Rubio had preventing it and now
the committee and has requested
to be moved down the agenda so
we will start.
With house bill one twenty seven
Representative Johnson and I'm
go ahead Representative and why
don't you let Allison no that
that that your expert witnesses
that need to be I'm in.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you our colleagues on the
committee and audience and Alice
and I have I
expert witnesses who may.
Who will introduce themselves
and a participate in this
discussion so I would like to
ask that we promote Maryland
admire.
And
Which we should be doing and now
make and make make and maybe
Erica Sanchez.
And miss Morales he went to is.
R. one minute okay.
If you know how do you raise
your hands for the extra
witnesses that would greatly
help if not support.
Somebody needs to go on you.
I think that was Allison poor
thing I don't know what she's
she's obviously juggling
several.
Thank you okay so would you like
for me to begin are we waiting
to promote expert is let's see I
you have I I see three of your
witnesses who don't.
So go ahead Representative okay
all right will at once again
thank you madam chair and thank
you at committee colleagues and
participants audience
For at listening to house bill
one twenty seven which is
homeless you the ID cards and at
this bill will help homeless
youth
we don't have support you don't
have support from parents or
caregivers.
Who are homeless and at this
bill will help remove some of
the barriers such as obtaining
an ID card.
And sometimes you know even S.
we need ID cards to do all kinds
of business to live a good life
and quality of life and
sometimes some of the barriers
for homeless youth are they
don't even have a mailing
address so they have two years
mailing addresses such as a
shelter or school or with their
ad DPS office so according
homeless you the ability to have
and ID card.
Youth ages twenty five and
younger will provide them
opportunities to continue
to.
With a good life obtain an
education obtain career and
things of that nature so with
that I will
Like to ask my at expert
witnesses to briefly introduce
themselves and then we we can
continue to move forward thank
you madam chair and colleagues.
Thank you Representative
Johnson.
Representative at Representative
madam chair at.
Mary went in our would you like
to began the introduction.
Yes it is thank you for your
attention and time to this.
Serious matter for our homeless
students who are unaccompanied I
am very Linda Meyer I am
coordinator of counseling
library and wellness Gallup to
the county school district and I
am the coordinator and liaison
for the McKinney vento program
within our district.
I also.
Well I think that's sufficient
thank you and thank you
representative Johnson.
Thank you again I see your name
would you like to introduce
yourself.
If you're referring a technician
Meghan Meghan need.
In need.
Expert witness.
Making me all right are you
Are you on I see you I see I see
great big white M. Megan if
you're on.
Go ahead and introduce yourself.
We can also move on to I hi Anna
Barella field went test.
For Erika Sanchez.
For Patricia.
Hello I can I can go ahead thank
you madam chair and members of
the committee my name is up the
economy they appoint this and
the program coordinator for the
Santa Fe public schools are on
that program we are the McKinney
vento program for the Santa Fe
public schools and we're the
ones who ensure that the Santa
Fe public school district is in
compliance with the McKinney
vento homeless assistance act
and it's a pleasure to be here
to speak on behalf of H. B. one
twenty seven thank you.
Just going Representative
Johnson and get your people it
at introduced and then you can
take it away I'm gonna try to
keep my my my community as much
as possible because that she
singing every.
Okay the baby Matt madam chair I
think we can go ahead and
receive public comment.
I'm I'm come I'm done with my
intro.
I'm sorry she grabbed my mouse
that got me off of a different
on to a different screen and so
this is going to be interesting
okay so if you are here in
opposition.
You are here in opposition to
this bill and I.
At the Newport.
I'm I guess this day and age
Multi tasking you are here in
opposition to one twenty.
Which is the home with your ID
card please raise your hand.
Okay if there's anyone here in
the.
Madam chair on sure I just
wanted to also offer for those
on the phone if you're in favor
start line is that raise hand
function on the phone.
Thank you for that so if you if
you just raise your hand in
support and don't want to speak
please lower it now otherwise
I'll start calling on folks so
your hands stay is raised I will
call okay I didn't mean to scare
folks off.
Okay
Okay so I'm.
All right so we have to go thank
you go ahead but you got.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee.
Thank you for the opportunity to
speak with you today I am a take
us on the honest lobbyist for
the Navajo Nation office of the
president and vice president who
supports house bill one twenty
seven the homeless youth ID
cards the office of the
president and vice president
greatly appreciates the work
Representative Johnson has done
regarding this policy.
And sponsoring the legislation.
It is important to the office of
president and vice president.
To support homeless youth that
reside off of the reservation.
Again we greatly appreciate the
Sanchez time and effort
regarding this important
legislation in obtaining ID
cards and waving the fees
associated with that thank you.
Thank you and twenty Cutler.
Good afternoon madam chair I
believe I believe I needed now
sorry about that
madam chair and and and members
of the committee we are grateful
to Representative Johnson for
bringing this bill I my name is
Wendy Cutler animus attorney
with the New Mexico Center on
Law and Poverty we recognize the
Dick the growing need
unfortunately for for for this
bill and it's and and how just
how important this these these
ID cards are so we're we're
grateful we stand in strong
support on behalf of the centre
online poverty thank you.
Okay thank you for that and I'm
now we will go to the committee
for questions so you can
hopefully I can see you
so either well actually I can't
so if you are if you are
committee member and have
questions and you don't have
your if you have your video
turned out you can raise your
hand if you don't have your
video turned on please raise
your hand in the.
Okay okay there I see
Representative Pettigrew so are
there any questions from okay
are there I see Representative
Lord and she raised her hand so
Representative Lord go ahead.
Thank you madam chair
representative I do have a
question just a brief question I
see that they're going to remove
the fees is it Sir going to be
somebody who is going to be
supplementing that the lost
cause there who's gonna be
supplementing the cost on that
thank you.
Thank you representative I would
like to do for to at the Tricia
ordinary Amanda Meyer or and
that discussion.
Thank you Representative Johnson
and madam chair thank you for
the time.
Under the McKinney vento
program.
Currently
We are.
Providing.
The fees services for this.
The difficulty is that
Many of the.
Individuals who and agencies
that we that allow for the
Identification and the charge
for it require us to have either
a check money order or cash
within many of our districts.
Disbursement of funds comes to
appeal and that makes it very
difficult for us so what I think
we would like to see is that
funds to the McKinney vento
program be allocated to provide
these ideas.
In a way that is more amenable
to different district
requirements.
And
It could be through our.
The state we can evento program
or it could be through the
district McKinney vento program
but if we could.
You know you have seven students
who are seeking.
And I do.
They truly do not have the funds
to pay for the ID.
If the HSD granting the ID you
could send a quote so that we
could populate a PO and then we
could reimburse that student
that would be.
Probably the best way to go
Megan you may have another way
and Tiana you may have another
way of doing it but that is what
we had discussed at one point in
time.
Thank you madam chair and
representative Johnson.
I thank you for answering that
question and then chair
representative could you I it's
really hard for me to hear on on
these computers without the
McKinney program and could you
spell that for me possibly just
into a little bit of research on
that please.
It's a federally funded program
it's capital M. C. capital I and
and E. Y..
Capital V. E. N. T. L. McKinney
vento is federally funded it
will district receives.
Funds to provide for supplies
clothing transportation
If necessary but not generally
and under the new.
Comment.
Stipulations we're also able to
provide technology if that's if
needed and if the district can
provide it thank you madam chair
representative that's all the
questions that I have.
Okay any other members have
questions.
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Pettigrew you're
on mute.
That's perfect for you all.
Thank you thank you madam chair
when we start over thank you
Going through my notes on this
and some request that I sent to
people one of the one of the
messages I got back from the
technical side.
Any changes certification
requirements are enacted during
this session.
Tell your to enact section one
L..
currencies regarding the
appointment of the homeless
homeless liaison responsible for
the training of staff may place
the state at risk of violating
the terms of the stipulated
order issued on the conclusion
of our David costs at all.
Verses John.
Montfort.
Disorder required the MVD to
train all workers including so
workers and contractors in rural
farm Institute DAC or and the
non federally compliant ID card
it continues on the basically
yes to the dress that technical
concern.
Please.
Thank you representative merry
are you able to address that.
Technical.
Situation.
Thank you Representative Johnson
and.
Madam chair person and
Representative Pettigrew.
Right now under federal law and
state regulations we are
required to train all staff.
Which includes transportation.
food services.
EA's educational assistants and
administrators on the McKinney
vento program.
I think your question would lead
us to how do we train the staff
at the agency that is providing
that.
Service of free ID's I think
that would be something that we
could easily do.
With the slide district as
liaisons I can't commit liaisons
to that but I think that that is
something that could be possibly
put into the law or into the
amendment for the law.
I also believe very strongly.
That
Our students who are
unaccompanied you.
Do need to have an ID.
In order to get a job in order
to.
You know get into school.
In order to even get services so
I think we need to do whatever
we can to make sure that the
agencies that are granting the I
do have the ability to
understand the beginning that
total loss and the ramifications
of that law.
Is that sufficient.
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair thank you
miss Linda Meyer I think is it
one of more can't see the only.
On my screen is that correct.
My muted again yes
Representative Pettigrew is
Maryland in higher thank you
thank you very much I hate
calling people by their own
right so thank you
I don't think that it really
address that one of the
administrative implications is
that this is probably going to
fall to the motor vehicle
department and.
The the liaison is supposed to
as I understand it supposed to
be a super in supervisory staff
member.
And so I don't really and I and
I get the the estimates of all
the way to Judiciary funding is
going to come out for that I
don't debate whether or not this
is a good bill I'm just
concerned that it doesn't have
the language and it did insurers
that everything is compliant
that's that's that's my concern.
Thank you Representative
Pettigrew and what we will do
before we.
We move to the next committee we
will research your concerns and
I will get back with you
personally before we continue on
to the next committee.
Representative Representative
Johnson I'm what what is your
next committee.
Bill Lee we are.
We may be on to health and Human
Services I need to double check
okay.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair if I may so speak.
Yes please is it possible that
we could.
Allow the liaisons for the
districts to provide that
service to the motor vehicle
department.
I don't know that it's within
the scope of the law but I think
If the liaison for the school
district who are trained to do
this education of others.
And of our stakeholders in
regard to McKinney vento I think
if they could provide that
service to the motor vehicle
department.
I think that would be something
that we might want to consider I
don't know I can't speak.
To the law any more than I have
heard.
Madam chair.
May we I see Meghan Mead and
Erica Sanchez at the expert
witnesses their hands are raised
may we call on them to provide
comments regarding
Representative Pettigrew is
concerned we are Representative
Johnson and and your witnesses
you can just jump in or just
jump and just go through the
chair but you know I just
whoever whoever has the answer
please feel free to just just
chime in.
Now they put their hands thank
thank you thank you madam chair
and members of the committee I'm
sorry that I was a little bit ly
I had a technical difficulties
as I'm sure many of us can
relate to.
Representative Pettigrew my
reading of what of that comment
from the Attorney General is
that
the DMV has an obligation to
train to make sure their staff
is trained on the requirements
of issuing identification cards.
And this would be overall a
relatively modest change to the
law it would waive fees for
unaccompanied youths and
homeless individuals and it
would allow.
Unaccompanied youth to access
their ID's without a parental
signature it would just mean
that they do in each stand the
office would have to have a
designated you know supervisory
official who is familiar with
that aspect of the statute
and you know certainly the laws
change
You know the obligations the DMV
change from time to time and
they need to stay abreast of the
of those changes so again my
reading of it is is that this
would just be something that
they would need to be familiar
with and comply with
I'm not sure if that answers
your question
If if if I can explain more fair
co wants to jump in on that
point I'm she was going to
respond to that.
Thank you madam at thank you
Megan Erica do you want to jump
in.
Madam chair representative
Johnson no I don't have anything
additional to add to that point.
Thank you Representative I'm.
Yes.
What do was there any
consultation with the DM B. R.
regarding the drafting of this.
Madam chair at I don't believe
so okay and you just think if if
there is anybody in the
participants who who maybe could
speak to to this issue our
please raise your hand in the
participant list and I will look
at that
I still the anybody I'm
Representative Pettigrew the
floor is still yours.
Thank you madam chair
While I will respectfully
disagree with the the minor
changes to the law
I hate to think this is a good
thing and so but I am concerned
about how we how we truly get
their and so I do think before
and it actually is scheduled to
go to state government state
government Alexion's and Sarah
snatched.
I do think before we get there
we asked the.
In V. D. to
Write a statement on it as well.
Thank you very much madam chair
thank you for the analysts who
worked on this bill did you
request information to Lee did
you request information from and
I never know but MPD or DMV
whatever from those people the
did you request and or did you
receive.
Committee chair so what I have
so far is the fiscal impact
report does mention the M. V. G.
as Representative Pettigrew
mentioned but that's all that we
have so far is that it's going
to require the MB to train
workers.
but there wasn't any
consultation with them.
Okay thank you for that
And in either are there any
other analysts who are and Julie
you would be the one who would
if you got something all the
analysts who are working on what
would have access to the same
things correct yeah that's
correct we only received a few
agency reports okay thank you
for the public I am our our
virtual nest have that have made
a lot of a lot more difficult
including having babies next
year dragon there can use across
the floor
so so we have we have not been
getting that information in as
we were during the remote
session and ask those sometimes
we are
Thank you I want to we're we're
doing things in a way that we're
not usually doing things so what
I would the staff here it is
acceptable to the committee is
that if if we are okay with the
with the intent of the bill to
go ahead and pass it on to the
next committee with the
stipulation that there will be
consultation with DMV I'm and
any any issues that and I will
let that I will let madam chair
of the next committee know that
we had requested
For that that information
essentially to be filled in and
if if if there is no I'm.
If there's no one who has other
questions or has concerns with
that I will entertain a motion
but let me look for
I see most of my committee I see
my most of my committee members
are is there any opposition to
that idea.
Okay so I will entertain a
motion.
Madam chair of the past okay and
the second.
The second was that
Representative Burris okay
Romero on the motion and Harris
on the.
Representative who are you
raising your hand okay it
The if somebody is scratching
their nose or or waving at
someone across the room or
anything so all right excuse me
if I don't know right away are
flipping their hair I see that
over over here so Representative
Pettigrew go ahead.
I'm sure I would request that
the do pass include the request
for
the ticket pass motion read
include the request as you
stated before.
Consultation.
Prior to it hitting the state
government elections in Indian
Affairs Committee okay so noted
so are is there any opposition
to our I do passed motion with
the stipulation that that there
will be investigations with DM
B. R. A. B. D. if someone could
please tell me which one is the
right one I would appreciate
that
so no is there any opposition.
Okay seeing none of I the
funeral you have a do pass.
Representative Johnson and now
and please check in with M. D.
D. R. D. M. B. and that and get
some information on that thank
you so much thank you madam
chair and committee members we
will definitely do so thank you.
Okay and not now we are again I
will say say that house bill
seventy have been rolled and
will not be heard to date and I
put I believe that we have
Representative Rubio in the
waiting room so she could be
allowed in we will be doing
house bill forty.
I'm.
With that and and I'm not sure
Representative thank you going
to join once Representative
Rubio joins her old committee
now she's that now she's been
promoted to chair but
Representative Rubio go ahead
whenever you're ready and if you
have expert witnesses please let
Alison no now so she can let
them in yes thanks Allison my
two experts will be neat and
crack and
my god hi are a little school
sorry my mind just went blank
I'm presenting paid sick leave
in the other one in labor so I
have my cell phone here and my
laptop here so thank you for
being so patient what was the
second name again so that in
all school A. D. R. I. E. L..
All right I have the notice
panelists.
Right.
Go ahead Representative Rubio.
Awesome great thank you all so
much good afternoon everyone my
name is Angelica Rubio state
representative for district
thirty five here in Los crucis
and I'm here today to present on
house bill forty I'm also joined
as I mentioned by my experts are
in rural school anything Craig
who are one of many who have
been working on this issue for
many years now we have presented
a version of this bill several
times since I began my tenure in
the legislature and so I am I'm
looking forward to the
discussion that we have today
this proposed legislation house
bill forty would prohibit the
operation and management of a
detention facility in New Mexico
by a private contractor it would
make private incarceration
illegal no state or local
government entity could enter
into new contracts renew extend
or expand any existing
agreements that now exists
between private contractors and
New Mexico government bodies
private prisons were established
with an aim of making money and
profit off of the incarceration
of people in this case New
Mexicans they were accepted here
in New Mexico as a tool for
economic development and
creating jobs which has been a
waste of taxpayer money as these
institutions pay very little
provide few benefits result in
horrifying conditions all with
little oversight all with little
to no oversight or
accountability like other
exploitative industries in the
state private prisons have
resulted in communities seeing
little investment and instead
further relying and depending on
these industries for survival so
why would we want to continue to
do business with them that is
what house bill forty tries to
address in the and and answering
that question New Mexico has an
abundance of resources to create
opportunities for New Mexicans
but we lack leadership with an
abundance of ideas this is one
of those bad ideas today I ask
that you seriously consider
supporting this legislation not
only think about it from a moral
standpoint because we should
never be profiting from P..
Will and their bodies but you
should be supporting this last
legislation because it is high
time for New Mexico to move on
from industries that only
exploit our state for profit and
then cut and run when they've
taken what they can get so with
that I will pass it on to Nathan
and are in for some brief
comments and then we will open
it up for questions thank you.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee thank
you for the opportunity to speak
with you today Representative
Rubio mentioned my name is
available school I'm an attorney
at the New Mexico in depth Law
Center and I have worked with
other Chinese researchers and
academics including Nathan Craig
to research the approaches other
states have undertaken to
address the operate on private
prisons
and to formulate an intentional
strategic approach for our state
it's B. forty as a result of
those efforts the bill
recognizes that a gradual phase
out is necessary to provide the
state and local communities time
to plan for this transition HB
forty progress expansion or know
of any currently existing
contracts with private
contractors simply put existing
contract will run until they
expire because all current
contracts expire between three
and four years the state and
local communities will be
impacted immediately and will
have time to assess the whole
impacts and options to plan for
just transition.
Second HB forty Haas the
expansion a privately operated
prisons and preventing
governmental entities including
the state counties and
municipalities from entering
into any new contracts with
private contractors additionally
HB forty make sure that these
companies aren't allowed to
circumvent these restrictions in
the future as we have seen in
other states statutorily
prohibiting private companies
from detaining individuals with
an exception made for these
three for those three companies
that currently operate one of
the seven private prisons in our
state for the duration of their
contracts.
HB forty also includes other
provisions that seek to
strengthen oversight of these
prisons by requiring counties to
share already required annual
inspection reports with the
department of corrections we
should review whether the
private contractors are
complying with their statutorily
required applications HB forty
also immense riches existing
areas of law that contradict
these other provisions that I
thank you madam chair members of
this committee and be happy to
answer any questions you may
have during this hearing.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is that
correct
for policy professor co
coordinator of the detention
visitation organizations other
part of the state.
Incarceration is a solemn
function the government
involving the deprivation of
liberty this is an act this act
is not something to be entrusted
to the lowest bidder was seeking
to turn a profit.
United States encourage rates
more people than any other
country forty eight persons per
hundred thousand.
Three hundred and sixteen
persons per hundred thousand New
Mexico has New Mexico occurrence
rates more per capita than the
nation on average.
New Mexico also has the highest
reliance on private prisons any
state in the in.
As a factor history mass
incarceration begins shortly
after the development of private
prisons between nineteen eighty
three and two thousand eighteen
the New Mexico prison population
ballooned two hundred and sixty
eight percent growth that
exceeds changes in crime rate
for this period.
In the context of mass
incarceration a
disproportionately high number
black Latino individuals are
arbitrated well the
disproportionately low number
why individuals are cursory.
New Mexico I incarceration with
grace and the promise cost
savings twenty thirty percent
improve services arising out of
private sector competition in
rural development looking back
we can see the experiment was a
failure.
Us savings were not seen in fact
it compare will cost the levels
private facilities costs more
additionally it was discovered
that private prison companies
were charging New Mexico higher
per diem rates the neighboring
states.
Private prisons consistently
have higher numbers released
eligible individuals all of
which costs the state.
Service is a private prisons are
not better in fact private
facility cost cutting efforts to
render facilities more dangerous
for both staff and incarcerated
population.
Which includes staff out for
cameras resulted in sexual
assaults physical assaults.
And your present study in the
state found significant
violations of civil and
constitutional rights recurring
and private facilities.
Any for rural development did
not take place there is no
significant measurable positive
impact on rural prison housing
county unemployment rates in
some cases counties that coast
residents have unemployment
rates that rose faster in
neighboring communities that did
not host private prisons.
She reasons for this are the
fact that most of the cleaning
and cooking is done by underpaid
incarcerated people.
Another reason that in rural
prison settings the majority of
corrections staff often
commuting commute from the
nearest metro area.
In the case or terrible the
county with the largest number
of private incarceration at the
both of the workforce commutes
from out of state driving in
from L. passed that's according
to the county commissioners.
Additionally while also prisons
suffer high vacancy rates say
private prisons have staff
vacancy rates that are nearly
double those private prisons.
So private you incarceration is
a replication of the solemn
government function to the
private sector.
We're not getting better
services we're paying more for
it.
It is feasible to close these
facilities have people moved out
state can do it in fact I was
just received.
Where this meeting
this meeting the fiscal impact
report it shows well there may
be some capital cost of the
ousted over time you're going to
be statements so thank you all
and I appreciate your time.
Thank you thank you thank than
in other areas and what that
Miss L. madam chair we will open
up for questions.
Thank you Representative Rubio
so I'm the the public some of
you have your hands raised I'd
ask that you lower them because
I'm gonna ask right now if you
are in opposition to this but
let me explain again there's no
rush to get your hand up
everyone will get a chance to to
give their public comment how
we're gonna do this as I will
ask for people who are in
opposition to this bill to
please raise their hand and then
I will ask them if they want to
publicly comment to leave your
hand up
and then we will do the same
thing in support so right now if
your hand is raise your hand is
raised just saying that you are
in opposition of this bill I
give you a second to work to fix
that if you need to okay so I'm
and.
All right so we see how many
hands are raised and now if you
want to speak in opposition to
this bill please leave your hand
up.
Okay we will start at the top
Mike Wilson go ahead.
I'm sorry.
Representative some members of
the committee of I
Of very I will be very brief in
what I have to say I oppose
private prisons I propose.
Private immigration detention
centers.
Thank.
It just just as a reminder
people speaking now are in
opposition to this bill and so
if you if you essentially if you
want private prisons closed you
do not want to speak right now
if you want to keep them all but
this is the time for you to
speak I know it gets a little
confusing so it again I will
give you a chance to lower your
hand if you have raised it and
and there's no please don't
think feel like oh my gosh if I
don't get my hand raised at the
very second I'm gonna miss out
because I promise everyone will
get a chance to speak so we will
go to Michael at Michael
Eshelman I hope I didn't do do
too badly with that name
whenever you're ready Michael.
Can you hear me.
Yes we can hear you Michael
my name is Michael Ascher I am
the county attorney for Otero
County
New Mexico which has so one of
the prior speakers said has to
be facilities of the four county
commissioners needs to
facilities in the county at
chaparral which is located near
the state line one is the other
terror county prison facility
which our houses state inmates
with part of the corrections and
also has agreements with federal
agencies such as the army to
house.
There's this docket report lists
as well as the marshal service
next door to the facility but as
a completely separate facility
is get her family processing
facility which houses
immigration detainees for price
I in the post of the bill the
current form I will not speak to
any of the merits of.
Of the pros and cons of of of
privately owned facilities but I
would ask that the committee
consider.
Changes to the grandfather
clause in the bill to protect
Otero County whether or not we
should or shouldn't have these
facilities Otero County has the
end of the county has
substantial debt of that is been
issued to construct these
facilities that needs to be
repaid the prison facility has
approximately twenty two million
dollars in outstanding bonds
which will not be repaid until
twenty twenty eight the
immigration facility the
processing facility has
personally thirty six million
dollar bonds outstanding which
will not be repaid until twenty
twenty eight
the concern Otero County has is
that.
Renew the agreements in order to
get to those states in order to
pay those bonds the only revenue
for those bonds is the money
coming in from ice to the
department of corrections so we
would ask committee moves
forward that we would like to
work with the Sanchez in
Making sure the grandfather
clause makes insurers Otero
County is protected so we can
repay those bonds I appreciate
the committee for hearing me out
out thank you madam chair.
Thank you my call and now we
will go to grace bill looked.
Thank you madam chair my name's
grace Phillips I'm general
counsel for New Mexico counties
and I'm speaking in opposition
to the bill as it's currently
drafted counties are not you
know proponents of privatization
and in fact for over the years
are County detention facilities
have moved towards County
operation today we only have one
county that has a detention
facility that's privately
operated and as Mr Eshelman just
discussed Otero County and and
an additional two other counties
have contracts for
but I don't consider to be
county jails but our with
private contractors with private
operators to house different
types of detainees and so are
our concern is that again as as
mistrustful and but it the the
issue isn't so much with the
concept of moving away from
privatization as the the way
that this bill would do so by
very abruptly requiring counties
who have existing contracts
existing arrangements you know
I'm going future debt to to no
longer be able to renew those
contracts and continue to manage
what they have and for that
principle reason we stand in
opposition.
Thank you grace and now we have
Alisha Tafoya Lucero.
Madam chair that sorry my screen
turned off and then on again I
don't know what that was about
okay apologies good afternoon
madam chair members of the
committee I am Alisha Tafoya
Lucero I am the cabinet
secretary for the New Mexico
corrections department and I
respectfully oppose house bill
forty in its current form
specifically in its current form
as it's written right now we
would not be able to renew
existing contracts with our
current facility operators for
for the purposes of NM CD this
would result in the loss of more
than three thousand currently
existing budget as it's
currently written it would also
prohibit our agency from leasing
space from private prison
operators that own the buildings
we occupy that's not the case in
all of our privately operated
institutions but at least in one
of on the on the building itself
is owned by the private vendor
and also as currently written it
would prevent government bodies
from entering into contracts
with private operators for new
construction of facilities for
public operation but I want to
be very clear when it is safe
and reasonable to convert a
private facility into a public
facility we absolutely will as
we did in clay in in twenty
nineteen but doing so requires
significant planning staffing
and ultimately significant
fiscal resources although our
population is currently at a
historic low of seventy three
percent even if every single
public bed were to be filled we
would not have enough space to
safely house the number of
people that are currently
incarcerated in the state system
if we were to lose does more
than three thousand budget right
now we work with three private
facility operators of four of
our eleven institutions are
privately operated we employ a
contract monitors at all of
these locations and they provide
oversight of the contract to
make sure that they are meeting
our.
And whenever they don't they are
held accountable and finds our
sense assessed against them so
understanding the concerns
surrounding the operation of
private facilities we have been
working with one of our vendors
to restructure their current
contract so that we can figure
out a way to attach payments to
program availability enrollment
performance and other things
that would aid in the our our
work towards rebuilding our
reentry division and our focus
on reentry madam chair that's
all thank you.
Thank you madam secretary and I
apologize for not recognizing
your name I'm calling you by
your correct title.
Trying.
Trying to keep up I guess is
that is the best that I can say
okay that is all the people in
opposition and if you are here
in support of this bill please
raise your hand.
Okay.
And if you would like to speak
in support please leave your
hand up if you don't want to
speak I'm just want to what it
does to know you work out there
please lower your hand.
And I will.
Going
We we will we are going to have
some from Spanish interpretation
so I think we are going to start
with those and if I'm Allison if
you could let in a lawn grow
Ortega to do some to do the
interpretation.
It starts with the it's no it
doesn't about A. L. O. N. D. R.
E..
Just yeah okay okay and and
A long throw I IBM I hope I'm
not killing your name too badly
if you want to in Spanish give
directions I think we only have
one person who needs
interpretation and that is
Bobby olah lan General.
So if you just want to our
quickly tell her how how you
want her to speak so that you
can not do the interpretation
you go ahead.
Alondra Ortega.
Are you there.
See what the Senate president a
member of the call me thank me
number this I don't know if they
are easily monitor those Ninos
you're not a we also have a
whole lot of that or are we in
the centre all the work and they
that initial school bus and
number.
Okay and Allison if you could
they live in Bobby Olaf
Landeros.
For the audience we are we are
working on making this
More thing was the and having
having.
Our interpretation going on
during the meeting but this is
this is where we are with our
technology today hopefully it
will get better so along your
whenever you are ready for I do
a lot to start please go ahead.
It is in the center of last year
Deborah to put the lesson but
also your mouth is yet that in
this.
Okay.
This and this is the members of
the committee they mean the
lettuce settlers there I saw a
lot of those minions you will
not open yes that that are a lot
of that over.
Member center the one million
additional school mass in
Albuquerque.
Hello you are translating from
Spanish into English.
No I'm.
The center I'm having to put it
okay okay my mistake I am so
sorry thank you very much go
ahead.
Yes you read good afternoon
madam chair and members of the
committee my name is on the
update that and I'm a mother of
two daughters in the probe to
mystic border in a member of the
center with the and that it is
basin opportunity today I'm here
to urge you to support H.
before.
My family was impacted and in
February of two thousand
nineteen when my husband was
detained and arrested based on
lies he was the money make
immigrants and immigrant
detention center for three
months.
It is going to.
Okay
very well said that a lot of a
lot to provide us your own
highly welcome yes postal but I
in Los crucis forum of the few
students protest on the the
stillness Gaston this year it
experiment for months that those
possible through your community
what you see is the most let us
in the area impersonal can you
speak into zoom out of open
enrollment thank you for the
rest of Senator by now.
In the second inning come out of
this it would be a an online
you.
I leave the trauma of being
separated from my husband for
him the dishes in the detention
center were really difficult he
sure would need them many abuse
that he suffered the call the
food that wasn't the best and
often time he wasn't given food
at all there was no privacy to
use the bathroom in the state
they have security cameras in
the bathrooms.
In.
Yes it is a colossal plus but
unless you want me as possible
for the issue on the meaning you
must run that the enemy of the
costs will go up on a lot I
that are you on the way it is
said that Australia hello this
is the problem and then agency
close so it only causes Denton
me custody on the way this when
the concern over again we'll
start off with that on let us.
Willimon then and only see
because they pull it up for you
and I'm is also not then see on.
Thank.
In order.
Yes I think it's is this the
soonest in an almost it is
almost.
This so money that some of us
will need going this is one
billion I don't think I'm not
going up it is still not in the
dense you're on so most things
that'll must insist windows X.
bongo.
What is also on this bill kept
going up request that I share a
quote in the past yes.
With us again but it's not the
same as before my husband also
first from depression in my
eldest daughter biggest fear is
that her father will be with us
when she comes home from school
or what sure looks up in the
morning my husband was the only
financial support my house
school and when he was in
detention I have to find out
Fund work but it wasn't enough
to take care of me children's
support my husband case and
detention center the conditions
in this detention centers are
they have and I see that the
concern is how much money they
can make based on how many
people they detain we are just
one more seat in their bank
accounts thank you for for your
time thank you madam chair for
letting me interpretive for
money member.
Thank you to both of you and and
my mistake I'm so sorry I I'm
try I'm not a good juggler like
some members of the committee
are jugglers so we will go and
and I'm not going to put a timer
but I'm I ask that people be
fairly brief I'm we we want to
hear from you but we we have
twenty people who want to speak
and we have other bills to here
so you know out of two or three
minutes and and if people start
going really long I may have to
put in a timer but for now we'll
just we'll just see how it goes
and try not to just repeat what
someone if someone else has said
the same thing with we we we
here at the first time so we'll
start with all my roles so still
Bob on weight loss.
When I start it is good
afternoon madam chair committee
members again my name is alma
process involving wells and I
work with the Santa Fe dreamers
project I had the opportunity to
work with transgender asylum
seekers inside of the Cibola
detention center ran by
CoreCivic I had first hand
knowledge in witnessing of the
conditions on the inside.
Horrific medical conditions the
food quality would make of folks
sick and the treatment of the
corrections officers hired by
the Cibola detention center run
by CoreCivic when I would
advocate to ice about the
conditions on the inside and the
treatment and the food quality
ice would tell me that it was
the responsibility of the
contract.
And there was absolutely nothing
we could do to access the
contractor to improve any
conditions in fact it took acts
of the US Congress to send it in
members of Congress to do a site
visit of the Cibola detention
center and after they witnessed
themselves the actual conditions
inside of the Cibola detention
center the trans gender unit was
closed at the Cibola detention
center and every person was a
trance are they were are
transferred out to other
detention centers out of state
so just wanted with that I
witness account ask that the
committee members please pass HB
forty and restore dignity and
humanity to folks that are in
the centers and to vote to pass
HB forty again thank you very
much.
Thank you all my I'm this next
one.
I Representative renter.
If tech I I don't I don't know
how to say it F. R. O. N. T. E.
R. I. S. T. X. so please
introduce yourself when you when
you start thank you.
Hi I'm my name is sue Han ho I'm
with the front eighties this our
collective I met constituents
I'm an artist and community
organizer I'm in immigrants and
a faculty member at UNM as well
as a member of the prison divest
New Mexico coalition so expert
witnesses today have already
attested to the committee of the
human and civil rights abuses
perpetrated by these private
prison corporations
on September twenty six twenty
twenty the US house of
conception many on civil rights
and civil liberties released a
report stating that it found
that people in detention centers
operated by for profit
contractors are facing negative
health outcomes and even death
as a result of inadequate
medical care for conditions
understaffing and delayed
emergency care.
Of one of these for profit
companies and its own audit of
its all right Aurora Colorado
facility determined that many
deficiencies I had been
categorized as a quote serious
life safety issue or one that
indicates the existence of a
system failure were not resolved
in addition the department of
justice found that private
prisons have higher rates of the
cell and are more dangerous both
to incarcerated people and staff
so madam chair person and
commitment committee members
employee to take these concerns
about the New Mexico investment
in private prisons into serious
consideration and support H. P.
forty
at this moment
we have the opportunity to stand
on the right side of history and
to stand up for human rights for
all people during this moment of
national reckoning following the
murder of George Floyd and
countless other black lives at
the hands of the state
profiteering within these
carceral systems that police and
prison mostly black indigenous
and that next people must end if
we as a country are to reconcile
and repair the damage wrought by
white supremacy and mass
incarceration thank you.
Thank you a lot of your
Martinez.
Madam chair comes on and members
of the committee my name is
eleven month in as from other
four girls and a domestic work
and organize that would have
sent are related to my husband
was detained on December
thirteenth two thousand
seventeen thank you went to see
his probation officer for the
first time of the fifteen
minutes getting ready to go to
office if by detained him at all
officers inform I okay of his
appearance is that it but I
Office of themselves.
The same day my husband was
taken to a total County come
detention center in that time
she was attending to a few would
always mentioned to us that the
condition where I am impossibly
is still are terrible they were
spent Representative I'm meaning
no salt eight remained on twenty
four seven as well as the AC
which leads to freezing nights.
If they were lucky they got a
small baby size blanket to cover
themselves the weather in the
shower was so have the they
could use boiling boiled water
for coffee if they could afford
it privacy was not being in the
bedroom.
In the time she fell very ill
and for him to be seen by a
doctor he had to submit an
application anyway to so we
export with the whole but it
good bit of COVID many offices
stated that they could tell me
as many applications as they
wanted but are but at the in the
office of does through the
application in the trust.
Today my husband is now home
with us and is still five for
his gaze my family so this is
they and additional living with
with immense trauma is that
happening.
My family also for our crimes
against us into not know it we
will give does this.
It's unclear
the
families in New Mexico we
continue to contribute to our
communities economy without a
small business and with the help
supporting more than eighty five
prominence every week to
maintain a meal on their plate
yes we wish we had back then is
not fair the those Corporation
and making the money of the back
of our families we only
represent money for them they
don't see it as human the only
see how much money profit they
can go from are softening and
sometime in our lives.
This is why I strongly believe
this is the pension Center
should be closed because not
only they so that being they
take those of those are from our
state but they take he is from
our communities does they they
took from my family so please
the ball just in support of HB
forty thank you.
Next we have Fernando Trujillo.
Hello.
Hello.
Go ahead Fernando.
Thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is federal to
heal the amendment policy
associate with gold futures a
nonprofit for and by women and
people of color in New Mexico
and we stand strong supporter of
this bill.
I don't have to repeat of the
people have been saying for my
own personal experience I.
I could I could confirm what
about some of the stories about
what it's like the conditions
and private facilities.
The federal Fernando.
Yes okay thank you so very much
and now we have Tim Davis.
Thank you madam chair Tim Davis
with the New Mexico Center on
Law and Poverty I think we can
all agree that the state should
it monetizing course iterations
to provide an incentive to put
more people in prison however
that's exactly what private
prisons do it's a business model
depends on locking up more
people to attain greater profits
it is as mentioned earlier this
is particularly troubling since
inequities in our criminal legal
system we to higher
incarceration rates for people
of color.
This incentive to maximize
profits through greater
conservation also leads to
cutting corners at the expense
of safety decent conditions it
also gives private prisons no
incentive to reduce recidivism
so we are the committee to
support this bill the state can
stop investing in profits for
private prisons and instead
invest in the people of New
Mexico thank you.
Thank you and now we have
barbers.
Hi Hey I Representative the
Santa Fe face network for
immigrant justice.
we represent over fifteen faith
communities here in Santa Fe and
around the state.
And we strongly support this
legislation S. that you give it
to do pass thank you very much
madam chair and committee
members thank you are brought up
Paul Gibson.
Yes madam chair committee
members and bill Sanchez thank
you for your time and for your
service my name is Paul Gibson
co founder retake Our Democracy
and that is an all volunteer.
The video on as well.
One second
I cannot turn on the video okay
I'm sorry my name is Paul Gibson
co founder Riddick Our Democracy
an all volunteer R. one C. for
statewide organization with over
twenty five hundred members and
we've been advocated advocating
at the roundhouse for five years
and each year we work with
allies like New Mexico voices
common cause New Mexico
environmental law center thank
New Mexico and tribal education
educational lines and dozens of
others to develop a list of
bills that we support each year
this year we support twenty
transformational built into them
speaking in support of one of
them HB forty just this morning
I finished a blog based upon the
excellent book just mercy book
outlines the horrid conditions
under which are incarcerated
individuals survive it was a
heartbreaking read even more
heartbreaking when you
understand the private prison
operators delivery from more in
human conditions.
due to private prisons being
driven solely by profit they're
rewarded by limiting access to
educational health and
rehabilitation services they
also generate more profit by
packing prisons while
understaffing them none of this
is in the public interest is
inmates housed in print private
prisons are much less likely to
re enter successfully into the
community finally the private
prison industry lobby advocate
lobbies and advocates against
every rational criminal justice
reform and advocates for
legislation that promotes mass
incarceration minimum sentencing
and life imprisonment all of
which contribute to increasing
their prison populations the
state of New Mexico has a higher
proportion of inmates in private
prisons than any other state
president Biden has just issued
an executive order to ban the
federal government from entering
into or renewing contracts with
private prison operators I
understand there may be some
fiscal complications and issues
in relation to a couple of
counties but I think we need to
ask this legislation and we
support HB forty strongly thank
you very much for your time and
for your service.
Thank you Paul Emily Kaltenbach.
You madam chair members of the
committee and we called in by
the drug policy alliance
Representative over forty
thousand members here in the
state of New Mexico we stand in
strong support of the bill as we
know our private prisons are
profiting off the war on drugs
that the business built on
corporation and these businesses
are relying on the failed
policies of the war on drugs we
also know that their extreme
disparities in arrests and so
those who are arrested for drug
crimes are mostly communities
our and so they have an
incentive incentive to further
criminalize people especially
people of color never you should
never be going to jail or prison
in the first place for health
issue not a criminal issue these
folks should be receiving health
care treatment social support
and housing in unity and we know
we have limited social supports
for individuals would like to
see those funds shifted our
community based services and we
also are very aware that the
private private prison industry
is vocal about posing any
changes to our from sentences
that could stem the flow of New
individuals into these private
prisons so we stand and strong
support thank you.
Thank you Emily and now we have
near record.
Thank you good afternoon my name
is neo rocker.
And I'm the policy council and
regional manager of the ACLU of
New Mexico I'm based out of Los
crucis I'm here representing the
ACLU of New Mexicos
organizational and membership
support for an end to private
prisons the ACLU of New Mexico
regularly receives and
investigates complaints
regarding the conditions that
people in detention experience.
These complaints range from cost
cutting measures that result in
preventable illness and
permanent injury all the way to
violent conditions that result
in that.
Private prison contractors are
inherently incentivized to
maximize profits at the expense
of those involuntarily in their
care.
These contractors primary duty
is to their shareholders rather
than to New Mexicans the COVID
nineteen pandemic has heightened
awareness of the conditions that
people in detention experience
both in criminal and civil
detention.
The ACLU of New Mexico has sued
the government on behalf of
detained individuals who have
experienced in humane treatment
including a lack of enforcement
of basic COVID safe practices.
In addition we saw that
employees of these facilities
were not given adequate
protections against COVID which
has run rampant throughout our
state particularly in counties
that have hi hi private prison
populations.
The ACLU of New Mexico supports
the spell to place a moratorium
on private prisons in New Mexico
it is time to put people over
profit and it's time to and
private detention in the state
thank you.
Thank you and now we have more
learning karate or.
And in advance excuse me for.
Really being tough on names but
I'm doing the best they can so
Marlene hi I'm sister Marlene
road and
I was part of
last senator because
Representing clients in civil
and then I am presently
volunteering and receiving
interviews preparing interviews.
I could go on and on about the
situations.
private prisons I want to speak
about to one is a client who was
very ill and so boleh.
I tried to get him health care
they would bring to the grants
clinic and give them Tylenol
after three years because
there's a broken immigration
system and all he was he was
incarcerated for three years his
only crime was to ask for asylum
when he returned to the call go.
they went on the plane and took
him off the security forces took
him off the plane.
Because it was so ill they put
his our court to this past
Friday in the meantime you went
to the doctors and the doctor
said why did you call earlier
you have advanced colon cancer.
So I want to lift up the fact
that.
health care is a very serious
issue and it is not addressed by
these private companies the
other person I want to talk
about is the person that was in
civil and was transferred to
actual Alabama if anyone wants
to find out what a private
company does go to and I want
all of them
all of them it was run by the
sheriff's department any money
that he could save for our food
he could pocketed he was giving
them garbage.
So I would I speak in favor of
this bill and hopefully we will
and incarceration the way as we
know now and begin to look at
alternative rehabilitative
situations thank you very much.
Thank you and now we have
Jonathan Garcia.
Sorry about that.
Thank Mr chair and members of
the committee thank you for
taking the time to listen to me
my name is Jonathan Garcia and I
am from Espanola New Mexico I
would like to urge you to take a
stance against private detention
facilities which is part of the.
Isn't indestructible acts people
are more the numbers and it is
wrong to profit off the caging
whether human beings it is time
to and mass incarceration and by
allowing the private prisons to
prison industry to exist in New
Mexico feels the mass
incarceration of communities of
color private prisons are not
held accountable and it is time
to end the state's relationship
with these corporations that own
these private prisons thank you.
Thank you your was solid.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee in New
Mexico the other silence from
the New Mexico Dream Team and
part of the coalition people
over private prisons I am a
community member of chip in New
Mexico and as a teenager faced
the challenge of uncertain
future in a community where
there are little to no job
opportunities in chaparral it is
hard to find career
opportunities other than being a
teacher nurse doctor our own
security guard the local private
prison and detention facility.
I decided to move to Los crucis
New Mexico to continue my
education I had an issue where I
found the opportunity to work as
a community organizer with the
New Mexico Dream Team.
While I was still studying full
time to become an engineer.
Through a new job I learned that
the private prison and detention
facility in Japan we're built to
generate money for the private
companies and that for the well
being of the community that is
the reason why now I advocate
for my community and that my
community there's there's better
other than there county in state
to keep investing their tax
money on on.
In use for things like the
private detention industry.
The reality is that people in
check but I have little to no
idea will have the how this
industry is badly affecting
their development the starting
from high school in following in
the community college one of the
few recommended for years this
criminal justice.
This is basically preparing high
school kids to have a future in
the on the did industries that
was hiring the most.
I'm working as a C. B. PH N. a
C. Cup or a guard at the private
prison or detention center.
Chaparral is a community of its
majority of people of color an
immigrant background so I
definitely being most would
agree with us in the efforts of
closing this private prison.
If they were received
information how their lives are
currently being affected my
community cannot take a more
years of being pushed to work in
humane traps using suffering as
our business model and I'm not
provide with the bridge needs to
happen.
For the best pitcher of my
community I hope you can also
support age reporting thank you.
Thank you and now we have Kurt
rigor.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Kurt rigor on the director of
the through advocacy ministry in
New Mexico I'm also you're
speaking today on behalf of New
Mexico France of churches and
I'm here to offer our support
for H. B. forty we believe that
the role of the state in the
operation of prisons should not
be supplanted by economic
players who are guided primarily
by profit.
The more we urge the state of
New Mexico to re claims
responsibility for the lives
that are utterly and completely
dependent on the state again we
support each before and we thank
you for this opportunity to
speak.
Thank you
R. O. R. to me C. O. Romero II
carver.
Hello thank you.
Good afternoon chair and
committee members my name is our
commission Romero econ for and
I'm a representative of yucca
youth United for comic crisis
action we're here to support HB
forty the providential
facilities moratorium act
because private prisons are yet
another example of extractive
industries.
There specifically in the
business of taking lives ought
to raise the name of Rosa
Hernandez who died in ice
custody under the management of
CoreCivic the symbol of
detention center.
It is not a secret that we are
seeing civil and human rights
abuses at a higher rate from
private prisons alongside
inadequate protections during a
public health crisis.
We see the prisons are meant to
be opportunity for
rehabilitation and the taking of
accountability but we are not
holding the private prison
system accountable they avoid
paying taxes and violate basic
human rights.
Private prisons are unsafe and
unreasonable and must be closed
immediately justice delayed is
justice denied.
We need to act now and protect
our people and their rights so
today we ask that you vote in
defense of human rights and vote
in support of HB forty thank you
for your time.
Thank you Carter Bundy.
Sorry is this working now Madam
it is Carter go ahead madam
chair members of the committee
Carter Bundy with asked me we
Representative correctional
officers around the state we
have made a conscious decision
to not represent private prisons
because we believe that for many
of the reasons stated they are
terrible for for the state of
New Mexico for prime for
taxpayers and more but I want to
highlight the ways in which
they're bad for workers when we
when the state took over the
Clayton facility instantly
people who are correctional
officers there got three dollars
an hour reses they had better
health care and they had
pensions all that money stays in
the state of New Mexico the
alternative is sending the money
to shareholders and executives
in Boca Raton Florida which is
where Geospace and national
Tennessee which is where
CoreCivic is based on there are
many reasons to and private
prisons but keeping our tax
dollars here in New Mexico and
investing in our people instead
of in corporations headquartered
in faraway states is one of our
top reasons for we hope you'll
support this bill thank you.
Thank you Carter.
Creating.
Hi madam chair members of the
committee and the sponsors of
the bill my name is Carla Cruz
puffer and I'm representing the
center for civic pot policy and
I'm in favor of H. B. forty the
reason why we're in support of
this bill is because we believe
that for for a for profit
motives and attention was a
roadblock to finding solutions
for real justice and safety of
our community we also believe
that for profit institutions are
more likely to prioritize profit
over individuals care in make
accountability much harder as
you've heard through the
testimonies we know that about
eight percent of our labor force
in New Mexico is undocumented
alone and this is not include
permanent residence that can be
under threat of detention loss
and this poses a huge risk to
our economy to mention some data
close to two point one billion
dollars are spent on detentions
centers from federal funds that
comes from taxpayer money Cibola
detention center alone appears
to have received thirty million
dollars from but the federal
government which again it comes
from our taxpayer money New
Mexico needs investments in new
industries that return to
communities as mentioned before
we support coming up with
creative solutions that create
better jobs that don't rely in
the dehumanisation of others but
the economic impact is little
compared to the trauma harms
separation detention has created
for communities and states the
results of the tension is
catastrophic in cruel for
immigrants refugees in our New
Mexican communities in general
the tensions rob us of our
family members and anyone who is
not a citizen can be at risk of
the tension under current
immigration law so we ask that
the committee voted for your age
HB forty and look for more
creative solutions to for
industries in New Mexico thank
you.
Thank you Ben Ben Garcia.
Hello it I apologize for that
madam chair and members of the
committee.
My name is angel Garcia on the
community activist community
organizer and member of the
league of United Latin American
citizens.
I am also return to sedition was
incarcerated in the geo group
private president California.
The reason why there are more so
that these prisons is because
the staff are not correctional
officers they are poorly trained
security guards.
Also private prisons are traded
on the stock exchange and that's
where the conditions are so
horrible because they cut
corners to maximize profits.
New Mexico also has to keep
these private prisons filled to
ninety three percent capacity or
else we the taxpayers from the
bill for the M. P. budget.
A private prisons never lose but
our state our communities and
your constituents rules so
that's why I strongly support HB
forty.
Thank you enjoy all for Nonda
Bandera.
Madam chair members of the
committee.
My name is Amanda and I work
with the New Mexico Dream Team
and back in two thousand eleven
my father was detained in check
but I.
The time you spend their really
broke him enough that he gave up
on his case and prefer to get
deported choosing to leave his
family he said that choosing to
leave his family was the hardest
thing he has to do and one of
the hardest things my family
have to go through.
It is ridiculous New Mexico
leads the nation in the use of
private prisons this really must
stop thank you.
Thank you I'm Kim Chavez Cook.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Kim Chavez Cook
with the law offices of the
public defender I won't repeat
what's already been said we
stand in support of this
legislation.
Thank you regulate Chavis.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Rikki Lee Chavez
on behalf of the New Mexico from
defense lawyers association we
stand in strong support of this
bill I will also not repeat what
has already been sent and
appreciate all of those who have
come before me thank you for
your time today madam chair and
committee.
Thank you Rikki Lee from
literature.
Hello madam chair members of the
committee John Lipschutz with
The New Mexico federation of
labor and for all the reasons
already stated especially those
by R. Carter Bundy as well we
stand in strong support of this
bill.
Thank you John J. Wilson.
Hi good afternoon madam chair
and left into the committee of
supply you join you today my
name is Jay Wilson I'm the
executive director for cal's
freshman mysteries and we
specialize in working with many
of folks come from adverse
backgrounds would try to get
back into the workforce I can
tell you from first hand
experience that I've seen in
that asset to deal with the
ramifications of the deprivation
of life the austerity of
opportunity and the lack of
accountability that has come to
characterize our private prison
facilities you know here in New
Mexico we rank low for many
things we rank fiftieth for
child care we went fifty three
child food insecurity during
forty seven for social mobility
but we ranked number one for our
reliance or dependence or
fixation are shackled agency to
private institutions for
corrections.
With eighteen thousand folks we
have interest rates today we
reckon the top state of our
nation.
This isn't a distinction which
we should look out fully upon
which I'm sure many of us today
are trying to address.
But for me it speaks and speaks
very much on a personal level
because as a black man.
My demographic constitute just
three percent of the general
state population however when
you look at the number of blacks
who incarcerated in our state it
is twenty six percent over eight
and a half times.
Me and my folks living here in
the state of New Mexico are more
likely to go to one of these
privatized prisons then we are
to go to a state school.
And that's not would be defined
as.
With these contracts that we
have we've grown to commoditized
people we've grown to move away
from justice from accountability
and from moving forward and this
is something which we want to
do.
When looking at what we actually
gain from divestment I know that
it was spoken that there are
some financial concerns but
we're not alone.
Eight different states have done
this before and over twenty
different states do not use
privatized prisons at the same
rate that we do comparatively
speaking the rest the cut the
country's it as eight point two
we use it at fifty three percent
to incarcerate folks.
What I'm asking you today is
this us a modest request.
Madam chair.
Committee.
I'm asking that we look at this
issue with our eyes of
transformative justice that we
look at the ramifications that
are happening with our country
as far as race and as far as
wealth is concerned and that we
do Google.
Our fixation our addiction.
To privatize incarceration.
Just since two thousand when we
started really wrapping up on
these contracts incarceration
has gone up by seventy two
percent.
There is a clear clear
correlation between our
dependence upon these
institutions their failure in
the communities in which they
serve if fill you in the way
that they save you could
constituents and the way that
they dropped the ball in the
purpose that they were supposed
to get these contracts for.
Again I'm just gonna be a semi
modest request today.
I just ask you this.
Let's make New Mexico a little
bit more and chanted for
everybody.
Thank you.
Thank you.
I'm.
New Mexico like can and again I
apologize if I totally messed it
up.
I hope I didn't mess it up so
much you didn't even recognize
it it's and I C. H. O. E..
Are you there.
They had to step away from the
computer so let's go on to
Margaret brown Vega and if that
person is still on and wants to
work raise their hand again
please do and and I C. H. O. E.
L. I C. H. E. A. R. and there
may be more but I can't see it
so we'll go ahead with that
Margaret brown I think it's
brown I can't see the whole
thing go ahead.
Yes I thank you madam chair
person I my name is Margaret
from Vega I am a volunteer with
the group called advocate
visitors with immigrants in
detention and I strongly support
HB forty as does our
organization I've spent the last
three years visiting on a daily
basis people detained at the
Otero county processing center I
document abuses there I've also
had interactions with staff
there and I can tell you that
that facility managed by
management training corporation.
Does not do.
Much for the community of chop
at all.
People that are detained there
are treated in very poor manner
cost cutting measures are very
common staff often report long
hours
Understaffing nobody really
likes to work there turnover is
quite high I can also tell you
that I spend a lot of time
listening to the Otero county
commissioners meetings where
they talk about the facility and
I want to underscore the
disconnect that exists between
the reality of how this
particular private prison
company operates a facility and
what they try to paint right in
their propaganda and I will
point out that.
Indeed it's in the contract that
the county commissioners need to
speak in support of these kinds
of our.
Of the contracts of these
businesses themselves so.
I've seen on the ground the
reality the negative impacts at
these facilities have privately
run facilities have for people
that are in them for people who
work in them and for the
community that lives around them
and so I ask you to support and
passed H. B. forty thank you.
Thank you Margaret and our last
one is Tom von.
I was come on from Silver City
I made now on the general
committee of the friends
committee on national
legislation a faith based
lobbying organization on Capitol
Hill and we.
Our point is that profit making
has no point no place in the
criminal justice system is
inherently immoral.
For people to make a profit off
pending on other people thank
you.
Thank you sorry of course the
phone rings when I I need to
work to move on with the meeting
I should silence that
So I will go to the committee
for questions so if if you're
yes I just a really quick
closing just really really
quick.
Sure I'd wanting madam chair and
committee I just wanted to just
and by saying that
I think why this bill is so
important in comparison to other
bills that we presented in the
past is that this does allow is
three to five years to really
work on a transition plan for
communities and so I think that
it is the responsibility of the
legislature and this
administration that the state
these institutions were
responsible for bringing private
prisons in the first place it
should be our responsibility
also to make sure that we see we
we protect the communities and
uplift them in ways that are
beyond this private prison
industry and so I just wanted to
make that last call because it
is our responsibility we can't
just kick this issue down the
road it has to happen now and it
has to happen with the support
of this legislature in this
administration.
Representative Rubio are you
able to stay around for
questions I know you've got
another bill in another
community and they're coming
going on the bill right before
me okay okay so if it turns out
that they're calling for you
just interrupt and we'll figure
out where to go from there so
questions from Representative
about us.
Thank you madam chair I I don't
I don't have a question I just
wanted to to say that I've
received an overwhelming amount
of emails in support of this
bill I'm very very proud of you
Representative Rubio for
bringing this before us I'm
really happy that I'm part of
this committee and I'm I'm
really proud to support this
legislation thank you.
Thank you Representative about
us anyone else.
Actually I do I do have a couple
of questions and then if if
someone else thinks that
Representative Lord did I see
your hand okay you go ahead.
Thank you madam chair I know
it's hard to see these we'll
hand things I'm I want to make a
mostly a comment at can you hear
me.
Okay I I just realize that the
hands were up there I was not
it's like I think it's okay I
got it okay so chair
representative Q.
so I just had a interesting
phone call with the mayor of
estancia and he is really
disheartened by this I mean I
understand both sides of the
argument but he just explain to
me that in estancia the gross
receipts tax is eighty thousand
dollars a month due to the
prison.
When the prison closed it was
twenty thousand dollars a month
and they struggled is that they
lost numer students more a lot
of people moved out of the area
and they had tried to sell the
building which is owned by
CoreCivic to Netflix but they
wanted so much money they
couldn't come to an agreement on
that.
So he's going to lose two thirds
of their income and my
understanding on this is losing
two thirds of its income we can
say goodbye to the town of
estancia.
There will be no town.
Fortunately it that there was no
way to negotiate the deal that
building is privately owned by
CoreCivic and it's very unlikely
that they're going to sell that
building.
He also informed me that so if
the state does take it over if
they do come to agreement he
still does not get any of that
the gross staff are grocers.
He's completely out of the
income.
And they'll get a few people
that will move there but they
will have no money to run the
budget so unfortunately property
values will go down like they
did when the prison was closed
before and it will literally
turn the town of estancia into a
ghost town and I'm very
concerned about that because
I've quite a few friends that
live in estancia I care about
those people out there and I
care about losing the historical
value of that town and it's just
becoming completely gone because
of the loss of an income so.
It said I I understand that I'm
listening to all the points of
you when that but we're going to
lose an entire city and that is
permanent and dial if anybody
has questions for him for the
Mehrestan scea you are welcome
to call him directly and that's
all they have right now thank
you thank you Representative
lord Representative Romero.
Thank you madam chair I just
want to thank members of the
audience for being so patient
with us while we get through
this virtual version of the
session I do want to thank the
sponsors as well being that so
many members of my community
have risen up to day to speak on
behalf of supporting this bill
is very much in favor of not
only reinventing our own economy
and I think what we the
challenges that we face
throughout rural New Mexico on
in looking for new job
opportunities new ways of
actually I think representing
our own communities well in the
you know social cultural and
important financial aspects of
what we're trying to transition
and across the state in many
many ways this is one of those
discussions and dialogues even
in our local community we we are
wrestling with that in different
parts of of the area so as well
I do absolutely empathise with
the revenue losses the
importance of us transitioning
our criminal justice system and
not profiting off of
incarceration any longer is
incredibly important to our
community so I want to thank the
sponsors I did want to fly the
question on defining
Of course the independent
contractor I think that's a
minor issue as far as you know
the sort of legal language
surrounding it that said our
community is strongly in support
and I support your billing with
that I see the other hands up so
all I was going to move it to
pass but all of oh wait thank
you madam chair okay
thank you Representative
representative of peta group.
Thank you madam chair of I
think.
The the first question I have
for the presenters is.
Has this.
presented to the governor and I
don't see in response from from
the governor's office I don't
see where there is no question
to respond to this and nothing
and.
The action plans issues place
felt really describes the desire
to re direct over two hundred
million dollars funds right now
so I do I guess my first
question thank you.
Thank you representative I I
believe will the secretary of
corrections what testified
earlier in opposition
so I would I would say that
that's probably she's
representing the the governor so
I think that might help to
address your question.
Thank you thank you very much
madam chair and Representative
Rubio.
The true hope she's representing
was for New Mexico of the
governor on that one but
So I do have concerns the
How.
How New Mexico is going to
for the purchase of the
facilities these companies and
which side of the fence people
stand on on this these companies
were will contracted to to do
something and so there needs to
be a repayment for those
facilities repaying the bonds
Justice of Terrel discussed.
I am concerned about several
things were presented today the
F. I. R. disagrees with many of
the different points the
presenters brought up from the
New Mexico and up to into
I think the presenters have the
same ability to read the impact
reports and analysis that are
I do not believe that this bill
this addressing the true problem
which is resolving the
incarceration issue.
the FIR indicates that we are
actually moving in a downward
trend on incarceration
we decreased our five point four
percent over.
FY nineteen and six point nine
percent.
FY twenty.
Over fifteen point one percent.
For me.
So.
I don't think that this bill in
any form or fashion actually
resolves.
It almost seems like some of our
presenters today we're blaming
the fact that prisons existence
on why people are in jail.
In this trouble so.
Yes enforcement of laws that are
on the books and what puts is
what puts people in jail.
Will Chris people in detention
centers what puts people in
prisons so I just I have several
concerns and I'm on the the same
pages the.
The cabinet secretary with us
and I do appreciate the time
madam chair.
Thank you representative and
just to just chime in on a
little bit on that madam chair
is that there are a combination
of pieces of legislation being
presented in the legislature
that address the the the ideas
that are coming to fruition
around criminal justice reform
so the while we don't but well
we don't believe that this bill
solves all of that we feel that
it's part of a much bigger and
more robust and comprehensive
plan that the state has in in
addressing those types of issues
we also just feel that it is our
responsibility at least in my
opinion that
as an institution we should be
these private prisons we will
and I and I mean that's my
promise as a legislator like if
it's not this year it will
happen like this is something
that I will continue to work on
and so we need to start working
on a transition plan for these
communities like the more
response yep of course there are
people across the state even
legislators who I work with who
are concerned about how it's
going to impact their
communities it is our
responsibility to to work on a
transition plan for these
communities and make sure that
we're up lifting their economies
without actually having to do it
by exploiting people and and and
their lives thank you.
Thank you Representative Rubio
thank you madam chair with that.
I love that idea I love the fact
that you put that there is a
that the the goal is for
together transition plan with
that Sen.
I'm I'm kind of the well not
kind of I am a big picture guy
I'd like to see all of those
different pieces are coming
together to bring something and
and in lieu of passing a bill
like this at this point in time
I think that it would be.
More.
On point.
Have a committee of
Signed by the governor to start
working on a transition plan and
then be able to present that
transition plan with a bill that
that and a budget.
The.
Fills with that transition plan
all of the same time thank you
again Representative Rubio thank
you again madam chair for
tolerating my questions.
No thank you Representative and
maybe you can be my co sponsor.
Thank you Representative
Pettigrew and
I am going to go a little off
script here I see that I I'm
assuming that it's
Representative Kerry Garcia has
his hand raised and I'm he
wasn't around for the public
comment alright so if we could
let them Representative Garcia
in and I'm gonna gonna ask
representative Garcia to not go
on and on and on like he always
does he talks for ever and ever
I'm kidding him he does not so
go ahead representative Garcia.
Thank you madam chair thanks for
the opportunity to speak of
those no this the issue it's a
very important issue to me and I
just got off and I just heard
bits and pieces of what Senator
was saying.
In my community we have to
private prisons right now.
If these prisons coals for this
bill goes through and these
prisoners Paul are or community
we are going to lose around
three hundred fifty job right
off the top.
We're going to lose about
Twenty five thousand dollars in
property tax from these prisons
and not the three hundred fifty
jobs are probably fifty thousand
people in requests could you put
the families and kids and they
all go to pack up and you can we
have nothing else in requests as
for slightly with the
Representative Rubio about it my
my concerns it is a real big
concern madam chair especially
we just lost the power plant
this year we lost a generating
state I mean the refinery right
out of requests images
devastated us and that this bill
will rule and I understand madam
chair Representative Rubio's
concerns and we do have to have
a plan.
Down the line it's going to have
to happen but we need to plan it
out not just dump it on somebody
right now we need to take into
consideration madam chair the
people that are gonna be
affected by these layoffs and
the president will leave well
I've talked to my County manager
and they said if this goes
through and I'm not the only one
is suffering from this there's a
lot of people the most so for
they will pack up and leave we
have one facility in holding
eleven hundred people this is
the old federalized inmates and
on state prisoners the other one
is the women's prison B. I. B.
I. might be wrong do the women's
or men's prison that is during
requests and we are in grave
danger.
Of Lujan everything in that down
if this happens if there was any
other year that were normally
fold in a long that's fine we've
been devastated by the COVID
madam chair we are one of the
highest colonies COVID now and
now to dump this on on our
community it'll be devastating
so I respect the Representative
Rubio is planned.
But this point I would have to
be against said right now we we
down the line like the center
said you know make a plan get it
all online then review work will
be better I really appreciate
your time.
We appreciate today we speak
today thank you madam chair.
And I did talked a long now you
didn't I I think I owe you two
or three minutes that some
further and some further
committee hearing.
Thank you Representative Garcia
so I just I have a couple of
questions so in terms of pay and
benefits and retirement that.
Do private prisons compare with
with our our our corrections
department with the state.
Thanks for that question the
chair madam chair so all I will
let me can speak to some of
these financial issues and also
to up to the transition to the
three year phase out because I
know that that's what folks have
been interested in to hear more
on but I think what's important
is that what we've seen through
some of these institutions is
that they're very low paying
jobs that benefits are not
at the end some cases not even
in existence and so we certainly
feel that in places like Clayton
for example aware of state
corrections to go over and much
like what asked me mentioned
earlier as well as that we've
actually seen those transfers
C. no increase in not only
salary but budget so all it
Nathan speak to that but for but
those are those are some of the
realities that we've we've seen
from some of these communities.
Thank you these are all
important questions ones that
but well deserved consideration
so for my understanding more
college asked me that when folks
when at Clayton when they were
hired on by the state the
country dollar an hour rates so
they were paid better they got
their training.
And they got retirement packages
they didn't have produce.
So they all received improved a.
I I also want to point out that
the claim is secretary to
Senator Stewart mentioned the
sort of having up.
A slow process of doing this
that transition equity where
people ended up getting paid
better.
That that was the result of the
contractor pulling out and
giving ninety days notice.
these others disabilities that
we've been discussing close as a
result of the federal government
agents that have been re
initiated so these these are
incredibly vulnerable.
So these and.
I think it's.
Useful to have a deadline to to
begin working on this with a
sense of urgency.
Now.
We'll close with the contracts
terminate you're not gonna be
closed ahead of those there is
time to develop a plan with the
deadline looming.
Yes that's my answer to the
question about the money I also
want to address secretary
Senator why is to that it
presents leasing that it's
actually not the case and in
fact that's one of the options
that's option number four in the
FIR the state would take over
the facility leases Matt looking
very briefly at it that's
appears to be eight is expensive
capital investment up front all
these transitions are going to
result in savings down the road
all for the options laid out in
the FIR.
Thank you for that and and I
don't have any further questions
but I will echo that.
Personally there are some things
I don't believe should have
profit and the incarcerating
people is one of them because
cutting cutting corners is how
you increased profits and you
all just be all just really be
out there and say I believe the
same thing for health care that
what when we put in profit it's
it's obviously gonna take away
from the services that the thing
you know things that people get
so so I am I am totally with
that when I was served on
probation some years back I was
always bothered by the private
prisons coming into it to
appropriations and asking for
more money particularly for
health care it was like it was
in our a blank check that we
wrote to them and they come back
and say oh we need another eight
million for health care we need
you know and that.
I won't go on but and and of
course health care is is my area
and and the horror stories that
I've heard and particularly
around health care and are just
and what really gets me is if
you take care about what we all
know this if you take care of a
problem when it's that when it's
a little pain in the side before
it becomes that a severely
infected gallbladder you're
going to save money but when
profit is is the driver you may
think you couldn't you know it's
it's you're weighing your risk I
guess so so at this point I will
Representative Rubio did you
have anything else or I will
entertain a motion thank you
madam chair thank you all for
listening and for folks who were
able to
Provide a public comment it's
just really great to see so many
be able to call in and
participate so thank you all for
for doing that.
And I will I will echo what
Representative Rubio said I
don't believe we can get a
hundred and forty one people in
our committee room so so for
those people who are talking
about this is you know we're
doing this in the dark and we
are not open to the public I
would I would put out there that
we are more open to the public
but I will entertain a motion at
this point.
Madam chair would you pass okay
that was Representative Romero
and a second.
A second Representative but I
Okay I'm.
All right I was then we please
call the roll.
Representative Barreras.
Yes.
Representative Lord.
No with an explanation.
Representative Pettigrew.
Yes.
Madam chair Thompson yes.
What was that a three to I could
was okay okay so by a vote of
three to two you have a do pass
and Representative Lord you
wanted to explain your vote.
Thank you I'm thank you madam
chair the main reason I'm voting
against it it's not the concept
include reserve a lot of
research on the reasons why and
I do understand that my problem
is that I would like to see more
about the transition more about
budgeting and definitely I I
have a really hard time I can't
vote to destroy the town of
estancia and I can't go to
destroy requests I have to think
about those people to thank you.
Thank you Representative lord
okay so we will move on to house
bill one eleven which is vice
chair Romero and Representative
Rubio so go ahead whenever
you're ready.
I'm sorry let me just make an
announcement again if anyone is
here for house bill seventy that
have been rolled it definitely
by the sponsor so if you're here
for that you can stay and enjoy
that the entertainment here if
you would like but you're here
for that we don't we don't want
you to sit there and and be
trying to multi task would you
don't need to be here you don't
want to so Representative Rubio
and I are facing madam chair and
just make sure.
Once you get into the okay what
why don't you do that I saw
Representative Pettigrew passes
can't cope with things are
moving.
No I'm I'm waiting I did madam
chair want to comment on what
you talked about with the
hundred and forty one hi.
We're not gonna agree on on on
everything but one thing that I
do appreciate.
Is in this committee.
To date it doesn't matter.
As many people that wanted to
talk were allowed to talk and I
wish that was the case in every
committee and I am I it.
I am very thankful that you're
running this committee that way
and I just wanted to give my
appreciation for that thank you
that that means a lot I'm I'm
I'm trying to be fair and we may
get bills where we met we in
this committee it has been at
least in my in my history that
we hear from everybody we may
have to limit the time because
we.
We have we have.
I'll just leave it there
sometimes we have to we have to
do what limited time but it has
been the practice in this
committee that we hear every
voice so with that
Representative Romero and Rubio
please let Alice and know who to
let in and you can go when
you're ready thank you madam
chair if we could let in Karen
Myers Maria Griego and surge
And thank you remember
professors are saying
Tina's and Tom at Tom yes
Martinez and Tom Tom pretty then
forgive me professor Martinez.
I hope he's not one of your
professors you might get in
trouble for that actually is
Madam.
If it would be more at work
Hopefully not adopted my great
and Dr Lee Massey Rachel Biggs
and Elizabeth area.
How did you get all that or do
you need her to work.
Go back.
And while we're waiting I I want
to again
Show my appreciation to the
committee members and to our
staff and our.
For being patient with us as we
work out we don't have
everything perfect we never
will.
On virtual so thank you for
being patient with us and we
will do that thank so did you
need more name.
Airliners Rachel Biggs and
Representative.
Maria Griego.
Search Martinez.
Tom pretty men on Riley Massey.
And.
We are not in love sliding.
One second what was the first
name again okay.
I go.
Yeah okay I have okay okay
great.
Right next third Martinez.
These are.
Tom pretty then.
All right Riley Massey.
She's now as.
Great Rachel Biggs and Elizabeth
alia.
We L. I. A..
If they're not in there no we're
other issues.
All right thank you thank you
madam chair thank you Alison
we'll go ahead and get started
if that's alright I will let my
co sponsor Representative Rubio
get us started on hospital one
eleven.
It's Representative and thank
you madam chair and committee
again
I am hearing very proud to to
stand with their set time zone
or whatever with the
representative Andrea Romero and
other advocates who have been
incredibly helpful to us over
the course of the last ten
months trying to really get a
handle on this housing issues
here in the state of New Mexico
as many of you know COVID
nineteen and build a lot of
inequities especially when it
came to issues related to
housing and evictions except
that many of of the these issues
have been impacting our state
for many years before that and
so we are I am very fortunate to
have spent the last ten months
working with advocates who been
on the ground really trying to
figure out ways to make our
housing system here in New
Mexico much more I'm fair and
equitable and I think that this
piece of legislation is is part
of the foundation that we hope
will begin a much more robust
conversation within our our New
Mexico legislature to really
confront these issues
we have been meeting practically
every other Friday since March
Representative Romero and I were
sitting in in one of our caucus
meetings early in in the spring
last year and it felt like we
were the only ones really
shouting at the top of our lungs
about how are we expected to
help families stay at home when
they're losing their home and
this was one of the biggest
issues that we were really just
really impacted by and so over
the course of the summer in
preparation for the first actual
session housing was one of our
biggest issues unfortunately it
didn't make the call and we
pushed even further for the
second special session to try to
get something done locally with
the support of advocates and
folks at the mortgage finance
authority we.
We're able to put out I utilize
community grant block of
community.
I always forget the acronyms of
CDBG funding to really help not
only just renters but landlords
who were having difficulties
paying their their rent or their
mortgage and and and towards the
end of the year all we're
worried because of the millions
of dollars that needed to be
spent the mortgage finance
authority was successful in
doing that and so while that was
a temporary relief for many we
need to see we need to really
fill in the gaps to really fix
some of the issues that exist in
have existed for a long time and
that's what house bill one
eleven attempts to do and so
that's sort of the the the
history of how we got here and
all that Representative role
metal speak to the specifics of
what this legislation will try
to accomplish thank you
Representative Rubio I'll just
talk briefly about the bill
that's in front of you so again
this is been the work of ten
months and really with the
pandemic in mind we were already
in a housing crisis in New
Mexico prior to being faced with
the challenges of housing that
we do now our biggest concern
has been landlord and tenant
rights that's what this
modernization piece really looks
at is what that relationship is
how it relates to the legal
system and providing the inputs
and outputs that are necessary
for protecting people's rights
in the process so really what it
does is it balances those rights
between the landlord and the
tenant we've been getting calls
I think from everyone in the
legislature who's been
responding to somebody is
something housing related so
what this also does is
modernized essentially the
barriers to finding the
resources to be able to pay your
rent we have understood that the
discrimination that goes on in
our state regarding where
payments come from whether it's
a voucher or another sort of a
supplementary way of paying
rent.
landlords currently will
prohibit their tenants from
paying in that way including
testimony that we've had heard
from the state of New Mexico
wanting to provide renters
resources that they absolutely
qualify for whether it be
veterans assistance child
support a social security income
etcetera they've been unable to
make those payments to certain
landlords I'm so we want to be
able to update our system in New
Mexico to ensure that that
discrimination no longer takes
place that's one of the biggest
low hanging fruit pieces in this
legislation and then finally
what's really exciting and has
come about because of this
legislation is a housing council
so currently in New Mexico just
for background for some of our
new members the only form of
housing sort of resources that
we have as a at a statewide
level is the mortgage finance
authority and they have been
absolutely instrumental with us
and working on how to modernize
our our our housing system
there are quite a governmental
organization so although our
our interim committees to meet
with them they really are
focused on more than anything
affordable housing so this is
the first time ever New Mexico's
history but they've gotten
involved in renters rates and
being able to provide that
resource so not only do we want
to thank them for stepping up
and helping us with this we want
to be able to provide this
legislation to help with
modernizing our overall housing
system so with that I have many
experts and that's because this
is.
Legally dense a piece of
legislation but I do want to
introduce them really quickly
and then they'll be here to
answer any questions with me I
have Maria Griego she's with the
she's the director of the
economic equity at the center
The New Mexico Center for long
poverty Karen Myers is the
director of consumer financial
protection initiative with the
City of Albuquerque surge
Martinez is not only my
professor at the UNM School of
law he also works in the
economic justice clinic and
supports a lot of the landlord
tenant relations
with us also Riley Massey she's
a housing attorney with New
Mexico legal aid and Rachel
Biggs is with us as the policy
director from the Albuquerque
health care for the homeless and
finally Elizabeth Ely a
professor who I haven't had it
yet but also works on the use of
housing housing vouchers at the
UNM School of law and works in
preventing discrimination
through the Human Rights Act as
well so with that I'm I will I
think we'll just take questions
if we may I know it's.
It's a big piece but I I'm
really looking forward to the
dialogue thank you madam chair.
Thank thank you for that
presentation and thank you all
of the expert witnesses I
recognize a lot of your names
and so welcome to us the act so
now we will go to the to the
audience first we will do people
if there are people here who are
I'm in opposition to this bill
please raise your hand if you
don't know how
it's under participants there
should be a of a place to raise
your hand under participants so
go ahead and do that.
And I'll give you a a little
while to make sure that we that
people can some people don't
spend twelve hours a day on so
those lucky people.
Not have had to figure out how
to how to do this so so I'm
going to give them a little more
time.
Okay so I see some hands raised
and now I will ask you to lower
your hand if you do not want to
speak.
Okay so we will start with mark
Fiedler go ahead mark when it
whenever you're and.
Whenever you're in an and ready
to go.
Okay
Madam chair and members of the
committee I will not take much
of the committee's time as
you've already heard from me via
an email Video regarding this
bill.
with respect to the bill Sanchez
although the uniform resident
relations act could certainly
use some updating this bill does
not do a good job of doing so I
am a licensed property manager
and I'm very familiar with that
law the unintended consequences
of implementing this bill as
written will be to harm tenants
rather than to protect them is
certainly was intended you will
also harm the state's economy
overall.
If the Sanchez would like to
take another run at this in the
future I and others in the
property management industry
would certainly volunteer to
help sidestep some of the land
mines in the proposed bill I
urge the committee to vote
against it thank you so much for
your time.
Thank you market we have Bobby
Griffin.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Bobby
Griffith.
President of the parliament
Association in New Mexico.
I'm also a.
Owner of.
Around five thousand units in
the state of New Mexico.
My company is J. O. great and we
are mostly in the affordable
housing industry.
We're one of the largest
providers of affordable housing
with New Mexico mortgage finance
authority very familiar with
them.
I don't want to say that I
oppose the entire bill I believe
there are a lot of issues with
that I don't think are favorable
to either side.
I do want to say that recently
that NMFA made available some
on funding my company received a
hundred and forty thousand
dollars and helping residents
pay their bills we were able to
do that with the.
New Mexico mortgage finance
authority that was money that
was released in December.
I wish there was a way that more
money could be released quicker
because we do have a lot of
residents that definitely need
help with this pandemic and so
many people being put out of
work and not able to effectively
pay all their bills we
understand we do work out
agreements with our residents
but to tie our hands overall I
think it's a little frustrating
I do want to say that as part of
an association is a large
organization we represent over
sixty thousand units of the
state of New Mexico with over
eight hundred members it's sort
of disheartening to me as the
president of that organization
that there's been meeting since
March and sounded like every
other Friday and that we have
not been asked to be at the
table which I do believe that I
think that we could reach the.
agreeable situation when we and
if we could just talked about
this and I think that we need
time to have a say instead of
just have been
this before the committee I do
want to say that some of the
things that extending the
eviction process I'm I'm I'm
mainly want to indicate I I
understand what we're trying to
accomplish but when we put
everybody in the same
I guess category we have
residents who become bad violent
issues like that and we're
talking about extending how long
time it is for them to be
evicted so those are a little
bit of issues for us to if this
is not just about payment of
rent we're talking about fiction
and there's more than just a
fiction for non payment of rent
as I think you understand I
think we need to clarify that
and learn how to address that I
do want to say thank you to the
group of for allowing us to
speak and the apartment
association of New Mexico and
its government affairs committee
would love to be able to sit
down with the the bill of the.
The people who made the bill and
and have some discussions before
this is actually proposed but
what we're available and would
love to discuss thank you for
your time madam chair.
Thank you Bobby chart Sheldon.
Madam chair.
Members of the committee.
my name is Chuck Sheldon.
I own TMC management we manage
about two thousand units here in
the state and the state of New
Mexico.
we also have over between two
hundred fifty and five hundred
vouchers that we support people
on and and work with agencies to
take people that have been and
and dire straits so we
understand these funding
mechanisms.
I'm also chair of the government
affairs committee for the
apartment association you have
had the opportunity to work with
several of the.
Cultural is on the other side.
But as Bobby growth was
mentioning you know
unfortunately we haven't had an
opportunity to sit down and and
actually have an exchange of
ideas as to how this might work.
my key point.
Is this is going to do the act
it opposite of what we're trying
to achieve we're sure to
workforce housing at this time.
I putting more constraints.
On the owners and we're talking
about affecting owners that are
small business people.
No we had a case.
Yeah and northern New Mexico.
What older couple have property
you're using it to live on.
Because of the moratorium you
know the tenants were able to
pay rent but now you have an
older they can't make payments
either so you know there's an
inequity here and trying to
figure this out how it's going
to work for all parties and it
can't just be a blunt on the
owners that have come about in
their small owners in you
everybody has a mom and dad that
have lived in the home and saved
for that home and then lost.
I.
We need to make sure that we're
not affecting those folks and
what we're trying to do here and
one of the things I've seen and
looking at these bills and
looking at the aspects of the
bill of not allowing people to
get their property back people
deciding not to pay rent.
In FMA has in fact helped
people.
But only with.
Federally loaned properties we
have no one helping really
easily.
People and not market properties
so they're running the blot for
example we have a over three
hundred thousand dollars out an
unpaid rents.
Chris small company that's a lot
of money.
Yes we were looking at extending
that in not being able to get
help.
To collect rent to support these
people so then the burden falls
on us.
To do that and support the
people and I understand we need
to have a housing.
But we need to figure out a way
so is commensurate to both
parties the tenants and the
owners it can't just be put on
the owners you have to support
the tenant.
Yeah we're gonna lose properties
as well but what we are and
where I get my thesis is that
we're going to stop investment
in New Mexico.
Money won't quit coming in New
Mexico to build more buildings
we are short now and having
workforce housing it's going to
be.
It's going to get more critical
here within the state.
Again I second the notion that
we need to set out to be able to
talk and see how we work through
these things I can't be in favor
of the bill the way it's written
in the impacts is going to have
on the market place.
In on my.
Madam chair thank you for the
opportunity for be able to speak
here today.
Thank you Chuck and we will go
to Ernest Gallo.
Madam chair can you hear me.
If we can hear you are just go
ahead madam chair Thompson and
committee members thank you for
your.
The time hello my name is Ernest
right now and I am a retired
machinist there was a employed
at General Electric I also come
from a small business
background family background
many in in my family owned of
rental units are that they used
to help supplement their their
retirement income or their
income in general.
during this time of me working
at General.
Electric you know I have the
opportunity to invest in a four
oh one K. my father always said
that real estate was the best
investment because it wasn't as
well.
All of bill is as the stock
market so I I took his lead on
that and I invested in some
rental housing and
Fortunately I was able to read
retire in and I am one of those
so called small business people
that utilize the rental income
to help subsidize my retirement.
The and I just like to say that
the current law addresses non
discrimination the current law
addresses rules and regulations
pertaining to compliance or
noncompliance by both parties.
Is the could be tweaked in error
yes yes it could but to the
extent that it's been done I
agree with with more.
And charco it's it's it's too
one sided and I've dealt with
some really good renters and
I've dealt with some bad ones
that I thought I had read it
very well.
In this legislation just makes
it really tough to the vex
somebody for an you know non
compliance of a lease agreement
first our or or just are out
right destruction of property
and it's it's not good and in my
eyes the pro the proposed
legislation does not address are
guaranteed compensation to the
landlords.
For loss of income and or
possibility for closure due to
the non payment of the rent and
them not being able to pay the
mortgage company currently the
way it stands you can get a hold
of a mortgage company and say
Hey my renters aren't paying the
rent are you know can I get a
pass on the mortgages.
And then they'll they'll line
you up with the a planned so say
maybe for twelve months or
something at the end of that
twelve months and you get a
balloon payment for all of the
back.
Active mortgages is owed and you
have to continue on making your
payments there's a lot of people
that have invested that don't
have their properties of fully
paid for and they they stand for
closure if they don't have any
income coming in at all and the
the section thirteen of the
renewal of agree
Excuse me the renewal of the
agreement during
the an emergency that's been
extended to the lease agreements
just really really ties our
hands I mean there could be
people out there I hate to say
it but there could be people out
there that say you know what I
just don't want to be in the
central.
Worker and I'm not going to work
therefore I don't have to pay
rent and I don't have to worry
about it right you know at.
It's unfortunate but there are
people out there like that
you know like I said the the
proposed legislation arms the
mom and pop landlords that rely
on this income.
For support
and in closing I would just like
to say say I stand in strong
opposition to this proposal that
legislation is written thank you
for your time thank you okay we
have Steve Ross.
Can you hear me.
Yes we can go ahead.
All right thank you very much
madam chair members of the
committee thank you for the
opportunity to speak against
this bill again as it's
structured and written
I also echo both Bobby and
trucks comments as well as the
other folks that have spoken
against this I hopefully in
assisting way I can kind of give
you all a little bit different
perspectives I am the executive
director of the supportive
housing coalition of New Mexico.
And we actually are with what's
in this bill as Bobby indicated
there's certain aspects of this
that makes good sense so
certainly the bill it's all is
not without merit however the
bill in its entirety is
structured does pose a lot of
problems and challenges and
specifically for our
organization.
Our mission is to end hope
homelessness by providing
permanent supportive housing to
individuals and families so this
might seem a little peculiar to
you from our standpoint but we
actually do this in two ways we
provide a lot of vouchers with
contracts to the city and work
with the seven hundred and fifty
landlords throughout Albuquerque
to help people that have
experience homeless to get house
the other side is we currently
own and or manage seven low
income properties so therefore
we set as a landlord in that
capacity.
So with what's in this bill and
some of the aspects of this bill
it really will create problems
for a nonprofit like us going
forward in terms of being able
to help people stay stably
housed one thing just indicate
to that I know this has a COVID
our relationship to it but in
twenty twenty we actually
experienced a loss of some
seventy six thousand dollars by
not being able to work a
collector and so forth now
having said that yes there's
been some good steps forward
both MFA that we work with as
well as other loans that were
provided to help.
The.
The business's and even non
profits like us to kind of help
sustain some of this but again
what we see going forward as the
way this is structured it puts
the entire burden of what's
trying to be.
Accomplished on a landlords and
property owners so again it
presents a problem even within
our own organization so I wanted
to at least your those
particular points with you
and I would just add that
there's there's kind of a ripple
affect your you for a little bit
of it but it have nonprofit
organization like we are you
know we would need we need to
continue to maintain these
facilities the pay the utilities
to pay our staff it goes on and
on so there's quite a few
suppliers that enter into the
picture for what we do and for
us as well as other landlords
and property managers so what we
would see here is that creating
more problems going forward
especially when you look at all
the extensions that are put in
here when it comes to evictions
and lastly I would just point
out that the other aim within
our organization by being
supportive and trying to keep
people safe stably housed is we
have a lot of staff to try to
work with the are the
individuals that we both work in
our voucher program as well as
that are in the properties that
were managing to do the best job
we can for the resources they
need so that they can continue
to stay health and whether that
has to do with.
Rental assistance income or
whether there also has to do
with any health or behavioral
health issues that's what we do
but we can see where there's
problems with how this is done
in again I would also point out
that I we definitely would want
to sit down to be able to look
at how we can take the merits of
what's in here but with the
other aspects of it that are
affecting the industry to really
come out with the right solution
that works for everybody in that
sense and I would just indicate
to I'm our organization we are a
member of the department
sensation I'm a past board
member I currently serve on the
go current affairs council that
truck mention madam chair
members of the committee thank
you very much thank you for this
opportunity.
Thank you and we have mapped.
All right can you hear me we can
hear you met okay I just saw I
agree with everyone that spoke
before me I am a property
manager all right here in Clovis
New Mexico are rather small
compared to several the other
people that spoke but I still
manage and own a good portion of
about two hundred properties.
One of one concern that I just
want to add on to this as has
been voiced prior is that know
our did a statistics report in
two thousand eighteen that shows
that seventy two and a half
percent of all rental property
owners are still individual
owners these are big
corporations are these are often
times your neighbors our own
people the only own one or two
properties this law further
restricts their ability to have
economic output from the rental
units on basically it it adds
more restrictions on a big shins
but not only objections for non
payment of rents but for just
termination of leases and
general of things that could be
our economic activity anybody
can terminate a lease in order
to hopefully maybe sell a house
to remodel to rezone
effectively under this law gives
tenants some loopholes that
could be exploited by lawyers as
well as themselves and chords
that make them
on able to have their lease
terminated R. one loophole would
be in any assistance payments
that that is the if an
assistance payment as paid on
behalf of the tenant from you
know any sort of assistance out
there are that it would hold a
termination of lease for the
next six months because it would
be in the landlord as
retaliatory
what this does is it creates
unintended consequences that
landlords will often times are
not to accept the payments that
could effectively help these
tenants secondly is that.
If more landlords are leaving
the business or not invest in
this business
it leaves more property managers
more bigger places that are
gonna tie in their application
process they're gonna tie in
their criteria and it's gonna
have the unintended
constitutions of hurting these
tenants that most need the help
of for instance there's a good
portion of people out there that
have bad credit that of criminal
history or have no credit
they're often times looking for
a starter home if it becomes too
risky or the the prospect of
taking them is is too risky for
the land or they will just not
help these people I think there
is too many unintended
consequences of these tenants
the ones that often times need
the most help of no longer
getting that help to the laws
that are implemented such as
this are thank you for your time
I just wanted to voice our quick
opinion on the matter.
Okay thank you.
We'll go to the audience for
people who are in support of
this bill please raise your hand
and again it's under the
participants.
Okay and now if you wish to
speak please leave your hand up
if you do not you can lower your
hand.
And I'm going to ask that we
that we maybe be a little
quicker
Just just
keep keep its expected
thank you.
My.
Walk up and she's not a happy
camper if you can't hear but
luckily my husband is back and
he's that he's managing things
so so we will start with that
Justin Rogers.
Right yes I think moment to
reload on me it's well my name
is Justin Rogers I'm a Committee
in Albuquerque and also a member
of the renters coalition of
Albuquerque how we as a new
fledgling organization for
tenant rights support this bill.
Because it I run these at least
three things that have affected
some of us personally and the
other folks that we know first
the license the timeline of the
eviction process allows renters
paid Representative for
individuals or groups.
Second because it prevents
landlords from refusing to renew
released during the state of
emergency like the current
pandemic and I only because it
prohibits discrimination on the
basis the source of income.
Well I'm also going to review
that just a few lines of
statements from one of our other
members to ensure CEO who is
unable to join us right now
because he is at work like many
people during the day of Julian
says in my role as a social
worker case manager I witnessed
firsthand situations that would
have been easily remedied for
renter has been able to pay back
rent after the fiction was
ordered in most cases of serious
mental health crisis or the
ending of a period of hard won
sobriety could have been avoided
if the client has not allowed a
few extra days to get the money
together to pay their rents.
In one of the hardest things my
career I with this land will
refuse to lease apartments one
of my clients because they have
a housing voucher through the
local Housing Authority landlord
stated that they had a history
of working with the voucher
programs and didn't like the
types of tenants they sent his
way my client who still living
on the streets of that time had
worked extraordinarily hard to
overcome that there severe
mental illness to fill out the
application and get no
identification papers the
landlords casual refusal to
lease was soul crushing my
clients and reducing the myself
it be one Levin's protections on
source of income which for that
situations like this and
countless others are happening
again.
Thank you.
This thank you yes we have
Nicole Martinez.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Nicole Martinez this month
celebrates fifteen years of
employment at the agency in our
Community of Hope in Los crucis
I work with people experiencing
homelessness and last year with
the assistance of our amazing
landlords staffing managers we
house five hundred and seventy
people in dynamic hearing.
During my tenure here I've seen
my fair share regulations that
increase the likelihood of
someone becoming homeless many
of which are being addressed by
HB one eleven.
As a housing service provider
who helped with rental subsidies
for five requests I can attest
that it often takes longer than
three days to get current on
rent especially if they're going
through an agency that has to
fill grant requirements.
We also know that housing stock
is limited all over the state so
adding eight days to the current
seven to help someone okay
housing is extremely important.
Just yesterday our agency became
aware of how our program tenants
are being discriminated against.
In one situation a local land or
houses many of our clients
issued a zero tolerance document
to our clients leaving this
document out that are resigning
so we were unaware of this
happening.
The document stated that only
those in housing programs will
receive the zero tolerance form
would be addicted immediately if
there were any disturbances.
Please we urge you to help us
dismantle the out of date and
unrealistic time frames that
currently exist in New Mexico
law.
We need our landlords we can't
provide housing without them but
we also need the laws to fairly
reflect ways that will lead us
to more successful housing
outcomes for all thank you.
Thank you.
Rebecca Malartic.
Okay.
Sorry yes we can hear you
Rebecca go ahead.
Hi
my name is Rebecca R. A. I am
the director of policy and
planning for the New Mexico
mortgage finance authority or
MFA one
on our alleged official
penetrated agenda that is
approved by both our board and
and I think legislative
oversight committee because bill
was that right now after the
insurance session and I did work
with bill writers on section
fourteen of the bill which
create a housing how to service
the state interdisciplinary
coordinating body integrate
coordinate outline housing
service.
Thank is really excited about
the housing County we believe
that you know the way housing is
funded in our state I go to a
lot of different entity and we
believe that collaboration of
many of the housing entity will
really online resources to meet
the needs of affordable have.
Thank you very much.
Thank you Rebecca right now
loose what is.
Hi my name is they know what is
I am building a community school
coordinator at Whittier
elementary school I work for
Albuquerque public schools as
well as ABC community school
partnership I'm also the former
president of the south some
better neighborhood association
and both my my community service
work and my role as the APS
employee I have worked with a
lot of families that have
experienced housing instability
and I'm
I I'm here today to testify in
support of house bill one eleven
and I urge the committee members
to support this bill as well
thank you.
Thank you.
Kirk Rader.
Definitely madam chair members
of the committee my name is
director and the director of
litter evidence to New Mexico
and also speaking today on
behalf of the Mexican firms of
churches.
I'm here today to offered
through CS six support for H. B.
one eleven the housing
modernization bill begin by
stating that we believe housing
is a fundamental human right and
indeed the US government stated
the commitment to the goal that
all citizens have decent housing
and a suitable living
environment in the federal
housing act of nineteen forty
nine unfortunately we've seen
too many governmental and
institutional policy since that
time they have indeed
contributed to the to
homelessness are outdated
uniform on a residence
residential relations act as an
example of that.
In Albuquerque journal article
back in nineteen January two
thousand twenty so before the
current pandemic began it was
noted that according to a report
of the US department of housing
and urban development New Mexico
had the nation's largest
percentage increase in
homelessness from two thousand
eighteen to two thousand
nineteen the report in it they
read the report and reporting a
reported an increase of twenty
seven percent Furthermore the
report indicated that New Mexico
also had a fifty seven percent
increase in chronic forms missed
that year also the highest in
the nation there's no disputing
the fact Mexico already had a
housing crisis before the
beginning pandemic began and all
available data thus far
indicates the crisis is only
continue to grow.
While there are a variety of
avenues that must be pursued to
address address both the system
systemic issues and the current
emergency H. B. one eleven would
allow for many positive steps to
be taken to address the housing
and homelessness crisis we face
we urge your support madam chair
members of the committee thank
you for the opportunity to speak
to you today.
Thank you Catherine carpenter.
I hate to interrupt you can you
either get closer to your might
or speak up a little bit.
Yeah sorry about that much
better thank you our our age we
want to eleven would well
housing equity and would meet
the clients that work so hard to
navigate the maze of public
benefit programs would finally
be equipped with the tools they
need to sustain and promote
housing equity we know that
source of income legislation
improves voucher program
effectiveness and increases the
voucher utilization rate
leveraging housing funds wisely
in opening the door to
opportunity for hospitals that
would otherwise struggle to
achieve housing equity but if
you want to love and so much
more than a desperately needed
source of income law it also
addresses the eviction crisis by
expanding time frames for
tenants to get current on rent
to prepare for court and to
secure new housing ultimately
preventing homelessness thank
you so much for your time today.
Thank you Catherine we will
serve the feet and M..
And when you come on can you
please introduce yourself.
Hello.
Yes.
Introduced as I went out this is
my name is eva settlement and I
apologize that my name is not
correct there I am in strong
support of this legislation as a
small property owner.
In New Mexico
I currently rents a room in my
house and I am considering
renting my entire house and at
the end of the day most of these
provisions will not affect my
bottom line and they are simply
the right thing to do for
tenants you need need time to
get current on rent especially
when many tenants will face
eviction at the end of the
moratorium and I find it
astounding actually hear that
tenant can be evicted within a
matter of weeks after and even
just a small portion of rent
it's just and humane and I've
lived in other cities where it
would take a minimum many months
of active tenant and our
landlord tenant laws were were
up more aligned with this
proposed proposed legislation
positive that and these other
cities are balanced landlord
tenant laws did not harm small
landlords I had friends who were
small landlords themselves if
this is let's legislation just
simply the right thing to do for
tenants thank you for the
opportunity to speak.
And we have rich we never.
Yes madam chair members of the
committee my name is rich when
there are I was the fair housing
attorney for New Mexico legal
aid from two thousand to two
thousand six we have fortunately
have not had funding to have
another fair housing coordinator
and I have been involved in
housing issues and I and number
of capacities since then this is
the first time in the over
twenty years I worked in the
area of housing including
landlord tenant law that I have
seen a significant change to
landlord tenant law which is is
what people said seriously
outdated.
And I I believe that this bill
will go a long way towards
leveling the playing field it's
much easier for landlords to
evict tenants and for tenants
will related actions regardless
of legal another legal legal
services organizations out there
many tenants do not get
sufficient they're not able to
get Representative they don't
even necessarily know that they
can get Representative if if if
there are our lawyers available
for Representative so I and I am
also a property owner one one
medical property I also want to
do the right thing so I really I
stand in support of HB what one
eleven and I commend to sponsors
of this bill and the team of
experts who have worked with
them over the last ten months to
get us to this place thank you
very much.
Your Nancy Koenigsberg.
And I just hi Nancy.
I'm.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee
my name is Nancy Koehn expert
and for thirty two years I
Representative people with
disabilities and in many
instances I and my colleagues
Representative people in
addiction situations one of the
things that was extraordinarily
difficult.
Where the short timelines under
the current law and it was.
Not infrequent for us to get
calls on a Friday night to try
to prevent
innovation and and madam chair
I'm not sure.
If I am.
I can't tell if I am.
You can hear me we can hear you
Nancy okay thanks I just
couldn't tell so I and to to not
belabor the point there are I I
agree with much of what was said
I do want to focus on the
expanded time frames again as
rich we said one of the things
that we find out is that often
people don't know where or how
to provide legal representation
and by the time they got to our
organization disability rights
New Mexico things were I'm on a
very short time frame and part
of what we did end up doing is
I'm asking for extensions in the
opportunities under expanding
the time frames I think are very
important having ten days
instead of three to get current
on rent
twenty one days instead of ten
days to prepare for court which
is hugely important again when
people don't know where to turn
to for.
Low or no cost legal
representation and for of form
many of my clients having extra
time to secure new housing and
without if in fact they were
affected or additional time off
and people with disabilities
have a far more difficult time
than people without in I'm
looking for and finding other
housing especially people who
need ADA accommodations because
a mobility impairments so I as a
as a former legal advocate for
folks I would strongly support
this bill to protect the rights
of people with disabilities and
others to both maintain and
secure for housing thank you.
Thank you Nancy we have Kate
Bennett.
Can you hear me up.
Yes we can hear you Kate.
Okay we could hear you now we
can't again.
Yes you are.
That's very weird because what I
just muted myself as far as I
can tell but anyway I'm glad you
can hear you on that I'm I am an
advocate with independent living
resource center we work with
people with disabilities I.
Achievements great quality of
life as possible and I recently
have been very surprised at my
experience with the voucher up
not that before I was doing what
I was what I'm doing now which
is basically a general list of
for many years I was a housing.
As an.
I used to tell people because I
would go through their their
possibilities and I would say
and heaven on earth for people
with disabilities is the voucher
because you can't live where you
want to and
you will be at subsidized rates
what is happened recently is I'm
just going to very quickly.
One consumer and she's given.
All.
Sure she is in a wheelchair that
she has about sure she's had a
project for a while she was
forced to look for another place
it took me.
And she worked every day and I
worked with so then we would
talk in the morning she were to
probably twelve hours a day at
which I would work a few hours a
day to find a place that would
accept disabilities we what we
looked at mom and pop apartments
we look at large apartment
complexes we look at affordable
housing we looked at large
property management company
these are one of the only
management company I ever felt
that I must.
Eight or ten of them well let's
Maddox's I have to thank them
and I just want to publicly
thank them for being such great
people they accept about sure
that they didn't have any
openings that might.
The only way that we found when
was that there's only one group
of the departments and the cost
in Albuquerque that to that must
take the voucher and it doesn't
seem to cause them any trouble
that they must take it.
The tax credit.
Hey I got the whole rest of that
that they that the tax credit
thank you and that they staff
there were lovely and and we
went through every single one
it's still too probably over a
month once you have that list
and finally found that now she
is in a wheelchair she so she
had to have an apartment that
was either by elevator or on the
first floor and it took that
long and to provide to one and
what I will tell you is that she
looked and I looked at what was
so shocking we looked on use the
internet of course and we use go
section eight.
And this is something that is
certainly changed because the
majority as in almost all of the
ninety percent of the section
eight properties that were on
its so called on go to section
eight were told them that told
her and me that they would not
take the section eight.
So that I mean that's that's an
indication of the problem we
also use DELLOSO which is
usually excellent nobody on zero
and one other thing that
happened and I know that to
there is one that I I guess I'm
not going to give the name but
there's one company that that
that really manages are doing
this for a long time I really
pretty much know the players and
I want to come to be that
overseas the.
Most of the really really
downtrodden apartments and we
call them and but they also
features some nice.
And so we called we called them
we asked them and they said
basically that only the ones in
control dangerous.
We're the ones that the could be
that we're we're one where she
could use the voucher she is she
being three bedroom and none of
their houses even this this
organization actually
specializes in lowincome and has
a lot of low quality apartments
and I'm not giving the name
that they would not allow her to
move into one of the few nice
once because she is using share
this with the I appreciate you
giving me the time yes that is
that I do have another concert
our who had much your similar
situation can you start wrapping
it up we still.
People I'm sorry yes there's one
other a tenant who is who ended
up having to go back to his own
apartment where he had been
which was in a really dangerous
area so thank you I appreciate
it I know I took a lot.
That's okay thank thank you we
have bring us so we're really.
Hello can you hear me we can
hear you great thank you I'm
good evening madam chair members
of the committee I represent the
New Mexico coalition to end
homelessness which is a
membership organization of
eighty homeless service
providers throughout the state
which have endorsed this
legislation our coalition
operates many functions within
the systemic rom of homelessness
and housing but one of one of
which is the facilitation of the
Albuquerque and balance of state
continuum of care for people
experiencing homelessness
through this we manage the
coordinated entry system to
manage the process of housing
people who are experiencing
homelessness through the use of
rapid re housing vouchers and
permanent supportive housing
vouchers.
We strongly support house bill
one eleven because it
strengthens protections for for
prospective tenants to increase
their voice of the housing
options available to them
without being discriminated
against for their housing
assistance we hear story after
story from homeless service
providers of certain landlords
that will accept housing
vouchers which drives people
into certain areas of town and
limits their options and
opportunities to expand to other
places throughout town or the
state to use those housing
vouchers.
The measures house bill one
eleven are important because
they address many of the
barriers low income families and
individuals face on a daily
basis and maintaining their
housing stability through the
protections for extended
protections for objections while
also addressing significant
barriers that homeless service
providers and civil legal
service providers face in
responding systemically to
homelessness and housing
security and housing and
security.
And with that I ate I thank you.
Thank you Tina Cruz.
Regardless of income level with
access to justice under our
system of civil law.
Goals of the commission include
expanding resources for civil
legal assistance to New Mexicans
living in poverty and increasing
public awareness of the need for
civil legal assistance.
And my capacity as co chair of
the eighty Chasey.
I am here today to let your
committee now that the
commission supports house bill
one eleven to the extent the
legislation will allow for
landlords and tenants to access
the federal funding that will be
made available to New Mexico for
rental assistance and or
basement due to the economic
consequences of the COVID the
current deadlines in the uniform
owner resident relations act do
not adequately allow for
landlords to be paid and for
tenants to access the federal
funding that is being made
available.
The commission believes that the
expanded deadlines set forth in
H. B. one eleven we'll help
ameliorate that concern.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you for your
work on behalf of the citizens
of New Mexico and for the
opportunity to speak with you
all today.
Thank you to know this one is
the phone number that ends in
nine seven nine seven.
And when you come on can you
please introduce yourself.
Hello.
We can hear you can you hear yes
hi my name is Evelyn sh and
I am a voucher to tenant.
Thank thank goodness because
before this my address was an
alley in Albuquerque sh and
I wanted to say I am currently
residing.
in the international district at
Louisiana and central and not a
very healthy place to live if
you look up the amount of these
calls and adwords calls sh and I
have been looking for stray for
better housing
and I found a lot of.
Reluctance on the part of
landlords to rent to people with
vouchers.
I used to be a homeowner my home
got tipped upside down in the
mortgage crisis and
And I'm not a shabby Senator by
any means and yet.
When I ask people you know do
you accept vouchers it is like
to work doctor turned some off
together a preconceived notion
of who is shopping with the
voucher sh and I just want to
say how very unfair and limiting
that is I'm still right now my
president location at eight PM
central and that still shopping
well now I'm locked into a lease
for years but still looking to
move out of this kind of
neighborhood and yet being about
your tenant seems to be a big
barrier.
And I just want to say stop
that.
Thank you.
Thank you an exam we we are so
glad that your house now
and our last a public comment is
Deanna Crichton cook.
Hi madam chair thank you for
this opportunity to speak this
is Deanna Crichton cut
I work with education in
Albuquerque New Mexico and I
would just like to take this
opportunity to reiterate all of
the comments that have come
before me regarding extending
the time frame for evictions
which really allows renters to
get to their next pay period
before they have an opportunity
to make up their background but
I also really want to highlight
a piece of the bill that hasn't
really been mentioned yet and
that is the formation of the
housing council housing is not
really just about housing
housing is a very intersectional
issue that has impacts that are
very broad and wide ranging for
families and one of the things
that I see working in education
is a very direct line between
students residential instability
student mobility and educational
outcomes we also see that there
are some really strong
connections to toxic stress
child's endangerment and abuse
when families are constantly
moving from place to place and
are not able to have a stable
and safe home environment so the
housing council woods bring all
of the people together across
our state agencies and in
departments who have a part to
play in this in in offering
housing supports and to focus on
leveraging and optimizing those
resources so that we're all
working towards a common goal
and there's one common point of
contact at the state level for
people who are experiencing
challenges or discrimination or
just for resources that are
coming in to make sure that
they're able to get out in a
timely manner that they're
getting to the people who need
them the most and that
discussions are happening with
everybody at the table that are
inclusive and collaborative
thank.
You so much for this opportunity
to speak and I clearly have in
support of yes on this bill.
Thank you and that's all the
public comment we have so I will
go to the committee for
questions.
And if you if you raise your
hand or or wave or.
Whatever and.
I am not okay Representative up
Representative Lord I see your
hand now go ahead.
An issue that was clicking the
button and it wasn't allowing me
to do anything I'm.
I I again it's another bill
where understand what people's
intentions are but I really
think that there should have
been someone reaching out to the
apartment association only
because I have been in landlord
and I actually have a tenant who
did not pay the rent and it was
really hard to me financially
because I had to pay for
everything and then I actually
have to get them addicted and
they destroyed my house and so
you know there's always another
side to the store and I would
have liked to have seen more
inclusion of understanding that
it can't just be told and one
sided there has to be inclusion
of some safety to people that do
on their homes and are renting
them and I also understand that
we do have a two minute spell
laws actually called a friend of
mine who
you Madam front park someone to
get his opinion on this and he
said we do already have a
tremendous amount of laws in
place already and that and
they're usually on the side of
the tenant verses with him and
he said the same thing if we
have to wait longer it just puts
more strain on the people that
only apartments and own the
housing so that's all to Senate
thank you very much Madam.
Thank you Representative lord
any other questions.
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair.
I terminate my camera from time
to time because of the parade of
people what look at me too often
they're they're gonna get tired
of looking at me so apologize.
I I do have a question for the
bill Sanchez
Once again.
Was there a specific
conversation with the governor
Rick regarding us this this bill
as I read it actually creates a
housing council and so when the
governor's office and again I go
back to discussions.
And goals for the legislative
session and then our state of
the state address doesn't
address this and so can you can
you can you answer that for me
that I have another question.
Thank you madam chair
yes we've definitely been in
contact with the governor's
office and and and and in
particular if you'll read of
many of the analyses between the
Indian Affairs council CYFD AG's
office New Mexico mortgage
finance authority and the admin
office of the courts they're all
in support course that's her
administration that said I would
love to call on my
support expert Serge Martinez to
talk about the housing council
specifically.
Yeah absolutely so the the
council
As has been mentioned is
an intersectional of creation
that would bring together the
folks who have who in their work
have responsibility for touches
housing in some way at the
governmental level at the public
in the in the public sphere
people who are experiencing
housing people who working in
areas that that are affected by
housing in an effort to really
facilitate a statewide
conversation to coordinate some
of the response to to share
information about what's
happening in different places
and have sort of a central a
nerve center for housing in New
Mexico it's it's it's an absence
that is keenly felt by those of
us who work in the housing area
that there's no one place to go
for example when the pandemic
started there was a big question
of okay is the state going to be
able to respond and.
Many of us were running around
calling each other because we
didn't know who to speak to at
at at a at the state level to
say okay what it is there
something that we can do so the
the point of this is a it's a
conversational nexus information
sharing opportunity and ability
to really understand all the
different ways that housing is
affects different social goals
that we have education community
development and the like and
public health personal health
mental health and also again try
to bring together enough people
that people regularly to talk
about that and and really come
up with a understanding on state
level of policy plans resources
and needs.
Thank you madam chair vice chair
Romero and that.
Mr Martinez I'm.
Not sure I got the answer I was
suppose we're shooting for.
I'm not trying to not not trying
to push you in a certain
direction I just need of.
The fiscal analysis that that
that looking at somewhere around
a hundred thirty percent
increase or for storage
workforce solutions.
significant changes in human
rights and human rights.
bureau and so many different
things and I just don't see any
of that address so the
governor's budget.
Madam chair at Representative
Pettigrew if FMA on those
substantive changes
essentially the what you're
looking at from the department
department of workforce
solutions and we've been in
contact with them about some of
the question on essentially a
discrepancy of a confusion about
what we're changing in the act
itself we're just changing the
definition to ensure that folks
who are receiving income from
another source at that that this
is within the Human Rights Act
so that every thing that folks
have talked about in the gallery
about having an and eight a
source of income that may not
just be from their own pocket it
cannot be discriminated against
and so I think what we've what
we've been trying to discuss
with them and what we hope to
clarify with them is that the
administrative burden burden and
if you read through some of the
question on like office supplies
and what would cost money we we
do not anticipate that and and
definitely think that if it's
perhaps reading correctly as
what we're asking the office to
do and just Representative that
if you have a source of income
from another source it's it's
something that can be dealt with
as a means of discrimination
within the Human Rights Act alt
also let if we can if I may
madam chair of our experts on
the Human Rights Act
specifically Rachel Biggs is
with us to discuss that and
she's with Albuquerque health
care for the homeless.
Or.
Members of the committee thanks
for the opportunity I would like
to echo what they represented
had just stated about the Human
Rights Act this is simply adding
source of income as a protected
class under the Human Rights Act
there's already provisions and
the Human Rights Act you allow
for
Arguments of discrimination in
housing so this is already dealt
with that we're not adding
anything near in terms of
housing rowdy source of income
specifically this is also been
shown to be really effective in
other areas eighteen other
states in the country have
source of income discrimination
laws we're kind of behind the
times there's hundreds of other
localities across the country
that already passed these laws
it's pretty bottom of the barrel
in terms of protections but it's
it's the first thing that we
need to do and it's the right
thing that we need to do as you
heard from our testimony today
to make sure that people have
access to affordable housing
throughout New Mexico
I would just like to add that
what we see in terms of source
of income discrimination is it
is often uses other proxies for
discrimination against on people
with disabilities are that based
on someone's
income level and so we're not
changing too much here in the
description the Human Rights Act
and again we're just adding
source of income into that as a
protected class.
Thank you very much for for
those answers
Another concern the this panel.
Brought to me is
H. B. one eleven makes.
Meetings of the state housing
council subject to the open
meetings act.
Does not state the precise
number of members that make up
the council making it difficult
if not impossible to certain
when a quorum of the council was
convened for the purposes of the
on that.
Can you address please.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Pettigrew
absolutely that was a great
fight by the AG's office we
would all we have to do is
specify a number the idea for
the housing council as a
professor search Martinez
discussed more than anything is
to make sure that it's very
inclusive we have been in touch
with the apartment association
as far as being able to ensure
that there's somebody on the
housing council from the
industry we have been I have
spoken with
their lobbyist and so we you
know as far as hearing some of
the push back we are obviously
still open this is about
landlords and tenant rights and
so just to be clear clear we
would be happy to specify a
number we just have not done
that yet but we say probably
somewhere around at least ten
when we first created a list of
there were twenty five specific
of folks but we decided not to
be so prescriptive about it and
if a professor Martinez has
anything to add to that I'm
happy to say absolutely in the
next hopefully in the next
committee we do have a change
that would that would specify
that.
Yeah and I don't have anything
to add the declined to say
there's no magic number but it
will.
It's not a problem to pick an
actual number that is based on
discussion and thoughtful
approach to this.
Thank you thank you very much
madam chair
sure.
Romero in I'm sorry professor
Martinez for not only addressing
you properly last time
thank you I have to say I I
appreciate your passion
Representative Romero I
appreciate the fashion of
Representative Rubio as well I I
thanks I am concerned with the
number of people that that
called in today in opposition.
That that felt like their
organization should be part of
the solution not.
Identified as part of the
problem.
In in not that that.
Personally you that was an
intention.
I just feel like
Because they they weren't part
of the solution they feel like
they were identified as part of
the problem.
And and I would have had a few
discussions with the math works
just gone you know I do not have
I do not see this coming and
they just didn't throw at the
end of the day
really.
Again I appreciate your passion
I appreciate what's going on I
just felt feel like they're
probably some some other front
end work that could be done to
make sure that that becomes a
win win and
You know in business we try make
when winds from from every deal
that we may there are people out
there in the in the world that
don't win win situations they
what they want a situation where
I win you lose and I get that I
get that I'm not one of those
people I like when when there's
there's times when two times
now.
Two different Canadian dates
where I walked in.
In my head I'm done well no no
in you people are able to change
my mind which goes people with
both of my mind because I'm not
typically that way and so I and
I appreciate that so on on the
other side of it I really would
like to see some some more front
end of.
More from and work on this I
would ask for for yourself
Representative Madam chair for
Representative and if we get
this right one of the state's
from working so Representative
Romero and Rubio working with
professor Martin Martinez sorry
on this that that as you write
the by laws for this board.
That in the membership it
doesn't say come up and
president.
In the attendance log.
So I think it's important that
people are there.
So I just add that piece to the
well like I said I do appreciate
your passion went from thank you
and in the it's not as this is
nothing personal I just feel
like some of the people should
be involved
if if the motion is for do pass
on this on the left.
And that but I do.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative pacar duly noted
on the council thank you for
that yes thank you
Representative Pettigrew for
your for your thoughtful
questions I'm I am not seeing
any other hand so I will
entertain a motion.
Madam chair would you pass.
And I will thank you I'm Allison
can you take the role.
Yes yes.
Representative Lord no.
Representative Pettigrew.
No.
Thanks chair Mero.
Yes.
Madam chair it's awesome yes.
All right.
Okay I voted three to two you
have a do pass thank you all so
much for your for your
discussion and I'm and we are
down to our last the whole which
is I'm actually in
your.
house bill one fourteen
Representative cadenza I'm not
sure if she's here.
Representative condemned that
in.
I see her picture we're getting
close.
Whenever you're ready
Representative Cadena.
Hello you madam chair thank you.
Welcome.
Yes I am grateful to have
experienced wonderful committee
debate for the last couple of
hours as a member of the public
in years ago thank you.
And I would actually based I
mean my kids a lot of multi
tasking and I heard you all
vote.
I had to throw my phone up and
and get to business and I'll get
to catch up with them later but
I just wanted to share was so
proud and excited as my experts
also joined we're gonna be
looking madam chair we get
started the second for Kim
Chavez Cook from the law office
of law offices of the public
defender's okay do you have any
other expert witnesses no it'll
just be miss Thomas cook and I
today okay okay so Allison will
let her in and you can go ahead
and get started Representative
okay I'm also just making sure
all my built in front of the L.
it somehow looks like Kim Chavez
Cook was made a co host on my
screen.
The issue of the chair press.
Really I'll be glad to what.
What.
so madam chair members of the
committee thank you
I am honored to be in front of
you today make a lot of good
then I house sat for district
thirty three I am ready to
present house bill one fourteen
and we'll try to just keep it at
top level today I know we've had
a long day and certainly be
available to be more into the
technical details as needed but
house bill one fourteen is about
of a move towards more
individualized sentencing with
New Mexico within New Mexico's
criminal justice system so as
I'm sure many of you are aware
of for lots of parts of our
systems whether it's mandatory
minimums or what I'm addressing
today Vigil under attachments
due to sherry is bound by laws
that we've passed to impose
sentences on people that are in
front of them in court so what
house bill one fourteen does is
address what are known as
habitual offender enhancements
and impart it does two things I
madam chair I know as as many in
in our in our body and
colleagues do you understand
that addiction is a health care
issue and not a crime so what
this does for folks that have
charges and convictions on what
we call simple possession we're
defining that as something that
basically is not intent to
distribute or traffic so these
other possession related charges
that for that class of
conviction there will no longer
be a habitual offender
enhancement so that if someone
is picked up again facing new
charges they won't automatically
get what what today is a one
four or eight year prison
sentence based on these
possession charges so that's the
big deal is that we're we're
we're removing habitual offender
enhancement from possession
charges.
My convictions and then the
other piece of that for the
other ways that we have laid out
Vigil offender enhancements and
the rest of New Mexico's
criminal code we are saying that
the judge would have discretion
whether or not to impose that
sentence so they could impose it
as they might to date with the
same parameters with the same
one for an eight year marks or
they could decide based on the
unique circumstances of the case
and the offender in front of
them to do something different
so madam chair I'll leave it at
that I will turn it if it's
appropriate to my experts and
Kim Chavez Cook with the office
of the public defender yes
please go ahead.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I don't
appear to have video so
hopefully that really terrible
had shot will suffice for right
now
I and I don't want to go to too
much detail again I'll be
available to answer questions
many members have them I just
want to give a quick overview on
a couple of points one is that
we really
do you want to try to move
towards judicial discretion and
away from mandatory sentencing
historically and traditionally
judicial discretion was the
standard that's how the judicial
system in the United States
always functioned but mandatory
sentences started to gain
popularity in the nineteen
fifties and the early at
mandatory minimums were all
really passed with an eye toward
addressing the drug epidemic
believed that they would have
the potential to
deter criminal activity but what
data has shown in the decades
since then is that increase
penalties and mandatory
penalties do not deterring
criminal activity and
particularly not criminal
activity that is as
Representative Cadena mentioned
really a public health issue so
limiting judicial discretion
what we've seen is that what
actually does is over populate
our prisons and cost us lots and
lots of money and it ends up
affecting what are essentially
nonviolent low level felons so
if there is a little story I
will tell that there is met some
of you may know justice Jean
Franchini back in the eighties
this is sort of a
an institutional knowledge Keyes
was very anti mandatory minimum
and that tried to challenges as
a judge in the number of ways
and in one case it is said to
the let urban legend is that he
resigned from his position as a
judge so as not to impose a
mandatory enhancement on someone
and there are a lot of judges
that have spoken out not I'm not
going to name any names in New
Mexico that federal judges
certainly have.
Also spoken out against
mandatory sentences they want
the ability to make
individualized decisions and
again that we found that the
data board bears out that
increase penalties don't deter
crime and they also don't make
us safer because when people
receive longer sentences they
actually are more likely to
recidivism when they get back
out again
so I will I have submitted to
handouts to the committee that
the staff tells me are available
to you there two PDF articles
that the committee members
hopefully can review at their
leisure but they basically go
into much more detail on those
points of aware of the evidence
and the data that I just said in
really broad strokes if you want
to read a lot more detail those
are available to you in I
believe I share drive of some
sort all stopped there and
answer questions if necessary
thank you so much I hope the
support about.
Thank you so much we will now go
to the audience
get the facts the bill of the
day our numbers have dropped way
down
maybe people just have lives
that they have to work or or
potty breaks that they need so
I'm I'm I will ask you first
people who are in opposition to
this bill please raise your
hands.
And if you hear baby shark in
the background it's my
granddaughter my husband thing
baby sharks so.
Okay just a couple more seconds
anyone in opposition.
Okay I'm anyone in support raise
your hands please.
Okay I'm.
That looks pretty stable okay if
you would like to speak I'm
please leave your hand up if you
do not want to speak lower your
hand and I'm not discouraging
anyone I just don't want to call
on somebody if you really don't
want to be called up so we will
start with lose health are
Campos.
Good afternoon chair and members
of the committee.
My name is Lucy let Campos I'm a
policy associate both futures
New Mexico formerly young woman
United.
We support HB one fourteen
because we believe that animals
are and moves us a step closer
to addressing some key
components of the criminal legal
system are for.
I currently live in Albuquerque
but I was raised in the Espanola
valley I've seen how many of our
community members have been
criminalized as they walked
through their journey of
substance dependence recovery.
We know that for many of their
the journey of recovery doesn't
begin by eliminating completely
the use of substances but in
many cases by reducing that.
People incarcerated for a health
issue or face harsher sentences
greater penalties simply because
there charges have been stacked
up.
We know that each case is
different and the circumstances
that bring people to crime are
unique.
As we work towards a true
criminal legal system reform we
believe that judges should be
allowed to have the discretion
as they look at the individual
in front of them and the process
in the processing that they are
making.
We urge you all to support H. B.
one fourteen thank you for your
time.
Thank you and hopefully by the
end of this session I will be
better at pronouncing your name
it sounds so pretty when you
when you say it didn't it
doesn't sound so pretty would
not be state so I will practice
Rikki Lee Chavez.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Rikki Lee Chavez
on behalf of the New Mexico
criminal defense lawyers
association we stand in strong
support of this bill we
appreciate the Sanchez
willingness to take up this
important issue we brought this
issue also before the NMC
collation the coalition is an
organization that's made up of
other organizations
that have the interest of
supporting New Mexico and policy
initiatives that make New Mexico
safer for our families as well
as making sure those policies
are faced with.
Well I apologize there's a one
three and five year olds were
very excited for dinner here we
also wanted to note that this
bill does is does something that
is going to help all of our
women and people of color you'll
find that the that the people
with these sorts of crimes that
are then enhanced are women and
people of color and by I
addressing the issues that H. B.
one fourteen brings before you
you're going to help that
disparity thank you so much for
the time that you have if
there's any questions we have a
great network of a defense
attorneys who are always willing
to answer legislators questions
and we look forward to
connecting with you thank you.
Thank you Kaltenbach.
Good evening madam chair members
of the committee Emily
Kaltenbach with drug policy
alliance and we stand in strong
support of this bill and want to
thank the sponsor for bringing
this important issue forward as
an organization we advocate for
people who are struggling with
problematic drug use that they
actually receive services in the
community health and public
health system and not in the
criminal legal system they
definitely did not deserve harsh
sentences this bill is this is a
really important step as we move
towards the equalization of
personal possession and personal
drug use unfortunately Vigil
offender laws are based on the
premise that higher
incarceration rates make
communities safer and the data
actually says that that is not
the case so instead of funding
measures that address root
causes of repeat offending
senses such as mental illness
substance use use already our
New Mexico the pool offender
statutes punishes the symptoms
and those folks who are
struggling with problematic drug
use deserve treatment social
supports and harm reduction
thank you so much.
Thank you all the time also
with.
Later we can't hear you.
My apologies I seem to have been
on mute okay we hear you now.
Wonderful.
Good evening and madam chair
members of the committee and
thank you for the opportunity to
speak here this evening my name
is Leslie to muskets and I'm
here to speak on behalf of the
ACLU of New Mexico in to express
our support for house bill one
fourteen.
As you heard earlier this
afternoon in the discussion of
another bill the United States
incarcerate more of its citizens
than any other country in the
world in New Mexico in cars
rates people at an even higher
rate than the national average
these are sick shameful truths
that we should seek to change
laws like mandatory habitual
offender statutes senselessly
drive up mass incarceration
which as you've also heard
disproportionately harms are
black brown and indigenous
communities.
We know that measures like
commercial founder statutes do
not make RCC for and it sounds
like you have some materials
before you that of shows show
that that reality is these laws
have been in place for a long
time and so we have a lot of
data and to to show that that
truth to the contrary
incarceration especially the
prolonged incarceration endorsed
by mandatory habitual offender
sentences actually cause harm
and makes it more difficult for
individuals and their families
to escape cycles of poverty and
addiction which are some of the
root causes of crime
additionally incarceration is
the most costly response to
crime.
Laws like mandatory habitual
offender sentences cost New
Mexicans money that should and
can be better spent in New
Mexicans support this despite
the so called the tough on crime
narratives we often hear New
Mexicans overwhelmingly believe
that our current criminal legal
system which prioritizes
incarceration above all else is
ineffective and must be
reformed.
The strong majority of New
Mexicans support reallocating
resources away from prisons and
into addiction treatment mental
health services and other
community resources HB forty one
fourteen would allow judges to
consider the particular
circumstances individual human
beings in front of them when
issuing sentences.
This that makes the bill an
important first step towards
realising the better future that
New Mexicans hope for wearing
car ciation as a last resort not
the first the ACLU of New Mexico
stands in strong support of this
bill and urges the committee to
give it to pass thank you.
Thank you and we have Diane with
cash.
Okay and then I needed now I and
I and the cash removing simple
possession of drugs from the
habitual offender Act is an
important action for New
Mexicans in general but it's
also important for my family
particular my son is likely to
end up with years of
imprisonment because of his
illness of addiction without
this change he already has prior
convictions for possession I
also strongly support judicial
discretion for crimes that would
continue to qualify for the
sentence enhancements provided
for in habitual offender Act it
doesn't make sense that it would
be better for us to have long
expensive to tax payer years of
incarceration handed down
without individual judicial
examination of the end of the
circumstances and appropriate
discretion on a case by case
basis years of incarceration can
destroy a fragile life that
could destroy my son's life I
strongly support H. before one
fourteen and ask you to vote yes
on this bill thank you so much.
Thank you Diane and we have
Barron Jones.
Hello can you hear me we can yes
hello thank you all chair and
members of the committee on
women's parents also I'm also
with ACLU of New Mexico what I
would like to speak on this bill
from our personal point of view
prior to my days that these tell
you I sent them approximately
you know ten years in prison off
and on and on my long distance
as well as a visual
enhancement and I just some I I
know I've had the.
I guess you know messing great
people and I'm Forces
circumstances on that are just
languishing in prisons
throughout New Mexico because of
these enhancements one as my
work is at the so you all work
with a lot of and we are
situated people and I'm and I'm
and I work with the mother one
gentleman who's on serving fifty
six years of officials for a for
a a simple robbery crime so on
these these laws on that many
people set before me they just
blown our prison population and
just sort of make it really
difficult for folks to to
transition on and and so also so
thank you I really encourage you
all to support this piece of
legislation and and that move
away from this barbaric practice
thank you much.
Thank you bear in I'm and that
is it for public comment so I
will go to the committee.
Questions.
Representative Romero was that a
waiver was that a push your
glasses that okay okay go ahead
Representative Romero thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative and I and all of
the advocates here I so
appreciate this bill because it
wraps and an issue I'm very
passionate about which is the
the fellas ation of drugs in my
community the ravages of many of
the Democrats alcohol opioids
and and of course what's
happening in the shadows right
now through the epidemic our
through the pandemic rather
You know we're really concerned
about the future of our state
and criminalizing these areas of
of basically addiction is is
incredibly I think negative for
the future but we want to
accomplish here so I commend you
for this piece of legislation I
did have a question just because
of the nexus between in
particular do you why and and
and potentially the harm that is
caused by that in particular to
somebody who becomes a victim of
of of someone in that
circumstance I you know my my
interest is in more so
discretion to the judge to make
a determination will this affect
that ability to make those
determinations in any way in
particular someone is harmed in
the process where someone is
intoxicated by whatever
substance it maybe.
Madam chair representative thank
you for that thoughtful question
and I just wanted to first honor
as you all saw is a little bit
flustered I'm just trying to
catch my breath as I got into
quickly and as soon as I
concluded my rambling opening
remarks I thought I didn't make
the point that brought me to
this bill to talk about how this
impacts the community come from
and the committees that raise us
and people that deserve
certainly more respect and
dignity and their lives and
struggles and then one by one I
saw those hands pop up and I
knew that in the depth of the
incredible advocacy we had in
New Mexico that folks are ready
to bring it and talk so much and
so clearly hand in such
compelling ways about why this
matters also this is certainly a
conversation we've had
internally I'm gonna turn it
over to ms Chavez Cook to
address your question on that
point thank you madam chair
representative.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representative and vice chair
Romero so the E. I.
This kind of provide current law
it's just it's only in case law
so it already has been found
that the habitual offender act
does not apply to DWI felony
level two felony level D. W. I.
which is the fourth or
subsequent based on a an
interpretation that the there's
already a self enhancing penalty
scheme in the D. W. I. statute
that sort of stands alone so it
already goes up and up and up
based on repeat offenses and
that is that there is a separate
statutory scheme up for D. W. I.
that results in harm on in in
great bodily injury or death and
so that reference to it sixty
six eight one oh two does not
cover that statute that's a
different statute so and that
also for whatever it's worth has
reference to it of an internally
enhancing penalty for someone
who has pre deprived D. W. eyes
as well but is not excluded by
this statutory amendment and I
hope that answers your question.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative and miss cook
that does really help me
formulate just the understanding
that what we're seeking to not
criminalize addiction we
definitely want to be sure that
our court system in our justice
system does protect victims in
those cases are circumstances so
at a I I I will look at the
statutes that you referenced
thankfully this is recorded just
to be able to ensure that
everything's in line but that
helps me understand what you're
doing and again I commend the
sponsor for bringing this for
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative.
Thank you vice chair I'm
Representative Pettigrew.
I am.
Thank you madam chair I am way
too slow on I'm writing
something staff and
Representative Romero
thank you madam you get beat me
to some of the things and so but
again I appreciate that.
I missed something.
In the F. I. R. in in the.
Representative.
Cadena is that correct.
Madam chair representative
had a group I hope is Kevin and
then.
The better yes thank you I
appreciate it yes madam names
mean a lot to me I appreciate
that and is years Pettigrew.
Yes yes Pettigrew thank you
madam chair representative thank
you thank you both and so my
question.
Leads to a question from
Representative Romero.
You made a reference I'm the F.
I. R. explicitly says this is
caught in conflict conflict with
with the current bill that's
running HB fifty nine can you
please can someone please talk
to that and how that's going to
be dealt with should this make
it.
The house for and a follow up
question to that has.
I haven't looked it up yet the
Cisco the judiciary next.
yes.
We believe me so I understand
that the next question thank you
very much Madam chair
representative will start with
that line and yes Representative
Pettigrew the referrals after C.
pack go to House Judiciary
through the session I do want to
share and then I'll turn it over
again to my experts to get I
certainly in the years I've been
working in criminal justice
reform and now more recently in
the body I continue to say out
loud that we don't have any
demonstrated evidence that
increased penalties improve
public safety safety and frankly
increase penalties are from what
we've seen often cause more harm
and keep people further away
from the care they may need when
they're struggling with
substance use so the house bill
fifty nine while there may be
conflict it's it's certainly not
something that I support but it
yes will have my expert talk
about the potential
contradictions should both of
these legislative efforts become
law but just as a as a value
when I looked at what it means
for families struggling with
substance use in our state my
intentions are to bring people
closer to the care they need and
hopefully enter up some of these
generational cycles of trauma
and substance use incarceration
madam chair I might turn it to
my experts now.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative Pettigrew the
most direct conflict that I
identified between the two bills
is that this bill is codifying
in other words writing into
statute what is already the law
which is that felony DWI which
would be a fourth offense or
greater does not is not subject
to this particular enhancement
scheme because the D. W. I.
statute already has its own
inherent internal enhancements
came so since we were amending
the statute anyway we've put
that in there but what H. B.
fifty nine seeks to do is
actually undo that case law that
has already found that it does
not fall within the statute and
places that explicitly into the
statute so that then felony do
why would be enhanced by the D.
W. I. statute and then
additionally received a habitual
offender enhancement so that's
the conflict in substance just
to make it clear for you and
what I as a legal answer to what
would happen if both bills were
to make it through both houses
the the short answer is the loss
as when two conflicting statutes
passed whichever one passes
second it becomes a law so that
would just depend on speed.
And then you know if there is
confusion beyond that then
litigation takes hold and you
know it's it's a thing that
comes up from time to time but
hopefully the legislature in
this case because they're so
directly conflicting the body
would hopefully make a choice
between the two.
So I I so appreciate that thank
you madam chair thank you
Continue.
I'm gonna get there trust me.
Representative continued and
thank you Mr Kirk I'm.
I'm gonna be continually
conflicted.
When I know that there's two
things that opposing each other
that we're waiting and no
offense please for those of you
that are or are about to be
attorneys that that that
guarantee that that there's an
income for somebody up there
because they think it's
providing court and and I'm just
I'm concerned about that you
know at night I listened to one
of the the people that were were
In in opposition not opposition
but work.
Work for this bill in in their
concern about.
and actually not more than one
staff keno's of fences but you
know I I work in an industry
where.
The federal government's tax
offenses against me daily I did
this on the front.
And so ensure outcomes
and and each offense is
exponentially worse.
So I can have somebody.
And you'll laugh of this and
that and this.
This is two point.
There's a microwave in all in
that in an office that used to
dry material somebody walks in
and puts the Rideau in there or
not read a breakfast or their
breakfast burrito
in their shop.
Inspectors there
that's right at they want gas
in in the Martinez in the wrong
place that's a ten times
multiplier.
So I'm I I.
There is something about things
that happened this release that
are we doing correct I'm just
not sure that this bill gets us
there in and I do appreciate the
the bill and I appreciate the
conversation I look forward to
seeing what Judiciary does with
this and some of the other bills
so you are potential ankle
conflict with that in hearing
this on the house floor thank
you appreciate your patience
with me once again thank you
madam chair thank you.
Okay I am not seeing any more
hands and I I will just say that
thank you sponsor an expert at
it for years I have thought how
kind of
Crazy it was to to put people in
jail or prison for substance use
disorders or mental illness I'm
and to me it it always felt like
all we're doing is teaching
putting them somewhere where
they can learn to be better
criminals rather than dealing
with the underlying money
problem which was an addiction
or a mental behavioral health
diagnosis so I think this is
great I mean of course there are
people who who for the safety of
others really do need to be put
away but that's that's a small
minority and I really like the
idea of leaving it up to the
judges because there is never a
one size fits all so thank you
for bringing this legislation I
think it it it has the potential
to really make some good changes
in the state so with that I will
entertain a motion.
Madam chair I move into passed
okay and do I hear a second.
I can't okay that was
represented by that as I'm
trying trying to not make things
too crazy for LS and and so I
was so will you take the role I
mean that the report.
You know what I mean.
All right.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Lord.
Representative Pettigrew.
No explanation.
I share more I'll.
Yes yes.
Madam Thompson yes.
So I agree to to we we have if
this bill that's passed and now
Representative Pettigrew come
back to you for an explanation.
What I just wanted to
reemphasize I am interested in
seeing how this comes to the
fore after Judiciary
not that I'm totally opposed to
this the my judges just don't
know what to think yet.
Thank you for that.
Okay I think
that is it for today so I'm that
wasn't too bad what was it four
hours from the okay it will get
worse.
Do we need to ensure and I don't
know if we need to formally
adjourned no we don't internet
the end of this that we are we
are in recess so we stand in
recess until they're radically
Tuesday at one thirty I'm and.
Theoretically in terms of
legislative time and I really do
want to thank at thank the
audience for for being being
being here essentially being
involved in your government and
we have a wonderful staff and I
probably don't get to say enough
but thank you to our analyst at
to Alan and and I'm not sure who
are get Gabby is behind the
scenes I don't know who else is
but you make things run smoothly
and now so we will be in recess
until Tuesday afternoon thank
you all have a great evening and
we get thanks bye bye.
Thank you.
