Senator for heart of present.
Representative Lujan.
Present.
Representative Doria the Santo.
Representative Serrato.
There.
Mr Chairman.
Senator.
Members we have a quorum
We have one bill on the agenda
and I hear the Sanchez first
built to cross over from the
Senate.
And
You know I wonder years Sanchez
Senator Diamond Senator Hemphill
she also had a first will come
over when I was in my labor
committee.
And I kind of put err on this I
bet you have to sing the song is
that'd been the traditional run
the house side on a on a
rookie's first bill so I won't
committed to that but if you
want to volunteer after a I
called in your I need to close
that sent to you.
So members we have
Senate bill one ninety three as
amended wrote equity budget then
Senator Diamond to put on your
bill yes Mr chairman and members
of the committee thank you for
allowing me to visit your
committee this morning and and
welcoming me to your your house
here so I'm introducing Senate
bill one ninety three which is
a role on budgets meant that all
and I'm happy to night with
Senator Hemphill as you
mentioned in getting efforts
done really to bring a voice to
our rural New Mexico districts
that so many of us have up there
and really it's it's an effort
to bridge that rural urban
divide which we cannot deny it a
severe and it is it is it real
and so and the blue hill and
beyond I will tell you that what
I experience in my district is
that the divide in New Mexico is
not so much Republican versus
Democrat but it's rural versus
urban and how we're going to
have a voice to kind of bring
both of those together and
create a bridge there this
legislation is the first attempt
to narrow that divide.
Again by reminding us all that
two thirds of New Mexico's
population live in cities of
over a hundred thousand or more
and so a lot of our population
is very detached from the
challenges of our small
communities many of us know what
that is there is a challenge for
some communities to simply keep
a post office open or our rural
community libraries there's just
a disconnect there and so we're
trying to find a central point
they can it knowledge those
disparities and really bring
some people as a nation to it to
our rural areas inequitable
resources the router included
and broadband which we've
witnessed more than ever this
last year released funding
distribution inequities in
educational resources and really
in many cases just simple
infrastructure needs and so as
you read through this bill what
it does is creates is again a
central point of contact for
creating a position within DFA
that will address those needs
and really far beyond it would
have a legislative presence to
be an adviser to all of us to
address the disparities are in
different ways that legislation
may affect different areas.
and again it's just a
nonpartisan effort to really
bring your voice to our rural
communities so I want to
acknowledge Representative the
we start Austin's was signed on
in the house so also if you'd
like to say a few words on this
as well and and then we'll open
it up for discussion if you have
questions of me Mr chairman.
Thank you Representative diamond
Representative but I mean a
Senator Diamond.
Representative Terrazas do you
wish to add to the presentation
of the of the on the senator's
bill.
You do thank you thank you Mr
chairman this role shortly I I I
think she summed up really well
I I don't think we need to go on
and on about it but I I do agree
exactly with what she was share
with all of us that you know
there is a there is inequity
there and so I'm I'm black co
sponsored and and be a on this
bill so thank you very much for
having us here this morning
committee in Douglas you.
Thank you Representative and and
that doesn't on your
presentation Senator Diamond yes
yes Mr chairman we have some
expert witnesses are having
challenges getting into the
committee this morning I see but
I think the between
Representative Terrazas and I we
can speak for rural communities
ourselves so we.
Tax Senator Diamond what are
their names in terms of your
experts yes Priscilla this
southwest cost we have Stacy
**** and Carol Miller.
Do you wish to bring him on
board as a as an expert witness
or are do you mind if I call on
them as as attendees yes that's
fine.
Okay we'll recognize them as
attendees them and and column in
at the at the proper time
okay members were going to go to
the audience and
As as some of you know before we
go to the audience we have a
little pole.
that's going to show up on your
screen to those people in the
audience and on the pole you're
gonna have
a support or against the
legislation so you have to have
like fifteen seconds to fill out
the poll in terms of your
support or opposition to the
measure before a Senate bill one
ninety three merry can you are.
But that there you go fifteen
seconds audience.
there you go I start seeing the
numbers
five seconds.
okay members the poll shows that
those people in attendance and
right in relationship to this
legislation under percent our
support of the legislation so
our members all go to the
audience I'll still recognizes
on those people in opposition
that maybe didn't reflect on the
fall if there's anybody in
opposition.
That would like to address the
committee now is the time so hit
the race and icon at the bottom
of the screen and I'll recognize
you those in opposition.
I don't see anyone so we'll go
to those in support of those
support that would that wish to
address the committee hit that
race hand icon at the bottom in
a recognize you
in the position that you show up
on the screen so first we have a
Carol Miller.
Merry bring Carol over.
Carol.
Carol Miller merry.
You brought Karen with luck
overseas.
There's Carroll.
on mute yourself and feel free
to address the committee.
Thank as much time as you need
Carroll.
Thank you.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee I was prepared to send
expert witness to address some
of the specific questions that
the are excellent Bill analysts
Mr Haddad did for this bill I
don't know if you want me to
speak in favor or if this is the
appropriate time to respond to
some of the clarifying
questions.
Carol you have the floor and
address the committee with your
statements in support of the
legislation.
Okay
This this bill is very important
in the last months it's become
more important even than I think
we realized when it was first
being discussed and introduced
because we are and are just
finishing up a census here and
there are some drastic changes
being proposed by the federal
government that are going to
affect every our rural and
frontier community and also
urban communities across the
country one particular change of
where the comment period is
ending on March nineteenth is to
change the way that the office
of management and budget defines
metropolitan and non
metropolitan areas which will
affect about fourteen million
people right off the bat living
and two hundred and fifty
counties in New Mexico that
change will affect Santa Fe and
San Juan counties and will
Change really everything that
those counties through and and
cause ripple effects into the
rest of our counties they will
for the first time be eligible
for rural programs where they
have more resources they will
lose their ability is
municipalities to establish
their own community development
block grant programs they will
have to present their programs
through the counties are there
will be some very significant
changes so that is just one
example in addition the census
bureau is in a process of
changing how they defined rural
and other areas and I can I
pulled out a couple of examples
that I wanted to share because
we were asked for specific New
Mexico examples and I don't know
if people realize that there
were only two counties in the
entire United States after the
twenty ten census that did not
have poverty data and one of
those counties was Rio Arriba
where I live and it actually
disqualified many of our
community programs for accessing
of federal funds that required
certain levels of poverty are
the other county was king county
Texas so you know things that
seem quite small a program I
know this committee and New
Mexico is very in favor of is
the mental health first aid
programs which are strong
throughout the state trying to
get more community people are
the skills to deal with mental
health emergencies and there's a
situation where a different
definition of federal one from
the economic research service of
U. S..
DA it's called the Ruka codes
it is that even within and you
also and the pick respond you
also community coalition we're
I'm a founding member
tell me salt house the roof
good code of four the same is
towels where they are eligible
for certain program but can you
also the bigger village adjacent
is not eligible for the same
program so we continuously come
up around definition problems I
would suggest in the committee
Mr chairman and members are
interested but possibly during
the interim of there could be a
committee meeting just looking
very specifically at definitions
and what the current changes are
going to need as they trickle
down throughout our state with
regard to front tier
specifically of when I was the
fed in the nineteen eighties I
actually wrote the first front
cheer definition it was program
specific it was small most
recently included in the
affordable Care Act where there
are twenty specific references
to frontier communities and the
number of frontier specific
programs that were established
so it's I don't want to get you
all in the you know sort of the
said we need to where I live my
life for we try and adapt our
communities to programmatic
definitions instead of being
more inclusive but I think it
would be an important
conversation for the legislature
this is a critical census that
is just being completed and we
want to make sure that we can
continue to get resources
because the state of New Mexico
office and uses the same
different programmatic
definitions that federal
programs to there are.
For rural and frontier
definitions within the New
Mexico state government for
example the front chairman and
street program has its own
definition for which communities
are eligible for that and
If if a member of the committee
has so specific question that
they would like to ask I'm here
with Senator Diamond as for
expert on this.
The reason for an on board is a
lot of the problems and Star
load someone has a problem with
the school situation that goes
to PED someone else has a
problem with water that goes to
a different place and the point
of central point of contact is
that all of these problems will
be collected in one location to
make it easier for the
legislature moving forward to be
sure that the legislation that
they are developing or amending
really needs to needs of all of
the different communities so
with that I'd be happy to answer
more questions but
thank you Mr chairman Senator
Diamond and members of the
committee.
Thank you Carol.
next we'll go to Stacey.
merry bring Stacy over she was
one of the designated the
experts on the bill and we want
to give.
Those three individuals
Stacey and Priscilla for a shot
at addressing the legislation.
Very.
Stacey is still run the
attendee.
Miss
living over let me see what's
going on Mr Chairman in the
meantime pasillo is there of the
southwest card is in your room.
Okay recognize Priscilla
Priscilla me yourself.
And feel free to address the
committee in terms of your
support for legislation as an
expert on the bill.
Absolutely good morning the one
of the as in the US
Come before you and the members
of the committee and I know we
have some you representative
welcome to all of you and some
familiar faces and I look
forward to working for you with
you in the future I I actually
want to thank senator line and
and Representative Senator says
for moving this piece of
legislation forward so a little
bit of my background just to are
you have an understanding of why
I think this is such an
important piece and not as I
have thirty four years working
with the council of governments
in southwest New Mexico dealing
with rural issues not only in
the regional level but at the
state level as well and so I
work with federal state local
programs and trying to meet the
needs and some of those are the
most basic needs which is water
programs and services that
provided a much needed and
economically disadvantaged
communities so that is what I
have
actually lived in my life doing
and and the building and
providing that kind of expertise
to these communities in the
walls rural areas I just want to
give a couple of examples of the
things that I do have really
happened as a benefit number one
sometimes it's really difficult
for people in the rural areas to
really understand the program
aims and what how they work in
order for them to even be able
to complete an application and
so there's a lack of capacity
and so sometimes in that in that
regard just really having the
opportunity to state to the
state that there are training
opportunities that can be
provided to these entities to
gain the knowledge to be able to
increase the capacity so I think
that's one important piece the
other important piece for me as
really I'm getting people
understand where some of the
challenges are because when you
have rural communities you have
anywhere from anywhere from zero
capacity to a hundred first
percent capacity based on
seeking funding and.
So what happens is that those
communities I don't have the
ability to be able to learn
about how the programs work
early in your standing then they
never applied for the funding
that should be entitled to them
to begin so that's what I have
spent maker do we and I continue
to do that and so one instance
that I want to share with is
that most of the world programs
from a federal agency have been
moved out all of the rural areas
into the metropolitan areas so
when you have a senior will
needs rehab for their home or
the need ADA accessibility as an
example they would have to
commute two hours before they
can actually applied for funding
to try to help them accommodate
their needs in our own home so
that's one example I'm also
dealing with another example
currently on the federal side
where they expect community
water system to be in violation
before they will even buy them
knowing that the system is been
dilapidated an impact on
programs for over thirty years
and I think I could go on and on
and on about the different
things that are within my career
but I I will say to all of you
that I'm passionate
I care and I want to give every
person in the state the
opportunity to have the same
opportunities anybody else
because it's not just about the
rural areas the project
communities as a whole it's also
about the state of New Mexico B.
world because we have to
advocate for the state of New
Mexico on the federal side as
well so that we can begin to
really get what is our fair
share and so thank you Mr
chairman and members of the
committee and Senator Diamond
for this wonderful opportunity
and I hope that my presentation
today conveys my passion about
making a difference in New
Mexico.
Thank you Priscilla I'm next
will go to the Stacey.
There you go Stacy
introduce your style and
you're free to address the
committee with your concerns
regarding the legislation in
support of legislation.
Eight thank you Mr chairman
thank you committee
representative process and
earned Senator Diamond.
You have an allergy is down
south today
I think they Carolyn I'm Stacy
**** and and my executive
director national center I'm
sure communities I think that
Senator Diamond Carole New
Mexico so that have done a great
job of talking about why we need
need additional in New Mexico
what I would like to do is read
a short statement from our
president national center for
financial community that she's
giving kind of a view from
outside of New Mexico which I
think we can be really proud of
and I think it's interesting to
think about and her name is
Carolyn Ford she's the assistant
dean emeritus prevention oral
health at the university of
Nevada school of medicine.
And again she's the president of
the board and the national
center for frontier communities.
And she says critically
important relative to this bill
as signifies to those of us
outside of the state this is a
national model that can be
replicated especially in states
with pockets and vast expanses
of rural geography.
Inspires intergovernmental
collaboration and cooperation
elevating and recognizing the
critical importance of rural and
frontier populations insurers
role equity sharing and resource
and services allocation rural
and frontier advocacy data
analysis and metrics and
addressing structural barriers
to resources and services your
policy statute or regulation and
these are all milestones and I
think I would just add to that
that we've had now calls from
Oregon and Arizona and Hawaii
and one of their places not
coming to mine and other states
that are following this bill
because they we all know and
frontier and rural communities
how desperately this lead and
and the COVID we've seen the
needs even grow greater and be
clear thank you very much Mr
chairman for having.
Thank you Stacy
that does that the crystal in
terms of
your experts and I'll go to
Those in attendance I would like
to address the committee and
support legislation and we have
first Tiffany Rivera if any.
Merry bring her on board.
And and keep up percent Stacey
and Carol in the panelists
section because our experts.
Mr chairman members of the
committee to me Rivera
registered lobbyists for New
Mexico farm and livestock bureau
thank you for the opportunity to
comment this morning
Farm bureau representative
twenty thousand members
statewide many who reside in
rural and frontier communities
I stand before you this morning
in strong support of Senate bill
one ninety three.
Mexico farming livestock bureau
supports policies that ensure
the resiliency of our rural
communities we believe that
Senate bill one ninety three is
the first of many steps in
ensuring our rural communities
are represented we appreciate
the legislation and how it works
to move New Mexico forward.
Where.
With creating awareness of rural
issues promoting collaboration
ensuring a more equitable
distribution of resources and
creating a sole point of contact
for communities.
Many of our state's
agriculturalist reside in rural
communities and we are pleased
that they will now have access
to this resource thank you so
much for the opportunity to
comment this morning.
Thank you.
If any next we have a Karen Witt
lock.
Merry bring occurring over.
Mr Chairman yourself and feel
free to address the committee.
Thank you chairman members of
the committee Karen what lock
with the national association of
social workers New Mexico
chapter we stand in strong
support of this bill we want to
thank the sponsors for bring
this legislation has been stated
by the sponsor CENIC experts
we're and desperately in need of
a non but to address the
specific concerns that are faced
by rural areas there is a
significant separation and lack
of resources in rural areas
including empowerment housing
behavioral health and many other
resources for the rural urban
divide is present that Senator
Diamond discussed in addition we
need an expert to provide
guidance on unintended
consequences that many pieces of
legislation have with regards to
rural areas as Carol Miller
discussed as well again we stand
in strong support and urge you
to vote for this legislation
thank you.
Thank you Karen and the next we
have
standing by the bring her over
merry.
There you go setting bill free
to address the committee on mute
yourself.
You're on.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee and a special
good morning to Representative
monthly effort what into thank
you so much Representative for
your continued representation in
support of northern New Mexico
and US in Rio Arriba unless on
the most counties Mr chair
members of the committee my name
is Cindy and I'm the executive
director of the United Way of
northern New Mexico we work with
over forty five local nonprofits
in the counties of your rebate
and Los Alamos many are
nonprofit work very closely with
our local governments providing
much needed services and
supports especially addressing
issues surrounding social
determinants of health we stand
in support of Senate bill one
ninety three and we want to
think how Miller for her
advocacy on this legislation and
of course the support for rural
New Mexicans Mr chairman members
of the committee we thank you
for the opportunity to speak and
before you and also thank you
for your support of Senate bill
one ninety three.
Thank you setting thank.
I don't see any other hands of
from the attendees that wish to
speak.
And now we'll go to the
committee.
So committee members questions
discussion I seen Representative
Fajardo.
Thank you Mr chairman and
senator thank you for bringing
this at a bill to attention
one of the things that you said
in your opening remarks was the
divide that happens between the
rural and the urban and I have
to tell you I think this bill
has coming about at the right
time because we're seeing that
divide increase more and more as
the legislature's around the
rural communities we're seeing
less and less and the we say
more and more legislators
elected in the more urban areas
one of my favorite stories is
you know at the land grants and
act actually chairman pie knows
this F. Q. a few years ago
there's a land grant that needed
to get water.
And they had the well and they
they just muted piping and it
was all the legislature that
came together and put in their
own capital outlay to make sure
that this small community got
water it was Google you know and
we're I know chairman I know the
exact amount is like ten
thousand dollars to make sure
community had water.
And these small dollar amounts
these small issues tend to get
overlooked by the urban
legislators because you know you
have one Senator and unit one
representative Representative
mass areas where like in
Albuquerque you have twenty
legislators I think this is very
timely
but I did have one quick
question and it was on the
analysis it talks about
amendment was put in to remove
language the state the amendment
also removed language we move in
a provision directing the real
equity Spence then to receive
complaints from communities
about laws and rules that are
intentionally or unintentionally
biased against rolled frontier
communities and can you explain
to me why that language was
removed
Mister chairman Senator.
I can Mr chairman and and
Representative Fajardo that
language instructors to request
a Senator Steinborn when this
bill was in front of the Senate
finance committee
and we didn't Bonner sort of
right keep that I think he had
some concerns that the
intentional or unintentional
consequences that may and so at
his request she asked if if you
could bring amendment to strike
that language we consider it
friendly and that amendment was
made.
thank you Mr chairman thank you
center and I'll have to we
specially disagreed with the
senator on that because the
whole reason and you have it on
the budget then is to take that
that's their job is to take
those complaints and it's their
job is to decide which ones are
valid and invalid and things
like that so I'm not even sure
Senator Steinborn maybe
understands the role of arms but
then for him to speak to strike
that this I'm not going to mess
with your bill I know it's it's
it's it's good I I am sorry to
see that language go
maybe over time we can improve
it because I think that is the
role of them Spence then is to
take those complaints and and
we're kind of cutting met the
needs by taking that language
out but thank you for this and
that was only question I have
and I appreciate you coming for
this.
Thank you senator
Representative.
Thank you Representative up are
the thank you for a bringing up
that Water.
Connectivity issue up in the one
about the stuff out of this land
grant on the community of
communist just on.
west of of the queue.
And you are right Representative
Fajardo that
the Land Grant Committee members
about nine of us.
Each pitched in about five
thousand dollars and we came.
up with the forty forty five
thousand dollars that was needed
to finish the project and I
think that project is is also
kind of ideal in terms of what
in on bugs then would probably
look at
mainly because the mutual
domestic.
Experience some fraudulent
behaviors in terms of their
passport.
And that's why that community
was short forty thousand dollars
and
it's unfortunate but things like
that happen especially when
there is no oversight and you've
got some bad apples running the
show but because of the
foresight and dedication and
commitment of the land grant
basically are the leaders of
that community
they basically put a slate
together and brought in the one
new board on the mutual domestic
and and that's the board that we
dealt with and going into a
this initiative to fund that
project for the but that was
real discerning.
Representative Fajardo members
is that there was funds to fully
connect that community of
communists but because of the
fraud involved on that passed me
to the mystic only half of the
community was hooked up so yeah
at this water tank you have half
of the village connected and it
wasn't going anywhere until
every household.
According to the plan was
connected so again good getting
back to your legislation
Representative diamond these are
projects that I feel need
oversight to see that they're
fully
unleashed and fully developed to
avoid you know further agony and
and discomfort in terms of
addressing those very
crucial needs of potable water
to our rural communities yes we
have a Representative a Ambrose
Castellano.
Thank you Mr chairman I think
you said I mean Representative
that also for bringing this bill
forward I serve in my district a
lot of rural communities as well
and we find a lot of H. shape
with the water like a chairman
said we're right now they're
doing a domestic water line
there in shop and they'll
they'll age outside of them I
twenty five and there's a lot of
the issues that that we do faces
as rural communities my question
would be is yeah but then is
that ninety nine thousand just
for the abutment or is that with
with some kind of staff.
Mr Chairman representative thank
you for your question so the
ninety five thousand dollars
it's allocated in this but bit
the bill first of all does
appear in H. B. two so it is
funded that would include the
salary and benefits to begin
with this legislation states for
one position so that position
would be housing dean D. DFA and
report to the secretary the
secretary would have the ability
to create that salary schedule
you know.
Fifty to seventy and then we've
built in for all benefits that
would be included with that so
that just funds one position
it's been stated before that
there's probably a high
probability that this could grow
into a town office once they see
the disparities are really out
there in rural New Mexico but
initially it just covers the
cost of the single position.
Okay thank you and.
And I guess it's a concern that
you know having so much rural
communities are or broader rural
communities that this one person
can handle all the needs and I
hope it does turn into it to an
agency that we can really
represent a rural community and
he's because I mean right now
you know it's so broad and so
there's so many
and that's a concern but I hope
it does turn into something
bigger and better because I
rural communities do need
representation that we need and
I think you guys for bringing
this bill forward and I'm in
full support of your senator and
representative thank you.
Thank you Senator quest'anno
next we have a Representative
Montoya.
Mr.
My scratchy voice this morning
Mr chairman and senator.
Diamond thank you so much for
bringing this bill.
I had similar questions about
the singular voice and I think
it was answered in that last
dialogue that it will more than
likely if it passes point to a
broader.
System of representation I doubt
seriously that a single person
that have to be a Superman or
superwoman to cover tribal every
corner every nook and cranny
every nuance of this vast and
underserved state I applaud
greatly the focus on front here
I absolutely agree I think we're
preaching to the choir that
there is an urban and rural
divide that is devastating to
those left out.
I also wonder about the metrics
in the F. I. R. it speaks to the
metrics and how.
You know proposing something as
grand as this state I think it's
a it's super needed and really
positive I just want to speak if
you can speak a little bit on
that piece and then I have one
final question after that.
Thank you Representative and Mr
chairman it's been asked like
how will we measure success of a
position like this and it is
going to be difficult because
we're giving so much
responsibility really to one one
position but I will say it's one
more than we had before right
it's a step in the right
direction to get this done.
I would anticipate in the in the
climate that we're in right now
and so much federal relief
that's on the way that much of
the to the positions time and
the next twelve to eighteen
months will probably be focused
to make sure that the funding
relief this sent out New Mexico
that there's not a disparity
between the urban recipients and
the rural recipients I imagine
that will be a priority as well
and then as we transition and
and it and the need to grow we
can discuss water infrastructure
needs
a multitude of disparities that
are out there but it's hard to
tell what the first priorities
will be I am going to assume
just because of our clients that
we that they will be tasked with
relief at distribution of
funding and that in the initial
years is would be my guess.
Thank you so much Mr chairman
and so Senator
I'm not sure if if you're aware
of the bill that Representative
Castellano and and myself to put
forth is called each be sixteen
and it.
If both of these bills which are
very similar in their scope and
intent they're crossing over
right now this is in the Senate
in here is here I believe they
would be fairly highly
complimentary the design of ours
if I can just briefly describe
it to not.
Not kind of take this this this
time is that the intent is to
create a plural bicameral two
year emergency clause that would
really help so the.
Decipher make recommendations
prioritized in a very broadly
and intentional inclusive way.
If this bill passes in the but
is put in place this rural
committee could be the perfect
sort of container if you will
for that dialogue when we're
looking at broadband
legislation the potential for
cannabis the potential for well
the need for the roll out of the
vaccine as a first emergency
priority it could be a really
wonderful way to kind of merge
so my secret intention not so
secret is that both of these
bills will find a way through to
the governor's desk and serve as
complementary in lifting up and
finally after decades of
inequity serve our rural areas
across ideologies across
partisan lines but with an
intentional focus the plot this
this bill and and I yield back.
Thank you Representative Montoya
annex we have Representative
Rapp and and after that we have
Representative Lujan.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator for being for this bill
I'm curious it might be
something that's more just your
your your witnesses kind of the
formation of this and if there
are other similar positions in
other states or you know what
kind of where this group from
and the reason why I noticed
that one of your witnesses had
mentioned that the other states
we're looking at kind of
following suit and I'm curious
if there were other examples
that that kind of how the
engagement in rural and frontier
issues thank you Representative
and Mr chairman I was actually
Stacy **** and mentioned that
this is being looked at as a
model to be implemented in other
states it has been issue before
and and miss **** if you're
still on the line all I will
yield to you to speak to that as
well.
And thank you.
Thanks for the question of the
format thank you so much and yes
this bill we have not seen
another another office like this
are bill like this and the
nation if one exists we can't
find it and other states are
having the same issue that this
came from a three year stint
three year committee I worked on
this.
Until last year and one hundred
check it over again this year to
make sure that these issues were
dealt with because we've seen in
our those of us that are from
rural New Mexico I'm seeing
these issues in rural and
frontier areas our whole lives
and so national center for
frontier communities took a
success on about three years ago
though the committee around at
about thirty people and work
with the FAA and with
Legislative finance to figure
out how can we fix this what
could we do and how do we write
the language and how do we think
about this and so as we've done
that and I've I've only been in
this position here but in the
last year meeting people across
the nation.
Excuse me people are so
interested in it because of the
issues that Carol Miller talked
about the issues that Senator.
Diamond talked about and yeah we
don't know that this exists
anywhere else we haven't been
able to find it if it does we
now it's needed not only in New
Mexico but across the beach.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Senator on twenty other
witnesses on to as well sorry.
Mister chairman Senator members
of the committee
When we started looking at how
this would be implemented with
one position as a starting point
I encourage people to look at
the excellent web based system
that New Mexico house right now
for the long term care on board
program there is a difference of
on board makes the relationship
to the state individual art
without getting mediated through
the legislature or provided the
committee said so doorway and
dump tails perfectly with house
bill sixteen R. Representative
Montoya and I you know have
discusses before either bill was
drafted and put together thank
it can be a way where someone
who doesn't even know their
legislator is or has never paid
attention that would have been
entry point with the concerns of
their community or their
organization it's not designed
to be something for individuals
and that was what led
Senator Steinborn and also
Senator come the lawyer in the
finance committee was to look at
the term bias because when that
amendment was made because this
is more of an individual kind of
thing that legislative
regulatory or policy situation
but we just seeing that
From the beginning probably it
will be reset to call for a lot
of people reaching out hopefully
with our building on the
platform the on but platform the
state already has which is
excellent and then it would grow
from there and it would
definitely partner with and dove
tail with our we're all
opportunities committee.
So just thank you for that.
Thank you chairman thank you
senator the year witnesses I
really appreciate the wealth of
knowledge that you all have
especially I think I'd like I
could just sit here and listen
to a lot more of the context as
well thank you for that you know
I they're motivation for our
nation not to mention just New
Mexico has happens has
accelerated I feel like so much
in my lifetime you know and and
really we see that are I
appreciated chairman and and set
Senator when you mentioned that
third of our population remains
rural and how that ships over
the next two years or in of the
neck until the next census is
going to be really hi it's I
mean ensuring that they have
access to to the need to to
needs and what they need what I
really appreciate about this
legislation I just want to
mention a few things one and the
beginning but I I did like this
one is that it's at least one a
rural equity on button on the
screen so I appreciate that
there is that potential for
growth I think we all in all
just gonna happen really that
how you break down the four
different entities that this
position will work with and the
reason why I bring that up as I
see my husband who works on he's
a college counselor but his
passion is rural college
counseling you know he was able
to attend the college out of
state that really gave him a lot
of opportunities that you know
he couldn't had in his home
state of Kansas and you know and
he's County working group or is
that still will just retired
from a teacher that they remain
the only family for about
fifteen years to do that and so
really you know what has become
his passion a lot of I started
out at the talk of the Jewish
burning I just see that passion
you know how do we ensure that
kids have access you to college
counseling maybe to get a
scholarship they wouldn't have
known about maybe a half things
are that work these goals you
know before and really just kind
of seeing that that was a
consideration you know that I
never really fully had you know
I I grew up in a town that
originally had work house and
people and then by the time I
graduate high school the cow
element was gone the ranchers
work on it was a was all gone
and completely many malls I mean
you know and so you know for him
though that remains very active
part and so I'm I I something I
hadn't thought about before I
really do think that you know
non that's been.
Ability to bring in those
different entities and
understandings really helpful
and United we look for dissing
the results to come back and and
really what we're able to use a
state to insure that on that
those the the the heritage of
our state where those values of
so many New Mexicans come from
you know as reserves in that
we're we're holding on to the
think really do part of many New
Mexicans who may now live in
urban areas as well so I started
off intended but I really
appreciate that about yourself
thank you so much Mr chairman
and senator.
Thank you Mr Senator next we
have Representative on the line.
All.
Your cell.
There you go.
Thank you Mr chairman I I have
my camera because I'm with my
seven year old and she's right
around doing work and everything
so I apologize I got a little
distracted there with there but
I really want to think that the
panelists expert witnesses are
here stand for this Senator
for bringing this legislation
forward and I want to give a big
shout out to Priscilla instead
of who I've worked alongside
with in the past and say she is
that she's a wonder and she's so
important to her community here
and which the function eligible
of what her job does in southern
New Mexico and to all our cards
really across the state that our
work a lot on these issues
already and I think that that
facilitation that we're seeing.
Coming through with this
legislation is just
Is so important in the consumer
valued as we're talking about
today and I really want to
emphasize what
Representative Montoya said
about his bill working you know
perfectly almost.
With this bill because you're
gonna need if it if all goes
well we get both of these these
bills through and signed by the
governor that has to be in here
that would be just a the
opportunity to facilitate what
in our but then we need to do
and I just wanted to say I
support this legislation I've
worked in so many aspects of our
rural communities throughout the
state and
are those issues are just so
relevant and and where we are
today and I just want to say
thank you and also I do have a
question too I think as we go to
Carol about the statistical
value it's going to be coming
from the census and when we're
going those that those data
points that did information are
going to be developed a room
will have access to them in
regards to the the real
communities that you're talking
about Carroll.
Thank you Mr Chairman
representative.
Committee and their job and
then.
for the purpose of
congressional and legislative
reapportionment of first data's
supposed to come out next year
in twenty twenty two there were
some differences in the way the
census was prepared for in the
past and I'm aging myself here
but for the two thousand ten and
two thousand census several
federal agencies came together
and worked with the census
bureau USDA and HHS and others
to prepare in advance how to
analyze the new data that would
be coming out the department of
calling Commerce and the census
bureau did not do that this year
it was the first time in thirty
years that there was no specific
rural and frontier up front
preparation so the data is going
to start coming out next year
that's in that's in legislation
one that reapportionment happens
the other data usually follows
around
it would be in two thousand
twenty four where some of the
socio economic and other.
Data will start to come out but
that's why the current rush to
change the and B. O. N. B. does
not have to publish regulations
through the Federal Register
that the rush to change this
right now the metro non metro is
I will all use the word it's
kind of terrifying to those of
us that might see every program
more than four hundred federal
programs use that criteria so we
really are timing wise in the
perfect place to have
Senate bill one ninety three and
house bill sixteen because
there's a tsunami of change
about to come in the next I
would say two to four years.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Carol that's exactly what I'm
kind of pinpointing in on what
you're you're talking about when
in what we're we're looking at
right now and what what what is
coming down our way and I just
really don't you know what you
were discussing sharing with us
so I think that this is this is
a crucial time this is a crucial
piece of legislation in
conjunction with the
Representative Montoya is still
I think that it's I hope we
don't pass up the opportunity to
get this done on this this year
the sessions at thank you again
to sponsor thank you to the work
of everybody that's doing you
know doing the work in our rural
communities and
I happily support this piece of
legislation moving forward thank
you Mr chair thank you.
Thank you Representative Lujan
next we have a Representative
black.
Thank you Mr chairman I would
like to make a motion to pass if
it's appropriate all rights
appropriate the representative.
We have a motion for to best
recommendation not make a
second.
Representative black in the
second by Representative Montoya
further questions discussion.
Representative a black did did
you have a discussion on the
beyond the amount on the bill I
know Sir I just was ready to
make the motion.
Okay I do have some questions
They're not really questions
but you know this issue
kind of us spreading yourself
real for them.
In terms of the one person I'm
budget then
Is kind of concerning.
And
I know that on page two.
under item C. two.
You kind of have
That the but well.
find plain assistance to the
state and counties.
and then
you mentioned certain areas.
Health Human Services
educational services.
Economic development
infrastructure planning.
And
And seven other
items on the following page.
And you know what that brought
to mind is.
Possibility of kinda having
Assistant ombudsman.
and and for the time being maybe
not paid.
But maybe experts in our rural
communities that for example
have a specialty in regards to
health in terms of unfolding
maybe some of that.
Assistance and in that so that
that that will take up.
Maybe
a our system does not in the
health department are you
connected I'm not sure but I
think where there's a will
there's a way and then under
Human Services you know I have
we have vast knowledge on the
role of unity's.
That have engaged in those
services you know for all of
your order.
They have the ten year in terms
of understanding what those are
so that's the health and service
thank you Services Department so
you got to departments covered
their educational services PED
are we connect us is that was
meant to the PED economic
development you know how do we
position a Assistant ombudsman
and economic development.
Infrastructure planning funding
and improve of the water
wastewater utility.
road needs and broadband and
other infrastructures that's
right up the alley of local
government division under the
DFA how do we park somebody
there in our with that with that
mission of the of the main
ombudsman.
And and then we got public
safety you know public safety
department.
state police their main function
is a rural areas rural
communities and transportation
department the major roadways in
our state our rural areas.
land use and land development
energy and natural resource
management all that falls under
the energy and natural resource
department are we alright this
Assistant ombudsman there and so
you get my wrist Representative
Center diamond in terms of how
maybe we can start addressing
this.
Is do all.
Role of the Bussmann.
And it doesn't necessarily have
to volunteer she.
We can kind of create that
assistance you know and maybe
that's a that's a topic for next
year in terms of maybe providing
some funding and
so that's just one one one
concern
in terms of enhancing the
legislation.
The other is that in a rural
communities we have incredible
institutions with incredible
leaders.
Back in our land grant
communities
community basically
is the land base so if the
school wants the community they
go to the land grant.
Because they're going to have
the land which the expand the
school you know and
But in some in our rural
communities and I mentioned land
grants because on in our land
and communities currently rural
areas the land grant board of
trustees.
Its members and bears.
They have really good
organizational skills.
And and they know your history
of land management going back
centuries.
You know in terms of their
ancestors so it is not uncommon
to find land grant heirs our
board of trustee members in the
mutual domestic.
To find them in the US second
commission.
to find them as church leaders.
to find them in the school
board.
and
and that's what we have in these
rural areas that I think the
Bussmann can really kind of
benefit from is tapping into
that existing David leadership
that already exists with some of
these institutions in these
rural areas and I just mentioned
a few we've got livestock
associations kind of in in these
rural communities as well
or their participation on larger
livestock or farm bureau you
know so they have connections
and the and actually the
Bussmann isn't gonna start
prince cracked because he's got
all this expertise.
At that are available to him or
her you know that that I think
kind of up puts to rest maybe
some of the doubt of you know
I'm doing
for this poor person once you're
sick and that kids are running
in under first they are his
first thing so
that's all I had I I noticed
Representative at the process
had done is hand up but also
kind of recognize them
Representative diamond when you
do your closing and I think that
we're at that point to where
before we take the ball to allow
you to close on the legislation
and I recognized Representative
Terrazas as well.
Senator Diamond do is to close
on the legislation yes I do
Representative trust if you'd
like to say a few words on this
all online thank you.
Thank you senator and thank you
chairman in committee for
hearing us here today I think
you've covered a lot of the
things that I was going to
mention chairman of one of the
things as I as a new legislature
I'd I learned that having a good
relationship with the as a
matter of fact Representative
Lujan brought it up to your
local clog persona says she's
been awesome.
And having those relationships
pretty well you summed it up Sir
I I I it's exactly what I was
going to share that I would I
would see that a new the some
Bussmann would go out and have a
relationship with all these
clogs they would that way they
would be able to give a more
precise at least point that the.
Point into the right direction
of what is the most in need
because it is going to be a big
task and I believe us centered
diamond expressed that this is
just the beginning of of
something that will be greater
and I believe that it will also
grow with thank you so much and
I appreciate you hearing this
today god bless.
Senator Diamond.
So it's giving Senator Diamond
Representative Montoya I.
You're waving your hand.
Current closing what had they
had it up for about ten minutes.
Proceed Representative Montoya.
Mr Chairman your comments were
right on point and you know to
Cindy Montoya's earlier
suggestion that the social
determinants of health are so
essential to address both HB
sixteen and this bill address
those.
I.
Want to say in closing that the
one weakness of this bill is
that my bill fortifies Linde's
lateral support because by
design we have representation
from all the standing committees
in the Senate and the house just
as you mentioned all of those
incredibly important aspects so
it would give this on but as he
or she on board over the next
two years literally the lateral
support the slide in the
information the connection to
the local cogs as their ****
just pointed out I also want to
close in saying that we have.
Hundred thousand dollars to run
the committee by the Legislative
Council and we have a hundred
and fifty thousand dollars in
the feed bill already to study
infrastructure both of those
will be ready by mid summer so
the merging once again of these
two bills I think it's a perfect
marriage if we may force.
Marriage by design I closing you
back thank you.
Thank you Representative Montoya
Senator Diamond finally would.
I I appreciate this and I look
forward to working with
Representative Montoya to see
how we can really amplify both
of these bills in the coming
together I just want to thank
you all for your time remind you
that this is a bipartisan effort
it's just I know it's a small
step but it is a step in the
right direction that together
we're taking as a legislative
body regardless of of party
affiliation we are doing the
right thing by making sure that
the voice of rural New Mexico
still has a voice hearing so I
just to come together in this
the same spirit by making sure
that this was continues on thank
you guys for your time and and
tell the expert witnesses.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you senator of members
were on do pass recommendation
of Senate bill one ninety three
as a man that.
seen no further discussions is
there also is it do pass
recommendation.
Sena opposition
madam secretary that the record
reflect that all those present
voted in the affirmative Senator
Diamond you have a do pass
recommendation on your Senate
bill one ninety three as
amended.
Thank you all for your time
bless you thank you
thank you members of that does
it for today
but we haven't seen a bill come
didn't come at hasn't come
through yet on the referral but
we do expect the bills to to get
this committee and will will
schedule them in an appropriate
manner and and and an expedited
manner considering the time that
we have remaining in our session
so members that does that I
simply one of the other that the
us and enjoy our our fine day at
less you are you the great Mr
chairman of this you guys
