Technical things so what we will
start with Representative
Barreras.
Hello everybody I think maybe
it's because I clicked on the
forwarded
email so it was specifically for
you
so I'm bringing I'm from
district twelve and little
something about myself I have a
toddler one and a half year old
daughter so during these
meetings if it's virtual she
will probably pop in and out
from time to time I am
incredibly honored and I look
forward to us working with every
single one of you so thanks for
having me.
Thank you Representative birth
Representative Lord.
I'm ready good morning everyone
thank you Representative
stepping lord I am in east
mountains newly elected and
looking forward to being able to
help the people of New Mexico
this year.
Thank you and welcome
Representative Pettigrew.
Okay I am amused so hopefully
everybody can hear me
I am from Lee County house
district sixty one.
engineer by trade
Grew up on a farm and ranch and
Sir still have very deep ties to
that as well and so
I'm gonna be very interested on
how well what all happens and
commit in this committee as I
took our list of initial
bills oh my goodness and so
it'll be fun.
That we're here we get we get a
wide variety we are I have and
and I say this in the nicest
possible way we are kind of the
trash can't committee where
where we where things kind of
don't fit elsewhere and and that
is it when I was in physical
therapy school that was the term
we use when you know what when
you didn't have when you can
make another diagnosis you
called it blank and that was
kind of the trash can diagnosis
because you didn't know for sure
if it that it's not negative
it's just kind of a catch all
maybe I should start I should
catch up not get out of the
eighties and catch up to that
two thousand but but it is an
interesting committee it's a
good committee so madam vice
chair Representative Romero I
sorry I have done a minute late
trying to juggle all the
meetings which were all going to
be doing for the next sixty
pleasure to see you all
I'm representative Andrea Romero
I Representative in northern
Santa Fe County that's from the
City of Santa Fe through the
park of alley into the city of
Espanola and there for photos in
my district as well to suit F.
Pojoaque and I'm back and settle
to fund so so we're very rural
or very urban we got everything
under the sun in our district so
I this is why the casual
Committee is perfect for my
district because it always
affects us so we appreciate
having I I this is my second
year on this committee as vice
chair and I look forward to
meeting our new our new folks
and working with the the session
and deliberating on the future
of New Mexico.
Thank you madam vice chair and
this is your third year this is
your second term on this
committee that's that is sorry
about that they years playing
together and it feels sometimes
it feels like it was yesterday
and sometimes it feels like it
was fifty years ago so so I'm
Representative Liz Thomson and
this is my second term of Cherry
any committee actually any
question committee I have
chaired the tobacco settlement
revenue oversight committee in
the interim for a few years my
district twenty four which is
northeast heights of Albuquerque
this is my this is the beginning
of my fourth term in the house
by trade I am a pediatric
physical therapist to work with
them.
Well I'm not working with
anybody now because I found in
the pandemic that doing physical
therapy with infants and
toddlers overs though.
Doesn't do a whole lot so I am I
am not currently employed and
but once the pandemic it over
and and I'm.
Of course my my interests are
health care and disability
issues I what the reason I got
into politics is that I have my
husband and I have an adult son
with significant autism who
lives in a group home and so and
so a jewels are you ready for
I it seems we are to do
attendance after we've all
introduced ourselves but it's
kind of one of those official
duties we have to check off so
part do not are you tools.
I'm.
It and just for it for all the
members.
Her name is genet Joel but she
goes by pool
so just as the whenever you're
ready for attendance we're
ready.
Yes thank you madam chair and a
special welcome to all the
members of the committee and
congratulations to our new
members again my name is jewels
and I will be your committee
assistant I will call the roll
and then I'll share just a
little bit about my background.
Today's hearing the roll call is
as follows Representative
Brittney finance.
Representative Stephanie lord
here.
Representative Randall group.
Here.
Representative Andrea Romero.
Get this year controls and madam
chair representative Liz
Thomson.
Thank you jobs go ahead and and
and then we will go to staff
after all all call on staff to
do a brief introduction now once
once Jules is finished thank you
very much madam chair I just
want to say thank you again for
having me that the session this
will be my nineteenth
legislative session I served at
eleven years on various
committees are cleaning taxation
revenue government urban affairs
for years and education
agriculture and water resources
however for the last six years
I've been the main receptionist
in the capitol north
dealing with nineteen
representatives and their staff
staff of thirty which is what I
excel Act I'm a people person
map PC's but I will try to keep
calm and carry on with courage
and kindness and please bear
with me zoom and economic are
this is all very new to me and
our I. T. people and I work Sen
diligently Tuesday afternoon and
I apologize that this didn't get
out to you we thought it was
sent saved all of your currently
did not so I apologize for the
late notice on today's meeting
you're at legislative assistants
will have my contact information
they are able to call the bills
the fiscal impact reports the
analysis and anything that you
might wish to review prior to
our hearings but in future I
will let all of you know what
bills will be heard and I will
have everything as efficiently
and readily available as
possible
I worked in many jobs it's
during the legislature over
twenty years against by nineteen
year even leadership two years
twenty years ago so I say that
I've done everything except for
male maintenance and food
service.
So if your staff has any
questions please don't hesitate
to have them call me or email on
the legislative website my
telephone number at my desk is
five oh five nine eight six four
four one five.
And I would greatly appreciate
if you contact me in the office
I do not use my cell phone
generally during business hours
but I look forward to working
with you all and please let me
know if there's anything further
I can assist with thank you
madam chair members of the
committee.
In no particular order except on
my screen Lynn.
More it's great to see you all
my name is Lynn canning I am our
house democratic Majority
analyst for C. pack this is
let's see I was able I did
twenty eighteen and twenty
nineteen when representative
Thompson and Representative
Romero came on board and then
unfortunately I had to miss last
year but I'm happy to be back so
great to meet you all.
Hi everyone my name is Allison
Jones my first session so I'm
really excited to be here I am
the committee floater so that
means you might see me on more
than one session I just kind of
take over and we need to break
or can't be there so that's my
duties for the session.
Thank you Allison and I'm just
noticing I do not see
the Republican analyst is do we
know at this does it has anyone
heard anything of course I'm
getting a phone call now and.
And I if if one of the analyst
has her cell phone number
or.
she is here what.
Let me see.
She's not showing up it is she.
What I'm sorry what's your name.
Terms of use in the chat.
Okay okay so page can you your
camera is that working okay okay
but they're still you're still
should be up as a as a block on
here if I'm not mistaken even if
your camera is not turned on it
should show page so do you have
the ability to on mute yourself.
I guess not.
She her name appears on the list
of attendees not panelists yes
so I'm assuming she she and.
So page if you if you received
an email from Jules she sent out
a reminder about an hour ago I
believe.
So if you could check your email
and truck there she is there she
is okay okay I just I had just
snapped in my head I will
continue to go in the order that
I see you but page I'm glad to
see that you you are crossed
into the the other side okay so
we're Rebecca.
Hello my name is Rebecca parks
there and I'm really happy to be
serving as one of the committee
analysts for you all this will
be my first time as an analyst
so I have nothing to compare all
this Zunis two
and if there's anything you need
all of the questions you have
feel free to reach out to me
anytime.
Okay Julie.
Julie Browning you hear some
stuff background that's my
eighteen month old.
so I know on the lead committee
analyst and is my first year
working for the state
legislature but not my first
time being an analyst I work for
Bernalillo county community
schools and various other
organizations during policy and
I'm really excited to be here.
Thank you page.
It says she's trying to and
meet.
And I do if I do appreciate
people keeping track of the chat
I can multi task in some things
but here I try to.
Try to stay a little more
focused on
On so I page.
I don't even I I'm
it is this something.
That you are here to help with
yes I just
asked you and you so page you
should see some that pops up on
your screen that says the post
once you to you.
And she appears to be on muted
now.
Okay can you say something in
fear if.
Yeah can you hear me yes we can
hear you.
We just landed on the moon or
something.
yes so I've been an analyst for
the house Republicans off and on
for the last twenty years
and that happy to be here.
Thank you okay so I think I
think.
I will lay out a few things and
please feel free to I think we
missed Allen because we can't
see
We sure did I just skipped right
over and it's like it's a black
square I just went right.
I'm sorry Alan go ahead.
What this is my third year I'm
happy to be here in just to show
you that I can offer.
Your muted Alan we don't hear
you anymore
okay I don't know what my gems
not working okay.
Your.
We'll see your lovely face next
time you and page
and I'm sorry your wasted so
much time on your hair and make
up Alan or when you're not going
to be on Representative so you
know.
It's a practice run.
So.
Is pretty informal we're gonna
go over kind of how things run
out I know as freshmen and.
This can be kind of daunting I
will tell you
I I met with that with some of
the analyst yesterday and now
I'm what kept coming up was
let's be gentle on ourselves and
on each other because this is
going to be difficult it's gonna
be a learning experience for all
of us and I think we'll we'll
save ourselves some gray hairs
and some all stars if we can
just say you know what it is
what it is and we'll we'll get
the work done probably at and I
will I will be the first one to
tell you even when we're in
person we're not perfect so I'm
so just keep in mind that that I
it's okay to make a mistake it's
it's not the end of the world
the there's no the if you're a
witness or a are your presenting
a bill are you're on committee
if you do the wrong thing there
is no trap door that will open
and swallow you I promise so so
please try not to stress too
much about about you know
following we will follow
protocol but if you slip up and
say Mr chair or you don't say
chair or whatever it's not the
end of the world if it becomes a
pattern I will remind you gently
you know and and it for for the
public that's on and for you new
members in it seems kind of the
F. and stifled but as you do
this you'll realize that
that it's it's actually a good
system it keeps things
professional and it keeps things
moving so in if there's a heated
debate let's say between one of
the committee members and
someone who's presenting a bill
rather than you know yelling at
each other they have to say
madam chair you know
Representative but address this
is my point so it it kind of
helps to lower the temperature a
little bit when and and I will
be the first one to tell you we
are we probably get.
All of the controversy of bills
essentially so there are going
to be some emotions and and
there's nothing wrong with the
motion as long as were
respectful you know and and I'm
a big crier some I I remember I
chaired the end of life hearing
and health and Human Services
when I was the vice chair and
they finally just brought me a
box of Kleenex because I just I
mean the stories I was hearing
so and you know if you see me
crying it's not the end of the
world it's who I am
I just just a reminder to try to
remember to go through that year
you madam chair or Mr chair if
you have a a male share I'm and
we are going to stay on subject
so you know if we're talking
let's say about about
Selling stolen car parts you
know even don't don't don't go
off on to something that you're
upset about that that that
Representative has said to you
are hacked another bill that
they're care while you're care
you're also carrying a bill that
makes you know makes it legal to
kill puppies you know we're not
we're not gonna do that we're
going to say on the bill and in
in this committee and in the
house in general I think all
bills will be heard I'm it
except the past you know the
last few days if you've got a
house bill and we're your first
committee and there's four days
left in the session there is no
way your bill is going to make
it through the committees in the
house the house floor in the
Senate so those bills may not be
heard
there have been shares and and I
I won't name names that I won't
but there have been chairs to
just say I'm not going to hear
that bill that will not happen
in that committee I'm if you
know if if a sponsor doesn't
want the bill heard M. and
doesn't want me to make that
public I have done that in the
past you know I some of the I
will tell you why and.
When you're a freshman took on a
bill and he didn't really
understand what it was that once
she understood it she didn't
want to carry it anymore but she
didn't want to just call it so
she asked me not to hear it so
I'm that's that happened one
time in two years so it's it's
rare but it might happen and if
you if you have concerns please
do not I'm not my door is always
open although I won't be there
my phone is always and I guess
is a better way to say it these
days
feel free to call me or email me
or text me.
And it generally we try to go in
the order that the bills were
referred to us so and usually
I'm in right now it's by number
because we you know the bills
that we have right now airing
their first committee bill are
in their first committee hearing
so generally we go in order but
we do sometimes try to grow
built by subject so we we do we
are working on an agenda for for
Tuesday and and we are going a
little bit out of order and part
of the reason for that is that.
The analysts have to analyze
every bill there are there are
democratic and less Republican
and less than and Committee
animals as and they rely on
input from agencies in our from
department of health from public
education department and I also
rely on the fiscal impact report
that comes out of the
legislative finance committee
staff and those have been a
little slow in getting started
so what we are looking at doing
on to say there are several
bills that are repeat that have
been previously introduced so
they do have some of that
information of course it will be
updated but at least it gives
our analyst a place to start if
we started with with brand new
bills they would they would have
to wait to start to do Indian at
analysis until they got that
information and then as I said
it's coming in slowly so what
we're gonna do want to say is
take bills that have been
already introduced so that that
the analysts have a little bit
of a head start I'm hoping just
by shake of the head analysts
have anything started coming in
I do you have any agency reports
any FIR is nothing still okay
but we still have five days to
our next meeting but so so in
general we will go in the order
that that bills come into the
committee but there will be some
skipping around and and I I am
opening to hear it you know if
you have if you are a bill
sponsor and you have a an expert
witness who who works you know
tell you know works on Tuesdays
and not thirty days I will
gladly put your your bill on
Thursday as opposed to to it may
not be you know you have to skip
that to think that the next one
but I try to be really flexible
in making sure that that you can
get your witness and it's not
such a big deal anymore because
people don't have to travel you
know they can take that half
hour off of work or whatever.
Or so that may not not be as
much of an issue this time but
if it is please just just make
the request and I promise I will
do all I can to accommodate you
The public comment this this
committee.
Have been known to have eight
hours of public comment
and that was with people doing
three minutes each so in general
this committee hears all public
comment although it the time is
limited and we are not sure
quite how that's going to work
hopefully there.
We have to meet our meeting with
the speaker our to talk about
you know whether we could have a
countdown timer on the screen so
that when people are speaking
three minutes seems like a long
time well it depends sometimes
three minutes seems like I if
you're really nervous it seems
like forever and then sometimes
it's like then I just said my
opening statement and the three
minutes are up so count down
timer so that people can know
when they start to wrap up and
if it turns out that in a three
minutes has been standard if if
we are really slowing down that
may be cut down to two minutes
some committees just for you for
the freshman some committees may
say okay we're going to have
thirty minutes of total
pro and thirty minutes of total
con and you advocates figure out
you know or you know they they
figure out a way to do that we
generally don't do that on this
committee we hear all the public
comment but we do we do limit
the time
But there is a each each
committee chair has a way to
Do they have their own personal
style at running their
committees and and there are set
rules there is kind of it I and
I don't even know if it's a
written or unwritten rule of
having your I met if you were
going to amend your bill
to have that in twenty four
hours in advance to give our
analysts time to to make to
change their analysis to reflect
the amendment but we have in
this committee allow people to
do amendments on the fly and
that that is something minor you
know you left out a word or you
need appear yet or the numbering
as Ross something that won't
change what the bill does and
says it sometimes we sometimes
we will say okay what will put
you on hold and go up well go
upstairs to Legislative Council
get get online with Legislative
Council and get them to draft
you an amendment and bring it
back and then we'll do it that
day and and the it has been done
to say okay we're gonna pass you
out of this committee with the
understanding that you will get
whatever you need to get fixed
in the next committee just to
keep you moving because sixty
days goes by really fast that
what we really want to do is to
give legislation a chance to
pass I don't want it to get
stuck in this committee you know
and especially since work
Tuesday Thursday committee if
you come in on Thursday and you
know it's got to one aids that
you want to change one of them
to a one B. I don't want to make
you wait until the following
Tuesday and those five out of
sixty days waiting so so I I am
flexible but if it makes changes
that would affect the analysis
I'm gonna be pretty strict with
the twenty four hour rule at
least until we get towards the
end of the session when we get
close to the end I'm we could be
a little more flex a little more
flexible on that but it really
makes it hard on the analysts
because they are and we.
Got a lot of bills I believe we
got nineteen bills on Tuesday
twenty bills I see I'm twenty
I'm so we're looking
Your put you two together so I
could look at both of you those
of you who are holding up
fingers for me.
I think that's pretty much I'm.
Pretty much what I had to and
and I'm gonna open it up to vice
chair Romero to see if she has
anything to add.
Thank you madam chair I just
wanted to also say that we're
probably going to disable the
chat that there won't be that
option for us to communicate
within the meeting itself so
just the encouragement for
finding alternative means than
the chat because again with
madam chair being having to read
meeting and everything else
we're we're trying to keep it
focused so the we're just for
the panelists and the attendees
to get in touch with us and I
don't know how we're posting all
of the information regarding our
meetings and everything other
than the normal alerts that are
going out and then on the NM
Legislative got website the
what's happening is we're The
daily agendas coming through if
you do need to get a hold of us
you can chat us right now.
And I did see that one of the
attendees did try to get in
contact with us through the chat
I'm gonna post my email and
there I think is the best way to
get in touch with me and my cell
phone number as well for
everybody for today.
Yeah for in for a committee
members we will all have each
other's cell phone so MHM so we
we will have a text thread you
have that will say you know what
we're starting in five minutes
or whatever and I hope I did
that don't don't you still
things starting on time in the
legislature although virtually
it may actually work since we're
not doing four sessions but our
time is usually one R. S..
Historically one thirty on
Tuesday and Thursday but what
we're doing four sessions I
don't know if we ever started at
one thirty on and so but with us
not doing four sessions we can
be much more
Much more on time and and trying
to stick with that schedule I
have asked that the the rules
share speak with I'm with with
the Republicans and and and just
and for us to try to not have
caucuses during committee times
you know let's say that we can
reserve eight thirty to eleven
thirty four morning committees
and then maybe one thirty to
four thirty committee for
afternoon committees where both
caucuses agreed not to have
caucus meetings during those
times because we
So that's what we're hoping to
do and and I'm glad that
Representative Romero brought up
the chat it is going to be
disabled when we're in meetings
I'm which is probably a good
thing I'm.
What representative Thompson yes
for the for the folks that or in
the chat right now of one has
asked Rikki Lee Chavez has asked
thank you for your service for
one thing but please let us know
how you'd like us to be
recognize raised hand feature
are so do we want to talk about
that a little bit I'm not a
hundred percent sure that that
is figured out yet
I know the thing I ask of the
speaker is to I some of you have
probably use this there is a
whole wing feature on on zoom
and we did a democratic Health
caucus retreat and we use that
some so I've asked if we could
use that because what happens in
a live committee is once once a
bill as is explained before I go
to the committee for questions I
will hold the audience and I
will say who here is in favor of
this bill and then by raising
hands we get it we get a clue of
of of what the what the
temperature at least of our
audience is but we will not have
that visual so I'm hoping that
we can do a poll feature if we
can't do that we may have to do
the right hand which is going to
you know some of course
sometimes we are going to have
hundreds of people in attendance
and so that that may get a
little and we all the worst
where we literally are not
building the plane as we're
flying it because we've never
done this before and so as I
said be be kind to each other be
gentle be gentle with our tech
people and our and our staff
because that we know we have
ideas about what we're gonna do
and then when we try emit like
that that was not the right idea
so so I'm not Rikki Lee I'm not
exactly sure it may be raise
hands to speak
I we haven't quite figured that
one out but I I.
I wanted to go ahead and do this
meeting before we had everything
figured out because like I said
if I didn't we would have been
having our organizational
meeting on Tuesday and we would
have already had seven days of
legislative days gone before we
ever took up a single bill so so
please be patient
With us then we're gonna learn
this together.
So I'm glad someone is keeping
track of check because
when I'm not running a meeting I
can keep track of chat but when
I'm when I'm doing all the
talking it's harder for me so
I'm do any of you have questions
or things you are Representative
Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair
Several different questions and
and I think you can answer one
of them which is the right Sam
thank is a I've had it up and
and and not I understand one
when.
Running in the meeting that it
gets it gets a little hard and
that that was one of my
questions is are we going to
have somebody on our chat the
this is are not on our chat but.
On the zoom that is keeping
track of.
People that would like to speak
and then the order and if we're
not using chat.
If we're not needs to chat how
are you madam chair
going to communicate that to us
so that we know who's fixing the
who's coming up in the talk on
on top of that
How do we
How are you gonna be handling
witness testimony as well are we
gonna have a list of who's going
to be speaking are you gonna
limit their time
You've already talked about the
three minute public comment
So how do you want us so we have
somebody who wants to speak on
one of the house one of the
bills how do you want to skip
that communicated to you so they
get on that witness testimony
list
Yes
I.
Let me kind of good take it a
little at a time or I will
totally forget what you that so
thank you very much so in turn I
had originally thought that we
would have a dedicated staff
person on to keep track of
raised hands and public comment
I clarified that that will not
be the case although when we are
doing the bills were were
expecting hours of testimony I'm
we will have someone who will
keep track of of whether it be
raising I and I think that will
probably be how we do it but
that's not a hundred percent
that someone will keep track of
what order people raise their
hands so so there's there's that
witness the witness the expert
witness in fact in a normal
session you would have sitting
at the table with you in front
of us and those people will be a
panelists so they so you were
what generally happens is that
the representative or the
senator will discuss their bill
a little bit in front of the
committee and then the expert
witness will give a statement
and and we do not limit the time
although and you know if
somebody wants to take two hours
to explain a bill I think we I
you know I may at some point say
you know.
Let's cut to the chase but but
there is no there is no limit on
on expert witnesses so you an
expert witness can kind of go
back and forth or you can see
that the Representative will
speak first and and give us the
kind of the gist of the bill
your expert witness will say
whatever it is that you brought
them there to say and then once
you have presented your bill
then I will go to the public and
probably through raised hands I
will say who here is in favor of
this bill and what you know will
take longer than the usual
fifteen seconds because we're
going to have to look at that at
the raised hands and then who
was in opposition.
And and and that that point I
will take public comment and and
that will again probably be
through raised raised hands and
went when it's not a you are in
when we don't have a lot of
people for public comment we are
not quite so strict on the three
minute limit but again I'm not
you know I'm not gonna let
people go on and on and on
because people want to tell you
every story they know about a
certain subject and we just need
to move on so so we will get the
public comment and then I will
come back to the committee and
and you can ask questions and
there in general you can you can
ask as many questions as you
want as long as you're staying
on the subject and you know if
if and it's not like you get one
turn or you get a time limit you
can ask questions and then if
someone else ask questions and
and it raises another another
question for you it's fine to
come back on and and your expert
witness can also answer
questions which happens
frequently because we cannot
possibly be experts on
everything that we're dealing
with so so essentially consider
yourself and your expert
witness or witnesses sitting at
the table in front of us and any
of you can speak to answer any
of the questions.
That answer what you asked so
far.
I think so I think.
And
What is your thought with
respect to
If a bill.
Well with any bill that comes
with an F. I. R. is there a
chance that we can we can set a
rule thank you madam chair the
the if we haven't received the
FIR within say twenty four hours
then we hold that bill until the
next.
Committee meeting so that gives
us time to review the FIR
against it as well.
In general we will not hear a
bill that the analysts haven't
seen the F. R. I. F. I. R. I I I
don't I mean they're probably
has been the case not in this
committee where that has
happened but that will not
happen and and we we we and
Jules will be responsible as
soon as in FY are comes out on a
bill for a minimum of twenty
four hours in advance she will
get you will get that out to you
all the committee members so and
if but you know if if you see
that we have a meeting tomorrow
and and you haven't received
your FIR either contact me or or
jewels and and just find out
what's going on you know don't
sit there and wait until we're
in in the hearing the next day
and say I never got my FIR
please try and be proactive and
I know we have ten billion
things to keep track of benefit
if you lose track and you
realize oh my gosh I don't have
the FY are
but it has been sent to you and
I probably will say I'm sorry
you know that that Jules did
send them out and and I'm sorry
you you.
Didn't see yours or whatever but
honestly the
That meant FY ours are
incredibly important at the
analysts will look at the FIR so
we'll we'll kind of we will play
it by ear with that but I don't
think unless there's a glitch of
some sort that that should be a
problem you should have access
to the FY are
well in advance it because it's
a cause for the analyst although
as as things kind of heat up
there's going to be less time
Well let me say for if we are
the additional committee if we
are the second committee the FIR
will will already be done so
that should be so much of a
problem as it gets late in the
session what time is that such a
crunch the FIR should be done
and that and for those of you
who don't know halfway through
the session and I don't know
what the date is is the last
date that you can introduced a
bill so so when it starts being
crazy at the end the FIR as well
all be done because there will
be no unless unless there's a
major amendment to a bill that
changes things than there may
need to be another FIR but in
general thank you during the
crazy times the FY ours are
already completed.
Thank you very much madam chair
the last quick the last question
I have for you in thank you for
your patience with me
Is there a chance that someone
can send out an email with
everybody's contact information
that sits on this.
Either is the staff an analyst
or system there
and if you tell me who that is
I'll send my contact card to
them so they can.
That's easy for them to email it
out verses verses that's the
type at all yes I'm genet that
and and that that's what this
meeting is about is to answer
questions so and in that we
don't have anything else to do
today so any questions you have
that that's what we're here for
is to is to and I know it's not
gonna work but to make you feel
a little less nervous about this
process
and Joel do you have cell phones
and emails for all committee
members and and our staff.
Thank you madam chair I do have
physical office emails and there
are contact information.
There will be our master list
distributed to the entire staff
at the capitol and committee
last with resources available
what committees there serve on
and how they can be contacted in
addition the staff provided
assistants and analysts can
simply access he tried for the
FIR is should be updated
overnight or there be a change
quite often there is a change or
modification prior to a hearing.
But as soon as I get master list
information I can distribute
what I have to all the committee
members Mr who serves on this
committee and how we can easily
contact them students are
provided with that that would be
great jewel's send an email out
to everybody all the staff all
the members with.
It and if by some chance you
feel like maybe you put your
home phone number or you put an
old cell phone number on your
cut just you you might want.
Might want to go ahead and email
Jules your if you would prefer
an email other than your
provided email let her know that
and also your cell phone number
and then she will get a list
together of members and staff
that will be emailed out to
everybody.
That work tools.
Okay all righty any one else
with thank you Representative
Pettigrew.
Anyone else with questions.
Replaced Joe Meryl thank you
madam chair I just wanted to as
a couple just to go questions
just because I'm getting some
text and and I'm to trying to
get the interface between the
panelists and attendees so first
is are we ever going to be able
to see the attendees for public
comment or is it just both
verbal.
It's always verbal okay so that
I hope that's a bummer
at okay second question is of
the queue in a function does
allow the public to ask us
technical questions like which
which is sitting in there right
now about an English speaking
translator for
for someone who doesn't speak
English I don't think the
legislature provides that
service to my knowledge so I
just wanted to answer that
publicly but I don't know if
we're going to keep the queue in
a open to the public as well
as a feature in our
discussion I know I I'm
understand that most of this is
up to you madam chair so no
pressure so how we're going to
keep organized but just what
because of what's available
right now I just want to you
know let everybody know what
we'll be seeing in the future as
well.
So as far as the queue in a we
did not discuss that we we we
bombarded the speaker with pages
and pages of questions to take
back to the clerk and that I. T.
people I don't know if we will I
I don't know if it can be
disabled I don't know if it will
be disabled I don't believe
that's going to be a chair
decision I think it's probably
going to be eight eight eight
House decision so I don't know
the answer to that it that's I
mean if.
I would assume most of you have
observed a committee so in
general the public can't just
ask us something in the middle
of something so the fact that
we're taking the chat in the
queue away is is no different
than what we would be doing if
we were live you know we we can
read body language and we can
read heads nodding and and or
shaking vigorously which we
won't have but the public will
have essentially the same access
to us and and what you know if
you have somebody who who you
want in I mean you can give your
cell phone to anyone you want
obviously your cell phone number
and have people text you during
the meeting anything like that
but I'm thinking that we are
going to try and keep this as
close to what a live session
would look like which is where
the public can not you know be
asking questions during during.
Our our discussion so my guess
is that the Q. and a will also
be disabled but I do Allison do
you have you heard and we just
met with the speaker was that
just yesterday golly.
so do you have any information
on whether we're going to what
we're going to be doing with the
Q. NA.
We haven't quite got over that
yet but I can definitely figure
out get back to us okay thank
you so as I said you know we're.
None of us have all the answers
but my guess is that that just
to keep things
as as normal if I can use that
word as possible and as
As few distractions as possible
And and and in terms of that we
are all hopefully it won't be
such a big issue we are all
going to have our own bills that
we may need to president in
another committee at the same
time and in the it if if.
I would appreciate it if you
would text me or if you would
you know just interrupt or raise
your hand and say you know I I
have to step out for a minute to
go present in in our house
finance that House
Appropriations all be back I'm
just so we kind of know what's
going are you can text me or you
can text the whole group
whatever you feel comfortable
with but I'm once we start
voting we are very small
committee three is a quorum so
as long.
Well I won't get into that
because that goes with that but
but please try to let at least
me know if if you are going to
have to step out and and if you
and and what you're doing in I
mean if you're presenting a bill
I will know that you have no
idea how long that's going to be
it could be five minutes it
could be two and a half hours
but if you're gonna go change
your baby's diaper in as they
all be out for five minutes and
then I'll be back I'm just so we
kind of have an idea of because
it when we're there in person
you know members would either
with work in my ear as they were
leaving you know going to this
committee text me if you need me
which we're not going to have so
so we're gonna be figuring it
out I I know I sound like a
broken record but unfortunately
this is where we are we're going
to be figuring it out as we go
and we're just gonna be patient
and do the best that we can do.
Thank you just one more
Representative final us saying
so when you do raise your hand
it automatically puts us in
order based on when you touch
the button so it will be in a
higher call list and that way I
don't also know if attendees can
raise their hands as far as when
we do want to do public comments
and the ordering if that is a
feature that we could look into
okay I see heather raising her
hand on the ten days right now
so that's good to know that that
as soon as soon as they Q.
that's great they can we can
give them permission to speak
and have we can just give them
that direction to raise their
hand if they want to speak if we
do a poll
for yeas or nays I think that
will clean it up because you'll
have an easy number based on
that when it's open and then
president that's my
recommendation just because it
does automatically do it I'm.
I did not know that.
Yeah yeah so and if they do want
to speak then they can raise
their hands virtually and then
we can give them permission to
okay and then and then we are
also going to have people who
are calling in people who do not
have
Good internet so.
There's still a lot of things to
figure out and I do not envy the
I. T. people in any way shape or
form these days I'm just that
that meeting we had at noon
today to try and figure out how
to log on to the remote voting
from from out of the capital
I don't envy them and and I'll
put this out to the public pleat
you please be patient with us to
if you have suggestions it that
that are reasonable I mean don't
say why don't you guys use
whatever platform because that's
not going to happen because we
decided on on zero then and but
it you know if you say well.
You're free to reach out to me
if you have some suggestions
either as committee members are
even at the as the public you if
you solve some of these issues
I'm in a way that you think is
helpful please don't hesitate to
send it to me and I will get it
to the right people and let them
decide if that helps or not
did anyone else okay
Representative Lord thank you
thank you madam chair so I guess
my questions is since is on
there we're gonna be doing zoom
is going to be people calling
and so was in are we going to
have a sign language person or
someone to interpret for people
that are deaf or hard of hearing
there is a way to I believe to
request that if you make I I
have served on too many boards
and things I know that during
that interim we did have
interpreters sign language
interpreters I I don't know what
had in the past what has
happened when we have had people
who needed interpreters they
generally kind of brought their
own and but I I don't I don't
know Allison or and I didn't
know that heather was on have
have have either of you heard
anything about I have been told
that we will not have like
Spanish interpreters that we
haven't that that that's
something that we're hoping to
have in the future at this
session but because it's for one
thing it's very expensive and
not but it's fine language
interpreters does anyone know if
you can request
an interpreter be present at
committee hearings.
There is saying that she has
but you can't have closed
captioning on I don't see an
option on this particular
meeting but I know you can
do close caption so I have to go
to the settings and set that up
yeah I'm just about to ask if we
had closed captions on that
thank you for that question I
actually am I am
I'm I'm Madam signer I say I I
can keep up with the slow second
grader and because I work with
deaf kids for years and years
but thank you for that and then
our almost called you
representative Jackson Jim Jim
Jackson put in the chat that
that the home page of the
legislature now has info on how
to request an interpreter for
sign language.
For those of you who don't know
Jim jacks and and was the
executive director disability
rights New Mexico for many years
and he he works that as that
I'm.
Not a lobbyist exactly but
something like that so thank you
for that jam.
Representative Lord yes thank
you for that gym membership that
my other question is because you
know and lot of times we have
these committee session this one
they'll be hundreds of people
and I'm anticipating now with
zoom there might be thousands of
people who all want to speak on
the issue and and and it's kind
of important to transfer running
on brought up to
speaker egolf how we gonna
handle that because we're going
to have maybe a thousand people
on one side of the issue at
thousand people on the other
normally we say okay who's for
who's against it they raise
their hand or there's a list
because now we're going to have
people call me makes my district
is very rural and some people do
not have internet they can get
into so they're gonna be calling
there's going to be zoom do we
know any direction how we're
gonna handle that so we make
sure we get the fight people of
one side to find people the
other side so they both get to
speak on the issue.
In general in this committee I
do I do I don't do the five
people on it so that get ready
for some late nights if that
happens although you know if it
turns out that we we start
public comment and we see that
there are a thousand people I'm
not going to give a thousand
three I mean we
I don't think we are heirs could
survive that so it you know if
it turns out to something like
that I may say okay we're going
to have three hours of pro
comment three hours of our con
comments with one minute limit
each and and that when we have
meetings like that we will have
a staff member dedicated to kind
of controlling that
because that's just way too much
and when we do it in person
that's how we do we do it you
know we have we have people line
up essentially what's what's
there will be virtually lining
up here and and we will be very
strict with the time limit
because once you let one person
but what we're the time limit
that everybody feels like they
can so we will be very strict it
it's it's always the chair has a
lot of leeway in deciding how
things are done but what what
that generally this committee
has been at least attempted to
and and we have in person we
have allowed everyone who wanted
to speak speak okay somebody
just said the limit on these
meetings is five hundred people
I I don't know what I a no and
what we have and if in those of
you who don't know what room we
in the room that we need in is
fairly small so when we have
these big issues we have met on
the house floor and so the
public could be in the galleries
that we I don't know what our
rural areas like maybe sixty
people maybe on a good day
probably not even that
so so.
Again and and I know it sounds
like a cop out but it's not it's
really where we are we don't
know exactly what that's gonna
look like but we're gonna have
to figure it out pretty pretty
soon but I was assured by the
our our House chief clerk that
that when we have those big
meetings where we're expecting a
lot a lot of public comment that
we will have a dedicated staff
person to essentially run the
public comment portion of it.
Right to say that's probably
gonna be one of our biggest
problems and also people coming
in and saying they want to speak
on one side but they actually
want to speak on the other side
and see if that's going to be
quite management and there is an
immediate need but right so
somebody comes in screaming
obscenities or something they
can just mute them immediately
correct I think what and and I
don't I know that in the in the
first time we did a special
session virtually we hadn't not
we if that hadn't been thought
of in the first meeting people
did call in and and use racial
slurs and profanity and I think
now that you at least on the
well there's some ways that they
are that you have to identify
yourself so that so that you
can't just be a random you know
bomb thrower come in and you
know do something like that I
know that they have figured out
some of it for still
but and and I don't know the
technical issues Allison or
heather it is that those things
that.
If they start using profanity or
anything that I can immediately
need them and I can kick them
out of the meeting if they
still.
I
be question thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Representative lord
and.
Wait sorry just Representative.
I just wanted to also ask if you
are on the phone if you wanted
to do public comment there is no
handers function so we're gonna
have to figure out what.
It will be if folks to call and
zoom and want to speak
that when when we were doing
virtual interim committees that
was an option so I'm assuming
that they have figured out how
to do that that that's not
something I want to get deep
into because I can barely keep
my head above water with what
I've already got my plate so so
I'm trusting the I. T. people
and the staff people to figure
all that out and and then what
I'm less I really need to know I
prefer not to know it do it just
because it'll be one more thing
for me to worry about it I'm a
worrier so I just say put it in
their hands they know what
they're doing I don't know what
I'm doing in terms of that so so
we'll we'll out we'll put our
put our faith in our our and and
we have wonderful staff if you
have a and you probably haven't
had a chance to figure it out
being virtual but the staff but
that when people say what what
surprised you most your first
session it was how amazing our
staff is I'm they bend over
backwards to make sure that we
are able to do our jobs for the
people of New Mexico so please
it was somebody says if you are
calling into with their hunch
line to raise your hand so
there's that R. nine star star
nine star night yes so what.
Wants to call if.
My guess is that that there
probably on I haven't really
looked through but what was on
the calendars has is pretty
detailed information so I'm
guessing that that probably will
be on there about how to do all
that so.
And I will remember that it's R.
nine but because I always start
the exes needs so that's the
only one I need to remember so.
Okay Representative Barreras
you're also a fresh fresh person
so do you have any questions.
Thank you madam chair I don't
have any questions right now I
do appreciate the the other
freshmen that are on that
awesome really quick great
questions including a
Representative Pettigrew he
actually asked a couple of the
questions that I had already
written down so I appreciate it
and I don't have any other
questions okay eight in the
evening this week we are having
this as an organizational
meeting if if a question pops
into your head don't hesitate to
call me or text me or email me
when I you know I won't tell you
that you can call me anytime
because I do sleep although they
are weird hours that I sleep I
do sleep.
and hopefully more now that I
now that we've gone through our
first date we're going to figure
this out I I like I said I'm a
worrier
but please I I it I will I will
put it out there for the staff
as well you know send them an
email if you have a question
Lisa is wonderful you have your
major are minority office people
the speaker's office at I and I
think I did finish my thought
probably but our staff is
wonderful and they really do
they really will help you wait
there's no such thing as a dumb
question there really isn't
because
this is so new for me this is
unlike anything you've probably
ever done in your life I'm in a
maybe if you were city council
or county commissioner it
similar but for most of us this
is this is not what our real
life has been up to this point
so so again I'm in the state be
gentle with yourself and there
is no such thing as a dumb
question and people will treat
you with respect and without and
will help you any way they can
Representative birth.
Okay madam chair thank you since
there's no such thing as a dumb
question I would like to ask
Representative Lord where she
got that we could nice
microphone because it looks
really cool and also coming in
super super clear so I would
like to know where she got that.
Okay the true story on this my
ex husband bought it for me for
Christmas.
Still very good friends that is
not right for each other I'll
get you the information on it is
a great Mike it's professional
Mike and I have a Mexico's with
it and it is definitely for him
it was worth the investment I
don't know how much it costs
but.
It was a great guests now but
you are getting the details on
that you look like a DJ right.
Yes.
Thank you yeah and I I really do
mean there is no conflict and so
does anyone else have anything
else any any staff have anything
I not in the and we will meet
Thursday at one thirty tools
will send out once we once we
get the agenda which I think we
are close to I need to clarify a
couple of things with that with
the member about some of his
bills and then we will and we
will we will always have an
agenda out at least twenty four
hours in advance well I
shouldn't at the end things
happened so quickly although in
this committee I will say our
work is more front end loaded we
tend to be the first committee
as opposed to the second health
committee so we need to we tend
to get our work early and then
when the Senate bills come over
we will generally get those
before the second committee that
the Senate bills so it's not
quite so crazy for us and I have
to say for the public it for
everybody else that our analysts
are so wonderful that when our
load start slowing down they
start pitching into the second
committees the judiciary's and
places like that to help them
out with their analysis
it really is a great great team
I'm a great team and somebody
just said I met Tuesday I don't
know what I said but we will
meet Tuesday I don't I have no
idea what I said but we are
Tuesday and Thursday at one
thirty so if you hear me say
something else and and you
think.
Please bring it to my attention
because I probably didn't mean
it was probably a mistake M. we
would get I have no idea what it
will look like again in in the
real world when we meet in
person we do work is that our
days sometimes if we part Genda
if we get too many bills or if
we have an even if we don't have
a lot of bills that we have
spent eight to ten hours on one
bill so when if we get into that
kind of situation we may need to
be on a Saturday and then if it
gets really really bad we may
also need to meet on a Sunday
but I do realize that everybody
has a second committee and so we
we work with the chairs work
around each other to try and
figure out a time so that you're
not supposed to be at two
committees at the same time all
I and I was thank you Mr
appropriations which you are not
cause for an afternoon committee
and they need every afternoon we
don't have to worry about that
but be prepared as the session
goes on for may be happening a a
Saturday session I don't know
what this is going to look like
but it's definitely not
Do you have any other questions
or anything and anything to add
staff Jules anybody.
Okay I guess I'm okay
Representative was just trying
to talk I think okay Jules.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
Madam chair will you be kind
enough to email me your agenda
for Tuesday your the analysts
and what order you'd like me to
schedule
as many of these twenty bills
that we have so far so I we're
gonna have to start.
And yes we do we do with that I
should have said this before we
do set up an agenda and we
follow it as best we can but
let's say you know
Representative Romero has a bill
in front of us but she also has
a bill in in not appropriations
we may go out of order on our
agenda depending on who's
available you know if somebody
is on another committee and they
text me and and say you know I'm
presenting in another committee
can you put me at the bottom of
the list so we will jump around
within the date of trying to
make things easier on our
members but we will not hear
bills that are not on the agenda
and and of course we don't
always get through our agenda
and I will tell you that I'm I
prefer to have a full agenda and
not get to everything so that we
don't waste a minute and it's
called rolling over you know if
you're at the bottom of the list
did things take longer than we
anticipated you know in your
schedule for Tuesday you may get
rolled over to Thursday if we
don't get through it but I
prefer to do that and put on to
fill because to feel be able to.
You bill I don't usually talk
this much to fuel bill and then
be done what we still have two
hours of work time that so so
there will be times when bills
are not heard on when they're on
the agenda but that's that's the
nature you know if we could say
okay we're going to give each
bill fifteen minutes and that
fifty minutes we vote we could
stay on schedule but that's not
how we run things so just be
prepared to
will follow the agenda we will
never hear a bill that's not on
the agenda well I won't say that
let's say that we we had a we
had a bill on it Tuesday and we
said you know go get your
amendment and they they they're
amendment is ready that Thursday
I and we've already heard the
bill and it's just kind of up
past it because we've already
heard it and they just want to
get an amendment we may I may
let them let them slide in but
but we will never start a bill
that's not on the agenda we may
finish up some I mean and
sometimes we're in the middle of
the bill and again this probably
won't happen
but we get called to the floor
okay we're gonna be doing we're
going to be discussing on the
budget all committees need to
break and we're in the middle of
a real doctor you know I was
that substantive bill we may say
okay we're going to stop we need
to go to the floor we'll take
this up at our next meeting.
That doesn't happen a lot but it
could happen.
I know I think we were done and
then I went on for another
twenty minutes I'm I'm sorry but
I I hope it please I I I really
do mean if you if you need some
hand holding it you need some
some
I think we just will refuse here
but things are still are still
are still going so I'm we will
we will recess I I can't even
remember.
Do we need to do we need a
motion to recess.
The land R. Allen I I.
However tools tools.
Yes.
Yes
Yeah.
Well I will entertain you madam
chair so move health.
Okay in the second any any
opposition okay we will be in
recess until to date at one
thirty and there will be an
agenda coming out as soon as we
get prepared thank you all
