Recruit.
Your.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Rubio here.
Representative Terrazas.
Representative Roybal Caballero
vice chair.
Representative Alcon chair.
He'll.
Did you get representative
Garcia I called the I think
here's the okay act.
Okay with that I think we have
enough to the beginning of the
meeting but that we get
everything put together we
should have everybody else and
he'll if you can go ahead and
bring or Senator Gendo.
from the intended to that we're.
And we can start with this bill.
you Senator Chand do you need
anybody else to accompany you.
Mr chairman I believe secretary
of GSD John Garcia.
I believe he's logged on as well
okay is that actually Garcia.
With.
No.
No.
John.
All.
John Garcia.
The defined Mr Garcia.
There is a Mr Garcia but his
hand is up so maybe he's just
using a different account.
Okay.
Larry yes.
Thank you Secretary John Garcia
there yes the you can promote
him.
Thank you Mr chairman here all
right did not.
Okay with that Senator Shendo to
the Senate bill thirty nine.
Is here is that you are in the
hot seat so whenever you're
ready us get done all right
thank you.
Mr chairman members of the
committee of what the Senate
bill of thirty nine as amended
what that does is so adds a
definition for native American
resident business.
End of American resident veteran
business.
And then also native American
resident contractor in America
resident veteran contractors.
Respectively in those sections
that deal with resident business
and resident veteran business
contractors.
It also removes the language of
that only businesses with annual
of well increases the cap which
is currently at three million of
the original bill was to remove
that but on the Senate floor it
was amended to increase that to
six million.
Of it and so
I believe that so what we're add
of we did the I want to go ahead
and the secretary of Garcia to
add a little bit more we did
also made an amendment.
Initially of.
On the
On the.
Of the application.
Of.
Under section have operating on
lands located on an Indian
reservation so those really are
a the three changes from the
original bill is basically it's
it's remote and add to our
current procurement co a native
American owned businesses as
well as veteran owned they'd
American businesses.
Secretary Garcia.
Thank you Mr chair members the
committee Senator this is the
governor's one of the governor's
bills it is opposed to expand
that by New Mexico program as
the senator said I will go into
a lot of details but that really
that the goal is to encourage
more of the purchases that the
state does were up at obviously
a pretty big
supplier of a lot of lot or
needs for goods and services and
we just want to make that more
available to local businesses
and so the senator talked about
some of the changes in the law
that the law had restricted to
to allow better definition for
native American businesses and
and the it also does get a
little bit of a better
preference for veteran owned
local businesses some Mister
chairman Senator I'll save more
the comments for later if
there's any questions thank you.
K. one moment that the senator
you're ready to go to the
audience for COVID of just just
a quickly I forgot to mention
that the we're also increasing
the current five percent I mean
to a percent for resident
businesses and the American so
at this time will stand for
questions okay good audience
eight Representative Garcia V.
which of co sponsors that
correct.
Yes very yeah so if you want to
weigh in appreciate that of you
to remote be a.
Representative.
Mr Chairman can you hear me we
can hear you have anything to
add yes Sir sorry I couldn't get
the link of Mr chairman and
members of the committee first
of all thank you for dozens
presented twenty today and
Gentleman and professional
probably one or the bill pretty
well for the kids my my concern
is what the reason I'm on this
bill is because we need to make
sure our the job to stay in New
Mexico because the contractor
coming in and taking all of good
good paying job or good of
contracts out there and our
veterans or native veterans
intern when our regular citizens
are being left out of all what
can we.
Of produced here in New Mexico
if we can get more jobs why are
doing these things for our
veterans and our native American
and our native American veterans
also at a rigid is.
The money will stay New Mexico
instead of going out of state
you know I'm sorry I and they Mr
chairman but the also for any
questions thank you Mr chairman.
Okay so with that be ready to go
to the audience I'll go to the.
This and the.
Anybody who is there that wishes
to speak in favor of this bill
and they will raise your hand I
will give you approximately two
letter G. towers
restraint not to repeat on
everybody else said that.
With that in mind I will start
with Jennifer whatever.
Yes good afternoon Mr chair and
committee members my name is
Jennifer Weber and I am here
representing the New Mexico
chamber of commerce in support
of Senate bill thirty nine.
Because of our G. R. T. tax
committee on business to
business services New Mexico
small businesses are at a
disadvantage when it comes to
contracting with the state in
addition the chamber believe
that to make the state more
economically competitive we must
also address systemic barriers
that block the equality of
opportunity for many communities
in New Mexico.
This bill increases the
preferences for New Mexico
resident businesses and
contractors as well as our
native American and veteran
businesses it will help the
small businesses be more
competitive while providing a
historically under utilized and
disadvantages disadvantaged
businesses an opportunity to
contract with the state we ask
for your support for Senate bill
thirty nine thank you.
Very cold.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee my name is Terry
called I am the president and
CEO of the greater Albuquerque
chamber of commerce.
Keeping government dollars in
New Mexico and buying local
makes good economic sense for
the state yes supports job
creation here.
Local business.
Excuse me growth we see
legislation like this as
leveling the playing field are
in state businesses and we urge
your support of the bill thank
you very much.
Do Senator.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is drew
Center and on behalf of the
pueblos of Santa Clara okay
Wingate centrally bay.
SUNY.
And
Okay we get it that's why sorry
about that we strongly support
the legislation to dresses the
concerns about tribal
corporations and she will help
advance the interests of both
the veteran and other in
individual native American
companies thank you.
But again fine then mute button
up job description.
The.
John Dickerson I'm speaking for
the veterans and military
families caucus and we strongly
support this legislation thanks
to sponsors for bringing it we
urge you to pass.
Well.
Mr Chairman appears upon the
order on the does not have the
current zoom preferences so we
cannot allow him to unmuted this
time.
Okay sorry about that well R. J.
Garcia.
Chairman of this is Archie
Garcia I'm late members of the
of the committee I would
encourage you to.
Have a do pass recommendation
for Senate bill thirty nine I'm
a service disabled veteran and a
small business owner in New
Mexico.
I believe that this bill will
provide a competitive edge for
small veteran businesses and
also provide an income stream of
of of taxes for the state of New
Mexico so I urge you to support
Senate bill thirty nine thank
you.
You know.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee my name
is Khan right she no lobbyist
for the bottles back then yes we
are strong supporters SB thirty
nine because of the this bill
will allow New Mexico companies
and native contractors and
New Mexico veteran businesses to
benefit from expanding business
opportunities are invited in
advantage of the myriad of
contracts that are each year by
the state for products and
services some of them are sole
source and others are put out
for competitive bid but this
bill with the proposed language
and changes increases the
preference percentage that would
allow me to contractors the
native Americans are actors to
successfully bid and secure a
state contract for those reasons
Mr chairman we strongly support
this bill Anders Committee to do
likewise thank you.
Okay I don't see any more hands
raised is there anybody who
wants to speak in opposition to
the bill.
Anybody want to speak in
opposition.
Mr Williams you want to speak in
opposition go ahead you got two
minutes.
Mr chair story the tend to not
remember where we were on just
thirty nine Sir.
Should I get are we are SB
thirty nine Sir well that's what
we're listening to yes Sir my
apologies so thank you for the
opportunity I was intending Mr
chair and members of the
committee speak and supported
this and I'll be brief A. R. P.
New Mexico does Sir stand in
support of this bill thank you
all right okay.
With everybody I don't see
anybody in opposition.
In that case the Senator the
we'll go back to you.
Okay I will go ahead in stand
for questions from the committee
at this point.
I would
push my button I could that I
can hear you right I was that
was group the deadline Mr
chairman I don't know how to
read lips but they were moving
pretty good I think thank you.
Representative the last.
Thank you Mr chair.
Thank you senator for bringing
this legislation I I think it's
nice
I see what you're trying to do
is encourage
better businesses.
I think it's a great great
program and or or bill.
And I was looking at how
just kind of going through it
quickly I'm sorry that I I got
here a little bit late we're way
out here that it's so by the
time I got here to get my
computer going takes a minute
but I.
How many businesses of.
Senator do you believe Mr chair
Senator do you believe it's
we're we're going to benefit
from this legislation.
I don't have the numbers but I
know secretary Garcia has the
numbers that are currently how
many of resident businesses are
benefiting from our your medical
as of twenty twenty one yes
those numbers and then.
I'm sure it's just going to go
up from that number once we pass
this bill so I will go ahead
defer to secretary Garcia
secretary thank you thank you
senator Mr chairman and
representative it was last year
was sixteen forty.
and that was about seventy six
percent or so of total contracts
let in the state we expected to
be.
You know to grow from there in
the governor's asked us to be
tracking the performance of how
well this bill
increases two things one the
amount of businesses taking
advantage and also the the
dollar amount of those
businesses.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Mr Garcia for that.
So are they open the door I
turned away to see but I was
listening to you thank you so
much that's this is good well
anyway I just I just want to
thank you for this type of
legislation.
What makes it all the way
through and I look forward to
supporting your bill thank you
very much Sir.
With the real that count.
Representative right thank you
Mr.
I'm I just have one quick
question for the sponsor and
Senator the where we the purpose
is just to add in native
American businesses as into
transaction wrecked
no the the the the resident of
doctor of Mr Chairman
representative the our current
procurement code already has of
prepped preference for our
resident business and Veterans.
But it does not have native
American all businesses or
native American owned veteran
businesses that's all we're
doing is adding those those two
groups into our current is
people.
Okay thank you thank you for
secretary I I got it the Mr
Chairman.
Okay at the state madam chair
anybody else with the hand
raised the regular
Representative.
Yes okay I don't have a motion
for a new best of
that myself Representative but
the.
I see your hand up no Sir I
would just my up Mr Mr chairman
I was going to make a motion for
two passed it's sort of been
done I will lower my hand okay
thank you Sir at this madam
secretary will you call the roll
of the motion for a do pass.
Representative Baca.
Representative Baca.
Yes.
Bash yes Representative black.
Yes.
Okay.
Yes.
Yes Representative Miguel Garcia
yes Representative Rubio yes
Representative office.
Yes Representative.
Reebok Randall Cherry Meister.
Yes.
Representative contract yes.
Ten.
Okay you're on your way to the
house floor I think aren't you.
I believe so of send you well Mr
chairman what one second.
Mr Chairman is one more Canadian
okay are okay all right.
Thank you all so much appreciate
that thank chair members of the
committee.
Members of the committee also.
That okay you are rich
Representative black.
You are on house bill one ninety
five and I wouldn't do the
Senate bill there's a figure of
the to catch your breath right
now all the way down to the
annex.
if you are already a
Representative how do this
year's thank you Mr chairman and
you are correct I was running.
I'm so Mister chairman I will
delight I'm.
I believe that everyone is got
me in the amendment to house
bill one ninety five you want me
to go over that first or how
would you like me to approach
this.
I didn't know you had an
amendment.
Yes.
So yes Senate out last night I
believe it was.
It's clarifying language is the
is the amendment.
Okay go ahead in the well good
thing your bill and then we'll
we'll go on the amendment.
Thank you Mr chairman so what
house bill one ninety five does
is it it just changes the
language that's already statute
for a hundred percent disabled
veterans to receive the
exemption on their property tax
bill.
So in the current language we
county assessors have when
someone presents there
Certificate that the Department
Veterans Services sends them
once implied through the state
the department of Veterans
Services issues a certificate
saying that they are eligible
for this exemption so then the
homeowner veteran would go into
the assessors office and applied
to have that exemption applied
to their property tax bill so
currently the weight the statute
is written.
That exemption would not go into
effect until the following tax
year.
So what this bill does is it
makes it so that it's immediate
so when the veteran goes into
the county assessors office and
presents regardless of what time
of the year it is and presents
that certificate from that point
that date forward they would be
exempt from the property taxes
if their hundred percent
disabled and have that correct
paperwork.
I'm so Mr chairman that's the
gist of the bill.
The amendment
is it once I read the FIR.
And the analysis it looks like
the wording on the the bill was
a little confusing so the
amendment quote unquote okay
let's go head movie a movie for
discussion purposes.
And I will make that motion to
have a second I'm not.
Thank you Mr chair.
Okay.
Okay Representative go ahead and
explain your amendment okay so
Mister chairman on the amendment
what it does is.
On the in the title it changes
the B..
To read relating to property tax
providing an immediate exemption
from further property tax
obligation upon the granting of
a veterans exemption certificate
from the Veterans Services
Department and presentation to
the county assessor by a
disabled veterans or their
married surviving spouse.
Then it changes the language
that on page five of the bill.
I'm online three it after
section instructs the remainder
of the line lines four through
seven sh Representative
construction striped I'm in
their entirety and in we insert
in lugar up.
And presents the veterans
exemption certificate from the
Veterans Services Department to
the county assessor that
qualified disabled veterans for
the veterans and merry surviving
spouse shall be immediately
eligible for an exemption from
the property tax instead of
waiting until the new calendar
year this does not contain any
retroactive provisions and shall
only be valid win and at the
time it is presented to the
county assessor.
Point two two two six three two
point one M. S..
Thank you thank you
Representative because I don't
know why I missed that part.
Good enough okay have a motion
to have proper second.
Thank.
Rural okay with that that go
ahead with the opposition to
accepting the amendment.
The.
Okay you have an amended bill
Representative black.
And now you're ready to go
forward with your amended bill
thank you Mr chairman and
committee so I'm what happened
was actually brought this to my
attention was I had a a disabled
veteran that receive their
property tax bill this year and
they came to me with it and they
purchased their home in two
thousand twenty and on that bill
the title company failed to pay
the taxes so they were on the
hook for the twenty twenty tax
year and the twenty twenty one
tax year so two years of taxes
one one year was already doing
one and a current penalty and
interest
and the veterans during the
COVID could not get her
certificate from DBS.
I was unable to obtain that so
that brought that to my
attention and I was very fearful
that if she would receive that
certificate after January first
that the county assessor would
not accept that and she would be
on the hook for another year of
property taxes I'm so that's
actually what prompted me to a
to to drop this legislation so I
I guess I will stand for
questions at that point Mr
chairman.
Okay at this time I will go to
the internet since you've
there's anybody there who would
like to speak of favor of this
bill.
If you there's anybody they want
to speak in favor raise your
hand.
Hey I have a Mr moody Richard
would be.
Thank you Mr chair and members
the committee Richard moody the
city one vice chair The New
Mexico veterans and military
families caucus as well as a
member of the rural caucus we
supported any build any
legislation that makes it easier
for veterans to claim their
property taxes it exemption
Representative black we
appreciate you bringing this to
the notice of the committee
thank you.
You.
Okay I don't have anybody else
is there anybody in opposition
to the legislation.
Okay see nobody and I don't
think you have anything more to
add to Representative black I'll
go to the committee
Representative Rubio.
Thank you Mr chair and my
apologies my camera I I'm my
internet some stable right now
but I just have a clarifying
question I do support the
legislation I just wanted to ask
is it just for clarification how
would this work I guess in the
bigger picture I I know you
share your the story about the
the the the couple that you were
speaking of but how would this
work.
Overall and and in the bigger
sense in terms of the intent of
the bill does this limit the
exemption to disabled veterans
as opposed to all veterans or
help can you can you describe
that a little bit more.
Yes thank you Mr chairman I'm so
no all this does is is where by
it doesn't it actually
encompasses all veterans that's
current current law all veterans
are all this does is it
clarifies that what we and they
present that certificate to the
county assessor then it goes
into effect immediately verses
what currently the practice for
the county assessors is to not
apply exemptions until the
following tax year.
That's current practice so what
this would do is this would make
the county assessor if they if
someone did this and let's say
July that the county assessor
would have to go from July
forward and and not tax the
veterans.
Okay all right thank you so much
Representative.
Thank you.
Mr chair thank you my friend
Representative black the only
thing that I I think it's a
wonderful bill if we talk about
this in committee I I always
remember what
our chairman told us in in
trying to make New Mexico
tractive State for for the you
know for veterans and this is
gonna be something that's going
to compliment that I the only
thing I have is it the and I
remember us talking about
remember your story about a
person a gentleman who purchases
I don't know if that's what
you're strict describing right
now but you he said he purchased
his home he just missed the
deadline and then had to wait a
whole entire year and so it is
that correct Mr chair
representative that is correct
Representative.
Happening.
All right the only thing that I
have a question on Mr chair
representative is your effective
date of the bill
and I.
Like to see maybe a an effective
date so that it can go ninety
days following the the signature
otherwise it may going to twenty
twenty three but you know this
better than I do I'm just asking
the question of Mr chair
representative is that does that
sound right or am I wrong.
Clarify that for me I'm I
believe that Mr Chairman
representative we're we're fine
with that and we're just see us.
That's all I wanted to ask it
thank you know that I just want
to step legislation thank you Mr
chair representative thank you.
Okay.
I I personally like the
legislation because it clarifies
everything
makes it easier for everything
to be done what is the will of
the committee.
Make a motion to have a due pass
on H. B. one nine five.
Ended.
Amended that's correct.
Okay and I hear a second from
I heard somebody stating that
that was Mr chairman it was a Mr
there was a Representative box
that made the second for the
amended all right thank is there
all right I have a proper motion
and a proper second madam
secretary would you call the
roll please.
Representative Baca of yes
Representative bash.
Yes Representative black yes
Representative.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Yes.
Representative Rubio yes.
You're also.
Just what.
Representative one more provided
last year.
Representative I've been
hearing.
Okay.
Yes.
K. R. Representative I didn't
quite hear that our
Roybal Caballero once.
Yes okay thank you.
Ten two of their voters that you
have to commend that.
Okay Representative let you have
a due process good that's coming
their way forward.
Thank you.
That okay I we will now go to
Senate bill forty one.
Representative douche chair
representative I mean Senator
Stewart Representative Chandler.
Who is going to present on this
one.
She raised their.
All right Mr chair
representative Chandler
indicated that she would be
presenting and we had asked that
she be brought in from the
attendees to as a panelist
Energy render H..
Is currently not in as an
attendee Representative.
Maybe somebody state of some
more so just the in the essence
of time.
Let's go to the.
What the next on the agenda.
Forty one a second home to be
house bill two forty three
chairman okay yeah okay yeah
that we would like to know what
the number is that the lawful
okay let's go to a house bill
two according.
Vice chair of you'll take over.
Representative on the phone many
just see what you have to say
I'm sorry.
What
thank you for the link.
Okay.
So we don't see you on the Mr
chair she Representative
Chandler said that she's in with
the link.
Please raise your hand.
All.
Madam vice chair and will not.
Okay
so what do this Representative
Chandler let us work through
this and in the interest of time
the chair wants to present on
the next bill.
And in the meantime we'll go
ahead and
Work on bringing you sorry.
Thank you thank you.
Mr Chairman.
I I'm not showing that there's a
path that we got FIR on on your
bill house bill two forty three
and my analyst is not able to
locate that it either I'm not
sure that this is an issue maybe
do analysis on the bill no.
We didn't do it here.
I don't know if there's he or
she did not do it at a an
analysis no Sir I am women now
losses from the majority and
from the.
And from the.
The majority at the end of the.
And the committee in the
analysis.
Warner.
Yeah when you for Mr chairman.
I got an email from Soviet I
nineteen on the committee sub
but it didn't have the agenda
attached Representative black
showed me the an ad copy a
picture of an agenda and I sent
an email to so fee but I
apologize but I did not get that
added to my agenda yesterday
Sir.
I'm sorry thank you yeah at the
analyst Howard dela Cruz.
All.
Your name that I didn't know you
were are we going yeah.
Yes.
The agenda was done after I
yesterday.
And it wasn't the golden.
It is going to go to run is that
correct yes.
Our
state.
Can you point me to the FIR Sir.
Are you.
I have a copy of it but I proved
that because I'm sitting here at
home.
I.
Building haven't missed Mr
Chairman.
Thank you.
At
home okay.
The.
Debate is.
There's not printed and you at
home.
I'm gonna go see if I can find
it.
So the case that I don't know
will madam chair.
I would I rest my case.
Okay are you ready to present.
Yes ma'am I am ready to present
all right you may go ahead at
any time.
Thank you madam chair but I'm
not House Bill to forty three of
this demand numerous sections of
the article eleven of the public
employees retirement act that
they're on we're getting to
retirement the public officers
and employees.
Grease is the maximum pension
from ninety percent to a hundred
percent of the final average
salary.
And it applies to the five state
and municipal employee
retirement funds.
And it does not have is a at a
salon said.
madam chair I believe in the
attendees
I believe I have the the the
Mister Greg Trujillo who would
be what was expended by ready to
answer any questions that I can
not answer and actually if if
you could could you upload them
to a panelist.
To help me out.
Thank you.
Chair and CEO you promote
them please feel panelists.
I can
Madam vice chair can you just
tell me who that person was
again.
Well his hand is raised we have
a plan right yes Representative
let.
Let's let communication this be
running one way at the time so
it doesn't get confusing thank
you.
All right.
The Mr he'll.
On Mr chair.
Again Mr here would you like to
add anything to what I just.
Did you.
Yes Sir thank you madam chair Mr
chair greater you executive
director with the array of I do
want to mention that to the
terrible word has not taken an
official position on this bill
as it reads but happy to answer
any questions I will point out
that a similar provision was
part of Senate bill seventy two
that was passed to in the twenty
twenty legislative session but
was amended out at the end of
the.
The process of a happy to answer
any technical questions that the
committee may have.
That.
Madam chair I and we will stand
for questions.
Yeah
this time in the attendees.
R. I would like to go ahead and
ask everyone who wishes to speak
in favor of the bill to raise
your hand.
We.
All right and the first name
that I've seen and our John
Lynch.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee John live shoots
with The New Mexico federation
of labor AFL-CIO we stand in
strong support of this measure
and think this the chairman for
for sponsoring it we view this
as a I honestly it's a much
better alternative to some of
the double dipping bills that
has come before this committee
in the past this this particular
measure will certainly encourage
our workers to stay at work a
little bit longer and by doing
so they will earn more pension
this we consider to be a win win
situation for all involved and
will certainly help with
retention and recruitment in the
future self with that we
encourage you all to support
this measure thank you very
much.
Thank you.
Next on the list I have Mister
Carter Bundy.
Madam chair members of the
committee Carter Bundy with
asked me we also want to thank
the sponsor chair outcome for
bringing this we truly
appreciate the efforts of all
the sponsors who are trying to
address the short staffing
issues including some of the
people on this committee we
truly are grateful because it's
real problem across frankly the
state across all jurisdictions
we think this has none of the
potential downside of double
dipping but you know we talk
about the importance of
recruiting in this may help with
some recruiting for people are
taking longer terms but there's
another element to the large
number of vacancies and that is
people leaving once they hit
ninety percent our current
paralogs caps their earnings and
maybe percent so there's
literally no reason for them to
keep working past ninety percent
this gives depending on the plan
and whether they're public
safety or or not public safety
it gives people a really strong
incentive to stick around for
another three to four years
keeping people on for an extra
three to four years will greatly
help reduce our on going vacancy
problems and of course that in
turn helps us helps us be more
fully staffed so we again want
to thank the sponsors we urge
your tier one to support H. B.
two forty three thank you.
Thank you.
Next on the list I have Sean
will be.
Your.
It.
Madam chair members of the
committee this is Josh Anderson
was asked me I got the a new
button I will not repeat what
folks before have said but just
want to think chairman al cone
for bringing this forward and
asked the council eighteen fully
supports and we urge of the
committee to also support thank
you madam chair.
Thank you.
Now we'll have Mister John
Willoughby.
Hello madam chair members of the
committee to Sean will be with
the Albuquerque police officers
association we've debated and
gone back and forth this
particular committee is taking
great care of of analyzing the
problems that face New Mexico
but we stand in staunch support
of this legislation and we think
chairman outcome for bringing it
forward this is what thinking
outside of the box actually
looks like I've talked to
counterparts throughout the
country as soon as we were had
the opportunity to read this
bill for up in Iowa for instance
they give a hundred percent
retirement with the thirty two
year investment and it really
really helps I will police
agencies in keeping their their
cops if you're not worried about
retaining the police department
you're never going to buy time
to fill the ranks by recruiting
them it is a two way street this
bill does that it helps retain
your best and brightest your
most experienced officers while
you're working on recruiting
it's much better than double
dipping where you're actually
filling a vacancy with the
person that created the vacancy
in the first place which is
counter intuitive and
counterproductive I think
the chairman for bringing this
legislation and everybody that
that co sponsored it I think
that this is going to even help
the solvency as we have
employees that are working
longer in in the pension system
and it it definitely is a win
win as it's been said before
thank you for the opportunity I
hope you you you vote to move
this bill along today thank you.
Thank you and next thank we
actually won't.
You madam chair can you hear me
OK.
Yes.
Thank you madam chair my
apologies good afternoon
everybody my name is Ashley long
with the internet international
association of machinists and
aerospace workers and for the
state of time we support this
measure and thank the sponsor.
Well.
Are you anyone else wishing to
speak in favor of the bill.
Representative.
Representative channelise your
hand up with the to speak on
this bill are you letting us
know you're yet still waiting
and that can be.
Okay
I've been talking to her madam
chair so I think she's ready to
just get in the presenter bill
all right thank you yeah I've
been back and forth also I'm
hoping I sent an email to
With her address to please have
her Brian so again anyone else
wishing to speak in favor
Kimberly peta.
You wish we can work in but we.
Madam vice chair Kimberly this
is the committee assistant
Representative Chandler I
believe she's trying to get her
in.
Thank you
We're okay so just let them know
that the fact that we're working
on it so not to not to raise
hands at this point because
we're still in
thank you so now I will go to
anyone in the audience that
wishes to speak in opposition
please raise your hand.
Anyone wishing to speak in
opposition.
All right I don't see any hands
all right I don't see any hands
Mr chair would you like anything
to add anything before we go to
the committee are you ready to
go to questions from the
committee they'll probably have
a questions that I can not
answer anyway but.
I'm ready to go thank you and
first up on my Representative
about that followed by
representatives the last.
Sorry I thought you called me
I'm sorry madam chair
representative first yes ma'am
I'm sorry I didn't I'm trying to
mute myself go ahead Mr about
Representative about.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative thank you bring
this I have some questions again
I I do want to for those that I
have not seen the FIR this so.
Is excuse me because if I I have
some questions it's those you
have seen that for our I have it
so.
One of my questions is how many
employees or members of her Kerr
will this be impacted how many
jobs across the state.
Mr Chairman you want me to take
that Mr chair here would you
please yes Sir madam chair and
representative Baca any
member that's participating in
the preposition will be able to
take advantage of this group
that's that thank you madam
chair or co chair but that's not
my question is how many how many
people are currently covered
under current because I think
what we're talking about this
again it I still remember the
day we were talking for about
thirty two thousand people that
are.
Covered under the pair
retirement.
Madam chair in the
Representative Baca all right
now we've got approximately
forty eight thousand active
members participating in Paris.
thank you madam chair thank you
Mr trail so we're talking about
forty eight thousand people that
would be actually this would be
impacted okay the the question
that I have the madam chair and
to the committee is.
Right now.
How many years curly do we have
to get to get the full ninety
percent because I am very aware
that the percentage to receive
ninety percent of salary resist
how many years in order for a
person working under current to
get the full benefit of a
hundred percent Tyerman.
Madam chair representative Baca
the.
Current ministers thirty one of
retirement plans so it does very
but if we use state general plan
three which is one of the
largest plans it would take a a
member approximately thirty
years to receive a.
Ninety percent of their budget
if we look at some of the police
plans you're probably looking at
twenty five years for them to
receive ninety percent of their
their pension.
thank you madam chair and thank
you of as shown in my actions
and phone of my statements on
the floor of support please but
I mean we're talking greater
than just police officers as you
said you have thirty one
different categories across the
people are covered of what is
the bridge on the road those
folks that are not in law
enforcement.
You madam chair and
Representative Baca if their
civilian employee in our state
general plan normal state worker
in be looking at thirty years to
get to the ninety percent.
you madam chair thank you Mr
trail no currently this you know
do we is it is a straight thirty
years or so to years of service
in order for somebody to receive
the for maximum is that.
Total of age post service.
Requirement yes Madam chair in
Representative Baca we have a
not only thirty one a different
retirement plans but also to
chairs of benefits so in general
if it's your one member works
thirty years
you know for the stage they
would get their ninety percent
and it's straight to their under
twenty five an hour so they can
retire at any age with twenty
five years of service any
additional beyond the twenty
five years they're adding to
their pension working towards
that ninety percent of for tier
two members which is a member
who started employment after
July one of twenty thirteen they
have a lower pension factor and
they have to me what's called
the rule of eighty five with
their or their agents service
must equal eighty five obviously
to get a higher percentage they
can they can continue working
beyond that to get to the ninety
percent threshold.
You madam chair thank you up Mr
drill no one of the other
questions I have in this is a
big question about is solvency
okay right now is a good looking
at the other FIR is for
different.
Different bills that I've seen
we're talking about fully funded
solvency we we talk about the
other day why I I spent a lot of
time and I will say I was very
frustrated by the by the
discussion about how the room
will be looked at one oh six was
going to hurt the so the was it
hard to fund.
But from what I also understand
is that.
The girl is actually.
Fully funded.
This is my correct with that.
Madam chair and representative
Baca
I will state to you know FIR no
testimony did Paris say that
house bill one oh six of her car
solvency of the way that the way
that that bill was structured
you know was a slight positive
but the fund the policy aspect
of it I think was more the the
issue with the the return to
work bills.
As you stayed so right now para
as a whole we're about seventy
one point five percent funded.
we are within the the twenty
five year that threshold to hit
a hundred percent funding we
have a number of other funds
senator judicial magistrate that
are a little bit less funded
that then that we have our
legislative retirement plans are
state police plans are volunteer
firefighter plans they're
actually in excess of a hundred
percent of funding so but but
overall we're about six seventy
one point five percent funded
and we are on a pass to to full
solvency within twenty five
years.
I thank you for that because
we're talking about twenty five
years so what currently is the
the deficit in the our program
is it again.
The numbers can run together but
you
can billion dollars in order to
be fully funded something around
it was it was in the.
Currently Madam chair
representative we're about six
point five billion dollars is
our unfunded liability at this
point in time.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Mr trail but you know one of my
one of my my my buster was my
heart you know but that's what
it's having difficulty as I said
before I definitely understand
what it's like to.
Well as far as retirement and I
definitely know that the
challenges we want to our people
to have as much retirement and
the quality of life at standard
living after retirement to work
does yours which is why some of
the bills we talked about talked
about you know leave it in the
end and ready more money into
people's pockets otherwise but.
One of the things about is we're
looking at kind of the the
disparity or discrepancy between
your B. M. and para because when
you're talking about is that for
somebody that's retarded apparel
after thirty one years for
civilian jobs are up to twenty.
No not receive a hundred percent
of their salary does that also
include how does the cost of
living include
R. O. factor into that as well.
Madam chair and representative
Baca
Two years ago when when
It'll also prior to that change
your retirees received a two
percent flat Cola after seven
years of being retired that's no
changed of effective one St July
of twenty twenty four article a
model will move to a variable
model where it's going to be
based off the investment poor
performance for the year is well
as are funded ratio for that
year so it'll be variable from a
half a percent up to three
percent depending on on the.
Perform maintenance and are
funded ratio at that point in
time the last two years and next
year our retirees have been
receiving a flat two percent
thirteenth check could still
cost of living adjustment but it
is not compounded but but the
compounding and the new variable
called a model will take effect
in twenty twenty four.
And I will see Madam chair
representative
Currently caps the percentage
you can rich Steve on a pension
at ninety percent as opposed to
E. R. B. which there is no cap
so the longer a employee of your
B. U. continues to work they can
they can actually receive over a
hundred percent and pension
depending on the years of
service that they put in.
You madam chair of somebody who
is covered under your be I would
not agree with your statement.
The fact is that even for myself
at thirty years the percentage
of our term it is actually about
seventy percent.
Yeah
I will tell you that I in order
for for us to for talking about
to get a hundred percent.
How many more years and maybe
another thirty we've also
committed thirty years.
So I I don't know that it's
actually it's actually kind of
the same well thank you so much
my final question is going to be
regarding the hundred percent
now you're also saying that
every year they get a call up so
it's possible that somebody that
reguards at a hundred percent
again I have no but through the
cost of living and so at least a
minimum of two point five
percent it's possible they could
actually be receiving more money
will be on the but they were
making when they were working
full time.
Madam chair and representative
that is accurate to me and I
will point out that's not to
unique to para in any member of
that you know is fortunate to
live long enough life in
retirement depending on the call
model that can exceed the salary
that they were receiving during
their time of employment.
Thank you madam chair but under
this thing would also and that
the number of people are going
to be doing that we're actually
going to be increasing so fans
Senator Senator full right.
Just before at twenty five years
or thirty one years it was
ninety percent.
Now you figure the somebody that
starts working at twenty one
they do there twenty five years
as long for spent their forty
six.
The fact about is the number of
people that are going to be
impacted it's going to be a
dramatically increase which
again will also put a great
strain on the of the solvency of
the earth for it's not you just
the number of people that you
said are fortunate.
Of the forty six Representative
fifty one if you're doing thirty
one on the civilian side the
chances of that a greater number
of people which will put a
greater number straight on on
payroll is actually increase and
I'm actually the fund and then
later on I want to be coming
back a couple years saying Hey.
You know we're we we have to
have now instead of the by
twenty forty seven
Being fully funded now we're
pushing out too much beyond
longer the probably be here so I
I I do unless I do have
questions I do this is a concern
for me as we're talking about
the impact to the to the to the
peril that also again
as I you know the two things
that I will support and the ones
that I always do import long law
enforcement to do our first
responders also sports schools
well that's I think that's going
to create the disparity between
R. N. A. R. P. so thank you
madam chair for my comments I
have no further questions.
Thank you madam chair if I may.
Just a real quick madam chair
and and Representative it is a a
unique concept and this is
something when it came up in
twenty twenty took me awhile to
wrap my head around as well of
but as you say somebody can
stick around and earn a longer
pension but the longer they
continue working more
contributions they're putting in
and the lesser amount of time
they're taking a payment out of
the system so yes we are we are
going to pay them a higher
pension at the point they had a
ninety percent cap per hundred
percent cap but they're also
taking out of the of the time
they take out a monthly pension
is less and so so we do actually
in general is a slight positive
the funding once we have an
official analysis based off
Perez a population will be happy
to share that with the with you
and with this committee
representative.
You madam chair I'm just respond
back to the COVID there because
you know the other thing that
part of the discussion regarding
the double dipping in the other
what six to return to work was
it's a young man's game so it's
kind of one of those that.
Receive this are these are are
we are we are we kind of doing
what we were trying hesitant and
not to do through the other
bills so that's on my comp my
comments thank you madam chair.
Thank you a representative
local.
Thank you on next we have an
honest Representative Deborah.
Thank you madam chair.
And Representative are going.
I'm don't have an F. I. R..
Do we have any actuary actuarial
actuarial.
Information on this because I
have nothing.
And I I hate to to do that but
because I do see support
teachers and other people on
payroll return to work and so
forth but I mean.
We have a a tremendous amount of
movement right here here in the
legislature with different bills
it looks like
we have we're passing this I
have no idea what this the fires
going to state I'm not sure if
it any actuarial information to
support what I'm my decision
that I I see.
Madam chair I see Representative
Baca just grasping at trying to
get information that's what
that's why I walked away from my
from my computer because I went
mask my legislative assistant
where where's my FIR on this I
said and I didn't I was not
prepped on this.
So.
This could be terribly affected
me one of the things I mean I'm
listening to
the gentleman Mister to heal.
But I don't understand how you
can use information from twenty
twenty well we've got other bar
other other bills that are
affecting Tara and all these
other retirement programs and
you know all I know is that our
bond rating is affect is the
number one reason reason our
bond rating is affected is
because
because of of these these are
retirement plans and I'd love to
see our state in up with a
better interest rate but we
can't get that because our bond
rating it is is lowered and so I
mean.
Do you have any natural
actuarial actuarial analysis
it's hard for me to say but I
know what an actuary is.
Madam chair if I may.
Again apologies a we we got this
bill a little later as well and
we did request the analysis I
don't have it at this point in
time hoping to have it by
tomorrow and I'm I'm happy to
share with the committee with
the with the legislature as a
whole is soon is a as we have it
madam chair.
Madam chair representative I I
that's great but I mean we're
voting on this today Sir and so
you know I don't know anything
about this bill and I don't mean
to be abrasive because I'm gonna
work.
If I could Representative
Barreras I understand where
you're coming from.
And I think it I know I have the
F. I. R. may be because I'm here
in the lan I can get and if I
are you getting it wasn't done
out there bill I don't
understand I mean you know maybe
if things are better and a lot
of that in Santa Fe.
But in all fairness I hear both
you and Representative block
out.
And what I will do is I am going
to roll this over.
I don't think it's fair for me
to do something like this I know
this is important this is
something that I feel I would
put my name on it if I didn't
feel it was something that would
happen that could happen and
that would help this the
problems that we're having in
the hiring people and filling
the vacancies but I don't feel
that if if I'm not be I myself
did not feel of of not being
fair so what I'm going to do is
I'm going to roll it over and
I'm going to ask the speaker to
allow us to meet Saturday
morning at about eight thirty in
the morning that we can hear
this bill that and that should
give you enough time.
Who's to the FIR is to get your
numbers together to see what
your delayed and I apologize but
like I say I mean I don't
understand what's happening if
you can't get enough I are in
front of me and I can get one in
the lan.
I don't know what state.
I really don't have any way to
explain that I am not a magician
but I definitely felt that if I
had the information.
Are you guys in Santa Fe should
have the information I'm sorry
that you don't have a computer
so madam chair I will route is
we're I will ask for permission
to your disability thirty
Saturday morning.
And display I will have those
complaints should know if I I.
Mr Madam chair representative I
want to tell you thank you very
much I appreciate that because I
I'm not trying to be abrasive in
a way that allows us and now
let's go to the next bill
Representative would you please
when you.
Are referred to madam chair
Mister chair you have to wait to
be recognized that way we don't
get into all of these back and
forth I was having a difficult
everybody I'm talking about
Representative the last two
about you okay okay
Representative I'll come on
chair did were used you were
still talking to do want to
continue.
Madam chair I are you on on that
at this time I I apologize like
I said I I don't understand why
R. that either side of the aisle
get unit F. I. R. but I guess.
Maybe maybe there's some some
problem in the system that keeps
them away from the from the
Argentine but it allows of
bloody and a lot of to get it
will.
The speaker if they will give us
permission to be Saturday
morning all right.
Mr chair do you want to take
over should I continue how do
you want to proceed with Senate
bill forty one go ahead net they
get over thank you madam chair
thank you.
Representative Chandler and for
what message are present.
Okay thank you.
Thank thank you madam chair can
you hear me given all of our
technical difficulties here I'm
hoping you can hear me.
Just last year hello I lost you
out.
Madam chair yes Representative
we can hear you okay
Representative gender because
what the whole.
Going here.
Representative Chandler calm
down.
Okay we will go down.
Two years all.
Bills thirty nine am I correct.
Senate bill forty one of okay
yeah I got I got a case of the
bill forty one.
Representative Chandler I
understand you are
Representative do Stewart
Senator Stewart.
So how is your of whenever
you're ready thank you Mr chair
and good to see you all
committee members I am
Representative Chandler I'm a co
sponsor on Senate bill forty one
and I have with me as an expert
witness Shane you who is a labor
attorney in the state who
represents a number of labor
unions here and I know that you
he is known to the committee.
Senate bill forty one as amended
with an emergency clause.
Relate to the university
research park and Economic
Development Act in fact it
amends it.
And the reason we are seeking to
amend the act is there's a
there's a bit of a gap between
that act and the public
employees bargaining Act.
The sand of all regional Medical
Center was organized as a
corporation under the university
research park and Development
Act.
Because it was already nice
under that act.
It is not subject to the public
employees bargaining Act because
of a gap in that get more or a
deficiency in the bill in the
law.
We are proposing to amend the
law that is.
Commonly known as your pizza.
To require to allow for
Public to create two to name it
as a public employer for the
purpose is of the public
employee bargaining at that's
what this bill does and by doing
that it brings it under the
require a bargaining
requirements of people.
I hope I was clear Mr chair
there are about six hundred New
Mexicans that work at the Santa
regional Medical Center and
because of this gap I'm calling
it that those employees have no
mechanism under which to
organize a labor union they so
choose to do so.
And with that we stand for
questions Mr chair.
Okay at this time we will go to
the audience and see if there's
anybody who wishes to speak in
favor of this legislation.
And at this time I will start
with Mr live shot.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee John
Lipschutz with The New Mexico
federation of labor AFL-CIO are.
We are strongly support this
measure and thank the
Representative Chandler and
Senator Stewart for bringing it
forward it to it is honestly
it's it's just kind of tragic
the situation that the six
hundred workers of falling into
where they are literally in
limbo they are not allowed to be
recognized as public employees
and they're not allowed to be
recognized as private sector
employees when it comes to our
collective bargaining rights and
that is just a very unfortunate
and frustrating situation I a I
I mean if for no other reason
there needs to be some kind of
clarification about what how to
classify these employees
obviously our position is is
that we believe that any worker
who wants to organize
collectively should have that
right the fact that the six
hundred workers do not have that
right under this situation we
feel to be very unacceptable so
it is for those reasons that we
stand in strong support we urge
the committee to support as well
thank you very much.
SP long.
Good afternoon chairman can you
hear me OK.
I can hear you.
As the long go ahead afternoon
chairman members of the
committee my name is actually
long president Rick or.
We would like to thank our
sponsors for their hard work on
this legislation my apologies if
I have a bad connection along
with the F. T. New Mexico
president Whitney Haaland we
would like to lift up the voices
of the health care workers on
the front line at university of
New Mexico Santa regional
Medical Center as in a couple of
them maybe on this committee
hearing today but many many more
of them are working on the
hospital floor right now but
wish they could have been here
with us.
That being said getting to brass
tacks this bill does two things
it fixes conflicting Lara we
like doing that and you like
doing that.
And secondly it ensures that
healthcare workers gain
recognition of their unions
under the public employees
bargaining Act two things both
of these things the majority of
you we believe believe in it as
well with that we ask used we we
ask you all to support Senate
bill forty one thank you.
Our job.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Josh Anderson with
asked me Council eighteen again
just want to be respectful of
everyone's time and want to echo
the comments made by Mr
Lipschutz and I miss long and of
actually County team fully
supports this bill want to also
think Senator Stewart and
Representative Chandler for
bringing this forward and we are
urged the committee to support
thank you Mr chairman.
Bundy.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Carter Monday with
us international I will repeat
this except to say on thank you
Representative Chandler and to
Senator Stewart we think this is
important to close just sort of
gap that this six hundred
workers following thank you.
That was I was fast
Joan Baker.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is John Baker
I'm the political affairs
director for the way local for
twelve.
Right there's you we stand in
solidarity and support with the
health care workers at the sand
of all regional Medical Center
and ask you to vote yes on
Senate bill forty one.
Then I have
Whitney Haaland.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is within Holland president of
the American federation of
teachers New Mexico I'm here to
stand strong support Senate bill
forty one which provides a
technical fix to recent changes
made to the public employees
bargaining Act we support Senate
bill forty one because it will
remove the loophole currently
being used by hard working
frontline health care workers
the ability to join together as
public employees and for me you
we believe that all New Mexicans
should have this right in state
statute should not stand in
their way I want to thank the
sponsors are bringing this
important piece of legislation
forward on behalf of New Mexicos
workers and we urge the
committee to vote yes thank you.
Then the Seacrest.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I am
damn Secrest I am the president
of C. WA local seven zero seven
six and we also urge the passing
of this bill.
Okay I will go to do the again
these now and anybody who wants
to speak in opposition of this
legislation.
Get ready to go I will start
with the Terry called.
Good evening Mister chair and
members of the committee I'm
Terry Cole president and CEO of
the greater Albuquerque chamber
of commerce we do oppose this
legislation because we don't
believe it's necessary it's not
solving a problem the employees
I research parks do not need
their organizations to all of a
sudden maintained a government
agency in order to form a union.
The only path and in the case of
research parks it's not the
right past research parks are
important unique entities and
there are very good reasons why
our research parks don't operate
as traditional state agencies we
remain concerned by the
destruction that could occur and
critical health care facilities
in our area as well as the trail
of potential consequences that
come with changing how research
parks are situated and treatment
under law for these reasons I
respectfully ask that you oppose
this bill thank you very much Mr
chairman.
Jennifer Weber.
Yes good evening Mr chair and
committee members my name is
Jennifer Weber and I'm here on
behalf of the New Mexico chamber
of commerce in opposition to
Senate bill forty one in twenty
twenty one the chamber published
driving New Mexico's future and
economic competitiveness
analysis of the state and an
action plan to jump start our
economy post pandemic one of the
four key factors we found in our
study things that New Mexico
must do in order to build a more
equitable and diverse economy is
to continue to grow and
strengthen our state innovation
capacity meeting
entrepreneurship innovation hubs
research and development and
availability of capital.
Appropriations formed under our
P. that have contributed to this
needed innovation we are
concerned that Senate bill forty
one will have unintended
consequences that will affect
New Mexico's ability to innovate
the chamber understands
employees that are the subject
of the bill likely have the
right to organize under the NLRA
we ask for you not to move
Senate bill forty one out of the
committee thank you.
Nathan bush.
Thank you Mr chairman my name's
Nathan bush I am in terms of
government relations officer at
the university of New Mexico I
do want to recognize and
appreciate the bill sponsors for
their long standing support of
education in the state of New
Mexico having said that we do
have some unintended
consequences of the legislation
would like to highlight briefly
Santa regional Medical Center is
organized as a research park
which did allow it historically
to develop its own financing and
create a business and a service
hub separate from UNM Sandoval
regional medical center's.
Employees importantly are not
UNM employees.
Furthermore as a result of the
paid a statutes the research
park statutes Santa regional has
been very successful in
delivering health care research
and business opportunities to
underserved part of New Mexico.
And specifically where the
services were in short supply.
In terms of our research parts
we are now concerned because of
the floor amendment last weekend
the Senate floor of the bill now
affects UNM medical group in
addition to Santa regional
Medical Center but actually that
is not even clear because health
care facility is not defined in
the bill.
If the concern is the right of
employees to collectively
bargain I would also want to be
clear the sand of all regional
does not oppose collective
bargaining by its employees
under the national labor
relations act in fact S. R. M.
C. employees are currently
permitted organized under the
national labor relations act if
they so choose to do so it's non
governmental employees although
one C. three nonprofit.
We are concerned that the
legislation also relates to
ongoing litigation and may have
the effect of undercutting the
rights and remedies percent of
all regional based on recent
District Court decisions for
that reason
we sent about regional Medical
Center has invited legal counsel
to join us on the line today in
case there are questions of that
type.
Finally the legislation does
have an emergency clause we're a
little puzzled by that
especially given the fact that
these employees in question do
have the right to means to
organize under federal law we
respectfully ask that this
legislation be held over for
further discussion in the
interim thank you so much.
In my mission anybody.
Yeah I guess not we'll go back
to of the sponsor at this time
would you have anything to add
Representative the.
Mr chair no we are available for
questions from the committee
thank you.
I will go to Representative
Rubio.
Thank you Mr chair I move for
the past.
Okay Mr chair old.
Representative did the by us.
Hi there.
All right to be recognized okay.
Okay Representative Rubio you
have a motion for a due pass
Do I have a second on that I do.
Cavalcade I have a proper motion
under proper second.
Motion that was seconded not in
discussion okay Representative
that lasts us your hand is up
thank you Mr chair I'm sorry I'm
still learning and I thought we
were skipping discussion I I
just wanted to ask of Mr chair.
Representative.
Yes this to McCullough.
It's it's Thursday yes yes we
need some time to calm down I
just got it meet then Senator
have to get those Government
House I did anyways I use that
term on my great grand son and
he understands that.
Well House Bill thank you very
much and you know what I
appreciate is that I I I just
thought we were going without
discussion I'm sorry so Mr Mr
chair.
Representative
so my question is is this so
because I've been trying to read
all this all day trying to
figure this out are we is this
actually still in litigation.
Mr Chairman representative of
what this what is this when
you're referring to this this is
a bill that amends the statute
that bill is not in litigation.
I understand that Madam
Burmistrov chair representative
that's not I know that this is
not an litigation is is there
any employee employer litigation
currently happening that
includes anything on this bill.
There is litigation relating to
these employees rights to
organize.
Is it in is it act as we speak
Mr chair representative.
Madam chair Mr chair and
representative it's in
litigation.
So it looks listen this is it's
because I'm I've been reading
and reading reading on this
trying to figure this out Mr
chair representative and I'm
figuring out that that you know
we you know I want good employee
employer right up relationships
I mean I'm I'm for that a
hundred percent I practice that
every day in my business but
from my understanding article
four section twenty four thirty
four of the New Mexico
constitution prohibits the
legislative acts that affect
parties rights and remedies on
pending actions.
And that is the only thing I
that stalls me if if if what
you're telling me we're in
litigation current litigation we
can't.
We can't move forward so that is
been settled.
Mr chair and representative your
assessment of whether or not the
constitution bars this
legislation is incorrect and Mr
chair if I may um defer to our
expert Jane used to address that
issue.
Mr chair representative thank
you for the question that
section in that you're
referencing is of course article
four section thirty four we've
done an expansive research on
article four section thirty four
there is no New Mexico case
which strikes down a law article
four section thirty four is
intended as a guard rail and
what it does is it creates a
situation where it's a new law
is passed current litigation
which is the subject of the old
legislation must continue under
the old legislation but new
legislation which changes the
law allows parties to litigate
that issue in a different
context so there there is no
case in which a law was struck
down as a consequence of article
six article four section thirty
four but it just instructs
parties that if they have a
pending lawsuit that must
proceed under the prior
legislation and so if the
legislation change the
litigation that is in existence
right now would simply proceed
under the old statute any
parties chose they could
mitigate the issue again under
the new staff but it doesn't
right constitute the law does
not create a constitutional
issue.
So let me understand that Mr
chair representative what you're
trying to tell me is if I'm and
and and listen this is going to
be in my general question to any
of this any
Any any anything the work we're
going to mitigate or not going
to get excuse me but create new
legislation on so my mic my
question is in general.
So you're what I heard from you.
So if there's if they're in the
middle of a lawsuit.
I hope I understood you right.
And then they they the and
they're bound by those rules
that are that that they're tied
to at that moment in time.
You're telling me that the
legislature can change the
rules.
And create a new law that will
supersede that law in the middle
of of of a court case
it might understand in that
right.
Mr chair and representative no
and I will asked my expert to
address that more fully Mr chair
representative I I I apologize
if I misspoke the answer to your
question is no let me give you
an example the tort claims act
we would the legislature from
time to time changes the tort
claims act and it any given time
there are hundreds of lawsuits
pending under the tort claims
act the way the law operates in
those cases which are pending
continue to conclusion under the
old tort claims act and those
cases which are filed after the
tort claims act is modified date
litigate those questions under
the new tort claims act and
there's never a constitutional
challenge when we change the
tort claims act there is simply
a division an article four
section thirty four sets out
that division so that if you
have the case pending under
current law it continues to
operate under that law as it was
written you have the right as a
litigant in the state of New
Mexico to litigate under the
tort claims act as it is changed
if you file a new lawsuit after
his change if you have a pending
lawsuit when the tort claims act
is changed you don't get to go
retroactively and apply the new
law that rule of legal practice
would operate exactly the same
way with regard to this law the
pending litigation would
continue to go forward under the
prior law under the prior
legislation and any new
litigation would go forward
under the new law and that
concept or notion has.
Expressly been authorized by the
New Mexico Supreme Court cases
elephant Butte at verses that
last group so this is settled
law this is the way it operates
with that that the old law The
lawsuits continue under the old
law and when there's a new law
the continue under the new
lawsuits continue under the new
law.
Mr chair representative if I was
in that situation than what I
would do is and and and first of
all I was in I was you know.
There was some rules that they
gave me and I'm new you gotta
understand this is a couple
years and I'm and I try to
respect the constitution water
try I respect the constitution a
hundred percent and so because
for that reason I mean I'm I'm
always again I'm gonna repeat
myself.
Has nothing to do with the
situation I always want employee
employer regular relationships
to be respectful and honorable
to each one that's not my
problem my problem is is what I
understood then now that you re.
In that.
Mr chair representative is what
you're telling me is so if I was
in the situation and I'm in the
middle lawsuit what I do is I'm
in the middle of this lawsuit
under the the of.
under the laws that we're living
on under at this moment.
So what I would do is if the law
changed I just dropped my.
Lawsuit start a new lawsuit
after the after the law changed
and and and and basically doing
the same thing that I was
kind of talking about earlier
it's just another process you're
just saying you know what year
it won't it won't in other words
that lost at the start of the
state before this.
We'll continue.
If they continue with that
they'll stay in that older set
of laws.
But if I dropped that you're
saying.
Then I can start again under the
new rules I could change the
rules of the game.
And really start my my my
lawsuit then under those new
rules and drop the old one is
that did I understand you right.
Representative Representative.
I'm not sure I understand the
question but perhaps Mr units
can and does and can address.
Mr chair representative a change
in the law in in any law that
the legislature adopts in the
governor signs changes the rules
of the game and when we change
the tort claims act changes the
rules of the game
person who is in litigation when
the rules are changed may
continue to proceed under the
old rules or may choose to
continue to choose to start
again under the new rules that
is how the law operates in the
New Mexico Supreme Court has
expressly
approved that that that that
notion of the law the
legislative leader changes the
rules sometimes in that he gets
to have that option to go under
the old or under the.
So my question then would be Mr
chair representative did you
just do this because you saw
that that that that hospitals
and generally this or who
actually encouraged you to.
Proceed with this let me get
with this excuse me with this
legislation what was your chair
and Representative.
What is the the reason for the
legislation is to ensure that
these six hundred plus employees
have the right to organize that
is the reason and there's as we
said earlier in our presentation
there is a gap in the and our
and their ability to do so
because of your pizza and how it
was originally drafted in
nineteen eighty nine before the
public employee bargaining Act
was enacted in nineteen ninety
two.
Thank you again my biggest thing
is I don't want to have a vote
that I went against the
constitution and that's why I
was trying to clean this up I
was trying to wait a minute I
don't want to.
How do I do that because I
respected.
Permanently I mean to me those
are rural those are those are
there to protect all of us not
just me not just you all of us
in the process and you know that
that I mean I understand what
you're saying so basically what
we're doing as is the reason for
this is to change the rules so
we can move forward and and and
and they can create a new.
Lawsuit that would allow them
then to be participate.
This is what I'm getting out of
it so I I I I get that so much
my next question would be you I
heard someone say there in
limbo.
They're not.
And I understand it they're not.
Private.
Employees and they're not public
employees I've never heard of
that.
That's right.
Of the way your pizza was was
drafted eight are not considered
public employees currently for
the purposes of the public
employees bargaining Act and
they're not considered private
employees for the purposes of
and of federal labor relations
act.
That is very confusing Mr chair
representative I've never heard
of that so who hired them if
they're not private and they're
not public.
the answer to.
Representative inch Mr chair
they are employed by U. N. M.
Sandoval regional Medical Center
which has
I guess you might say and I
don't want to use the word
unusual but maybe a unique way
of having been organized under
your pizza.
The organized as something what
are the organized as.
Formalized Mr chair and
representative there are
organized as a research park
corporation.
under state law.
In the state laws a law we've
been talking about you your you
paid.
Mr chairman and Representative
my expert would like to
supplement my answer he might be
able to clarify things for you
Mr chairman Representative Mr
chair and representative they
are employed by the university
of New Mexico Santa regional
Medical Center the University of
New Mexico Santa regional
Medical Center is a part of the
UNM health system they are eight
fully owned subsidiary of the
University of New Mexico and the
Peter corporation which is UNM
Sandoval regional Medical Center
is directly controlled and
operated by the regents of the
university of New Mexico so
while they're technically under
repeated not treated as public
employees they're employed by
the government of the state of
New Mexico in the form of an or
Peter corporation the reason
they can't organize as private
employees is because United
States Supreme Court fifty one
years ago it's my practice
without the Hopkins county
decision the US Supreme Court
said if a corporation is owned
or operated by a governmental
entity then we cannot take
jurisdiction over that
corporation as you might imagine
it creates issues between the
state and the federal government
and so as a consequence they
can't organize a union in the
private as private sector
employees and they can't as of
yet into this legislation passes
organized as public sector
employees finally I would note
that rate it treats these
employees as public employees
they are identified as public
employees for the purpose of the
tort claims act so what we're
doing is not really a stretch
these employees are public
employees under the tort claims
act we are simply seeking to
extend that definition to
include the public employees
bargaining.
So Mister Mister.
Mr chair representative I mean
they have to be organized as
something are there non profit
are the what what what are they
have to be organized under
something I I I've never heard
of somebody I mean it's just the
answer give me has a lot of
great you haven't defined
exactly what they're organized
because I mean I'm I'm an
employer I have different
entities and I understand that
so I'm I haven't heard clearly
who are they employed under.
When you said limbo that just
like threw me off with what is
level level means that there's
no there's no place for them
they're just in floating around
in space so I'm just trying to
understand that.
Mr Chairman representative I I
don't believe we've used the
term when.
What we said is there's a gap in
the law
that probe preclude these
particular six hundred plus
employees from having the right
to organize under either state
law or federal law and Mr chair
and representative I think in my
previous answer I pointed you to
the.
Thank you under which.
U. N. M. Sandoval Medical Center
is organized and it's your
pizza.
I meant it is the the university
research park and Economic
Development Act and that bill
that act decided in the bill
that we are presenting to the
committee.
Thank you Mr chair
representative so you're telling
me that do okay let me just let
me just cut to the chase to they
have a on board of directors
have to have something to they
have a board of directors under
that separate under that
regional hospital.
Representative and chairman I
believe our efforts that the
regents control this.
Medical Center but I will ask
him to clarify if I miss on
misspoke.
Mr chair representative they do
have a board of directors of
which is controlled by the
university of New Mexico regent
and I believe I've reviewed
articles of incorporation I
believe that the majority of the
people on the board our
University of New Mexico regent
but the corporation is organized
as an Peter corporation it's a
special type of corporation
created by this law which allows
governmental entities to create
these nonprofit corporations but
they are wholly owned by
university and an instance that
we are talking about this is a
corporation organized under of
repeat it which is wholly owned
and controlled by the board of
regents of the university of New
Mexico it has no private
ownership whatsoever the
ownership is one hundred percent
public ownership it is a
governmental entity created
under the special law.
And thank you I'm just trying to
I'm trying to think of it in in
my banking years I'm thinking of
the shell that we have
college shall we we we had our
our it's it's in pieces right
and we separate ourselves
minutes that's a normal way to
organize you started you just
because you on that you start
another nonprofit you start
another LLC and although the it
inception money is coming one
way from from one end to do you
can't create another entity by
itself and and the only reason
I'm asking that is because
that's important for me to
understand it to to to tie in
what you're saying it's just
confusing the way your that
maybe that maybe I'm not
understanding that I've done a
lot of business I understand
that pretty well it is kind of.
Not making sense to me only
because it has to be of it has
to be is a nonprofit has to be
some sort of organization and
under that they H. you they
should have their own board of
directors who.
Operates that.
Separately I mean I I've never
heard of what you're you're
saying we're a border regions
can go supersede in go beyond to
micro manage a different entity
I've never heard of that and
that's why I'm I'm I'm I'm
confused.
Mr chair representative I can
read you article three of the
articles of incorporation of UNM
Sandoval regional Medical Center
the corporation is formed as an
instrumentality of the regents
of the Univ University of New
Mexico so it is an odd situation
to be Frank with you I I I
understand why it is confusing I
have not heard of Pete at into
about six months ago and most of
the legislators that I've spoken
to I've never heard of repeated
either it is a strange law which
allows the universities of the
state of New Mexico to form
these essentially nonprofit
corporations that they the
university's control own and
operate but as is indicated in
articles of incorporation this
is an instrumentality of the
University of New Mexico and its
board of regents.
Thank you Mr thank you Mr chair
representative I mean I'm
getting at is just this is not
and you you've got to agree with
me I'm not asking crazy
questions I'm trying to clean
this up because it just does not
make sense to my my my
background it's just not coming
together and and and it's so
strange deal here it sounds to
me like it's a a private entity.
So what we want to call it up I
will one your time is different
where their private leave.
Being.
Employees.
It's kind of weird yet we're
asking to be it's the way
they're structured as a problem
and so then they're turning
around and wanting to.
Get the benefits of a of a
governmental agency yeah that's
what I'm getting from it is this
it's just not this is not too
much I mean it's I I've very
rarely heard something like this
I I mean I can tell you in in my
in my.
Two decades of being and and and
you know having my mic in my
education and what I've worked
around and dealt with this is
this is out there and so I'm I'm
just trying to figure it out I'm
again I think of asking of
questions I I I don't want to be
two of those and that was just
trying to grasp it and it just
wasn't making sense I I will
I'll let others if they want I
know they made a motion is the
state as a wait a minute I got a
lot of questions before I just
move on this and and you can see
we're we're that.
I mean there may be it may be
some of the other members
understand it better I can tell
you have a lot of background in
this in this does is very grade
very different and it's and and
you're in your legislation is
trying to tie public and private
together is the way I'm looking
at it and maybe maybe I guess
that's why last question.
Allowing them to I guess let me
rephrase that Mr chair
representative right.
Right in this legislation.
This.
Private.
It's one I'm I'm assuming it's a
nonprofit I'm assuming because I
mean I haven't heard that
exactly straight.
Is trying to which is sitting
here as a separate entity with
its own board of directors is
trying to connect itself to your
amendment as a public company.
And so is that gonna affect any
anti donation things I mean I'm
trying to just tie this
together.
It.
Mr Chairman representative will
have no impact on the anti
donation and I would point out
to you that
the Medical Center.
Does receive the benefits of a
political subdivision and that.
It
budget from of the tort claims
act so it's officers and
directors and employees are
under the the States tort claims
act and it also it is deemed an
agency or other political
subdivisions of the state for
applying laws relating to the
furnishing of goods and services
by that I think they mean the
procurement laws of the state.
And it is also operates under
the state's risk management
order Fund so the entity that
we're talking about receives the
benefits of being of the state
in that it's protected by the
tort claims act and the risk
management funds and and yet
it's leadership does not
apparently want it to its
employees to receive the
benefits of the state's public
employee bargaining Act so it
seems that they want it both
ways they want the budget but
they don't want the
responsibility to allow their
employees to organize these
employees to organize just as
every other University of New
Mexico employees have the right
to organize.
And that's just you know this is
what I'm saying I think you and
I are finally come together what
I I mean I can see both sides
they're both trying to do the
same thing I I I get that now I
mean it just it starts to come
together for me I I I you know
again it's six hundred boys I
understand I just a it was very
confusing it's not.
The absolute.
It it's it's not what you
normally would see and and and
I'm sorry for you know a couple
more years get the government
you know what that means a Mr
chair representative a Chandler
no no Mr chair Representative
the ticket cheesy
good lower roll and I'm just
gonna tell you I just I'm I'm
just listen to this and that
system I mean it is confusing
I although I always want to make
sure that employ a player
those right relationships are
good and and respectful and fair
I hope that this doesn't affect
their sometimes there's a
disparity in and and.
In pay and benefits it's
generally put as a package
together is this gonna affect
our employees paid in compares I
mean since we're gonna I guess
I'm gonna pull together you're
saying we're gonna pull them how
is it going to how are their
payment or not to be in their
their payroll packages in
comparison to the to to you to
to the U. N. M. are they going
to match or the gonna be off
kilter.
So how is it gonna be of it's
gonna be it's gotta be balance
somehow is how is it going to
affect them is that gonna lower
their pay because are getting
more benefits are they going to
retain their pay and their
benefits on top of that and it
and it and it offsets there that
that in to dig in compared in
comparison to your amendment
that's really the question.
Mr Mr chair representative this
law simply gives these employees
at the Medical Center the right
to bargain it does not affect
their current pay or benefits
should these employees to stay
organized under the public
employee bargaining Act they
will then have the opportunity
to bargain all of those items
that you delineated Mr chair and
representative.
Okay well thank you Mr chair
representative I mean I just I
just what what are afraid of is
this disparity we're it also
causes another problem where you
NM Hazare someone of the same
capacity maybe make you not as
much money because they have
these benefits and and and this
other entity by itself because
we're tying them together throws
that off kilter and and I wanted
to be for again I just I I'm
wondering is that gonna turn
around and you an employer group
wait a minute they're paying
they're getting paid more or
lesser I don't know how that
works and that's that's kind of
what what why and I'm trying to
make sure it's fair to everyone
and and and and I I believe that
they should you know I think
that's the big question is it
and and I don't think that was
brought up in here but it in my
mind that's what's coming
together.
Is is is that now I don't think
you have anything of that on the
FIR I'm just going by my
background and what I understand
and so with that I'm done with
my questions I think you guys of
of answered in a and I'm sorry
for the tortures question bill
I'm just trying to like build in
my mind and figure figured out
thank you my Mr chair
representative madam vice chair.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Representative and and thank you
so much to the to both of you
you have the Senator
and maybe at this because I do
have vast knowledge on Mr chair
as well.
Community and labor organizer I
I totally one hundred percent
plus understand what is
wanting to be accomplished in
this bill and I just wanted to
relate to the committee members
the reason why New Mexico part
of the supporting this bill
because I happen to be a patient
through the UNM health systems
and I am seeing quite regularly
at this time of our medical
regional center UNM on the line
medical regional center and I
was there recently.
And I was heartbroken.
By the degree of tension that
the health care workers were
experiencing
because they were faced with
having to make decisions.
Between
on whether they would accept
over time we're working
additional hours.
For having to go into care
childcare
the children.
the other.
Heartache they were having was
they were all being moved
from one unit over to the main
hospital because of the number
of COVID cases that were coming
in and they weren't given a
choice they were being told that
they had to.
and at the same time I'm waiting
there in the waiting room
hearing all this tension going
on and listening and I ask a few
questions and then I was told
that they were attempting to are
being faced with trying to find
a way to the representative
because they felt.
Only white didn't know whether
they have the right what rights
they had and we're how to
addresses Mr chair and
You know it was hard right
breaking because the conditions
were just so stressful and so as
a longtime labor organizer I
knew absolutely that
when I saw this bill that they
need you know the M. the
employees made a very clear
pathway in order to be able to
exercise their right to working
nights as a collective
bargaining unit and when there
is not that clear pathway then
there's.
Where exactly the scenario that
Mr chair the sponsor and her
expert identified and why it is
that we have an obligation in
order to make
clarifications on the law and
adjustments in order to be able
to.
Sure that our work force across
the state more.
We're going directly to this
particular body
have that clear pathway because
every worker has the right in my
S. belief system to organize and
every worker when they have the
right to organize has a right to
our creator organize their
bargaining.
And in this case I you know I
wonder because I was trying to
look at the law and we were
remember going through this I
was looking at the law that was
being cited Mr chair and I was
looking at the background of a
lot of that the representative
sponsor mention and you know I
often wonder
why entities do what they do
And I had a question as to why
it was that.
I never knew that we had UNM had
a was also present allow medical
regional was also a research
part court court corporation and
that.
I I was blown away with that and
so it it it makes me wonder why
those kinds of entities are set
up to begin with and makes me
wonder why there is
Strong opposition and why we
were told.
are you know wait Mr chair
misinformed.
On the legality by throwing out
at the very beginning that there
was an active lawsuit without.
Understanding clearly what that
meant and how related to this
particular piece of legislation
and I'm so happy that
Representative sponsor Chandler
and her expertly able to
explain.
because I I I don't ever want
any Representative or anybody to
be swayed one way or another
with our fear or missing
information concerning a legal
issue.
We those of us that are on the
policy position so you're
correct Representative that up
but I thought that we needed to
have that Representative to us
honestly and truthfully
and and it had not been done so
in in some of the opposition
COVID and so I wanted to make
sure that we were clear on that
and that and I wanted to relate
this personal experience that I
had direct because I have
personal direct knowledge of.
Workers and their position with
their employer being threatened
in compromise because they felt
totally unprotected.
As as an entity as an organizing
bargaining unit whatever it was
that they've chosen wanted to do
to be able to do.
Elves and articulate what was
that they felt they could not
work beyond sixteen hour ships
or twenty our ships because they
had small children at home and
why it was that they didn't want
to be exposed to our critical
care patients that were being
seeing Michael that there are
multitude of other reasons so
I though in all the line of
questioning that Representative
Terrazas was doing after a
couple of questions that I had
so Mr chair and and and
Representative I just wanted to
clarify that and offer that to
the committee and why I feel so
strongly about
supporting this piece of
legislation and giving these
employees
what all that they're seeking
and that is that clear pathway
to be able to organize as a
bargaining unit as a public
under the public employee
bargaining unit which is their
right because they are employees
of a university system so thank
you Mr chairman and
Representative income they might
thanks to the Senator and with
that Mr chair that that.
Thank you.
The I want to add to that is
being part of a bargaining unit
does it mean you came in the
budget the fact is our in my
life based on values being part
of a bargaining unit means I
have lost budget though that's
part of life.
So with that I do have a proper
motion under proper staff and
that in check with K. would you
cloud to vote on this.
Representative.
No.
Representative bash.
Yes.
Representative black no.
Representative okay.
Representative doc Cruz yes.
Representative Kaga Domingo
Garcia yes.
Representative Rubio yes.
Senator also.
Representative Terrazas.
Representative Terrazas I'm
sorry yes and I'll explain my
vote.
Yes.
Yes but my vote okay.
Representative Roybal Caballero
vice chair yes.
Representative Alcon chair.
Yes.
The vote and then I'll go to
Representative dot last just for
one minute.
The vote is H. two two two
passed.
Representative assets for us but
the Mr chair I'm not the.
Mr Mr chair you know I I I I I I
voted that way because I I'm.
I I am concerned about the the
employees and and import deal
although I hope that it doesn't
cause a disparity that was my
biggest concern and and as you
know that try to use my mic my
experience to make good
decisions properties versions
but I hope it doesn't cause of a
loss of income on their part as
you said that you it's cost you
before.
When they start comparing
themselves to the public private
you know sometimes there's
differences in in in in payroll
there because it's payroll and
benefits and that's were I just
hope that there's not a despairs
disparity and so it and that's
why I voted for that but I hope
that there are in because a
disparity thank you Mr chair
okay thank you I'll with that I
think we're done for the night I
don't think anybody has a.
I don't I don't think anybody
has gotten an FIR that never got
one on the other bills so that
in that case the.
Hi you have made the decision
that I will last for a eight
thirty in the morning Saturday
so we will interrupt any other
committees that are scheduled
the head L. as normally and
honestly it in my whole life a
lot of that of cherry and I have
tried to stay away from
Saturday's and Sunday's because
I.
They don't feel like we need to
do that but that.
The that we're reading the
clock.
The the.
I'm gonna have to do this so
with that he did not and listen
and keep an eye on to go that
route okay.
Thank you thank you.
There anything anybody else
wants to at not see you later.
Have some dinner.
The
recording stopped.
All.
