Matthews.
Representative small.
Here.
Senator Zamora twenty.
Representative Zamora.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Matthews.
Somewhat off vice chair.
Sure ninety.
I'm here and and really quickly
madam secretary I got a text
message Representative Hochman
Vigil she's.
It over to a panelist is joining
us and please comment on the
role as well as Representative
Zamora I see his picture that as
well.
Corn.
Thank you Secretary so good
afternoon ladies and gentlemen
thank you for joining us for
this afternoon's session of by
the request of the sponsor house
memorial ten has been rolled to
a future date not yet
determined.
So at this point and we have one
built to consider for this
afternoon without further ado we
will bring over the Sanchez for
that one bill house bill two oh
seven representatives Stansbury
Representative Ferrary please
raise your hand will pull you
over to genesis panelists.
I see in both you already thank
you for being with us both this
afternoon
and so without further ado.
Let's go ahead and hear house
bill two oh seven food hunger
and farm Act.
Thank you Mr chair and committee
just eight.
Is
give us the number.
Different bills and I don't know
which one or work in a need will
get their incentive okay.
Do you go to Representative
Ferrary thank you Mr chair and
committee just to give you some
background on how this bills
team about the food hunger and
farm Act a coalition of over
four hundred people have been
needing and small is our troops
since the beginning.
I guess we're getting someone
else's.
Okay.
Of over four hundred people have
been needing in small and large
groups since the beginning of
COVID nineteen to communicate
coordinate and strengthen our
collective ability to respond to
the needs of New Mexicans around
food hunger water and
agriculture and this cross
sector group is made up of
people in the Ag industry people
of faith legislators
philanthropies state government
employees anti hunger advocates
pro local agricultural act at
arm's advocates anti poverty
advocates and mutual aid groups
and each stakeholder brings
perspective about how food and
water and security are playing
out across New Mexico and are
United in a desire to respond to
immediate mid and long term
needs of people facing food and
water in security and those who
serve them.
And even our pre pandemic a
group of eighty stakeholders
we're focused on addressing
hunger and they were meeting
while advocating for a multi
pronged policy and systems
approach.
And through this organized and
facilitated networking
collaboration and consensus
building a set of policy
priorities have emerged and
those are to strengthen local
agriculture and local food
systems to increase capacity to
meet urgent and emergency food
and water needs and also to
respond to root causes of food
insecurity and with that I'd
like to
Handed over to a representative
Stansbury.
We were very good afternoon this
afternoon thank you Mr chairman
and thank you to our committee I
really appreciate you holding
this hearing on a Saturday and
especially for this bill this
bill is a long time coming we've
been meeting in this work group
for over eighteen months now to
really try to understand how to
address both the systemic hunger
on one side of the equation and
to figure out how to better
support our farmers and ranchers
and address really difficult
structural issues in our food
system so that our farmers and
ranchers can get a better price
for their agricultural products
they can move their part
products to market inside of New
Mexico and ensure that we are
feeding New Mexicans with the
healthiest most culturally
affirming and baths food that
New Mexico has to offer so the
challenge that really are
working group has been working
on for this last eighteen months
is how to address the issue that
over ninety percent of our
agricultural products are
actually exported out of the
state and over ninety percent of
the food that we consume in this
state is imported so really
trying to reconnect and we've
back together our food system
and this working group as
Representative Ferrary and just
noted is made up of hundreds of
stakeholders across the state
who approached the food and
hunger issue from so many
different perspectives
and it's been critical to
actually have people sit
together at the table to try to
understand how to unpack and
bring these issues together and
during the pandemic it's been
absolutely critical to have that
base basis on which all these
different groups can collaborate
this group is help to and
facilitate the transfer of food
from local farmers in the south
valley up to the northern Navajo
agency has worked across the
state with food banks to help
get emergency supports and
volunteers to help and feed New
Mexicans as thousands of people
of order emerge.
And see food sports during the
pandemic and this group has been
working to really try to
understand them bring
understanding across all the
different people who are
involved in our food system and
address systemic issues and Mr
Chairman today we are also going
to asked that a substitute be
offered for the bill we've been
hard at work over the last
several weeks since the bill was
introduced working with the farm
bureau interface and our various
stakeholders to try to make sure
that we have the best bill to
put forward and so when the time
comes will want to put that that
said forward and one of the
things I wanted just to address
that got them addressed in the
sap is we had the benefit of
having the FIR and agency
analysis when we started working
on the substitute so we try to
incorporate all of the feedback
that we got from every agency to
ensure that there was optimal
flexibility and that we could
potentially funds this work so
you'll see the appropriation has
been struck but I plan to
allocate my entire junior bill
allocation and we are working to
try to get some additional funds
added to it you need to so that
we can launch this work and it
can be scalable to the resources
that are available so I'm so
incredibly grateful and proud of
the amazing work that all of our
groups have done and Mr chairman
with your permission we have a
couple of expert witnesses we
have lily Irvin Vitela from New
Mexico first to help to
facilitate the state Act plan as
well as and as somebody from the
US food banks that what will
also join us today on our panel.
Very well thank you
Representative really good
afternoon.
Hello and and committee members
hi my name is lily Irvin Vitela
and I'm the president and
executive director New Mexico
First and twenty from health in
New Mexico
you may now New Mexico first is
a statewide cross partisan
organization that works on
engaging communities and public
policy and I'm here today to
tell you more about house bill
two oh seven because it's a
really
hopeful example of what Dr
Cornel west talks about is
justice which he says is what
love looks like in public I
think it's important to remember
that near Valentine's day so not
only have over four hundred
people been working on this call
in this coalition that's made up
of individuals and people who
represent other coalitions it
builds on the work of folks like
to New Mexico Food nav Policy
Council who've been working
together for eighteen years
about seven years ago New Mexico
first this was before my time
together over six hundred people
to work on an ad resilience plan
we know that Abaco to resilience
is super important in terms of
feeding people but it's also
really important to our culture
how we manage land and how we
are together and so that that
effort involved over six hundred
people we had sessions all
around New Mexico there were
sessions in English and Spanish
there was a round table that was
specifically for tribal
stakeholders.
That of food and hunger has been
so pressing that in our town
hall about health body mind and
spirit last summer we had in but
the combination of our community
conversations our town hall in
our action teams over five
hundred thirty people involved
so we just over thousand New
Mexicans who explicitly said we
must work together you must put
partisanship aside you must not
think about this only has which
is agricultural need only which
is the emergency food sector
need are only what we need from
a health perspective but in
times of pandemic in times of
drought in times of economic
crisis we need to have the
infrastructure in place across
departments to have strong
vibrant meaningful authentic
partnership dialogue in decision
making with NGOs and other
stakeholders from the industry
as well so that we we have plans
so when drought hits us because
it will.
If god.
Hope hope it doesn't happen but
if we're hit by another pandemic
if it takes us awhile to recover
from this economic crisis that
we have everything in place to
know how to use our resources in
the most impactful way and so I
ask you to do what we do all the
time and if Mexico first which
is to really lean into the
wisdom of community because we
have everything it takes to get
on to being the first in the
nation and child hunger being
among the first in elderly
hunger our children our elders
and everybody in between
deserves better and I I've seen
you all in action I know that
you were the kind of people who
to show that love that justices
as justice is the public face so
we really strongly encourage
your support of house bill two
is seven to help us to better
buy in for each other.
Thank you very much I really
appreciate you being here this
afternoon let's go then back to
Representative Ferrary and
Stansbury can you please reduce
the substitute two one nine
number please yes and also Mr
chairman if it's okay one of our
experts is Katie Anderson who is
currently in the attendees and
she's with Representative runner
food bank if she could be
brought over as a panelist
actually so madam secretary
people over but in the meantime
Representative can you please
reduce the two one nine number
eight said to one nine numbers
for the substitute is two one
nine nine zero one point three.
Very well so for the registered
charity yes Representative small
can I move that.
That committee substitute for
discussion purposes absolutely
the motion made by
Representative small their
second second by Representative
Allison we are now on the
committee set up but before we
get there if you would like to
have ms Anderson so it's a
little bit about the about the
Millard do you want to go
straight to I'm sorry
Representative Brown I see with
you I see you yes thank you Mr
chairman and
I I just need a little bit of
clarity I have a point to
version and my assistant before
she left for the weekend road at
the top of the bill point three
what were the differences if I
may ask between the point you in
the point three just so I know
that I'm not going to miss
anything in the text.
Appreciate that yes ma'am
Representative is Stansbury yes
thank you so much Mr chairman
and Representative Brown there
was a in a clerical error in the
labeling of the substitute and
so that it and point to version
that you have that was sent to
the committee and preparation
for Wednesday's hearing is the
same bill as point three and the
reason why we push this hearing
was to clear up that clerical
error but it is the same draft
so this the point three should
be the same as the point two
that you receive for the
Wednesday hearing.
So Mr chairman and
Representative Stansbury so you
said there was a technical
change however could you
tell us what that was just so we
have that information it was
actually the mislabeling point
two verses point three.
Okay thanks to the state yeah
thank you for.
Representative L. I. C. S. R.
and I was muted.
Mr chairman thank you very much
Representative Stansbury.
Like I said I'm sitting here
with very many very.
Numerous copies of this
particular bill and what I am
seeing verses.
On.
The nine oh one point two
version versus the nine oh one
point three for version.
To me like you have taken The
appropriation that.
Mr Chairman Representative
Ezzell.
Yes Representative.
Yes I am so sorry that there is
so much confusion so and if it's
okay I'll just take a minute to
explain we were originally
scheduled to present the bill on
to Tuesday actually and Council
Service submitted initially a
draft that was labeled point one
and then they sent a second
draft that was labeled point to
then we had to pull that hearing
down because of that confusion
because we had some extra time
we decided to continue working
on the bill for a couple of days
and then a new version was
submitted by council service
which was the point two version
the second point to version and
because there was still
confusion we pull that hearing
down and are now having this
hearing on the point three
version so I'm sorry that
there's been so much confusion
as I think we all know it's very
difficult in a virtual session
our staff for doing the best
that they can and I'm sorry that
it created confusion.
So Mister chairman but I need to
just the representative that I
may Mr chairman.
Representative this is that
we're working off of.
Because we have like ninety
seven analysis now of for each
one of these bills so I'm
assuming.
Staying at.
Some of these analysis do not
have that number on it.
So it's gonna be kind of hard
to.
Just muddle through it.
Representative.
Sorry I have some work going on
in my house of stairs and made
the lot here and here and there
but
Representative is the L. and
into the Sanchez this was the
reason why we had to roll this
bill over so many times that the
cause of.
I I I I'm not one to throw
anyone under the under the bus
but you know the Council Service
sent to us I think some some
jacks that were questionable to
the point where the point one
version the point to and there
was two point two bridges
floating around to which
Representative Ezzell and and I
had a conversation on Thursday
afternoon
Wednesday afternoon related to
that and so just for the clarity
of the committee the clarity of
the analysts.
We we decided that we
going
wait till today Saturday four
point three version so that
there would be no question about
what version we are working off
of today what were you were
reading off of today so that
being said I I hope that helps
to clarify things and and
realizing that.
Agencies only sent out analysis
for the original bill
before the at our own majority
minority analysts they were all
sent the point three version on
Thursday I believe so with that
being said I see another hand
Representative Hochman Vigil
thank you Mr chair yeah I just
wanted to make sure that the
committee analyses that we
received do you include this
last version of the bill because
those I reviewed still had an
analysis of the appropriation
request.
So Representative Stansbury
please on the point three
version.
This.
Mr speaker on that point.
Speaker thank you for we go to
that that I have two point three
bills I have eight eight two one
eight nine three one point three
and I have a two one nine nine a
one point three.
We're working off of the two one
nine nine one.
One point three.
Thank you I'm sorry I
interrupted thank you
Representative Stansbury please
on the version two one nine nine
zero one point three.
Okay you wanna walk through the
changes from the original bill
Mr Chairman yes please or call
so thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you Committee so after the
original bill was filed and we
went back to our stakeholders a
point back to excuse me went
back to the agency is and had
additional conversations about
how to further improve the bill
so you'll see in some of the
original agency analyses that
they were concerned that some of
the efforts wouldn't incorporate
things that were already under
way and that was never the
intent of the original bill the
intent was to help to tie
together existing activities
that are happening and
department of act HSD the
emergency response efforts the
state has already had under way
so in a number of places in the
bill we've made changes to
reflect that it should
incorporate the existing
activities and reports and other
things that that agencies are
already doing in addition to
that we got some great feedback
we met with the agricultural
producers organizations
including folks like the farm
bureau and the chilli growers
etcetera and we had some
additional requests to make some
other language changes to ensure
that production agriculture was
fully Representative as it was
always intended to be in the
bill so we made some changes for
that and then finally like I
said we need to M. and a change
fire striking the funding
appropriation as we're seeking
that through and special
appropriations through the issue
to process.
Representative Representative
Ferrary anything else that.
Thank you Mr chair no I'm fine
thank you.
Very well this is going out to
the public for public comment.
I will open it up to all those
in support of house bill two oh
seven the committee says to do
that.
Because of the number of folks
looking this comment today we
will set a twenty minute limit
on all public comment so I will
start the clock please be
mindful public that you have
full.
Yes folks waiting behind you
that want to speak as well so
please because of that and so we
will begin with Mr president
from A. R. P. for all Mr chair
and members of the committee my
name is Roger Greer and I'm here
is to volunteer president with a
RQ New Mexico in the co chair
eighty RPG's Consumer Committee.
A. R. T. isn't strong support of
house bill two oh seven we would
like to thank the sponsors for
bringing forward this is very
much needed bill thank you.
Thank you Sir next we have I'm
gonna put you this name of.
I want to try.
Yes for a.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Secora Nefish and I am a
registered lobbyist for covenant
New Mexico thrive and we both
organizations stand in strong
support of house bill two of
seven we need to build the food
infrastructure for New Mexico
thank you.
Yes Representative listening go
to Canada can we can definitely.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee.
my name is Kerry Mallory and I
live in Albuquerque New Mexico
within the twenty eighth
district I'm a mother teacher
advocate for children and then
the voter engagement need for
Sierra action network.
Last summer the Albuquerque
journal published an article
about a community project I
started to provide nutritious
fresh groceries to put and
secure households in Bernalillo
county given the pandemic and
the dire need of hungry fans.
Hello my name and asked families
feeding families after.
Do this project I was
highlighted by Senator Martin
Heinrich and as a hometown hero
New Mexico magazine wrote an
article about this outreach and
I was also aware that the eighty
year right spot award from mayor
Tim Keller.
This project started by
delivering groceries and oxygen
family in Sapporo who had
absolutely no help.
We also help to to get APS meals
to be able to know
transportation to go to school
pick up sites it grew into a
huge community effort and as of
June seventeenth twenty twenty
my family along with other
members of the community as
neighbors and smaller businesses
without a hundred twenty
families with groceries and
supplies that could last up to
two weeks.
I'm not telling you this to
gloat and I'm not telling you
this to receive any recognition
or appreciation I'm actually
telling you this because it
shows a huge problem.
Why did myself my spouse and
other people within my
neighborhood have to step up to
feed food insecure families well
the majority of our less
decisional did little to ensure
that no child in the state what
sleep hungry in the midst of a
global pandemic.
What we did was not a
heartwarming story.
And honestly when someone tells
me what it was heartwarming it
makes myself sat.
Because.
We should have to.
Think about food insecurity as a
problem with our state.
Almost a quarter of children
right now in the state of New
Mexico on twenty twenty one are
starving and do not have access
to nutritious food.
And that is a problem House Bill
two oh seven should be up for
debate especially when our
children right now who is not
yet in almost two days within a
major each of your districts to
not pass this bill is the same
as condoning that it is okay for
children in our state to not
eat.
Being able to ride students
secure families with healthy
nutritious foods is critical for
the success of future
generations and our workforce
here in New Mexico.
I am hopeful that lawmakers such
as yourselves will recognize
that food insecurity due to lack
of income accessibility and
transportation is a crisis that
needs to be addressed together
we can all work together to
ensure that no New Mexican child
goes to sleep hungry tonight.
So after this meeting is
adjourned and you all take a
drink of your coffee drink your
water your luncheon feel full I
hope every single one of you
that is present for this
meeting.
Think about the children in your
respective districts who are
currently in pain from hunger
and at no fault of their own
will not be able to eat dinner
tonight thank you so much Mr
chair for hearing.
Thank you very much can be with
fifteen minutes left next on the
list is Pam Roy Pam good
afternoon.
Mr chairman thank you so much Mr
chairman and committee members
my name is camera I and I'm here
representing the New Mexico food
and agriculture policy council
farm to table and the rocky
mountain farmers union all of
whom are in support and these
are coalitions were innovations
as well.
And we want to thank you very
much Representative Stansbury
Representative Ferrary for
bringing this bill forward into
the work of New Mexico first and
the many organizations that miss
lily mentioned
really bring forward at this
collective work so couple things
that haven't been shared yet one
do this is this bill is a
comprehensive.
View of foods and agriculture
systems so it what it does is it
helps to see that hunger is
related to food and food related
to agriculture here in New
Mexico on the idea of
strengthening and expanding
agriculture's economic sector
while taking care of our people
and our communities so that's
one piece it's comprehensive in
its approach and it is very much
about coordination across
agencies across a set up all
kinds of our our food and
agriculture sectors bringing
everybody together and as little
mentioned that has been
happening they do point out
serve as a strength here in this
bill section six and section
seven so session six New Mexico
grown food products plan is a
simple that's already but I have
to say that you have a lot of
people behind that one of top
sorry I'll finish up there yet
thank you Mr it is Mr chairman
anyway so there is a cross
agency initiative already in
place for that and we see this
as an exciting opportunity for
every work on on ever collection
food systems New Mexico together
thank you very much Mr chairman
and committee strictness Reuters
going to steep steep good
afternoon your with this.
Steep your muted so I think you
good afternoon you Mr chairman
and representatives I represent
three fifty New Mexico world at
that rate just city group and we
support H. B. two oh seven there
are many bills introduced the
session aimed at expanding
markets for specific
agricultural products within the
state or funding the transfer
fresh pop produce from local
growers to seniors and other
vulnerable groups these are
wonderful bills but they are
piecemeal approaches H. B. two
oh seven takes a top down
approach to assessing these
needs orchestrating that network
of New Mexico growers and
consumers and leveraging food
assistance programs we believe
HB to R. seven will bring jobs
to rural communities improve the
health of New Mexicans and
address water scarcity it also
has the potential to address
climate change with sustainable
farming practices thank you very
much for bringing this bill and
for supporting thank you very
much that's going to pull other
Sims Garcia good afternoon.
Good afternoon Mister.
Garcia and I'm the executive
director of the New Mexico sic
Association forward to protect
water and farmland and
revitalize agriculture in a
second communities I'm here
today in support of house bill
two of seven which is the result
of broad collaboration I'd like
to thank the sponsors for their
leadership out we had a state in
which we noted that we construct
the local agricultural economies
in our The New Mexico with an
infusion of sixty million
dollars we could shift our
purchase of locally grown food
from one percent to fifteen
percent that has really inspired
our work that we are now in the
fifth year of a farmer training
project to invest in young
farmers who are committed and
skilled in growing food for
local markets but it is also
clear that we need supply chain
infrastructure to make small
scale farming and ranching more
economically feasible we believe
this legislation is an important
contribution to strengthening
interagency coordination on
addressing put systems in New
Mexico in a manner that connects
the dots between food security
hunger and local regional food
production and processing where
you're in strong support of this
legislation Mr chairman thank
you very much Mister sinister
Bill Jordan Mister Jordan good
afternoon.
Mr Jordan good afternoon your
muted.
Good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee of Bill
Jordan with New Mexico voices
for children we're in strong
support of the bill and want to
thank the sponsors for their
good work in bringing so many
people together because of the
pandemic one and three New
Mexico children are now
experiencing food insecurity
this bill is a revolutionary
approach to investing in a food
system that works for all New
Mexicans because it brings all
of our state agencies together
to come up with innovative
solutions to improve our food
infrastructure and reduce hunger
it's an opportunity to make
transformative change throughout
our state food system from small
growers all the way consumers
it'll have sweeping budget for
our state by improving food
security strengthening our local
economies and protecting our
water resources for future
generations we urge your support
and thank you.
Thank you Mr Jordan that's gonna
Ashley Wagner ms Wagner you with
this.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'm
actually Wagner the director of
public policy for the New Mexico
chamber of commerce we support
the effort that went into this
bill and what it seeks to do
which is to link all the food
components in the state which
does need to be better dressed
so that New Mexicans are better
served I also want to note that
representative Stansbury reached
out to brief the chamber on the
bill and ask for input along
with that of our members in
agriculture that collaborative
bipartisan approach is something
that we really appreciate thank
you so much thank you miss
Wagner let's go into the Kyle
Kyle Jim.
Good afternoon yeah Kyle genuine
share good afternoon everybody
my name is Kyle and I represent
an introspective based here and
for profit New Mexico and I'm
advocating for the tribal lands
to upgrade their food systems
our food networks of the average
tribal member from the Navajo
Nation has to travel over round
trip a hundred and twenty miles
just to get groceries especially
to gain healthy food access and
so we just want to build food
security within the Navajo
Nation and provide nutritious
food so we can restore our
longevity toward people in
practice and special foods
through ancestral knowledge and
so I do support the House Bill
two oh seven.
Thank you the reason gems go
then to Caroline.
Karen good afternoon.
Your mute it.
Okay.
But.
Yes there are you there yes my
name is Carolyn Kastner I'm a
member of the public policy
advocacy committee of the food
depot in Santa Fe and I'm here
to route Representative the
views of that committee the food
depot supports H. B. two oh
seven and greatly appreciates
the leadership of the bills
original sponsors and all the
legislators who favor passage of
this bill during the past year
the pandemic has put great
pressure on food banks all
across New Mexico these problems
will not end soon and the best
projections are that the effects
of the pandemic on our economy
will continue for the next three
to four years but even as we act
to address this immediate crisis
we must plan now for long term
policy solutions as those
suggested in H. B. two oh seven
to reduce the devastating level
of hunger among our citizens
thank you.
Thank you Caroline that's
correct and I Representative
good afternoon.
Hello Representative.
Thank you Mr chairman Brandt
then died I'm government affairs
director of the New Mexico
association of conservation
districts and also the
supervisor on the lease so water
I'm I'm in support of this well
as well as the majority of
conservation district in New
Mexico because it's so important
that we have sustainable Ag
sector in New Mexico with the US
is staying ability New Mexico
agriculture can help feed does
it struggle treatment so and out
of respect for the rest of the
speakers I'll keep this short
thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee thank
you Mr Van **** Patricia
Cardona.
Miss Cardona Good afternoon.
Your muted.
Yes committee members
chairperson Lente my name is
Patricia Cardona hi
Representative Sierra Club and
its thirty thousand members and
supporters we stand in firm
support tech house bill two oh
seven the food hunger the food
hunger and format are we would
like to thank all of the
sponsors for bringing this bill
forward nutrition is important
for staying healthy learning and
feeling secure and supported as
a person in society this is a
welcome bill for creating a
strategy that is data driven.
And a food system that follows
for the data goes the bill
provides for input from a
diversity of agencies to build a
systemic way to address food
inequities in New Mexico.
Food security has brought
effects on health due to mental
and physical stress that it
places on the body the US
Department of budget agriculture
has New Mexico as the least help
the state in the country sixteen
point eight percent of
households are unable to provide
food for one or more persons in
their households between twenty
sixteen and twenty eighteen B.
for COVID food availability and
society is important to
individuals as well as families
you're passing of house bill two
oh seven is orange.
Thank you very much Mr Paul
Gibson Mr Gibson good afternoon.
You are muted Mr Gibson.
Not anymore thank you Mr
chairman committee members and I
especially want to thank
representatives for our in
Stansbury for introducing this
legislation my name is Paul
Gibson co founder retake Our
Democracy an all volunteer
organization with twenty five
hundred members statewide H. B.
two oh seven as one of the
twenty transformational bills
retake this box supporting the
twenty twenty one session one
hearing after another I've heard
the very human impact of failure
to systemically address the
needs of rural New Mexicans my
only wish is that this bill had
a twenty two hundred million
dollar appropriation attached to
it especially after hearing
supports urgent please in
hearing after hearing I hear of
plans to create an agency or a
task force or conduct conduct a
study but no commitment funds to
do that work despite the state
having the largest surplus in
our history today have the
opportunity to send a message to
rural New Mexico that you care
we take our democracy and it's
twenty five hundred well
informed highly engaged in very
active members strongly
encourage a yes vote on H. B.
two oh seven and thank you all
for your service.
Yes it's going to Tim Davis
Mister Davis good afternoon good
afternoon thank you Mr chair
this is Tim Davis with the New
Mexico Center on Law and Poverty
we have been a number of this
coalition for the last eighteen
months and I just like to point
out that this bill will help us
administer snap or food stamps
in a way that maximizes
enrollment and brings more
federal dollars into the state
we've got about fifteen hundred
staff retailers in New Mexico
and participants spend locally
most recent data we have from
twenty nineteen shows that these
retailers were deemed about six
hundred and thirty two point
nine million dollars in snap
budget and the USDA study
estimated that every snap dollar
spent produces about a dollar
and fifty four cents in economic
activity is important to keep in
mind that all of the snap
benefit money comes from the
federal government we want to
send a big thanks to the
sponsors and we are to support.
Thank you very much that's go
then to cerita.
Thank you I'm sorry card is a
faculty of human rights to the
University of New Mexico I'd
like to make a comment on behalf
of New Mexico college students
we partly thank the sponsors of
this bill our students are food
insecure in no small part due to
government policy compared to
the nineteen seventies financial
aid meets far less need than
there is the state has reduced
its contribution to higher ed
and family incomes have
stagnated therefore I appeal to
you to support this bill which
includes contributing to college
student food security we
recently did a study at UNM
revealing that as many as six
thousand students are food
insecure about three thousand of
them maybe very food insecure
that is experiencing hunger on a
regular basis Popejoy hall holds
less than two thousand students
so feel three of those just to
get a sense of food security on
our campus if we had and all the
other New Mexico institutions of
higher ed images are unthinkable
this is also due to the fact
that research shows food
insecurity is likely to be
higher on our to your branch
campuses and community colleges
across the state I'd go so far
as to call it a hidden Crisis
this bill would contribute
resources to the very people who
are trying to propel themselves
into the middle class their
success is key to the progress
of the state one study revealed
that when a statewide court our
New Mexico college students does
not graduate it can cost them
ninety million in unearned
income and costs the state about
a million in taxes so please
help our state by helping our
college students by passing H.
B. two oh seven thank you.
Thank you very much it's going
to carry rate Mr Payne.
You are with us.
Mr chairman and committee
members my name is Gary Payton
representing the coalition of
sustainable communities New
Mexico the coalition of the
elected leaders of the cities of
Los crucis Albuquerque Santa Fe
and Santa Fe County these
communities in these elected
leaders represent forty percent
of New Mexico's population are
member stand in strong support
of H. B. two oh seven the
coalition is focused on
sustainability climate action
and social equity as such the
bills proposed hunger and farm
council will be postured to
enhance local food systems and
resilient agriculture while
addressing root causes of
insecurity for citizens across
New Mexico we particularly
applaud the proposed council's
role in planning for soil and
water conservation ecosystem
health and resilience we support
this comprehensive broad gauged
and hopeful bill and urge each
of you to vote yes thank you
very much thank you very much I
have twenty minutes on my clock
now so I will let one person
speak and then the rest of the
folks if you can just mention
your name your organization and
then put your support be great
let's go then finally to Judy.
Judy good afternoon.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'm
Judy Nestle speaking today on
behalf of Lutheran advocacy
ministry in New Mexico and the
New Mexico conference of
churches we strongly support
house bill two oh seven R. for
many of the reasons that have
already been expressed faith
communities are often the places
where we meet our hungry
neighbors that are still
kitchens and food pantries and
when we shelter on house
families we look forward to the
comprehensive and systemic
approach to addressing hundred
at this bill represents thank
you so much thank you very much
again the name organization and
state your support next we have
Scott.
Those guys you with this.
Okay then let's go then to
Rebecca Rebecca you there.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Rebecca
lateral eyeing the receipt
registered dietitian
nutritionist and the state
policy representative for New
Mexico Academy nutrition
dietetics and we strongly
support house bill to a.
Thank you Rebecca it's go back
to Scott study there yes I am
Scott Bunton member of the board
of directors of the depot in
Santa Fe we thank you for this
for thank you very much that's
going to back up.
At.
Hi my name is Rebecca yes I do
Larry and I am here and so
resident of Albuquerque and I am
here to support HB seven thank
you Rebecca let's go to Tony
Gonzalez Donna here with this
one and one's on us here I am
with the New Mexico Azteca
Association as well as a member
of the New Mexico Azteca
Commission and I am in support I
am a young farmer thank you
thank you very much next the
needs Miller said.
Good morning good afternoon
Mister chair members of the
committee the niece Miller
executive director of the New
Mexico farmers marketing
association and we stand in
strong support of H. B. two oh
seven thank you very much that's
going to be in.
A good morning councilmembers my
name is Ian Coburn I'm a young
farmer here in the Albuquerque
area part of the leadership team
of the Rio Grande farmers
coalition a group of.
Expiring and current farmers
ranchers and food producers and
we are in strong support of this
comprehensive legislation thank
you he and that's going to
Carlos how does the borrow.
Carlos you are muted.
That's going to look at the bat
hello my name is Luka conscious
and I'm with bread for the world
New Mexico we are strongly
support house bill two oh seven
and have advocates in in
churches all the way from house
to peace Lutheran done in Los
crucis and we urge you to
support House Bill two oh seven
thank you Mr going just missing
of are are you there yes I'm
here thank you again I represent
on the convener of the
interpretar coalition
representing several free
traditions and we we have been
we support that were strongly in
support of this legislation
thank you Mr Morrow Mr Wagner
Anthony Wagner.
Good afternoon Sir you're next.
You're on mute.
Mr chair members of the
committee Anthony Wagner with
Wagner farms and a member of the
New Mexico Food and ACT Policy
Council and I support.
House Bill tools seven thank you
Mr Wagner next we have share
Sherrin Berman.
Good afternoon Mister chair and
committee members thank you so
much for meeting on a Saturday
to look at some point Appel I am
I am with New Mexico First and
we strongly support this bill
please vote in favor thanks very
much thank you very much finally
we have someone call in from a
telephone hello are you there
and if you are you are muted.
Hello.
You are so muted.
Okay well then we will.
We'll move on then to.
C. will move on to all those in
the public that are here in
opposition House Bill to ascend.
With the time seeing no one we
will now come back to the
committee on discussion up
anyone that wishes to speak
please raise your hand and we
will go to you anyone of the
committee members.
Anybody.
If not then what is the pleasure
of the up okay representatives I
see to it Representative Ezzell
floors UNM.
Mr chairman thank you very much
just couldn't get.
Little Erro to point to the
right during their.
Representative Stansbury I
appreciate the effort that you
might need to this bill I
understand how important it is.
But I'm gonna hold up.
Something right here Mister
chairman and I hope everybody
can read it this is what I have
been up.
By farms and ranches down for
are I can't tell you how many
years and I'm gonna get it up
you're pretty close.
And that speaks volumes Mr
chairman and members of the
committee that helped the public
was able to say it.
You know what I guess the one
thing that I'm finding very.
Absent on this bill is.
Those people that actually do
provide.
Thank you.
Livestock and the vegetable
production in the state of New
Mexico can you tell me to what
extent that those people.
That I just pointed to route
their hello have they
participated in this.
Yes thank you Mr chairman and
Representative Ezzell we have
farmers both at the production
scale as well as small scale
farmers and even folks who grow
food for cultural reasons
participate weekly and our
workgroup and the development of
this bill we also had weekly
participation from the state
department of agriculture and
our extension service so act was
to direct your involved.
I want to know what farmers and
ranchers were involved the hands
on boots on the ground people
that were involved in this
because it's very important that
they are included on that
especially did two more you
working over the southeastern
corner of the state.
Representative Stansbury.
Yes thank you and Mister
chairman and Representative
Ezzell absolutely farmers from
all over the state Colin weekly
and and have helped us work with
us and one of the things that
I'd love to draw your attention
to since I know you're very
active in yourself rancher is
that we work to with the cattle
growers and extension and others
who have been trying to
understand how to support a more
robust need system here in the
state and so there is a section
in the bill that actually came
directly from recommendations
from the cattle growers and from
ranchers we know there are other
bills that have been introduced
around the inspection but one of
the things that we found is that
there is a need to really build
up the economy to support the
economies of scale not just
around the inspection but also
meat processing and distribution
so that our ranchers can you
know have the more stable and
sustainable supply chain within
the state so absolutely we work
directly with who's on the
ground today get this language
pull together.
Mr Chairman.
I can like to brag my area of
the state because Chavis county
was the number one Ag county and
state of New Mexico.
And I guess I missed out on all
this that was going on in our
area my brothers are in farms
are in south Chavis candy but a
couple of eleven very north Eddy
County and.
They didn't let me know when you
think about this so I guess
maybe we just missed out on all
this Mr chairman and
representative.
Chance very.
Whenever I'm reading this bill
and I hope that I am all the
latest and greatest that we've
been presented with here the
different agencies that are
listed is is mind blowing.
And.
I'm not trying to throw a bucket
of water on a forest fire okay I
do want our New Mexico grounds
they used to be used in the
state of New Mexico.
I and I I'm I don't want anybody
B. Hunkers to me that.
There was.
My kids.
Order milk okay I've been down
that road.
Mr Chairman.
Representative Stansbury.
I'm just kind of concerned
whenever you are getting.
Thanks to their line entities
listed so far that's not even
counting the ones that are under
the guidelines Mexico Department
of.
Group culture.
And then I'm seeing.
The New Mexico environment
department is not listed until
you get over here on page.
Oh my gosh.
I can where it is.
It is a page seven.
The corrections department is
listed at the top of page seven.
And I'm just very concerned
trying to get all these
different entities together
makes a little bit.
We're gonna have so much going
on that I'm afraid that there's
not going to be very much
action.
And sometimes that happens
whenever there's too many people
involved in this that are
wanting to do what's right.
But nothing has really
accomplished because of.
Everybody's desire to I want to
take charge of this or no well
it somebody else do it and
sometimes it just doesn't
happen.
Mr chairman.
Representative Stansbury I would
like to go downstream your bill
right now like I said I know
that there is.
What the pages is listed on page
three.
Three dell starting on lines
twenty one if you've got the
current bill in front of you.
You're talking about all public
and private meal program
nutrition assistance income
support need all that stuff.
Representative Stansbury Mr
Chairman.
It wasn't too awful long good go
impact I think it was less than
three years ago.
We were having problems.
In the Travis county joys
centers in in the US senior
centers in Eddy county Lake
County and I do believe that was
Roosevelt County as well as may
be Baca County at our senior
centers.
That was not get reimbursed.
In any money they had put back.
In a savings account or anything
like that they have to expand.
And we know for a fact.
Sometimes these are the only
meals at some of our state in
years got.
And whenever the state can't
stand up and support these
agencies because they are
withholding the money because
there are too many other avenues
this money have to dress as to
travel down I've done that.
Sickening is what I find it and
there was like a three month
period there.
That we had to strive very very
hard in those counties I mention
just to insure our seniors.
Got it.
Mr Chairman.
Maybe we need to take care of
our state agencies are really
stepping up and doing the job
they've been cut empowered to do
because right now I don't think
this is all happening.
Mr Chairman.
Representative Stansbury on page
four.
You can turn to that bit that
part of it.
And let's go down to line for he
says economic to workforce
challenges and opportunities
impacting agriculture producers
and their capacity to grow
process distribute cell fate and
stepped in state in New Mexico
if you have a pipeline to god
that will send us right whenever
we needed I would appreciate it
and also if you can see in that
same lines and now we don't need
it to flood and that we really
don't need a blizzard because
right now in the middle of
calving season or right now we
don't need that hail storm
because our Julie is fixing to
be picked.
We can take care of that I'm all
for it if we could pass the bill
to that effect I will back at
one hundred percent.
The cure is what you're saying
there economic and workforce
challenges are get.
Nobody wants to work out on a
farm or ranch anymore.
These young people.
That are coming up through you
know my children.
They're like mom there's no
there's no future in this we
can't make a living doing that
down on the farms is the same
what you cannot get help
anymore.
Julie industries impacted by
that because.
It takes manual labor to get
that done lots of these.
The products that we're talking
about it does take manual labor
to get it done.
And.
If there's nobody out there
that's gonna do it.
Then maybe that is plus sixty
years old the ranching thank
goodness my husband has a job in
jail because that's that is what
pays the bills but I'm the ranch
and.
Anything that goes on out there
that range it's up to me to do.
I might be able used to be able
to hire date help occasionally.
But in two thousand nineteen I
had additional all my kids
because of drought conditions
and I still get choked up
thinking about that and then to
top it off one of the cops
rolled over and killed a bunch
of my kids because they were
texting on their phones you know
what.
Whenever hardships like that.
Farmers or ranchers.
We're these agencies to help
those farmers and ranchers out.
Ever former rancher that is
listed again on that as based
adversities like that.
It doesn't matter how much
assistance.
That M. D. A. gives is.
It doesn't pay the loan at the
bank or the lending institution
where we've had to mortgage
everything to just make it down
the road.
Whatever.
or combine.
Caused over two hundred thousand
dollars.
And it's going to be used
Representative A. B..
Two weeks.
That's pretty tough on that but
farmer out there.
Farm her eight I said to her
ranch okay.
Mr Chairman.
I'm just wondering of rate of
I'm gonna get off that soapbox
on page five section for
immediate spectrum processing
plant I'm assuming that this
type of this great pair that is
running with this bill did stand
up in support of that is that
correct.
Really yep and I do appreciate
that very much right now there
is.
One processing plant Easter also
that is USDA inspected where
they can process seven different
varieties of protein.
Yes I want to go and I think
where did she go I don't see
here on the list right now.
Is that right production plant.
Providing leads to our schools.
To our hospitals to our senior
centers to our presence no ma'am
it's not it's not.
And to me that's unconscionable.
Because those people that are
listening in right now.
Beef producer poor producer goat
sheep the list goes on and on
and on by sin.
All of those have to be shipped
out of state to be processed.
Before they're able to be
consumed by New Mexico
residents.
They're not being utilized.
Within the confines of our state
and we have a a bill up
opportunity not ability we have
the opportunity to rectify that.
The problem I'm talking about.
Mr Chairman.
Representative Stansbury on page
six of your bill under section
five.
You're bringing in workforce
solutions department on line
fourteen can you tell me why
you're implementing them at that
point in this bill.
yes thank you Mr chairman and
thank you Representative Ezzell
as you know more what better
than and probably anybody in the
state and I think you just
beautifully summed up some of
the big work workforce
challenges and I know that you
have helped to co sponsor
legislation in the past to
address some of the work force
challenges this is one of the
most significant economic
problems for our producers in
the state is actually having
people who want to stay in the
business who have the capital
and capacity to stay in the
business and recruiting people
and retaining people who are
actually going to work and so
you know we took the
recommendations that had come
from department of agric
passionate ranchers farmers
different studies that had been
done and the recommendations
included all kinds of different
incentive programs job training
programs tax abatement
scholarship and remuneration and
so the purpose of this section
in the bill is to create sort of
a standing convening of all of
the appropriate agencies in
partnership with the private
sector and the federal sector to
ensure that we're actually
planning for workforce
development to address some of
these issues.
Okay and Mr chairman and
representative Stansbury if
you'll turn.
Excuse me to page seven at the
very top.
Did any of that is the
corrections department can you
tell me why you vetted
corrections department right
their place.
Yes those section six of the
bill so the the sections of the
Baylor about specific directives
around specific sort of problems
that were identified by the
coalition and I know you all
heard it bill I think last week
about expanding New Mexico grown
food products which is been a
program that has been primarily
implemented through and public
education department as well as
the aging a long term services
department we want to see that
expanded right like the state
has the capacity to purchase New
Mexican food to actually put
money back into the pockets of
our farmers and ranchers so we'd
like to see the corrections
department also I am purchasing
as much of its food as possible
from local farmers and ranchers.
Madam chairman of this great or
that one bit I'm really not.
Moving out skews me.
Thank god down to section eight
of page seven you're bringing in
the department of environment
you know what I have a problem
with the department of the
environment mainly because
they're the ones that actually
do harm our farmers and ranchers
the most do you realize that
they're the ones that have shut
down.
Cotton gins in the state of New
Mexico do you realize that right
now we have to cotton gins in
the whole state of New Mexico
because of the environment
department and you can check
that out through the to Mexico
department of agriculture New
Mexico used to grow some of the
best cop that there were that
there is but because of the
intervention of the environment
department Gooding all these
mandates on there that are
stricter than California
standards.
These June's.
I just said we've had enough.
And I really have a problem with
that also the environment
department also tells farmers.
What they can use as far as
pesticides we get that we want
to save our bees don't get me
wrong farmers ranchers
understand how important babies
are in pollination but when they
go to meddling in our businesses
and we have to keep everything
up to date as far as licensure
movie thank.
You know what.
We need to be out there working
with our boots on the ground
instead of sitting in a
classroom that the firemen
Department says we they mandate.
For us to be able to run our
operations
to see in some of the struggles
that the farmers and ranchers
have to go through.
Mr Chairman
I'm gonna hurry up I know
everybody's getting sick hear me
talking about this I could talk
about farming and ranching all
day long and the good things
that farmers and ranchers do not
only to provide food and
nourishment and clothing.
Everybody.
Everybody in the United States
but also taking care of the
state's wildlife in providing
feed and water for the state's
wildlife as well yet at the same
time we're BM impacted by I
don't know coyotes mountain
lions the list goes on and on
there too.
So you know it's a.
Vicious circle that we can.
One thing I do need
clarification on.
On page two of your bill.
Winds fifteen through seventeen.
Can you explain that particular
part of your bill and it's under
I think it's six.
Six.
Yes I'm Mr Chairman
representative it is L. as this
the case workers section yes Mr
Chairman representative yes
thank you so much and Mr
chairman and and Representative
Ezzell so this whole section
section eleven pertains mostly
to the Human Services department
and agencies that provide direct
services to low income
individuals and it's providing
guidance about how to streamline
and actually frankly make those
services more efficient more
effective and make sure that
they are informed by the best
practices so the specific lines
the you're asking about this as
training case workers and staff
to provide services in a manner
that sensitive to and trauma and
culturally and linguistically
appropriate has to do with the
fact that we have a huge amount
of diversity in our state right
so there are our agencies are
serving people in pueblos and
Navajo country we have case
workers that are serving people
in southeastern New Mexico who
maybe Spanish speaking or
English speaking we have case
workers serving different
communities in Albuquerque that
may have different and
linguistic cultural at
experiences so we want to make
sure that the care and the
interfaces in the most
appropriate manner and then the
concept of trauma informed care
is a concept in terms of social
services that just make sure
that like if people need help
there is you know there are kind
of lived experiences being taken
into consideration in the kind
of interactions they're having
and I just want to add one more
thing if it's okay Mister
chairman and and Representative
Ezzell that the section that you
were highlighting around the
Environment Department many of
the issues that you brought
forward are exactly why we're
suggesting that there be kind of
a collaborative sitting
structure is because we know
there's conflict between
agencies and producers in the.
Private industry and so rather
than forcing people to do stuff
they don't want to be doing or
fighting or suing each other you
know the concept here is to have
a way to have actual productive
collaborative conversations so I
appreciate you for bringing that
all forward.
Okay.
Mr chairman and representative
Stansbury on page eleven of your
bill under section twelve.
Is stating and this is.
This is coming up this year.
By November the first twenty
twenty one.
The purchasing Division of the
General Services Department
shall develop recommendations.
Are they in agreement with this.
I'm sorry Mr chairman and and
Representative could you tell me
the page number and section
alone so sorry I was talking to
and I'm sorry I was looking down
at my paper here it is on page
eleven of your bill under
section twelve.
Section all right the picture
now this bill is requiring that
the General Services Department
shall develop recommendations by
the there but the first of two
thousand twenty one.
So I am I have not spoken
directly with the department the
reason why the data is pushed
out to twenty thirty which is
you know a decade from now is
that it will take a long time
obviously to re orient our food
system I think some of the
issues that you highlighted
about meat production and
inspection are a case in point
right we have food banks
restaurants people who want to
purchase me in state that's
crown in state right now but we
can't because of the food supply
issues that you are have been
highlighting so we don't want to
set a goal that can be achieved
realistically which is why that
data is pushed out so far.
Mr chairman and representative I
was cured on line seven point is
by November the first two
thousand twenty one that was my
concern.
He
has that they will be mandated
to do that.
I I haven't spoken to GSD
specifically about that date it
Chairman representative
Stansbury under section twelve
on line thirteen.
Why did this recommendations not
applaud food banks.
And that is an excellent
question so we included that
language at the request of the
food banks themselves and that
has to do with the purchasing
price that they buy food on the
on the open market so you know
one of the inherent conflicts
especially around hunger and ask
is we wanna make sure farmers
can get the best price for their
May and their vegetables right
but our food banks are trying to
make sure that we can feed as
many people as possible so the
food banks due in part to
contracting with the state and
it's important to their business
model and to feed as many hungry
New Mexicans that they can
purchased food at the cheapest
possible price.
Okay.
Mr chairman whenever yours you
said that you have been vested
with the food banks is this
Roadrunner food bank or is it
all food banks located
throughout New Mexico all of
them so there's that the
association of food banks as
five food banks and they work
with over two hundred agencies
in every single community in the
state so they the entire
association has participated in
help support this bill okay it
was Mr chairman and
representative Stansbury I'm
assuming their whatever you're
talking about the smaller
organizations that that does
also mean local faith based like
close and fishes and dexter New
Mexico it would have thought it
yes okay okay thank you very
much for that response and I'm
glad to say that they are
included in that.
Mr chairman I guess one less
thing.
I'm glad that you're removes the
appropriation I really am
because I just finished up with
the appropriation committee
while ago we've gone over for we
hope is going to be the final
step before we come up with the
final budget.
Mr chairman I guess my concern
here is.
You've got a lot of sales in the
year S. H. A. L. L. I know what
kind of funny.
Know the rest of you all do I
talk to is I
What.
Going to be.
This hurts me to say it I think
that we have cell on I'm gonna
start off on.
I think it's page six.
No it starts up on page five.
Page four excuse me happened
back up now.
Yes.
For you have shell on page five
you have us shelves again twice
on page six you have to three
shells on page seven.
Whenever you're saying shell and
the list goes on and on under
each section.
Those are unfunded mandates.
And I hate to break that up
before this because I do
understand.
The.
The deep into this was to be
able to help lots and lots and
lots of people my concern is for
it it's going to be a lot of
unfunded mandates
Funded depleted because we do
have a lot of agencies that are
already doing this why are they
this is a problem with some
state agencies.
Why aren't they meshing why are
they working together why do we
need to point that out that
we're all working together to
help people not be hungry in our
state.
Mr Chairman I'm gonna be quiet
Representative Stansbury like I
said I do understand the intent
of this but we've got some
problems here until the state
agencies.
Decide Hey we need to get our
heads out of you know where.
And stand up for what's right
for all New Mexico I don't think
we're going to see it happen
thank you very much thank you Mr
chairman if I could respond
briefly at the toll of COVID we
we do have some other folks on
the list to speak with questions
and and and and comments we have
how can be healed Representative
Allison Representative Brown so
how can be hill Europe
Representative.
You very much Mr chairman and
thank you Representative
Stansbury in for a for this bill
I'll try to be brief Mr chairman
so I deeply appreciate and
respect the are on Norma's
amount of work that is obviously
gone into this bill in the
amount of collaboration and and
cross communication I think this
is exactly what we need to kind
of you know begin unraveling
some of these systemic issues
that we have in our state I am
fiercely supportive of this work
in this collaboration but the
one concern I have
Representative can't Stansbury
goes back to the appropriation
issue you know when we had an
appropriation in the bill was
seven hundred fifty thousand
dollars and and even then for
all of this you know interagency
work and the establishment of
you know that the office to the
various offices to keep track of
the work and then the I. T.
that's going to be necessary and
the data collection all that
even then to be seven hundred
fifty did not sound like nearly
enough to kind of get where you
need to be with us so then you
know we have a new version of
the bill and there is no
appropriation but you did
reference junior funding so
might my first question is going
to be you know what is your
approach with junior how are you
going to provide further
collaboration to get at least
two that the number that you had
stated in the bill before and
what are your plans in the
future to ensure that this
offices is set up you're going
to need reoccurring funds.
Thank you Representative Hochman
so this bill doesn't create any
new office all it does and
actually I'm glad you asked this
question in relation to the last
set of questions so I think the
last set of questions was why do
we even need this at all why
aren't these agencies just doing
their jobs well that's our
purview this is exercising
oversight over the agencies and
saying Hey you're not solving
hunger and food system problems
we are requiring you to solve
these problems collaboratively
so this bill does not create a
new agency it doesn't Lujan
create and New set of offices
our responsibilities and that
way it's sane take what you've
done work with other agencies
and help solve these problems
and the whole point of this bill
and the reporting requirements
is to ensure that they are
making policy and budget
recommendations to the
legislature on an annual basis
so that they can get the funding
to implement the things that
they need that is the whole
point of the bill and part of
the reason is for those of you
who work on probation our act
budget is actually embedded in
higher ed we don't have a place
where we get to hear even during
the interim about the act needs
of our state and lastly gets you
know put in front of LFC or our
natural resources committee so
the entire point of this council
and the work of combining the
agencies is to highlight and
bring forward the policy and
budget needs of the agencies I
said at the beginning and all re
state that we rewrote sections
of the bill to ensure that that
duplication was addressed in the
bill and that we were saying
that we're incorporating
existing activities and my hope
is that with a little bit of
junior money will see how much
we can put together but I am
allocating my entire junior
budget to this and also asking
others to do so as well that
will have your when funding to
at least have a couple.
People who can start to compile
this work with respect to the
database the first
representative agency response
that was put forward on and the
database I think you know HSD
looked at in relation to other
databases that they had and put
forward kind of like here's the
best thing we could build will
department of ag already has a
database of much of the stuff
that's included in the database
it just doesn't include the
extra years that we
corporate so I think it'll be
very hopefully nominal and with
participation from our research
organizations and universities
in the nonprofit sector we can
build a really robust system so
we tried to write the bill so
it's scalable regardless of what
resources are available.
Thank you for that answer
Representative thank you Mr
chairman that concludes my
questions.
Thank you very much
Representative Hochman Vigil we
just have a Representative
Allison.
Given the forces.
Thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Representative
Stansbury and Representative
Ferrary or bring in the spill
and just like it was initially
mentioned this was not piecemeal
it interest as I read through
the bill it this is all
potential issues and
incorporated other people to
participate that improves the
notion that in order to have
proof of property work it is not
a spectator sport and that's
what this bill does and I was
glad to see that the the
assignments given to the other
agencies and departments they
all join together to make this
so.
Bill a reality for that I think
the Sanchez and I thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you very much
Representative Allison let's go
then out to Representative Brown
Representative Brown yet before
then.
Thank you Mr chairman and
representatives Stansbury and
and very so I I also appreciate
your bringing this bill
at first glance I have to be
honest with you I thought oh you
know I think you know there
might be some merit to this but
the more I read the bill.
Mr chair in the more I thought
about it I I began to really get
concerned about some of the
provisions and first of all it's
the pulling of the appropriation
that
That really bothers me I also
serve on the Appropriations
Committee and I kind of know how
that system works and to put a
bill like this out there and if
it gets enacted into law I can't
see how in the world of this
will be paid for so perhaps one
of the representatives Mr chair
could explain.
How it was initially thought
they needed to three quarters of
a million dollars for your one
and now there's no support and
how close realistically can
junior money
be amassed to come up with three
quarters of a million dollars
the words it my concern is Mr
chair that this is trying to set
up a counselor program without
sufficient funding.
Representative thank you Mr
chairman and thank you
Representative Brown I I would
like to you know just reiterate
what I said which is that we try
to redraft the sub so that it
was scalable so the effort was
scalable and I just want to
emphasize that the agencies are
already doing a lot of this work
it's just not being done in a
coordinated manner so the idea
behind this bill is really to
provide that legislative
oversight and directive so that
the agencies can actually
collaborate and and make
possible this work ideally
obviously we would love to have
millions of dollars of probation
but we're facing a fiscal
reality wherein you know those
funds are not currently
available so I'm you know we
will put forward and I am like I
said I'll come out all of my
junior funding to this bill and
work with our appropriations
folks and others to figure out
how to fund as much as we can
for year one so that's our
that's our goal.
Mr Chairman representative thank
you very much so
Mr chair and representative
Stansbury.
How many people do you estimates
would be serving on this council
it it's a pretty long list here
and it doesn't say it's limited
to one per group.
For example members should be
appointed to the council from
schools universities and other
educational institutions in the
west bank I can see more than a
hundred people serving on this
council what what do you
envision Mr chair representative
yeah.
Yes that's our working group so
the idea here is that and this
is to align the agencies and
make sure that the agencies are
talking to members of the public
and across our different sectors
so the idea here is just a
foster collaboration and and
name the different kinds of
entities that would be
interacting with the state and
their own planning.
So Mr Chairman representative so
this is already happening
without additional.
The work that work in the
nonprofit sector and the private
sector is already being convene
by us but the the idea here is
to create a durable framework in
statute to address hunger and
I'm actually really glad you
asked this question because I'm
work is been done many times at
different points in history by
different administrations and
different leaders and yet we
still have the highest rates of
childhood hunger in New Mexico
and part of the reason is is
that we don't have a durable
framework what happens is you
have a few passionate people
like myself and Representative
Ferrary and others to bring
people together for a short
period of time but there's not
sort of a sustained and
institutionalized efforts so the
whole point of the bill is to
institutionalize that work on
the state side in collaboration
with the nonprofit and the
private sector so that that work
continues long after any of us
are here and we're actually
solving the problems on the
ground.
Thank you Mr Chairman
representative so
for example would you be with
people are coming from all
corners of the state to serve on
this council is there any
provision here for mileage for
example are pretty and what that
would have for other
governmental commissions and
things like that.
It's not provided for in this
bill and we've been convening
now for over almost a year by
zoom and I am you know way it's
worked fine.
Mr chair representative so I'm
right.
Pretty in tune with my district
and already had no information
or notice about what you've been
working on all this time but I I
really do sense that
my constituents have been left
out of the conversation.
And I think what a lot of my
constituents would say is that.
They don't really trust standing
up another government program
that's going to turn into more
than just making recommendations
I think.
People want to.
Live their lives and first one
imported ranchers Porter ranch.
And we have a tremendous
community network where I lived
for providing food for people
who need it we have of course
the school lunch programs and
even during the pandemic I
believe our school system
provided for drive up to pick up
your meals a service and a lot
of people took advantage of that
we have seen your meal programs
a wonderful program called
backpacks for home hunger our
community can't chair and
shelters that provide food for
adults and children there's just
so much there that these are
these are champions in the
community and I see this bill as
somehow not intentionally but
taking away.
Their their hearts and service
because it's like saying well no
we needed a statewide program
and you'll go to you know come
answer got it inventory here we
got a check and you can see
four two point here about
monitoring food distribution in
creating more efficient systems
that I think that those are
those kinds of things of the
province of individuals and
families and small businesses
and large businesses and for the
government to say we're going to
superintend all of this I really
don't think that's that's what
people really want we want to
address hunger and again like I
said we have many programs and
not just in my community I know
they're everywhere.
So I'm concerned about that Mr
chair representative I'll try to
speed up your just a little bit.
If I think if I may just
continue to try to be quick.
So I I do want to know if
grocery stores and we've got
quite a few questions the state
if they were brought into these
discussions Mr chair and
representative Stansbury.
I don't know specific grocery
stores and there have been folks
from the private sector they do
grocery distribution that have
been involved in these
conversations.
Mr chair representative I
I think it's important in this
is where most people get their
food is from grocery stores
sadly a lot of get their food at
gas stations when I was growing
up when you went to a gas
station bought gas and maybe you
could buy a pack of gum or candy
bar but now it's chips and.
All those things that are really
not very healthy and so a lot
has changed but I want to go
next to something in the bill
that also because some concern.
And that is that the council
member page three starting at
one fifteen Mr chairman of the
council shall annually develop a
strategic plan that identifies
and assesses the infants causes
trends and effects of hunger
malnutrition and food and
household water in security Mr
Chairman representative
I think we already know the
answer to that I think I could
Google that on my phone and in
one second pull up a number of
studies that talk about the
causes of hunger in the effects
of malnutrition so any public
library for that matter would
have boxer reports on on this
very topic and to suggest that
the council should and we
develop a plan that identifies
and assesses I think I think
there's so much in this bill
that we already I think you know
about and so in some ways it's
it's not necessary that the
council do this certainly not
every year I don't think it it's
all that changeable but
certainly Mr chair
representative the pandemic did
up and Weiss's new it and you
know there may be some
additional things we saw there
but when the schools were shut
down.
Children didn't have access to
those hot meals unless they were
still allowed to kind of drive
by service that was one of the
most disruptive things for a lot
of the children and their
families and that's just going
on for a year now roughly and
it's just so unfortunate.
I'm Mr chair representative I
I'm also concerned that part of
your bill would violate the anti
donation clause of the state
constitution talking about here
in the bill that statewide
infrastructure needs to support
food processing distribution and
storage by agricultural
producers and food providers.
Mr Chairman representative is I
think we're all familiar with
the anti donation clause and
when the state resources are
given to private individuals for
work at all it's it's not
supported
in our constitution in this
category.
Mr chair and representative
So much in here is already
happening and I agree with
Representative Ezzell that there
are a lot of the existing state
and federal programs that are
already addressing the needs
that you're identifying in the
bill and so I do find that to be
deported.
Mr chair and representative I
said I'd speed up but I'm really
trying to do that R. I'll just
say this that.
This is a very very well
intentioned bill and there is
not a single legislator in at
the roundhouse who who wouldn't
who who would disagree with the
fact that we don't want anybody
to be hungry.
we we want everybody to have a
great life to be provided for by
their families and the community
can sometimes pitch in and help
and and that's that's a good
model for for communities I
think.
Another concern here Mister
chair representative is that's
just kind of the camel's nose
under the tent.
We're the bill talks about
agricultural practices and land
stewardship.
And to me that is that is
pointing to
Possible very likely
restrictions over private
property rights.
And I don't think farmers and
ranchers are landholders even
homeowners would want think that
the government is stepping in to
tell them how they can steward
their land our farmers and
ranchers.
Almost to a person very good
stewards of the land and they a
research this for a living this
is their livelihood they're very
careful about it.
So Mr chair representative right
I think this is really kind of
the kitchen sink double kitchen
sinks built it's it's massive
and it's all players are
pointing to more and more
government control yeah I just
think people want to be left
alone and live their lives.
And and not have the government
telling them the food they can
have or where to find it or how
does all those things I don't
think people want that.
So my suggestion.
Mr chair representative is that.
This should not be under the
color of law this idea about
this council on food and hunger.
And farm.
It it could certainly be a
summit.
Done perhaps annually or every
six months or so to address
these are on a voluntary basis
invite the agency's you Mr plus
that so many of them in here and
I think agencies to participate
and
continue doing the work you're
doing it's good work.
But let's not.
Let's not get the government too
much involved in this because
again they're already so many
programs out there.
That are addressing these
issues.
Mr chair yield.
Representative Brown thank you
very much Representative Zamora.
Thank you Mr chair and that
thank you Representative
Stansbury in.
M. Ferrari Representative
Ferrary and.
Were there others that brought
this bill forward.
Thank you for bringing the bill
forward
This is when I when I read all
three different versions for
Ford or versions of the bill.
My my impression of it was.
That it was so brought.
That it didn't it didn't
address.
one certain problem.
And.
It reminded me of a time as a
freshman representative that I
walked over to the Senate side.
And I was standing in the
doorway watching the Senate do
their work.
And one of the Senator stood up
and and the.
He said here's another bill four
we do another study.
And we study things to death
here and yet we don't address
any problems that we want to
address because we're so busy
studying that and talking about
it.
And then.
In the yes Mr chair and
representative in the testimony
that we heard today.
We we were asked.
The past this bill.
Because we needed another study
because we weren't getting
things done in the state.
And.
It just and I know that's our
job as representatives here in
Santa Fe and stuff is is just
say the studies and to
understand and learn from but
then that's what the beauty is
of the of the legislature is
that you have people that are
experts in certain parts of the
the state in certain industries
and and lawyers to do the laws
of farmers and ranchers to
represent that community.
And then you you saying.
Somebody stepping up to the
plate trying to tell farmers.
And the act community what to do
and you wonder how much does
this person understand farming.
And and what are they get.
One of the ones that really.
Came out to me and I thought
what in the world is for we talk
on page four.
About seed saving.
What in the world is that what
what are we gonna dressed in
suits saving and if if we if if
we understand that.
And and I don't.
I consider myself an expert or
some or anything in it I was
born on a farm raised on a farm
farm all my life.
Then my wife decided to sell our
farm at the end of this year.
for multiple reasons that I
don't I will go into but.
When you've been farming all
your life and somebody tells you
that they're gonna start program
state saving.
You wonder what what are they
talking about because maybe they
don't understand all the complex
is the complex and sees about
saving stayed and how it gets
distributed out distributed out.
They understand what a hybrid
plants into they understand how
genetics work and seeds and they
understand what we look for in
the seed to date whether we're
talking about order cotton or
alfalfa.
Do they understand.
What the seed companies are
doing.
In the genetically modified
industry.
We're.
We can't do it here in the state
we don't have the technology to
do it and it's so important to
do those things today so.
And then.
I take it back to the beginning
we're gonna have a farm Council.
But we're gonna have.
The hunger farm Act to tell.
The council to tell other state
agencies.
What to do and and to me.
It goes back to some of the
testimony we heard from some of
the people on the committee.
And and I just.
I love what you're trying to do
but but I see a committee of
committees to tell committees
what to do.
And I think what what you're
doing.
Is this great work
Melanie every time I see you
work and talk I see your your
heart go into a hundred and ten
percent.
But this is gonna be a bill that
I will not support.
But not with the intention to.
Lose any of the support for the
Ag community in the state of New
Mexico.
That's those are not my
intentions by not supporting
this bill.
I don't want our constituents to
think that would in support of
a of a bill that would support
act it's that I don't support
the structure of the of the bill
and and and how broad it is and
how it has so many shells in it.
For the state agencies and other
other people in the state I just
I just.
Can help you support this bill
Melanie Representative Stansbury
I mean
sorry Mr chair.
And I hope that community.
Understands that we as
representatives of if there's a
certain agency that we don't
feel like doing their job maybe
we can go to that agency here or
the sector that agency and and
find out what the problems are
we can address them in a more
In point manner or we can we can
help those agencies and the
people across the state.
And the.
Thank you Mr for let me make
that statement and and thank you
Representative Stansbury and
representative for our.
Representative once you make
your points are well taken thank
you for your comments afternoon
Mister chair.
Act quickly.
Right.
Mr chair can I respond to that
quickly quickly repair sure the
whole beauty of this bill is
because it took the years of a
coordination of people who were
working on a state yes to our
small farmers like you you know
of agriculture the.
From the AG's Department
bringing all these people
together brought the ideas even
while we were going through the
pandemic there were there was
problem solving going on that
people were going and doing with
the departments already but by
bringing their voices from ad
from ranching from you know the
food banks from the distributors
you know and and looking at the
whole.
Get your act in security we want
this to be able to be coupled
with the different agencies so
that that problem solving can
happen year round not just when
we go to make legislation or
during the interim committees we
want this to happen throughout
the years because that's where
problems will be solved well
legislation can be
supported or introduced that's
what it needs to be something
that's not just once in a while
we are ready such as in
Representative grounds District
there's food insecurity that's
higher than the state average
and it's a twenty one percent of
kids in Eddy county are food
insecure and even their local
with even their local efforts we
need to make sure that we can
resolve these problems on a
continual basis and with the
support of the agencies Inc that
are responsible for it also to
work with those groups so thank
you Representative and Mr chair
thank you very much
Representative Ferrary present
as well thank you Mr chairman I
move a do pass on the house
agriculture water Committee
substitute for house bill two
zero seven.
What made by Representative all
of the second.
Hello I.
Bill let's go ahead
Representative madam speaker
excuse me it's call the roll.
Chairman.
This clarify is it a to pass on
the committee order.
You I I do believe that
Representative.
Make the most of it on the
committees but perhaps we should
go forward representatives also
if you want to amend your motion
to a do not pass on house tool
seven.
That's it I apologize Mr
chairman thank you so much and
thank you the committee subs
secretary I move a do not house
on house bill two zero seven but
a do and I do pass on the house
agriculture water Committee
substitute for house bill two
zero seven.
Representative Paul and I
imagine present healthful second
yes yes well thank you madam
secretary all rural thank you
again.
Allison yes Representative Brown
yes I'd like to explain my vote.
Representative Ezzell.
What I would like to explain my
vote.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Yes.
Representative Matthews.
Yes.
Representative small.
Yes.
Representative Zamora.
No.
Vice chair Herrerra.
Yes and I would like to explain
my the.
Chairman.
Yes and I would not like to
commend both.
But that's going on here is that
to want to spend their whole
screen Representative Brown
schools thank you Mr chairman
and members of the committee and
everyone who's listening so just
want to make it very clear that
I am concerned like every other
state Representative about of
the problem with hunger in our
state.
oftentimes
We see problems like this
because of bad choices that some
people make of drug addiction
leading to neglect of children.
joblessness and certainly
there's been so much of that
businesses closing people unable
to pay their bills.
not having a dad in the home we
we we know a lot of the reasons
for for when things go wrong and
we want again every child to
have a wonderful wife so I am
not disputing the effort to
combat hunger.
I am concerned that this would
be proposing to stand up the
council that does not have any
funding and will not have enough
funding even if some of
legislators are kind enough to
put in their junior money or
capital outlay whatever they do.
it doesn't make sense long term
when we know that this would be
need to be a recurring
appropriation and again there's
zero appropriation at this
point.
And I don't believe it's wise to
start something big and not be
able to carry through with that
that delicious people's hopes
and is just not productive and
so my suggestion Mr chair it
again is that another webi found
to do this but again I.
I do believe that no child
should go hungry no person
should go hunger hungry and and
everybody should be part of the
solution and that and so I thank
you Mr chair.
Thank you Representative Brown
representatives out in about.
Thank you very much and before
everybody starts right me nasty
emails or phone and then tell me
funded awful person I am for
not.
Helping people that don't have
enough they do the reason I am
voting no on this.
Is because of the unfunded
mandates that will be will be
coming because what what we're
doing here we're creating a
monster agency here.
And we'd like I said earlier
whenever I was asking questions
or making statements vote that
way.
Mr Chairman.
And representative
Representative this bill today.
Whenever we have state agencies
that are communicate with each
other.
To put an end to hunger in our
state there is a problem but
whenever you go to put too many
in there everything gets muddied
in these waters and so therefore
like I said.
The intent the job we're trying
to do here I applaud one hundred
percent don't get me wrong.
But it's it's the and funded
mandates and the monster agency
is being created for nothing
will be accomplished Mr chairman
thank you very much.
Hello thank you very much
Representative Herrera the thing
about.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
representatives for bringing
this bill to the committee I to
have real problems with the both
the size and the scope of the of
the project to be accomplished
and and no money to do it
I know this group I'm pretty
sure you guys for the group that
put together the five million
for food banks in the special
session and and that was such a
good and noble use of
legislation and I was so happy
to be part of that so I you know
I I too wish are they you take
another look at this you know
Margaret Mead is said you know
you get five good people in
rural and now you can use solve
most problems and I'm just
worried about the scope of the
latitude and that everybody
involved in and it's a lot of
work that I I hate you know if
we would feed the hungry maybe
better maybe we ought to make
sure our food banks work in a in
a like you made sure they worked
through this pandemic so I just
I just want to say that I voted
for it because support this
effort but I too am worried
about the scope and size of the
project thank you Mr chair thank
you Representative for women so
Representative Stansbury
Representative Ferrary by a vote
of seventy provided to the
negative you have to pass on
our.
This
is made to house bill two oh
seven thank you very much for
your after the tone and thank
you all in the public service
for your time this afternoon and
we will do everybody thank you
Robert we'll see what on to
think for a couple more bills we
had you are doing thank you all
enjoy the weekend.
Mr chair thank you Mr chairman
osprey at at Mr what was the
vote again are we sure that's
right.
To.
We have seven to three or six to
three or.
the committee.
On that night and that was my
fault I apologize I have
Representative Brown as a test.
That's accurate
thank you.
So I had Representative Ezzell
is a no and representatives of
one at as of now.
Representative Brown was a no
okay sorry Representative Brown.
Mr Chairman.
Yes.
With speaking.
Sorry Mr chairman this is rob
this is our Representative
small.
I don't.
I I thought that the vote had
been called.
And if we go back to obviously
these meetings are recorded Mr
chairman there is a do pass
regardless but as I I thank the
recording of the meeting would
reflect.
what are committee secretary
reported to you.
Representative all your point is
well taken we will have the
secretary go back to the
recording and report out the way
that the vote was taken during
the time of the vote this call
that as as I heard again and I
could be wrong I had seven as
amended to help
if the recording.
It will be effective at what.
Mr Chairman
Pretty sure it was of no and if
it didn't.
Come out that way it was meant
to be a no and that's one of the
reasons I explain my vote so
just to let you know I would
like the
the voters I intended it to be
the one that is recorded thank
you okay okay all right
Representative Brown.
Representative health yep.
I got you.
I was doing was re showing you
in the committee can but where
that is and Representative
Representative Brown does have
the right to ensure that her but
was the way that she a rich what
she wanted it thank and that
that we can.
Absolutely okay no worries we'll
wait Representative Brown.
The more of those out and so
that being said I appreciate one
month after we'll see everyone
again on Tuesday and Wednesday
in the well I can Mr chair thank
you Mr chairman all right bye
bye.
By leaving.
