Representative all right here
we go across now.
Yes.
Representative Rubio and we
will.
Representative.
Our.
Roybal Caballero.
Here Akan.
Is here.
Excuse me Mr Chairman I I just
got to check out the season the
panel body I up graded yet Sir.
The body up right Representative
there us us.
Yes.
Okay Mr chair.
Yes Sir.
Thank you.
It just wasn't graduated to a
analyst.
Okay we got lost okay so we're
ready to go then.
Not today should be very simple
like that and you heard me on
the floor we've heard these
bills what we stated that Ms.
you madam vice chair being that
my name on the top of these
bills I'm going to ask you to a
chair.
Thank you Mr chair.
Thank you to the members of the
committee and so today we're
going to hear what we've heard
and seen as the chair mention on
the floor about ten times now
House joint memorial six so
whenever you're ready.
Thank.
Thank you madam vice your and
the it is a house joint
resolution I'm sorry.
By okay now house joint
resolution is the one resolution
that we got through here last
year made it all the way through
the house made it all the way
you said that
Senate Judiciary.
And it came to a halt.
This is proposing the amendment
that allows
Disabled veterans they get a
hundred percent disability you
have there a we have the amount
of money that they have the
other taxes are graduated bases
would right now is a one hundred
percent disabled veteran might
back myself just not pay taxes
on the status.
Now.
That's where it is a veteran
that has an eighty percent
disability or sixty percent
disability gets no disco.
Gets no break on their taxes so
with this pass this resolution
sentiment to the voters the
voters allow us we could not.
Allow our veterans that are not
a hundred percent disabled with
the get some kind of help with
their properties for their taxes
under.
So with that madam chair I will
stand for questions.
Thank you Mr chair do you have
anybody what's going to be
speaking with you I don't have
anybody thank you have everybody
does I have a lot of people that
are panelists are ready to speak
up.
No one with me.
Okay
thank you Mr chair so right now
I again to the I can be.
And I'd like for the attendees
to
how do they do this right hand
if you're going to speak on that
the our house joint.
Solution number six.
And as you raise your hands and
I'll be all those that are going
to speak for on in favor of
we're gonna start with in favor
up.
Raise your hands please.
Well we're still coming from any
given another funeral.
Okay so we've we've got a good
start I see several other names
so if you're here for house
joint resolution number six just
keep your hands right.
And I'm gonna call you in that
order so on those in the
attendees who are in favor will
begin with Mr Gary Williams.
There you go Mr Gary Williams go
ahead and.
Thank you madam chair of co
chair my name again is Gerry
Williams I serve as the
associate state director for
community outreach for A. R. P.
New Mexico I am proud to say
also that I'm an airforce
veteran I come today with great
pride in saying that A. R. P.
New Mexico stands in support of
house resolution six and we
would like to thank the sponsor
Representative or call up for
his diligence on bringing this
bill back to be considered thank
you very much of Madam culture.
Thank you Mr Williams.
New Mexico on the attendees list
we have Mister Steve Hogan.
Whenever you're ready Mr Hogan
okay thank you
About acting chair thank you for
the opportunity to attend the
meeting and the Representative
Alcona thank you for sponsoring
this house joint resolution I'm
a thirty year veteran of the
United States Air Force and I
would and very much in support
of this bill thank you.
Thank you Mr Harmon.
And our next on the list but
their hands up for merry merry
and Martin bagels.
Whenever you're ready yourself
please.
Thank you madam chair and to the
rest of the members of the
veterans of the military and
veterans association I am master
sergeant retired one thing I
also retired two years ago from
New Mexico Army National Guard
after thirty seven years I have
a combined service with the
active duty the National Guard
deployed to operation desert
shield desert storm in nineteen
ninety and ninety one what the
transportation company out of
Las Vegas New Mexico and again
in two thousand three with the
same transportation company on
Las Vegas New Mexico for twenty
two months of the theater of
operations in Iraq I currently
serve as a legislative chair for
the military veterans leadership
council.
and also as the legislative
chair for the innocent
Association of the New Mexico
army and Air National Guard I
speak on behalf of the following
organizations the military
officers association of America.
The VFW.
The association of the United
States Air Force the navy league
the marine league the
association of the United States
Army the list of association of
the New Mexico Army National
army and Air National Guard
disablement American veterans
and the American Legion and the
order of the Purple Heart in New
Mexico it we would like to
express our appreciation for
these house join house
resolution to be presented
before the committee and we
highly recommend their passage
thank you.
Thank you very much Mr.
And next we have on the list
Wanda Morrison.
The
next one that Morrison very
well.
You may start whenever you're
ready.
You need yourself Mr Morrison.
more simply you on mute
yourself.
We're still not hearing now.
I'm sure you're calling on me.
No I'm calling on the last I
believe the last the person to
give testimony but apparently
they're not able to on all she's
raising I can
see your hand I called on you
but you need to unmute yourself.
Thank you Representative black.
We're still not hearing you miss
Morris and.
Okay so I'm going to.
Passover right now miss Morrison
and go to Richard moody.
Whenever you're ready Mr Moti.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the community
Committee my name is Richard
moody I'm a member of the
Democratic Party of New Mexicos
veterans and military family
caucus I appreciate the
opportunity to speak today
the the two house joint
resolutions before your
committee or both very important
veterans and will encourage more
veterans to move to New Mexico
or stay here are already
stationed here so the caucus
strongly supports the passage of
these two of bills and thank you
for your time.
Thank you very much good morning
and I want to ask one more time
if there are any other persons
wishing to speak in favor of
house joint resolution thank.
I don't see any other are there
any of the attendees who wish to
speak in opposition the house
joint resolutions.
I see none so thank you for
those that gave testimony I will
now go to the committee and the
first on the list was
Representative black.
Thank you madam chair and Mr
chairman for bringing this up
this joint resolution again I'm
I just wanted to clarify really
quickly
This so we're we're talking
about house joint resolution
number six right now my am I the
right one okay.
Sure I was not the right one
thank you for that okay so
currently
of veterans that are hundred
percent disabled received a
hundred percent exemption from
the property taxes once they
submit that paperwork to their
county assessors
the only issue that I see with
this and I've and I signed on to
support this because I think it
is important that we we do treat
our veterans fairly I'm.
Currently any other veteran
would qualify for the four
thousand dollar exemption which
is referred to in the next
memorial that we're gonna talk
about I'm.
So even better is eighty percent
disabled and not a hundred
percent they would currently be
able to get the force that the
four thousand and the two
thousand head of household which
would be equivalent to the six
that two six thousand dollar
exemption but what this would do
was is this what actually do a
sliding scale I'm and the only I
think it should go to the voters
I really do I I do support the
measure the only technical
logistical issue that I could
see with it is how often that
the VA maybe change or update a
veterans up.
Disability status Mr chairman
madam chair do you are you aware
of how often that takes place.
I get really Dr Christian that's
very and so Representative black
I mean I started at twenty
percent disability it took me
almost almost almost thirty
years to get would be a hundred
percent so it would for the I
believe was twenty eight of the
forty and then I stayed at sixty
four years and years and years
on July I really finally one day
they decided that that sixty was
not good enough and I would some
sixty all the way to a hundred
so just the status comes along
the the proper paperwork should
be established but better that's
New Mexico veterans out.
To establish the proper form sh
that they better and can I less
as a disability rating climbs.
Okay well thank you for thank
you for that Mr chairman and
madam chairman those are the
only the only things that I
wanted to try to briefly touch
on thank you so much.
Representative are there any
other questions from the
committee or comments.
I don't see any so what is the
wish of the committee
Representative Baca.
All.
Thank you madam chair and the
chair I would also support I
think that anything we can do
for veterans and those who have
bravely served our country
that we need to to help them out
as well and I would make a
motion for a do pass on this
house joint resolution.
Representative phone call.
second.
So thank you Representative back
a we have a motion of your past
motion and a second by
Representative Baca and the
second by Representative what
Mr secretary if you would well
let me ask you this when we do
it this way is there any
opposition to this bill.
Any opposition to the bill.
Thank you no opposition Mr chair
you have passage of house joint
resolution six and so we can go
ahead and move onto your next
presentation thank you madam
chair thank you members of the
committee I hope we have better
left it last year.
All madam chair are you ready
for me to continue yes sorry I'm
sorry go ahead
You see what happens when you
give me the floor I don't it.
Okay again the we're going to go
to a house joint resolution
seven I do have the right
numbers our house joint
resolution seven was the one
Representative the black was
that discussing earlier as you
can probably tell we tell.
Us more about it than I again
what it is is at this time a
member or somebody that was
served in the military John
forces gets a four thousand
dollar property the the.
The four thousand dollar
deduction on the valuation of
their property.
Now this has been in effect I
believe since nineteen eighty to
four thousand dollars I am
asking that we bring this up
through.
The knowledge days because I
mean honestly it since nineteen
eighty the that you all just
risen considerably and that four
thousand dollars just really
really not effective.
But this year I have added it to
where it goes along with it
hello and other words there's a
cost to federal faster level it
does then then the county
assessors will adjust according
to whatever out the Cola through
the federal government comes up
to another page like this year
do you receive that's on social
security receive to five point
nine percent the cost of living
increase so this bill would be
done effect last year if it
would have passed the Senate
instead of sitting on the Senate
floor.
R. right now a veteran would
have that didn't thousand plus
the five point nine percent
Reduction on their taxes so that
madam chair again I heard I
think you heard me mention this
this building is all the way
through the house you're good to
committees of the Senate at it
died on the Senate floor last
year so with that madam chair I
will stand for questions.
we're going to go back to the
attendees.
You would raise your hand if you
get to speak in favor of house
joint resolution seven.
Make a few minutes and I'll
watch hands go up.
Yes right hander to be here to
support speak in favor of house
joint resolution seven.
Okay.
I'm gonna go ahead and call on
Mister Gerry Williams to get.
Thank you again madam thank you
again madam co chair it is not
for me as a veteran to come to
us for passage of this
constitutional amendment to take
to the people of the state of
New Mexico I along with other
veterans who are homeowners
greatly benefit from the tax
great that we received as a
result of the consideration of
the state of New Mexicos people
so as a representative a or P.
New Mexico we stand in strong
support of this
this bill and anything that we
can do to assess we're here to
do so thank you very much of
Madam co chair.
Thank you Mr Williams.
And again I call on being right
goals.
Mr mapping most you may want to
undo it thank you
okay hearing yes now we do thank
you madam chair and to the rest
of the committee members
attending
as the legislative chair for the
military veterans leadership
council and also by
represent a lot of younger
members serving in the military
who are actually getting in to
and becoming a first time home
homeowners here in the state of
New Mexico this particular
legislation would go a long way
in helping these new homeowners
to alleviate the the you know in
regards to what they have to pay
and in regards to taxes and
stuff and it also becomes
attractive as a benefit to
individuals in the military and
also those who have been long
time phone numbers like myself.
We appreciate that this
legislation has been introduced
and as the villager as the
military veterans leadership
council we support this
legislation and hope that the
committee does give it a pass
thank you very much.
Thank you and our next on the
list we have received program.
Already had Mr Hogan.
Thank you madam acting chair and
the.
Representative al cone I
appreciate the opportunity once
again to just pay the
legislative process in your
community.
As a veteran of the United
States airforce was elected to
continue my residence here in
New Mexico I very much
appreciate the fact that you.
Consider the impact of the bills
on backroom and well I do
appreciate the exception that we
have now I'm very much in favor
of the increase that you're
proposing thank you.
Thank you.
And our next we have again Mr
Richard moody.
Thank you madam chair and the
rest of the committee for
allowing us to speak in support
of this bill today
The New Mexico veterans and
military families caucus
strongly supports of this bill
it apparently approximately
sixty eight percent of.
Veterans qualified for this
homeowner's tax exemption and it
would greatly benefit those
veterans living in New Mexico to
have the exemption range from
four thousand to ten thousand
and indexed to cost of living so
we strongly support passage of
this bill thank you ma'am thank
you for your time.
Thank you.
Are there any attendees who
would like to speak in
opposition to this bill the
Senate joint resolution seven.
Any opposition.
Okay.
now but I see Representative are
black you may go ahead.
Thank you madam chair Mister
chairman for bringing this.
House.
Resolution I did as well sign on
this one just to give the
committee a kind of an idea in
my County the four thousand
dollar
current.
Exemption equates to about a
hundred dollars off on a
interventions tax bill so it
saves them roughly a hundred
dollars a year I'm so.
I think in reality and in the
big picture of things that's
really not that much I'm that we
are giving these people so I
think it is a time that we that
we do increase it up to the ten
thousand so thank you Mr
chairman and madam chair and
I'm.
You're ready okay I do have a
question on Representative.
Black in your have you figure
how much of a difference that
would make in your county
raising it to ten thousand
dollars I have not I have not.
Sorry well you but.
Thank you and can you brought up
a point is this is a joint
resolution
Don't wait
And so.
I'm just wondering if we're
doing and representative I'm
gonna get my question
we doing enough at this time.
We can always do more but.
You madam chair we could always
do more but I mean I think we're
going to have to go up but we
got.
Well you know it constitutional
amendments takes so much effort
that's why of I just thought
about that but anyway
Any other questions from any
other committee members.
Then.
a motion.
Representative black asked step
up and make the motion public
sector motion Representative
black.
Yes madam chair I I'd like to
make a motion to do fast.
On house joint resolution
arsenal circular.
Okay Representative second that
madam chair.
You so we have a motion for do
pass made by Representative
black and seconded by
Representative devices.
And
madam secretary will you call
the roll well let me ask again.
I'm so conditioned to call the
roll is there any opposition
from many committee members on
this bill.
Any opposition.
Any opposition all right seen no
opposition and Mr chair you have
been passed on house joint
resolution seven.
Thank you
madam chair thank you members of
the committee wish me luck I
hope you have better luck last
year we flew get this bill all
with the set up for it and not
go through is just heartbreaking
but what can I say.
Okay madam vice chair a I am
done with my bills okay excuse
me.
So I do do we have any other we
don't have any other business
we have
to I think we can call the
caller today here and be ready
for Tuesday.
Tuesday we will have a lot of
bills.
Mr chairman I would like to
offer my assistance if you are
when you go to the Senate if you
need me anyhow I just let me
know thank you thank you very
much welcome back yes that
anything we can all do please do
it again hi dear this is just
been going on too long and as
the chair mentioned we would
have been a lot by their long
had passed given the conditions
that we're faced with some I
thank you all for attending
today and we will see everybody
on Tuesday we are hereby thanks
for today thank you so much.
Thank you everybody.
Share madam chair thank you so
much everybody I yield.
