Thank you good morning.
Thank you Representative for
bringing this bill all of all
the representatives but I think
this is
a very worthwhile efforts and.
Thank you so much for their
community and our safety this is
such a small.
One of showing our thanks and I
I think that's huge I I agree
with the amendment that that you
guys are are going to push
through our add to it on the way
to tax hopefully
Thank you have a couple
questions
in the D. O. T. analysis and and
secretary church may be able to
answer some of these if you're
not able to Representative.
We have an interest do we know
about what.
The the state pays for annual
maintenance sign.
And I only bring this up because
on page two of the June T..
Analysis.
He says the state's going to
have to take over the regular
maintenance and repair
replacement and I'm I'm curious
of if we know about one an
annual cost per sign ins for
stuff like this what's the
average life of the sign I mean
is this this to me it would seem
an inconsequential but I'm
curious.
I'd have to let
Mr church answer that.
Madam chair thank you if
Representative Pettigrew
Representative full will drop
I I if there's someone on from
the D. O. T. that that can
answer this of the fire and
generally in the past these
signs brought about a thousand
dollars.
For aside board
which usually includes the
installation and all of that
I now like the historical
markers that are out there
throughout the state they
usually get rotated and repaired
on the.
Kind of a I I would say probably
a ten year basis or something
generally signs last pretty long
as long as they're not hit by a
car or or some other some other
type of accident so that they're
usually a metal sign blanket
that has vinyl laminate on that
it's so so I would assume that
you know you probably get a good
five to ten years out of the
sign.
And I appreciate that what one
of the things I want to
accomplish with the questions
just to alleviate any concerns
out there that this is going to
be a huge cost to the DOT and
and because this is so
important.
Another one hundred and
administrative to the
implications the the yes she
would need to develop
administrative procedures for
approving signs and placement no
proof signs and may need to
amend relevant highway signage
rules policies for the phone I.
Madam chair representative and
again meaning secretary church.
You know with with my
involvement what I do feel like
those rules are already in place
there may be some minor
adjustments needed for the most
part just about everything is
already in place would you agree
with that I'm madam chair and
representative that's where the
amendment that I mentioned
command was simply go put it
under an existing program.
That's already in place and so
I'll have the amendment because
we just talked about this
yesterday and it was.
Certainly passed a twenty four
hour requirement but the
they already have a program with
the they I'm have signage and
this will have to also be
approved by their
The highway commissioners that
are in that the governor that
ARE okay and so we'll have to
follow the to use rules and they
gave me an estimate it calls in
reference to your other question
of about twelve hundred dollars
a year which would probably take
care of the design of the signs
and the maintenance any
maintenance that would would be
be needed because like the
By Tom church said.
The last for ever unless you
know some unforeseen incident
takes place.
And so I would just you know the
amendment will put in place so
that we don't have to go back
and change any laws.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative that's again
I'm I'm trying to to just okay I
want to get rid of anybody's
concerns with respect to
this being becoming an issue or
something that this gonna create
And that this can create a
situation that would make
somebody will not want to
support this cause again this is
this is critical to me.
Lasses Representative but you
might also realize that this is.
Probably locally you know and so
I just think that the size we
have been working with DOT all
these years that I have that
once the sun is out there you
know it's it's it affords
everybody that in that community
with that area to participate
and I have a feeling the signs
of really be baby so they'll be
well taken care of because of
how the law enforcement
community our works as well as
it's it's donated.
By a family member.
Yes I think that will provide
all across the state the Madam
chair representative that the
the families probably not enough
stuff for a very often there's
going to be community people
that step in and say Hey we we
want to do this for our fallen
officers.
Madam chair and representative
of my last question under
conflict and duplication again
this is from the DOT analysis to
further the MUTCD where would
likely preventive solutions
trust funds on highways but part
of the interstate highway system
and and the.
Madam chair representative and
again maybe secretary church I
have found that that we've we
have memorials we've had
different things could have.
Alright on the interstate
highway system and mainly
because we have some state
funding involved with that so we
do get some ability to do that
with them and am I remembering
correctly
is that accurate thank you madam
chair representative.
Representative I'd have to let
church.
Answer that.
Because I don't know.
Madam chair representative is
again if there's someone on the
DOT that that has a better
answer jump in
my eight my understanding is is
you know as long as the fall of
the MUTCD guidelines which are
pretty much a national standard
that includes the spacing of
science at various levels so
that they don't interfere or
conflict with traffic signs you
know directional type signs
there's also are you know Google
Keller coding
system out there are you know
for example there's there's
browsing for historical type
things and you know various
different colors that that that
are used throughout the system
again the the representatives
bill allows or requires that the
they DO to you create the
template which I think was a
very smart move in terms of you
know that it that it does follow
the MUTCD because that that is
the the national guidance on
that and in so doing that then I
guess it would you know it would
open it up to you know just
depending on if there are
conflicts and in both distance
if I ways been renamed things
like that my research and doing
the analysis is that most states
do have some sort of a program
like this they're very active
across the country and so it's
very possible to get this done I
did find that a lot of
municipalities who who have
maybe less restrictions on on
roadway signage and dedication
there are there are a lot of
throughout the country that were
involving local jurisdictions as
well this is is very common
throughout the country I I did
not see anything in the
representatives bill that would
create a call on.
Flicked of getting this done
the D. W. Y. memorial program
the representative Patrol covert
as mentioned this is an existing
program that allows families of
people who were killed yeah
victims of of D. W. lies to to
have the side placed you see
those commonly throughout the
state and so I believe that the
amendment would most likely
compliment that program and
given other means again
Representative Crowder as you
mentioned to not duplicating the
rules or anything that's already
in place.
Now.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative and thank you
secretary
that that's really all the
questions I have I just wanted
to to try and do my part to make
sure we we we get remaining
concerns with respect to this
bill I I I think it's worthwhile
and and I think that the the
ones on the interstate with you
know just as much as we have
with the with the state police
that the drive up and down our
two main interstates
We have one
Died not too long ago on also by
ten and I think that this would
be perfect.
memorials there as well so
something to do for for that
person in that family so
Madam chair representative thank
you for bringing this bill and I
look forward to supporting are
you about.
Thank you thank you
Representative on next we have
Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair.
What I just about just will
gentle lady yield but I'll have
to do that in this meeting your
so
Good morning Representative
they want to circle back and ask
a question regarding
on page two line to.
This partnership accept
donations of.
Instead of four and which is
something that Representative
Garrett mention before the
meeting started.
Okay I I I pretty much
understood it.
We're gonna donate what it says
of then you're going to you're
gonna donate assigned.
But if if you change that to for
the new would donate money.
In in the transportation
department I I heard you state
in your comments we would
collect that money for that
sign.
In some really stumbling over
that night and I appreciate
Representative Garrett bring
that up.
But just so that I will
understand the process.
Our our is the intent of your
bill to have that D. O. T.
create the template the size how
they want the signs.
And then the individual would go
to their local sign maker get
assigned made according to the
DOT specifications and donate
that sign to DOT or do they
donate funds to DOTA and DOTA
gets the sign right I'm just
trying to clarify the process
the gentle lady I'm madam madam
chair and F. and Representative
the money would come from the
community.
And those dollars would go to
this particular fund because one
of the things that was very
important to the offices of
brought this fourth was
consistency.
And one of the things that you
know we all realize
from printer to printer thanks
could change the line could be a
little wider or the print could
be a little bit different so
they will raise the funds within
that community.
And like I said the commission
or the commission member from
that area.
They have to approve it is well.
That dollars go to the O. T.
and they will take it from there
but it was very important to
have consistency so that the
signs across the state will look
the same and the only way I
believe that that can happen and
discussing that with that was
Franklin from the D. O. T..
Is that it's they they set the
specifications.
And everything will be the same
our offices throughout the state
and some if you want to chime
into then I'm fine but that's
what the intent of the
legislation well in in the
Representative I I appreciate
that I I do believe after
hearing your explanation we need
to change that from of two four
they're gonna donate for the
officer sites.
Okay this is that that means
they're going to actually give
the sign in and so I I agree
Representative Garrett the card
argue with an English teacher so
thank you.
Thank you both.
Madam chair I I noticed that our
colleague has your hand raised
and she can straighten out
whatever of best staffs
I appreciate it thank you.
Thank you Representative Crowder
and Representative here I don't
did you have an additional
question and now are now madam
chairman and representative
Representative Crowder
thoroughly said everything that
I had to say.
Thank you right.
Thank you Representative Crowder
do you have any more questions.
No madam chair I yield back time
thank you.
Thank you Representative is
there anyone else on the
committee who would like to have
some questions.
I'm seeing none can I entertain
a motion.
Any Russian it would move this
forward with the agreement that
the gentle lady will change the
word online to page two from of
to for and legislative
amendments to clarify her other
issues when it comes to the
house floor okay.
Okay so we have a.
The motion from Representative
Crowder in the second from
Representative Pettigrew is
there any opposition to this
legislation.
I see shaking now so
Representative Powdrell Culbert
you do have a due pass on house
bill two seventy five thank you
all very much.
You're very very welcome.
next we have a house bill one
seventy two Representative black
I believe she I saw her in the
attendees so we'll promoter to
panels so your.
I.
Please yeah it's cool enough
point.
Off of that with the elements
which I.
Sh.
They receive funding in twenty
the project is a lot.
Good morning Representative do
you have any any experts or
anyone that you wanted to bring
up on I don't know if
Representative tries this is on
a used by co sponsor I don't
know if you got I know he was
make a flight this morning yeah
I don't think he's on okay okay
well we're gonna we're gonna run
with it and hopefully I have all
your answers.
Sounds great so Representative
when you're ready go ahead I'm
madam chair I do propose an
amendment and and I'm I was told
that that was that information
was disseminated to that to the
committee is that correct so yes
we grew on how how I go about
the amendment process sorry no
thank you Representative no so
we have if you could just read
your two oh two number so that
everybody has the correct one
and we don't have any questions
about that and then we can have
someone from the committee move
the move the amendment for
discussion and then.
and then we can go from there
okay I'm so of the amendment
number is two one nine seven
nine one dot one.
Madam chair I make motion for
the amendment of the amendment.
Thank you thank you
Representative Pettigrew and
Representative Garrett for the
second and Representative black
if you just want to describe
with the amendment is and then
we can open it up for discussion
okay you madam chair thank you
I'm not sure if we do that the
amendment is just to change the
effective date in the original
legislation it did not have an
effective date listed so it
would have been sooner rather
than later so this actually this
amendment moves it out to the
starting with the effective date
would be January first of twenty
twenty two.
Great
I'm for the committee are there
any questions regarding the
amendment.
Is there any opposition to
moving the amendment.
We are now Representative
Garrett I move the adoption of
the amendment is that correct
Representative Harper.
Representative Garrett is also
active
thank you thank you
Representative Harper and so
we're now on the bill with the
with the amendment amended bill
is there are there any questions
real regarding the bill itself
as amended.
I'll I'll send it out to the
attendees to see I know that
there was some folks who might
want to speak in support if
folks want to raise their hands
if used in support of
Representative blacks Bill.
Our.
Is there any opposition.
We have Karen what lock if you
could please
if you can
will go ahead and meet you.
Go ahead.
With the national association of
social workers New Mexico
chapter and we stand in
opposition to this bill because
we believe that it would provide
a lot of information to it would
be somebody else would be
responsible for giving up
another person's personal
information and we have a
problem with that in addition
we're not sure there's a problem
here because we spoken to law
enforcement and emergency
response and they have indicated
that they don't think that
they've not been able to find
somebody
we're on a regular basis you
know they have one or two in
their career and usually that's
because the person has no idea
on them whatsoever I'm in
addition we see their civil
rights implications here that
this could be cross checked in
different databases and use use
that be used against them in
addition and a domestic violence
situation we see a problem where
a domestic violence person of
person forgot to take their
spouse their partner off their
contact information and it could
be used to find that person so
for those reasons we stand
opposed thank you very much.
Thank you is there doesn't
appear to have anyone else
On the attendees so we'll go
ahead and move it toward will
move it to the committee.
Committee members are there any
questions related to this
legislation.
Representative had ever.
Seven thank you madam chair and
thank you Representative for
bringing this bill
Madam chair representative on on
February the second we actually
wrote this bill to give you an
opportunity to talk with GPS
about the tapestry system can
you do this in favor Madam chair
representative and give us an
update on any findings that you
may have received.
Madam chair representative thank
you for that question I spoke
with
Jareth result those who is the
deputy director of control
operations department motor
vehicle and he's assured me that
the tapestry system is is very
secure the department motor
vehicle as is a centralized
location that holds you know
health information I'm and I
don't know if most people don't
know this but you actually
provide your social security
number and so that information
is has got to be secure so this
is the probably the most secure
database in the state others
that you know other than NCIC
that's what I'm being told by
the.
Department vehicle there there I
keep people.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative
We have a chance to speak a
little bit earlier and and your
reference to a letter that the
your co sponsor Mr Kirk uh
representative of trust and had
received can you and I don't
have a copy of that can you
could you describe the letter
placed at thank you
representative madam chair I'm
it was it was ported out to the
committee secretary last night
so that could be distributed to
committee members I apologize if
you all don't have that I'm but
basically the letter is from
heather general who is the chief
investigator for the office the
medical investigators I'm and
therein spew support of this
bill basically.
It states that this will assist
the office of medical investor
investigator with indigent
burial cases in locating next of
kin and more efficiently I also
on that point
Representative madam chair
actually.
With my.
County sheriff David black and
he is in the process of getting
the documentation for support
from the sheriff's association.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative for that
information I.
This is Phil hopefully continues
on I I think it's critical that
we make sure
that we're notifying
Next.
As as quickly as possible we put
this into
we we we are now very fairly his
responsibility to this to make
sure we do that.
For the.
We're not billing approaches.
To see before it gets to the for
the.
the actual analysis from DPS and
again thank you madam chair and
thank you Representative for
taking the time to bring this
bill.
Thank you.
Thank you Representative
Pettigrew next we have
Representative Powdrell Culbert
thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative when I first
saw this piece of legislation I
thought it was just way too much
government and so I had some
real issues with that and
The Santa Fe County sheriff's
department I went and I talked
to them about this piece of
legislation because like I said
I don't need any more government
and my life and one of the
reasons this was maybe it is
because they have their own
system in place to where they
can can identify try to identify
and individuals he said they pay
about a hundred and fifty
dollars a month and so that's
not a big deal.
For Santa Fe county sheriff's
department but when you look at
some of these other small
community police department you
know a hundred fifty dollars a
month may not sound like much to
us but it is a lot and some of
the smaller communities around
the state it may only have two
or three.
Officers and he said that he
thought it was a great idea
because it's voluntary for
someone to put their information
and their and that is the day we
had a word with the
representative to
look at the various ways are the
best ways to capture the
information so I think the fact
that it's voluntary and that
we've we're always looking at
budgets and when you know small
police department can't afford
to do this.
So the fact that this could be
done without any additional cost
and that they already have a
space as I understand it it
would be do what they can input
this information if if the
individual decides to do that.
And I know we have had some
issues around domestic violence
I worked domestic violence with
APD for seven years and
there are a number of other ways
that we can find out information
about victims and we locating
victims you know in the law
enforcement community so I just
thought I would bring that for
thank you madam chair.
You representative we have
Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative black ring
this bill forward can you remind
me.
What it was that that.
Because you to carry this bill
what what motivated you or or
drug you to want to care this
bill Ford's I know you're in the
position of a county clerk or
deputy county clerk one of the
two it's so Mister make
something happen that that.
Something you saw that because
your do this so can you speak to
that very quickly please thank
you madam chair and
representative actually it was
more of a personal kind of
reason for me and.
Yes away twenty years ago twenty
two years ago and he was
transferred from the hospital
and I'm GORDNER to UNM and we
were not notified of his passing
And I don't know if it it
doesn't directly correlate with
it but I did in researching this
come across some stories from
other other families that one it
there is they had a twenty five
year old son that disappears for
a couple of days and that was
not I'm not like him well they
reported missing and was missing
for about a week and they
finally discussion decided to
call the office of medical
investigator and sure enough he
had been there for a week and
the family was never notified he
was killed in a hit and run
accident.
so I I just I have been through
emotionally the the.
The pain of losing someone and
not knowing I'm immediately
that's what happened so I would
just like you know this would
make it a little it would make
it easier for law enforcement to
contact someone to let them now
so they're not sitting around
wondering what's going on with
their loved one.
Thank you.
Remember there was a good story
but I could not remember.
What motivated you I remember it
it was special so thank you for
sharing that again thank you.
Thank you Representative Crowder
next we have Representative
Garrett.
I'm sure what.
thank you Representative black I
I do support this but I have a
question
On the
I heard that taxed revenue
department had recommended that
to further mitigate both the
risk of exposure of personal
information and increased wait
times the field office
they had suggested along with
and we do that
He created maintain an
electronic form on the NBC
website where the sentence on
their own time would enter their
emergency contact information do
you think that amendment is
needed or is that something that
actually
Can be addressed in the process
so DO TT doing their electronic
work.
Madam chair representative thank
you for that question I'm
actually in my conversation with
Mr is autos we actually did talk
about that and I actually spoke
with
Emily Oster from taxed read
about this I intentionally have
the legislation written broadly
so that not to hamstring the
department motor vehicle on how
they have to implement my only
request for them was that they
create the database however they
see fit what is the most
efficient way for their
department to handle it because
I didn't want to put any strings
are is not where it would be a
an unfunded mandate to them.
Thank you very much Madam
chairwoman Representative is my
question thank you.
Thank you representatives are
there any other questions on
Representative blacks
legislation.
Representative agreed to one of
our Representative Powdrell
Culbert.
Yes.
Our office chair I would second
that that with a do pass as
amended.
Okay we have a we have a motion
for do pass as amended from
Representative Powdrell Culbert
a second from Representative
Pettigrew is there any
opposition to this legislation.
Representative you have a to
pass on house bill one seventy
two as amended.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you I'm.
Thank you next we have house
memorial three hundred road I
don't know is Representative
Chatfield here.
Representative Madam chair
representative Chatfield is on I
believe you can bring a man from
the participants list okay
sounds good
He's not on right now.
Webcast.
Madam chair he is on webcast can
you believe men promote webcast
you know he has to be on zoom to
get on.
Okay I will so madam chair if
you give me a moment we'll we'll
get it we'll get connected okay
some good.
Madam chair I believe you
waiting to be let in.
Okay well let me see if.
Is he under what do you know
what name is under.
All.
I think I just log into the rock
Committee hello okay.
That.
All.
So madam chair agenda logging
into my afternoon community no
worries no worries are present
okay that is all.
Okay let's see.
Or yes.
I.
Don you might.
We.
Good morning madam chair.
Representative Chatfield how are
you.
Welcome.
Welcome all right a little while
to get off no it's all good
we're we're very patient
committee so no worries.
Be here and I agree with for you
this morning house memorial
three and I have what it and
the.
Yes I'm could you just read the
to to number for folks point two
one nine eight two one point
one.
And you sent the Senator you
sent this several days ago so
folks should have that
and so before we move to adopt
the amendment Representative can
you describe what's on the
amendment.
yes madam chair this is
basically
Changes bills to Rita's as it
was asked to be
changed in the last meeting
sorry I was not able to be there
with our but I really appreciate
the hard work of my office mates
here to.
to get it up and and running
correctly
It basically changes the.
In honor of the human family to
Lucy and introducing.
Part of the transportation
department director so you're
saying like reductions for the
but after.
Okay thank you Representative
thank you is what anybody like
to move to adopt the the
amendment.
I have both Representative
Crowder Pettigrew which one
would like to do that.
because there were a.
Okay and that is our second.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative by your
Garcia so we have and we have
been adopted amendment is there
any discussion on the bill as
amended.
Is there any opposition to the
legislation
as written as an as amended.
Would anybody like to move
entertaining motion.
Right.
Representative joy.
I will do pass of house memorial
three as amended.
Okay we have a motion for do
pass as amended for house
memorial three is their second.
Representative Pettigrew is a
second is there any opposition.
There is no opposition
Representative Chatfield you
have a
up to pass on house memorial
three as amended you madam chair
thank thank you.
You members of the committee
thank you.
Thank you all for joining us
today Committee we we're our of
bills being directed to our
committee are slowing down a
little bit so on Thursday
I don't know sorry about that we
have we do have a presentation
so just give me one.
Second.
It's all.
So I'm thank you all so right
now we're gonna be moving on to
presentation from the bike and
recreational trails the process
for local communities and the
New Mexico department of
transportation's involvement we
have Jessica Griffin and Shannon
gliding Glendenning from the New
Mexico department of
transportation thank you all for
joining us and please feel free
to begin when you're ready.
Good morning madam chair and
committee members and nice to
see you Secretary church in a
while.
Thank you for having us today my
name is Jessica Griffin and I'm
the acting division director for
the.
Planning division at the New
Mexico DLC and I am going to
share my screen because we have
a short presentation for you let
me see if I can do this.
Work.
Can you all see my screen.
Great.
Okay so as I said I'm I'm the
acting director for the planning
division and we're going to give
you a very short presentation on
the active programs unit our
team within the planning
division.
would say if I can Erica so the
HSD planning division is a
relatively new division that was
created through that re order of
the the restructure that
happened last spring and DOT and
we have three bureaus data
management multi plant multi
modal planning programs and
research and we have about fifty
one staff right now and we we
actually have a twelve agencies
and we have oversight of around
forty eight million in funds per
year and that's federal with
state match funds
and I know this is kind of an
acronym alphabet soup here but
we oversee several different
planning are several different
funding sources and so I just
wanted to briefly tell you about
those and then we'll talk more
about the active transportation
programs so we have a state
planning research funds which is
an eighty twenty match meaning
it's eighty percent federal
funds and twenty percent state
match
and million that goes to
different DOT projects
everything from we're currently
funding a culvert study to
software for asset management
and then also by counters we
have a bike hundred program
two million of that the state
of the S. P. R. funds goes for
research and then of the rest
goes out to the regional
transportation planning
organization which we Fund
as well as other are to DO and
metropolitan planning
organization projects
we also every C. at the
metropolitan planning funds
which are the PL funds and those
are all those all are
distributed to the I in yes
around the state.
there's also three hundred
thousand we re received for the
local technical assistance
program and we have a contract
with U and M. to provide those
trainings to tribal local
communities and they can be
everything from I can pedestrian
designed to how to operate a
backhoe so there there's a lot
of opportunities under that
program for of locals and tribal
tribal communities to get
training.
and then we have active
transportation program which I'm
going to let Shannon talk more
about in just minutes and then
finally we oversee the highway
safety improvement program which
is about twenty two million a
year and that program covers all
kinds of safety projects the
intent is to re uh to fund
projects that reduce the serious
and vality injuries in the
states.
The DNC multi metal planning
programs and I'm also the bureau
chief for this for this bureau
we oversee all the federal and
state transportation planning
and reporting requirements
and and really those are all
required in order to get you to
receive all of the federal
funding that it receives not
just the funding that comes to
the planning division
so responsible for the long
range plan which are currently
updating right now and if you're
interested I can give you the
website link for that plan and
we also oversee other plants
such as the free plan which
generates about forty million a
year
as for freight priority projects
and then we also ever see a lot
of black vestry and and
community or regional safety
plans and Shannon is going to
talk about a couple of those
here in just a minute.
Russell involved in climate
change I participate on the
governor's climate change task
force we're completing a
resiliency study to assess the
impacts of climate change a fax
on you know on our
infrastructure
and they were also looking at
complete streets policies which
is
just ensuring that all of our
agents are accessible and safe
for all users you know bikes
heads um transit what have you.
and then we also have the
government to government unit
and we have three staff that
serve as liaisons to the R. two
PS in the NPS around state.
and we work very closely with
them on the all of their
planning documents and and
requirements that they have to
me and then finally as I
mentioned the highway safety
improvement program we do a lot
of the data analysis under that
looking at crash data and trying
to SS kind of the crash hot
spots around the state and then
going in and and doing
assessments of those areas and
coming up with safety projects
we work with the locals in the
tribe's on these projects in the
districts we don't we don't go
out and plan a project without
having a lot of involvement by
the communities that are
affected by that projects.
That I'm going to turn it over
to Shannon Glendenning to talk
about the active transportation
programs team and our bureau.
Thank you madam chair and
representative the mission
including and the active
transportation programs team
supervisor.
My team and I are responsible
for numerous active
transportation initiative plans
and programs the statewide
regional and local level.
Eighteen New Mexico by plane and
defied which and then the OAG
roadways are appropriate for
bicycle infrastructure
investments during roadway
projects and also provides nine
guidelines for those roadways
it's on the roadway contact.
What makes critical connections
for utilitarian recreational
bicyclists within communities
between towns and to other
states.
The last several years New
Mexico has had the highest that
think the tally rate in the
country.
To address this issue and reduce
or continue to address this
issue and reduce the number of
practicalities and serious
injuries we are currently
working with stakeholders on a
statewide questions AT action
plan but what I strategies to
improve pedestrian safety for
New Mexicans there education
policy process and that
restarted use.
Actions for India teammate and
strategies to assist local
entities in making the road
safer for pedestrians.
What the model planning and
programs bureau also supports
regional transportation safety
plans for areas in the state
with high pressure right.
Okay model accommodations
including pastor and bicycle
left in transit needs are always
part of our plans recent plans
include the Gallup regional
transportation safety plan and
the Fairview lane multi modal
quarter safety planning
Espanola.
Right now Gallup is taking the
plans recommendations and
developing projects to improve
safety and connectivity and
improve access to downtown.
Espanola preserving funding to
implement some of the
recommendations identified in
the plan including sidewalk
improvements and a multi use
trail that were connected to a
network and critical parts of
their community.
Our planning team Gallup in
Espanola along with with a
company or contractor for the
project recently received an
award from the New Mexico
chapter of the American planning
association for the safety
planning program.
Continue our work I'm currently
with the accounts of magic to
the consequences develop safety
plans that will address local
issues in those communities.
Our.
Importation team I participate
in road safety assessments or
audits where site specific
observations and data informed
proven recommendations.
Thanks short term solutions like
clearing vegetation updating
Psy.D constructing.
One major reconstruction
intersection improvements.
Great way to assess the needs of
our community.
But involvement is a really
critical a component of the road
safety assessment process.
Patients and stakeholders
decision makers and residents to
help identify those really local
issues and develop place based
solutions and champion propose
improvements.
Recently we completed our state
on US for ninety one in the
communities of New Mexico sheep
springs and miss you.
Thank you here with the school
bus drop off area was identified
during one of the stakeholder
meetings and the school district
and district six and the OAG
quickly coordinated to resolve
the issues for the school
children that's one of the great
outcomes of getting everyone in
the same room at one time.
We also support local plant
efforts including participating
in statewide
the school group or the City of
Albuquerque's vision zero task
force.
We provide support and resources
for local regional initiative
statewide.
Finally.
The federal funding programs the
congestion mitigation and air
quality improvement program the
mac the transitional part of
this program and recreational
trails program all the staff and
those in a little bit more
detail on upcoming flights.
Process and product development
process we have a brief outline.
What the thing funding talk a
little bit about the product
development process I'm
generally this follows so first
the tribal or local public
agency which includes town
school districts tribes nations
or pueblos.
By a project as a priority
oftentimes these projects
identified as part of a local
regional or statewide plan and
the planning process that we
described earlier.
Funding opportunities and to
support regional priorities the
T. opioid coordinate with their
respective metropolitan planning
organization or regional
transportation planning
organization.
For our programs the project
sponsor participates in a
project usability needing an
India to district staff R. T.
opioid coordinators are planning
liaisons and P. O. R. T. P. O.
planners and any other project
partners who will be involved in
the project.
At the meeting the project scope
budget and any other ongoing
projects in the area to see how
it fits in that context we were
to identify any major issues
that may hold up the project we
also identify strategies for a
successful project to get that
project out there.
A call for projects the project
sponsor submit their programs
application materials further
and here are TPO Madam chair
that with us the process is
really relying on the
partnership with the and here's
our teachers to support that you
help you through that process.
What advocation of the
committees the funding programs
are comprise of geographically
diverse and hear what our team
here Representative as well and
here T. staff to review of
applications and selections for
funding.
What what is announced the
ninety opioid coordinator at
region helps but the vine
process and provide oversight.
What is complete our technical
support engineer that the
district oversee the
construction process and helped
usher the project we're.
The general process we also
offer additional support through
a bicycle counter lending
program and we're currently
starting a festering cannot
pilot project using video units
to understand how people are
using the roadways and better
inform is projects.
What was the nature of the of
the New York teams TRPA hand but
the standard described the
entire process for federal aid
highway projects led by actual
tribal or local public agency.
Contains the critical steps and
resources from product
development projects without the
great tool for the project
Sanchez.
We also hosts Federal Highway
Administration trainings and
workshops on pedestrian and
bicycle safety planning as well
designing for those vulnerable
user groups.
Representative traditional
thank you plans and projects
across the state.
Continue to work with are you
okay with the agents.
Including participation on the
Rio Grande trail Commission and
developing projects with the
Economic Development Department
outdoor recreation division and
tourism department.
Presentation of provide a brief
overview of the three federal
aid highway funding programs we
administer my team.
All reimbursement programs and
have eighty five fifteen match
the eighty five percent federal.
Eighteen and nineteen we have a
call for projects for project
starting in federal fiscal year
twenty twenty in each slide
includes information about how
much funding was requested
through applications and how
much we were able to award.
The programs in that condition
mitigation air quality
improvement program and have it
approximately ten million dollar
federal funding target.
Including and and the OAG are
eligible recipients of this
program funding.
Projects include multi use
trails round about transcendent
performance sidewalks and ADA
compliant accessibility
improvements.
Programs generally provide
larger infrastructure projects
around the state we were able to
award over sixteen million
dollars over three years when
the thirty eight million dollars
requested.
Projects under this program
include that the tramway trail
over past increments in
Albuquerque.
was Alamos County urban trails
and multi use trail on Mexico
for with the public penance that
will connect people to schools
housing and critical services
the public.
Next we have a transitional kind
of this program at the really
popular program in the state
with a four point seven million
dollars available annually.
Eligible projects include
sidewalks bicycle infrastructure
president bicycle signals
traffic calming techniques.
Waiting.
Related infrastructure and
accessibility improvement
projects the most recent offer
projects we were able to award
at twelve point three million
dollars in federal funds with
the request of over twenty eight
million dollars.
Recent projects that include the
multi use trail in Lovington the
hunter river trail improvements
in Roswell
the school programs in Las
Cruces and Santa Fe and second
street pedestrian route
improvements and you can carry.
Next slide please.
Recreational trails program has
an annual funding target of one
point three million dollars and
broken into three categories for
motorized non motorized and
diverse tell projects.
Tribal local public agencies and
state and federal land
management agencies are eligible
recipients of the funding.
The last call for project we're
able to award three point three
million dollars.
for trail projects across the
state with over four point eight
million dollars requested
placing need out there in just a
new program.
Recent projects include the
thinning out Intel's projects
with McKinley and Cibola County
our record in line recreation
area within one county.
The Forrester health project
at the U. S. for services
Espanola ranger district and
galloped off highway vehicle
park.
Next slide.
Thank you madam chair
representative Jessica Maggie
are recreational trails and
transportation alternatives
program coordinator and I are
available for any questions.
Great thank you all so much for
your presentation I know there's
a couple question their some
questions from a couple of our
committee members and I
certainly have some some
thoughts and questions as well
so first we have Representative
Powdrell Culbert.
Thank you madam chair I'm just
curious you know.
Any time someone gives a report
it seems like New Mexico is
always at the top of the list.
And.
What the bad stuff and you
stated earlier that we have the
highest just be on the
challenges in the country how is
that.
And then you want to talk a
little bit about pedestrian
safety action plan an outward
looking into all of the issues
around pedestrian safety.
Thank you madam chair
representative there's a lot of
issues that contribute to
our destination tally right
we're working on the action plan
and we did a deep dive into that
greater involved crashes of the
past five years what we're
finding is a major contributor
in these crashes that decides
whether or not someone survivors
from the crash the speed with
the impact happened
but.
Other folks believe that the
five of our vehicles has been
increasing over time and that
contributes greatly to the
survivability of a crash
involving a pedestrian herbal
well road user.
Roadway design or crossings so
we're looking at ideas to
improve crossings most likely
they occur at what cost things
are not at like a signalized
intersection but somewhere
between that we're making legal
for them to cross but the
visibility is poor orders
several years someone have to
cross before they have to.
A lot of contributing factors
and part of our plan and
identifying areas across the
state where it's happening more
frequently and kind of dig down
into what's in those solutions
ninety.
Okay and madam chair I'm I'm I'm
just just curious because we
look at how are at the
population of our state I'm just
always at a loss that we're at
the top of the list do you all
have.
An area.
Make decisions.
For example on where bike lanes
definitely should not be.
Because I can think of several
roads in my district that have
these back bike lanes that are
just I'm a you right up on the
person.
You know but still a striped.
Four by late in the road just is
not wide enough.
And there's no real money
decides to make it any wider.
So do you all restrict where
bike lanes bike lanes are
allowed.
Madam chair representative
currently New Mexico the only
places bicycles aren't allowed
to ride on the on the interstate
within city limits over fifty
thousand for the Los crucis
Albuquerque and Santa Fe the
transportation commission can
decide whether or not to limit
bicyclists on other roadways
that that to them
in my work I normally advocate
for.
Having access for all roadway
users and they can get the best
possible so maybe a bike lane is
an appropriate you want to
separate your bicyclists from
the vehicle then that roadways
maybe it's a multi use trail
maybe it's finding a way to
allocate road race based on
different solutions and we can
work with you to identify the
locations that you want to have
that conversation.
I would like to because I see
that all the time you know and I
and I can use my district as an
example.
Where you know if people will
get out and ride at night even
if you're going the speed limit.
And.
There's no way you can make a
bike gets just go straight.
And maybe madam chair can
address that but there's no way
that that a by can just go
straight and so a rider in there
wobbling I don't care how even
the most experienced riders you
know are are not going in the
straight line and so.
Those riders sometimes will come
out of their lane and I've
experienced this gross wrote as
an example you know and and how
dangerous.
It really is for people to be
it's a dark road.
People are walking sometimes at
night as well as bike riders it
any time.
And so I was just wondering if
you all can have any information
on roasted definitely should not
be or should not have bicycle.
Traffic.
On the.
Madam chair and the
Representative Powdrell I of our
philosophy and at the DOT is
that we are intending for roads
to be multi modal you know where
appropriate more safe we are
really trying to work towards
more of a complete streets
policy where we do accommodate
all the different users with
safe infrastructure and
facilities and Shannon said
earlier sometimes that means
that maybe the road way isn't
isn't wide enough to accommodate
like sidewalks and bike lanes
and so that we maybe need to
look at a multi use trail or
something else but our
philosophy really is that you
know read are you know it should
be open it should be safe for
all users of all types to be
able to to travel safely on our
roads because not everyone can
afford to have a car or drive or
you know or has the ability you
know we have a lot of people who
have different ranges of
mobility ability and so maybe
they're in a wheelchair or you
know someone pushing a stroller
and so we we need to we we try
to accommodate all users and you
know when when we're designing
projects that the DOT we look at
all of the different users of
the road and what's what's
available within the roadway
within the right away to safely
accommodate everyone and
sometimes that's you know that's
not possible and so then that's
where we have to again look at
other facilities such as a multi
use trail that's maybe next to
the right.
but we we don't we don't we
don't try to they and bicycles
you know except where obviously
they they should be on the
highways going through cities
those cities have requested that
but we we try to be more
proactive in accommodating
everyone safe.
Okay well thank you madam chair
that may be the the.
Think that the DOT tries to do
but you know is not always the
right thing to do.
No because sometimes even though
you're trying to be.
Multi friendly.
You know it it ends up many
times you know at the expense of
someone's life because that
should have never you know ever
occurred on that particular
roadways so it may be that the
what's the role to thing is what
you try to do but I don't think
it's always the right thing to
do when you can look at the
environment and see is too
narrow on both sides.
Of the road
For anyone to be riding a bike
and and honestly some drive
people to even be.
B. R. walking so thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Representative
Powdrell Culbert next we have
Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair very
quickly I just wondered request
a copy of the our point there
was a lot of information in
there that that would quicker
than I could absorb so I was
going to see if we can get a
copy thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative yeah we
can certainly get that for you
all after this committee hearing
next we have Representative
pendant Representative Garrett.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you for the great presentation
the west side of Albuquerque has
by to country and every road we
talk about which is a lot of
roads the first question I get
is are their bike lanes however
my question is one of the
problems on the west side is
unconnected bike lanes thank you
have a beautiful bike lanes and
bike lanes and bike lanes so my
one of my constituents who's
been on the call listening I
wanted me to ask about that.
Thank you madam chair
representative.
It's really challenging to put
in like seventeen miles of bike
lane in one fell swoop for a
project and so a lot of times
projects are added piecemeal
with the larger goal of having a
connected bicycle network that
mediation and PO and R. TPO are
really active and having their
bike plan so that way the
project come about for
development you can fill in
those gaps and identifying those
opportunities but it's hard to
get a full networking one time.
Thank you so much and just thank
you both for everything you're
doing.
Thank you Representative next we
have Representative pepper.
Thank you madam chair and you
madam chair thank you for
scheduling this is been very
informative
for the presenters I appreciate
the presentations as well and I
would like to echo those two
things first Representative
Crowder three request for the
presentation but also if you
would be so kind as to add the
projects
you talked about the presenters
madam chair Prof talk about many
different projects that weren't
necessarily on the on the slides
and so I'd like to have those
at and and the.
Be able to see how we're
connecting and in different
parts of the state so you
mentioned one of the presenters
mentioned a project in Lovington
and and so I want to be able to
continue to showcase madam chair
our efforts from our DOT and and
other agencies as saying they do
work down Lea County Solomon
make sure that we.
You guys get maximum this is
this ability with that so the
other thing madam chair this is
to Representative.
Well grow Colbert's comments
As as a as a civil engineer and
as an engine and someone the
designed roadways and lets the
roadways I I do think that the
study the the the you guys are
working towards on a little
where we're having issues is
very important and it's it's
critical.
I agree with the with the
department last three that we
want to be multimodal everywhere
we can but I also think that we
need to because of
where we shouldn't be doing this
right now.
And so we have highways in in
southeast New Mexico that the
last thing you want on that
highway.
is is somebody on a bicycle.
And because there is no safe
place for them to ride and one
of the one of my favorite places
in New Mexico and this is New
Mexico state grab is chirpy
Sonora missile and I love that
road it's a beautiful road but
it and and bicycles love that
road just because it's so
beautiful it's also an extremely
on state road for those bicycles
I would think that we have a
significant amount of issues on
that road.
With with that travel and and I
know that the that we try and as
engineers we try and and control
that with with vehicle speed.
But we both know we with madam
chair we all know that the.
Eighty fifth percentile which we
try and design road speeds to
are also basically of of how
that road curves and turns and
and so we may have a thirty five
to forty five on our state level
road madam chair when the
reality is bicyclists on that
road really need to make that a
twenty to twenty five mile an
hour road just so you can react
is coming around correction.
Driving as your as you're
driving alone so I do think that
that maybe it is critical right
now that that we we look at the
roads and make a determination
on whether or not
bicycles should be allowed or
other forms in walking past
whatever sh people walking
should be on that road right now
just from a safety standpoint
and and that does concern me
significantly and and so I just
wanted to speak on that a little
bit I'm not saying that we
shouldn't make that road.
Any specific road multi mobile I
think the the fear of loss of
life is is
you know I would love to be a
timer madam chair and and used
to repel a lot when I was
younger.
At my age now I'm very careful
in cognizant of what I should be
doing what I shouldn't be doing
for my own life and and I feel
like some of these roads that we
see bicycle on right now.
Bicycle riders should be
concerned about whether or not
there on that road because they
are dangers.
So just just a thought my
thoughts and and they're exactly
what everybody madam chair rate
form today at school.
So but I I do want to share that
the the I agree with
Representative Powdrell Culbert
to maybe we have some road right
now that we shouldn't be doing
this on until we get until we
get the funding to fix of.
Thank you very much chair for
the options.
Thank you Representative
Pettigrew thank you Jessica
Lynch and so much for your
presentation as I I mean I was
really excited and geek out
about this presentation because
as you may know I wrote I write
but I I'm a commuter so I don't
just ride my bike for recreation
but I have a commuter bike a
huge commuter bike where I can
use to do laundry and and all of
that and so for me this issue is
more than just recreation it's
actually how do we address it
from the standpoint of people's
livelihoods and that it's it's
it's it's really trying to get
people to move around in a way
that is more accessible to them
because in in many cases
vehicles especially in some of
our communities access to
vehicles isn't always
acceptable
I am I'm one of those who did
that the the craziest things of
which is writing right right
right my bike to Santa Fe twice
and this year I didn't get to
because of of COVID but
the first time I did ride my
bike straight up north took the
back roads but I did ride on on
interstate twenty five a couple
of sections and and then again
rode my bike to from here to
look for most courses to Roswell
on highway seventy and then all
the way up to eighty five to
bond and and and beyond and so I
I I I appreciate all of the
efforts that the department and
others within your department
specifically have done to make
the roll that much more
accessible not just to cars but
to those of us who commute
really in in these the spaces
and I think one of the questions
that I've had and and I think
maybe it might help to address
Representative Powdrell
Representative.
Representative Powdell Culbert
and Representative Pettigrew is
questions around
I know a lot of our our efforts
when it comes to these issues is
very much piecemeal like we have
to just do it on a gradual basis
based on the fact of what
revenues look like and all of
that and so what I've been
curious about.
Is what's the big picture for
New Mexico when it comes to like
transportation equity and how do
we make it more accessible to
people not just cars but when
we're prioritizing like public
transportation and pedestrian
walkways and other mobility
issues I'd be curious in terms
of what you're your thoughts are
on that in terms of what the
bigger I guess the the north
star is when it comes to these
issues because I know we've seen
in other states and other like
part of the world where while
the vehicles is is an important
piece for a an important
vehicle for us here in New
Mexico because of the work that
we do and the industry we
support I've always just wonder
what it would look like to have
a really robust transportation
plan that really does work
towards prioritizing public
transportation and and
pedestrians and and so I'm just
curious as to what your your
thoughts are on that and then
because money is always a
question like what would be what
what we need to get there if we
were to to look at
at that.
Thank you madam chair and and
committee members this this are
all very good questions very
good points and and yes we we
very much admire you for riding
your bike.
Los crucis to Santa Fe I'm also
Jan and I both commute by bike
and not not so much
recreationally because you know
we we don't have time for that
but we do commute to and from
work and other places and so to
answer your question yes so the
planning division is responsible
for the federally mandated long
range statewide transportation
plan which we're currently
updating now to be the twenty
forty five plant and that sets
the vision for the department in
in in this update we are putting
in goals about increasing multi
modal of facilities and and and
a complete streets policy which
US secretary Santa is is in
support of and what that would
do is that that doesn't mean
that every street is you know
how the bike lane and sidewalk
and all that but what it means
is that we do look at at all.
Uses of the road when we're
either designing a project for
re doing a street a roadway or
even maintenance you know when
we when we do maintenance and we
go in and and we don't pay all
the way to the edge of the of
the shoulder and then we have
bikes that are trying to to ride
on that shoulder and they're
hitting the lip of the pavement
and that's that's in state and
so we don't have that practice
on every road but we do we are
aware of where there are
bicyclists we have a bike plan
Shannon reference that the New
Mexico by planned which which
does indicate where bike
facilities are needed and
districts use that plan when
they are doing a project or and
maintenance or repair
reconstruction they will
reference that bike plan and and
include bike facilities
and then also we have we have
several plans and that's what we
do in planning and that's why
we're also working on that
street safety action plan which
will help us to map out where
pedestrians ylides are needed
based on crashes based on the
pedestrian generators so we're
looking at land uses like where
you have schools or where you
have public facilities or
something where you where you're
maybe going to have more
pedestrians and so will be
mapping that out you also get a
better idea of where those
improvements needed we also have
the strategic highway safety
plan which is a five year plan
that basically has we do an
assessment of all the crashes in
the state and and we use I want
to get too technical but we use
like a and national highway
safety manual to do an analysis
of the crashes so that we can
map out where we need to make
improvements around the state so
you know we have a lot of
different plans and you know the
the number one.
In priority is safety for all
users on our roads and and so
that's how we plan projects and
how the funding is programs and
and really the districts are
responsible for their how they
program their funding and
prioritize projects they do take
multi medal issues than the
consideration and safety and
then of course with all of the
programs we manage we have
projects selection criteria
that's based on equity on safety
on a lot of other factors
because we are trying to start
to work on the equity side of
transportation planning and and
look into those issues as well
as like environmental justice
so.
That answers your question but
we we have a lot that we're
doing a lot of planning and a
lot of plans and we try to be a
resource to the DOT to the NPS
in our TPS and try to you know
work together with everybody to.
To work on this different issues
one state.
Thank you so much Jessica and
yeah this is that's really
helpful one of the questions
that I did have around our state
being so isolated in rural and
that I think sometimes it's hard
to conceptualize outside a
vehicle use because that's how
many of us to get around
throughout the state and I'm
just wondering like what are
your thoughts what are your
thoughts in terms of the work
that you do in the planning like
what's the unique part of the
work that when we're not just
talking about Albuquerque Santa
Fe and Los crucis that we're
talking about places like Gallup
where you what you presented
earlier and and other parts of
the state lake
Representative Pettigrew
mentioned laments that down here
in the south valley in Los
crucis we're I ride my bike all
the time but I also make I'm
also not a roadie by at like I
don't write a road bike I write
a gravel bike so I use the ditch
banks here in Los crucis which
are and don't Ana County which
which can is so so helpful in
terms of connecting us to places
but I know that there's
that it's.
Writing in Los crucis is so much
different than writing in other
parts of the state and so I'm
just I am just curious in terms
of of of your role and and
looking at a bigger picture in
terms of complete connecting
rural and isolated areas
especially when it comes to like
our elders when I know that
thinking about my parents who
still live in rural New Mexico
and sometimes like my siblings
aren't available to take them to
the doctor's office or something
like what what possibilities for
public transportation and things
like that exist are are
certainly things that I am
constantly thinking about but in
terms of connectivity around the
state I'd be curious to your
thoughts around biking
recreational trails but more in
terms of how this supports like
commuters and and what that
might look like for New Mexico
in the future.
Sure sure thank you madam chair
and and committee members that's
that that's a those are just the
questions you know we have a
very robust transit system and
you may want to ask for present
I don't know if you've had a
presentation from the.
Transaction I DNT but they funds
several world transit of
programs around the state and
you know at we we try to work
closely with them to help
communities with connectivity
for the last mile so so for
example maybe their sidewalks or
bike lanes are you know I have
so whatever needed from the bus
stops to communities and we have
several communities that have
received funding either Chrissy
mac or tap to do those kinds of
connections with transit
and then.
As far as yes the the rural
nature is it's very challenging
yes get out and and we work very
closely with the the R. TPS and
arts yes work with all of their
tribal and local members on
transit projects or by pet
projects or whatever and and
really help to get funding to
those communities for those
kinds of projects and then the
metropolitan planning
organizations the NPS they all
have like plans and pedestrian
plans in place and they also
have transplants and so you know
they
I think there's a really I think
New Mexico has a very robust
transit system
or different systems but overall
we have a you know we the state
is pretty fairly well covered
but that's definitely something
we're going to need to do more
of because as you mentioned you
know some some like elderly
folks that are living in the
world community state they don't
they can't really walk find
places and so they really rely
on the transit systems and I
think we're going to have to.
Funds more as the transit
systems but also the connective
itty within the communities to
the transit stops and
And you want to add anything to
that.
Thank you madam chair at those
definitely something that would
into our development of the New
Mexico by plan is looking at
people who ride because that's
their only option or to get
around town or they don't want
to drive.
Are we that they needed
certain areas of the and our
tier system higher within those
communities to make those
connections and well as looking
at where our jobs are located
where schools and we're medical
facilities are located these
rural areas and that went into
informing it
What what we're recommending
that plan as well as an equity
analysis that looked at
well populations for folks are
over sixty five or under
eighteen or maybe huge
population that can't right
normally or maybe you should be
driving out there or what other
options and so that went into
our analysis of that site plan
so as Robert upper
reconstruction or major
rehabilitation we can start
building that out had
connections to transit.
We try to look at that as well
looking at folks to do have to
travel longer distances across
the small town we really had a
look at the users when we're
developing projects as well
right the smaller areas.
Thank you thank you Jessica as
of like I I certainly appreciate
this presentation very much
because
like I said I I am with my
computer and I use it to get
around just as much as I
recreation I mean for me my bike
is my therapy like it's also the
the that's the tool that I use
to just clear my head and so I
certainly have a lot of
appreciation for the work that
you all do and and I certainly
after the the session would love
to connect again I'm in the
inner to really think through
because if it really is about
funding and and how do we really
expand on some of the ideas that
you all have like I am very much
committed to that and so I I I
believe that there is a road map
that we could be
that we could be getting into
what's called that
transportation equity and and
how we get there and so I'm I'm
I'm super excited about that
possibility so I'm again Jessica
Shannon thank you so much for
joining us today and if yeah if
you can send us your
presentation we would we would
really love to to have that on
file for for for for for each
resource.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members and and yes
and we have a lot of information
online so make sure to send you
a link to the planning division
website where you can find all
this information.
Thank you so much really if they
are the.
Yeah I know thank you all thank
you all so much for joining us
and committee members that's it
for today I did want to offer up
because of the fact that we
works probably gonna start
seeing some Senate bills come
through in the next few next few
committee meetings but in the
meantime
it would be good to see more
presentations like this from
folks so if you have any
specific requests in terms of
what you would like to spend on
the next couple meetings on
learning about please reach out
to Tom him and I have been
talking about how do we really
and recharge and us when we're
not what when we're not seeing
or hearing any legislation so if
there's ideas that you all have
please send them our way and and
we'll certainly do our best to
accommodate for the over the
course of the next three weeks
that we're we're hearing
session.
And there's no any other
questions then I guess we will
adjourn have a good day and
we'll see you all on the floor.
Thank you madam chair.
I'm
gonna be sending an email to
both of you because I have
something I really would like to
see.
Okay great awesome.
Thanks.
