Members
What started.
And
The first thing is
The secretary will call the
roll.
So that we can establish for the
record a form a quorum I mean.
So merry out will you please
call the roll.
Representative Black.
Representative Castellano.
President.
Representative.
Representative Fajardo.
Representative.
President.
Representative Montoya.
Present day.
Representative Serrato.
President.
Mr chairman.
President that's.
members we have a quorum.
And
We're gonna be a.
Going into the organizational
portion of our meeting.
Which is basically introduction
and kind of laying out policy of
the committee process.
But first of all
I want to just say that the
there's a there's Representative
back welcome Representative.
It's so I just want to start off
by saying that it's kind of it's
a glorious day.
It's a good day in the
neighborhood as Mister Rogers I
say.
Mainly because a lot of our
communities got some really good
slow and and that's that's
that's a milestone efforts
during our drought so would
register that.
Also it's a glorious day because
today.
My mother would treat one
hundred years old.
And she passed away.
February eighth twenty nineteen.
the third week into the session.
And her losses still being out.
by her eight siblings and.
For fifty some grandkids.
so it's a glorious day in terms
of it being my mom's one hundred
sixty was a lie.
I want to start basically
With introductions of the
committee.
And then after a introductions
of the committee will go to
introductions by the staff.
And the supports that as well.
and in your introduction tell us
where you're from.
But also tell us a little bit
about yourself.
You know the the the positive
things.
Where you ended up in jail for
for curfew however.
In the and the.
So
so what we'll do that and also
start with the the members
enough for medical order so
Representative Black.
introduction please.
Good morning Mr chairman I am at
Representative Rachel black I am
here from my office in the
capital and the lighting I can't
figure out either I'm dark you
can't see me or so like a little
weird
I actually represent district
one which is Alamogordo.
I do not have any land grants in
my area but I do have a little
bit of familiarity with that
since I work for the county
treasurer in a Cherokee county
that's about all I have I
appreciate being on this
committee it's a real learning
experience and thanks for having
me.
Thank you Representative a black
and and we
We really treasure your
experiences and and local
government.
and also
Your affinity for land grants.
next we have
Percent of Castellano.
Thank you Mr thank you Mr
chairman my name is Abbas
Castellano.
I represent districts seventy
which income and some here.
Santa Fe in Torrance County I do
have a few land grants in my my
area my district so I'm I just
thank you guys for let me be on
this committee and I'm looking
forward to to representing my
communities thank you.
Thank you representative gusty
on you kind of replace the a
pillar of of this committee are
rather of of our land grant it
initiative is
Representative from us on our
side it was quite a.
Quite a leader on these land
grant issues and and we hope
that that you follow in his
footsteps
there in your in your district
thanks we have a Representative
Cook Izzy up.
I don't see him on the board so
will not recognize them when he
comes in next we have a
Representative Fajardo.
Thank you Mr chairman so
Representative part I represent
the let's say County I've been
on land grants the interim
committee on and off since I was
a freshman
I'm not a this is my second year
and this particular committee if
I remember correctly I'm usually
the one that gets moved around
usually every year I'm on a new
committees I think this is the
first time I've actually been
consecutive on committees I
would have the two may land
grants in my District I think we
are probably the smallest Land
Grant
and thank you so much Mr chair
and thanks everybody.
Thank you Representative Fajardo
and I also want to recognize
Representative Fajardo as the
ranking Republican on the
committee.
So
so if I may kind of a.
See a need to kind of get
information out or
go to a consent item on the
agenda at center it's Deborah I
would kind of Representative
first of all go to
Representative Fajardo and kind
of collaborative we work on some
of these procedural issues in
terms of bill bill presentations
and passage of legislation.
So next we have a representative
on the line.
Good morning Mr chairman morning
committee members
Happy to be here today with you
all and it's a beautiful snowy
day or what's left of this
knowing that we had
I'm Representative Karen Han
from house district at forty
eight in Santa Fe County born
and raised and and
The beautiful county and I have
Have family at all to a northern
New Mexico and have them
experience and and worked with
sixteen of our our northern
counties over the last day.
Twelve years
and
got to understand and and have a
real respect for a land grants
and talked to many communities
and many errors to your land
grants and just have a lot of
respect and happy to serve on
this committee review of look
forward to doing really good
work thank you.
Thank you Representative huh.
And lastly in terms of
membership along on that last
the we still have a.
Our vice chair but I recognize
or after we hear from
Representative Montoya.
But CS and thank you so much
chairman and committee members
what an honor to be here of I
consider this particular
committee really close to my
heart Representative district
forty which includes a big chunk
of Rio Arriba part of San Miguel
moron Colfax County so really
the mountain communities that
straddle the song the the
crystal mountains many land
grants a little bit about my
past I'm I'm an artist a self
made choreographer dancer
painter of the landscape.
And also a lover of the arts as
a form of medicine for use I
founded a charter school back in
two thousand eleven called let
the of the Montessori school of
the arts and sciences much of
the curriculum was based in the
land let place based land based
work we had a campus of Law
School settles ranch we were
blessed and sick as and we
incorporated the art so I'm I'm
really excited to be part of
this committee because I
believe.
You the future who's going to
carry the traditions of this
beautiful beautiful state if we
don't invest in the future of
young people.
I'll stop there for now and
thank you so very much thank you
Representative Montoya next we
have our vice chair
Representative Serrato thank you
Mr chairman I appreciate it
thank you everyone I am
representative Linda Serrato and
I represent this outside of
Santa Fe all the way through
into the county so I have the
former Land Grant unless you
make you on as well as many
other community so I'm very
excited to be on here today you
know I worked for number years
across the north northern New
Mexico in working with a lot of
you know current board members
and those that care for land
grants today and I had the
opportunity to work on them with
on legislative issues years ago
on in DC as well so I'm really
looking forward to working with
all of you and at doing we can
for community thank you and
Representative Serrato I think
you also have the out what for
your area.
That's that's and
Representative.
Okay yeah that's that's an
online and community as well
yeah that's correct yeah that's
correct Sir thank you thank you
for mentioning that very.
Yeah I have fond memories of
Alessio with that that that
primary care
clinic that the community
established back in the
seventies I am I am familiar
with that that the clinic when
it when and when it went up and
and the organizer is that.
Put it together.
I'm.
Thank you Mr chairman for
bringing that up my mom was it
was part of that and getting and
helping with some of that she
was a she's a nurse here in
Santa Fe retired now but spent
to forty five years of her
career with the statements and
tossed over also with our labor
union I love in ninety nine and
and I'm those are some of the
things that they say they
actively worked on as community
health care providers and so
thank you for bringing that up
we're doing some really
wonderful things and our fear
community now and I I look for
to talking to you more about
them but there's some really
wonderful things going on right
and and I mean again Garcia
And
I have been in the legislature
now starting my twenty fifth
year.
I
I represent house district
fourteen.
which is some of the more
historic parts of both.
the city of okay okay and
unincorporated area of county
may need the at the square the
south valley which is semi
rural.
You know we have a lot of farm
some.
In this area and our ranches
lot of the.
Vineyards
and the a lot of orchards.
And
and and that the areas are the
also Broadway area.
basically also Broadway area
brought in a lot of
Senator workers to the road Mr
chair and us.
Also on the first
Mexican immigrants to come into
this area so there in south
Broadway.
As did the.
Many notable Afro American
families.
The most popular is the Powdrell
family from Phil Gramm barbecue.
But we also have you know the
bank now owns.
drive but now on the eighteen
American leader here in the
area.
this is Zacks.
Thank you.
We went into
Judgeships.
the babies who have land the N.
double ACP time and time again
many.
F. American family start and
stop broadly and then we cross
the railroad tracks.
self Broadway and we're in all
but a last stab list seventeen
fifties as a via about a last.
From the families of our
preschool across the river from
old town okay okay.
And then we crossed the Rio
Grande and we're an old at the
school.
Staff missing the sixteen
forties as a settlement.
My great grandpa to the eight
power at any Chavis.
And then we established as a.
Spanish land grant after the
pueblo revolt in sixteen ninety
two my great grandpa to the
seven power.
On Thomas and then we cross over
course and we're in a kind of a
blue collar a Chicano
neighborhood known as the Alamos
unable to.
And then pass that we're into
kind of a middle class CENIC
first generation Mexican
American.
Maybe
in some of those new
subdivisions are gone up there
on west central.
I have a lot of times the land
grants I mentioned yet the
school with.
The Randy Travis is.
The Las Vegas.
With
One day the oast my essay.
Will was the of content to the
Las Vegas Land Grant in nineteen
in nineteen forty six when
general Kearney came into New
Mexico and the current need New
Mexico territory of the United
States and he did it there in
the plaza unless Vegas.
And recognize my great grandpa
my great great grandpa.
As the first officially sworn in
official in the new territory.
And
I also have ties to the.
The land grant in
east of Las Vegas the land
grants.
Is basically kind of our this
non existent.
Through the loss of land by
average shot Chicago
industrialist.
And
also some you get the bottom
line grant there in the alley.
the west river.
And I have a.
Background in land grants.
I was self taught in terms of
the history the struggles.
I've done research after I
graduated from college
intensive research on this issue
and
And I've been involved directly
with many land grants in terms
of their struggles.
Or retaining their lan.
For a winning back and US
etcetera etcetera.
We'll go down to
our staff.
We'll start off with our.
Our brand new spanking new.
Committee analyst.
Martinez.
Good morning everybody I'm a
little bit our today so bear
with me
from the Espanola areas
specifically from the IBM lab of
the last contact is that like
any other I grew up literally in
the shadow of the church there
so that's a huge part of my
identity my dad is an artist and
so is my family so we are a
family of artists you might you
might know my brother programs
agent Martinez so my dad on the
best I myself am a poet I'm a
performance poet I'm a
competitive however I have
competed at national tournaments
with a team and individually as
I intend to do this year as well
but more importantly I am also
an attorney here in Albuquerque
and as soon as we're done here
I'll be opening up an
immigration legal clinic in the
south valley so I'm really super
excited about that I'm I'm the
oldest of five children I have
four kids of my own I have four
grandkids and that's pretty much
mostly what you need to know
about me thank you everybody I I
I worked the this is my second
year working the legislature
last year not I was with the
house Judiciary Committee and
this year and fortunate enough
to work with you all here and
I'm looking forward to that
excited thank you.
Thank you madam
and that will go to our
minority and majority analyst I
I know that we have new minority
analyst but all recognize the
majority analysts is been with
our committee from the very
chemical.
George.
Welcome and good morning
everyone Mr chairman and members
I know most of you and welcome
to the new members
I've been with the these that
the house democratic analyst
pool for this my twelve year I
am most grateful to say that
I've worked with chairman Garcia
for about half of that time on
different committees and and
this committee it's been a very
the.
The extremely gratifying
experience for me because
professor or a Garcia has taught
me everything I know about land
grants.
Is really a truly immersion
experience to
Learn about the rich history of
New Mexico and the
the full impact of the land
grant of families and and the
history of the land grant
troubles and I I hope I can
serve you all as well as I can
and if you have any questions or
anything that I can help you
with please feel free to ask.
And I'm just very grateful and
and the honor to be a member of
this committee and but Canadian
sorry an analyst for the
committee with the internet
again.
Sometimes you act like a member
of the committee I I and I I
hope I don't overstep my bounds
sorry.
You will clearly are minority
analysts I haven't met you so if
you could just kind of speak up
and identify yourself.
The.
Hi this is Howard dela Cruz
Bancroft on the lead minority
analyst last year I was in the
judiciary
I started in two thousand twelve
as a legislative assistant I've
been a governor's appointee on
the New Mexico border
psychologist examiners the
workforce development board
currently do research at Los
Alamos national labs and semi
retired and the Roger Montoya
you remember me from way back in
the day in Espanola at the
community college how are you.
The CS.
So I got another analyst here
his name is Karl foster.
Welcome Howard.
Good morning my name's call
faster I am the assistant to
Howard George it's good in your
face.
Okay.
Yes to try to press the flesh in
the near future I hope.
And maybe have a but I do need
some time.
Okay thank you.
We have a very collegial group
of analysts everyone's of techno
you know out of this committee
has a reputation of that with
PJ.
In the years past
And and I'm glad that you guys
all know each other
that's that's really important.
And we have a our outstanding
secretary who's been with me for
icons.
Very.
Hello nice to meet you all.
My name is merry and I'm from
Santa Fe born and raised here
and I've considered and honor to
work with Representative you get
Garcia.
And work with them for awhile.
And if you have any questions
please feel free to ask me and I
will get the information to you.
Thank you.
Thank you merry.
And
And we have us some support
staff I want to call him some
support.
But they might have a more
specific title if you could
introduce yourselves.
Our.
Chair members of the committee
my name is Gabrielle Schultz and
I you know me and may have seen
me on other Committee hearings I
am the house committee
supervisor so I kind of help and
assist all of our committees
trying to get things up and
running I know this year's
presented a lot of technical
challenges so I appreciate your
patience and just know that if
you're ever having technical
issues and need assistance you
can reach out to myself my
contact information is in the
chat that the chat is just set
for panelists right now so just
members of the committee and
telling us you can find it there
thank you thank you the brown
and and merry I think that does
it for our members and our staff
I hope I'm not even anybody out
into regular scenario we would
have committee attendance and
these are kind of the the
grassroot workers and the
committee that prepare our bills
are bill packages that run
errands for us that get us water
and yet is poppy
and the rumor monger sometimes
in the up thanks.
So but.
So we don't have that setting.
And so on now I kind of want to
go into kind of the committee
you know our committee has a
reputation of being front.
So we will start promptly at ten
o'clock on the on this that time
changes because of session
starting in the morning later in
the morning so we will probably
be starting committees maybe at
nine
maybe go original times of eight
thirty but for now will be
starting at ten.
I am will start promptly.
And actually
and our rules are real different
because we're not in the
setting.
So so we can't go by the same
rules are sentencing policies
that we that we've had generally
but
I do are appreciate lively
debates.
And
and in with the audience.
We do not tolerate personal
attacks.
From individuals in the
audience.
That are speaking in support or
oppose the legislation.
And also the people in the
audience.
For or against have to speak
exclusively specifically the
legislation before us.
Not anything having to do with
our hair do that type of
clothing we're wearing you know
X. Y. Z. bill and another
committee no.
also abide by our time and.
If we say you have two to three
minutes to speak from the
audience then abide by that I do
give organizations that have
membership.
that brings membership to the
committee.
At a little bit more time to
kind of reflect on the
organizational position on the
legislation.
and
In terms of the bill process
We'll be calling of the bill
presenter.
And
The bill presenter will be moved
from the attendees status to the
panelists status.
Likewise the bill presenter will
have expert witnesses.
Sometimes they don't.
And when they have expert
witnesses those individuals will
also be
recognized
Be moved from the attendee
status to our panelists status.
And
and when we go to the audience.
they'll be opportunities the the
chair will ask those in
opposition.
to raise their hand.
And they will hit the race hand
option at the at the bottom of
the screen.
And we will count those and
record them as.
How many were opposed of those
in opposition will ask who
wishes to speak.
It will give those people the
opportunity to speak in
opposition to the bill.
And we will do the same for
Those in support of the
legislation.
will last raise their hand.
Does that raise their hand what
the that they wish to speak and
support.
You don't necessarily have to
speak but if you wish you you
have the option.
and also the issue amendments.
We have a twenty four hour
amendment policy.
And that means that amendment
piece of legislation has to come
in twenty four hours before we
hear that they'll.
And
the amendment is presented by
that sponsor to the secretary
the secretary immediately
releases that amendment to the
analyst.
And.
What I'll be doing this year
because there are some concerns
from the Republican office the
minority office.
how do we.
Record that twenty four hour
period some kind of you know I'm
not real picky when it comes to
kind of
Holding strictly to kind of our
policy I think we have to be
flexible in this type of
musician so I'm willing to stand
a copy of the amendment to the
Republican office the time that
the time it when it hits our
secretary.
That way they see and then the
second document the time that it
came in.
That way we have full
transparency and we kind of are
comfortable knowing that this
amendment came in within the
twenty four hour period.
And
Members
That's pretty much all I had.
In terms of the organizational
questions does anybody else wish
to
Madam are reflected in on on on
what we've.
The Senate
No okay
Okay just.
A question Mr chairman yes you
do analysts would you like the
analyst to keep our videos off
and and the our sound noted
during.
All the discussion.
That would be good that would
be.
I'm sorry yes that that would be
good.
Okay if you could do that.
Okay members
We're.
We're ready to rock and roll.
On our first bill.
And
Turning this over to the vice
chair.
Show me basically.
chairing the proceedings of.
this first piece of legislation.
Because that's my bill so.
So I get be the chairman of the
committee and the presenter at
the same time I wish I could
but.
You know
I don't have that power yet.
I can kind of separate myself
So
last year Sir I thought you're
the chair thank you.
And proceed accordingly.
Thank you well the first item on
today's agenda is a house bill
forty one so Representative
Garcia please bring house bill
forty one partitions of land
grants forward.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair and members of the
committee
House bill forty one is a very
important piece of legislation.
It's been a priority.
Top three priority bill of the
land grant interim committee
for going on I'm gonna say sixty
years.
and it basically allows these
partition land grants to become
part of the larger mix of land
grants known as land grants that
are political subdivisions of
the state.
That are units of government.
This legislation.
As passed.
The legislature twice.
In twenty seventeen unanimously.
The house the Senate.
Voted unanimously to pass this
legislation pocket vetoed by
governor Martinez.
Kerry by Thomas on us are.
In twenty twenty a similar
scenario.
Passed the house unanimously.
Yes the Senate with one
dissenting vote.
I'm sponsor to myself a sign on
the door by the governor
Michelle undershirt.
This land grants as political
subdivisions of the state.
Was first established.
shortly after the.
Land Grant interim committee was
established in two thousand and
three.
And the first task of that land
grant interim committee.
All inclusive reform legislation
on land grants in terms of.
Bringing them up.
To the president in terms of
their governance.
there issues of transparency.
There are elections.
And their focus on retaining the
comments and winning back their
comments that was the purpose of
the interim committee.
And so in two thousand and four
the legislature passed this
monumental.
Land Grant reform bill that
include all these elements.
In modernizing the statutes or
land grants and further
empowering them.
As units of government so the
first time ever it created land
grants as a political
subdivisions equal in terms of
political status to
municipalities county
governments.
School boards.
Improvement districts.
At.
I think I mentioned county
government and city governments.
And that bill.
Brought in.
Absolutely twenty four land
grants automatically in two
thousand and four it brought in.
Twenty four land grants
automatically into that new
political status of political
subdivisions.
These are land grants that were
known as the article one land
grants.
In the General provision's Act
of chapter forty nine which is
where we have all our land
grants statutes automatically.
What did not happen.
Is that there are other land
grants that didn't come in
automatically.
The article to land grants.
Representative how does Land
Grant that the management.
Did not come in automatically in
two thousand and four.
The athletes gonna and grant did
not come in automatically in two
thousand four.
So what are these two nine
grants have to do they came to
the legislature.
With a separate piece of
legislation to roll them in.
The same status as these other
original twenty four land
grants.
There was other land grants that
didn't automatically come in in
two thousand and four as a
political subdivisions.
And we're these.
Achieving greater.
But not the land grant Senate
Castellanos area.
The Montana land grants.
So what is the land grants to.
In time they came to the
legislature.
They put specific.
Statute specific bills.
To roll them in.
The same status as these twenty
four original land grants.
These two other land grants that
came in under the article to.
And now we have the specific
statutory land grants.
That were approved unanimously
to be also a political
subdivisions of the state these
the language that I mentioned
are in chapter forty nine as a
specific statute.
She ladies on there you can go
to chapter forty nine Ingle CTE
media see what's on our you'll
see the comment that.
But you can see that they have
limited authority and power in
their statute.
And they have no political
subdivisions and there are
originals statutory.
Rupture.
So now.
We have chapter forty one I mean
we have house bill forty one.
That again.
Is wanting to do the same thing.
These other land grants have
done to become a political
subdivisions.
And these are partitioned land
grants.
They're known as partition land
grants.
And we have partition and
requests.
InTaos County the oil on the
lottery one Land Grant.
We've met there a couple of
times.
Yes North Taos.
We have a number of these
partition and grants and some
you get County.
The law are guiding us.
Land Grant which is.
West of the Montezuma.
The month this one more
castle.
We have the most be he less than
grant.
Which is north of Las Vegas.
Between.
Storrie lake and I send us.
We have
Senator Christine.
Which is south of Las Vegas.
On the road to landray.
a little bit before you hit the
on time she Calandra.
And we have and comments.
partition grant in Modoc county
just south of.
What are what I call the the low
road to Las Vegas.
And that is it's it's a
secondary road not the main road
we're and comments located.
And
What is house bill forty one do
it does exactly what we've done
with these other land grants.
It gives in the same authority
and same powers and why.
Because right now these
partition land grants are
marginalized land grants.
They have no capital outlay
access.
They cannot access capital
outlay like the twenty four
origin land grants like the to
article two.
Ninety three.
Statutory specific land grants.
So they cannot improve their
community from a capital outlay
perspective.
Because they're not considered a
unit of government.
You cannot access federal
grants.
And we've had a couple of these
land grants that lost federal
grants because the federal
entity realize that they were
not an official Land Grant.
And you'll hear that from the
experts.
There's no protection of these
land grants as with the other
land grants for one.
One of the biggest.
The whole expenses of our land
grants has been needs adverse
possession lawsuits.
On our land grant.
By individuals that go in there
stake a claim Survey report on
land.
recorded.
In the county clerk's office pay
taxes on it.
Yes it's not there's it's the
it's the land grants.
So then.
Thank file a verse position not
suits to claim title.
And then a lot of times a lot of
cases Land Grant has to go to
court that this is there's many
times there is not that money so
they settle.
Well.
The major land grants cannot be.
Adversely processed.
But yes these partitioning rants
but I mentioned.
Can be still adversely
possessed.
In the course of our.
Also.
There is no right of refusal.
For purchase of state owned
property.
The major land grants whenever
the state hasn't of building
property within the original
boundaries a land grants they
have to give the land grant
right of first refusal to
purchase.
And of the language doesn't
wanna Representative and they
put it.
On the auction block.
And open it up.
These are these partition and
rest don't have that opportunity
to do that.
Also we have statutes that
basically say that if a survey
has ever done on a land grant or
on the periphery outside of the
original boundaries that that
serve rare has to give notice to
the board of trustees.
There is this survey going on in
the land grant or on the
periphery why is this so
important when we pass that law
because we have these.
Basically individuals that's the
claim to the common.
Go get a survey.
the taxes on that.
And then ten years there and up
in a lawsuit with the land
grants.
Right first possession.
That's why the and requests need
heads up.
In terms of what surveys are
being done.
These partition land grants do
not have that option.
And
I want to mention to the
committee.
Madam chair.
That.
That we have been very.
Respectful.
And
Very inclusive of the opposition
on this bill.
In fact.
In the in the twenty nineteen
session.
When governor Michele Grisham
veto this bill.
She never heard first hand from
the partition and requests.
She only heard from the
opposition.
And
And part of our reasoning for
feeling was that she wanted to
see a win win situation.
With this she she she want to
see all parties kind of come to
hand.
And
and you know we've given the
opposition every opportunity.
To understand this legislation
terribly.
And we went over and beyond.
In December twentieth twenty
nineteen.
Seven months after the session
ended.
And myself and representative
from us on a side.
Call the meeting.
At the student union building in
New Mexico highlands.
In Las Vegas.
And we brought in the governor
staff.
Yes.
To hear firsthand.
From the partition and requests
why this bill is so important.
At this meeting what a partition
land grants.
At this meeting was the
opposition.
Because we wanted the opposition
to also hear first hand from the
partition that requests why this
bill is so important to the.
And never really faced off with
the opposition.
Or the opposition and ever
really faced off face to face
with these partition then grant
readers.
To hear first hand why this is
so important to them.
And it was a cordial meeting.
You know and that is a and
everybody had their say.
And there is a lot of issues
that came from that meeting.
In terms of some existing land
grants.
Our.
that maybe their course of
action.
might want to be improved if a
different direction was taken.
For example the Las Vegas Land
Grant.
And the opportunity to
understand and here possibly it
would behoove them.
To move from their current
status.
being controlled by the District
Court.
Two one of being a political
subdivisions.
Control then ruled by a board of
trustees elected by the errors.
And so there was a lot of really
good eye opening.
efforts that came from that
meeting on December twentieth
twenty nineteen and thank us.
And with that madam chair.
I want to recognize
One of my two witnesses or
witnesses.
so I would like to yield to run
on thank god with the lower
guiding us.
land grant to also reflect on
the importance of this
legislation.
Thank you.
you're the one that's going to
be letting people in that are
witnesses.
Or is maybe give us on Mary is
that you that will be leading
folks in our the panelists to be
witnesses for this.
It will but what which one which
is number is yeah I don't see I
don't see the name on here and
see Mr Ortega on the attendee
list right now Representative
Garcia are they the collar and
perhaps.
I am might be the it might be
the caller in.
Caller merry if you can meet the
caller we can check if that is
the right person okay.
I'm.
I believe the phone call last
four digits are seven three five
you can on mute yourself you
have that power now if you are
Mr on or take it we'd love to
hear from you as one of the
expert witnesses on this or a or
a Mr Joseph but the madam chair.
Those are my two witnesses.
I also don't see Mr Patea in the
list do you see him merry.
Your
I'm thinking maybe it's that
Phone number.
The person that's called in
you're on mute it you can speak
now are you one of the two
witnesses.
Madam chair I think they hung
up.
Representative Garcia would you
would you how would you like to
receive would you like to
question or I'm sorry.
Comments from the audience.
Where would do you have to reach
out thank you madam chair
You know these are individuals
that are coming from the
frontier areas of.
San Miguel County amada County
so
we'll have to kind of just a
plan by year in terms of them
being able to kind of connect.
but yes madam chair you've you
proceed in terms of.
We're going to the audience so
we do understand thank you so
much for that representative
Garcia and when we do see them
the list will have them go ahead
and comment and on but for now
we'll go ahead and move into
public comment as the chairman
had mentioned earlier you know
what will have everyone who is
in opposition to HB forty one
please raise your hand you can
see that at the bottom is one of
the options and that way we can
take a tally of all those who
are attendees who are in
opposition to this bill.
So given moment for everyone to
look at the bottom of the screen
you'll see you can click raise
hands we can take that tally.
Again you just there's a little
hand the very bottom.
If you click on that I can see
who's raised hands.
Would anyone like to speak in
opposition to the bill.
I don't see any hands raised at
this time we can come back if we
see the attendee list change at
all because I do know that we're
folks are having some trouble
getting on earlier on if you if
you are an attendee and support
of HB forty one please click the
race hand button at the very
bottom that we can a tally of
all those that are favor of this
bill.
Give it a moment for folks to
introduce our hands.
Okay merry if you can record
that we have for individuals
that are not attendees who are
in support of this bill now if
you'd like to speak please keep
your hands raised but if you
don't want to speak ahead and
click that button again that can
but and I'll take down your hand
so if you'd like to speak please
keep your hands raised and if
you are in support of the bill
please keep your hands raised.
Right so right now I have three
members sorry for members of the
public who are in support of H.
B. forty one who'd like to speak
I'm gonna go in the order that
they are on my screen and then
merry you can go ahead and I
need them as we go through does
that sound good.
Great so let's start with miss
my essence.
Miss masters now you're able to
and yourself go ahead and speak
please and please of the as the
the chairman mentioned earlier
we're keeping this about two to
three minutes per individual
speaker thank you thank you good
morning madam chair and members
of the committee
I am Tania Maestas and the chief
deputy at the attorney general's
office who oversees the treaty
of Guadalupe Hidalgo Land Grant
division and we have worked
closely with the representative
in this matter and we are in
full support of this bill and
ready to take on any additional
duties as necessary through the
treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo Land
Grant.
Thank you so much miss masters
we appreciate you joining us
today I'm going to go ahead and
turn to Mr are to let the.
thank very much Mr chairman our
door to let the with New Mexico
land grant council the council's
is in support of this
legislation they've worked with
some of these communities to try
to figure out how they can
provide assistance.
and I also have the Mr chair
with me to just call to Mr
Joseph but the it was trying to
get on but he said he was unable
to unmuted selfie try the store
six and I have him on the phone
if you would like and I can put
him through my speaker and that
might you might be able to hear
his testimony that way it's it's
if you would like Mr chairman
that's that's okay with you
Representative Garcia Mr to let
those are last person on here
who is is rates are and are
there to attendees a request to
speak at taking down their hands
so if it's okay with you
Representative Garcia I think we
can do it how Mr the S. speak
through on the structure of the
song yes madam chair proceed.
Okay Joseph can you hear me.
Okay good can you guys hear me
go ahead and talk a Joseph in
the seat the committee
community.
Can you hear me yes.
Yes they can go ahead.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee.
Good morning Representative
Garcia.
My name is to also this will I
have.
This our seventy five years I
have been member of the Los this
partition grant for fifty three
years.
I have also served.
Portable.
I have served.
Thank you commission for the
less effective.
This was settled prior to
eighteen thirty five the
settlers our farmers ranchers
what cutters and skilled
laborers.
Area code small farms and common
lands.
Farms were adjacent to the K.
this river Madam lands we're
adjacent to the village.
Of the mountains and the
forests.
Grant chastened eligible this.
What effect was formally
recognized in nineteen forty one
but Mexico under the trump.
I think is a fit case forty one.
But it was already constructed
and farming was president should
say the thirty five or earlier.
Our area around posted this was
used as common plans for the
community of course it is it was
organized with governing
structure.
Some of the uses of the common
plans included Gracie tamper
what people try farming and
irrigation in the commune one
area.
Some individuals actually built
homes and settled within the
partition grant.
Forward to nineteen fifty one.
Requests.
Wanted to sell the common lands
adjacent to this.
Actually purchased a hundred
acres within the partition
grant.
Appropriate in this was able to
get it paid for three thousand
acres the last.
David grant around making you
one similar case were granted
lower paying us some more than
others.
Fourteen thirty five settlers
from us in this appears common
plans to partition correct.
Common lands or organized with
the governing structure.
We live on the second performing
common lands for grazing what
amber.
Right part of the land and water
Grace ripple.
Thank you fifty one St governed
by the board of trustees the
partition grant has been.
Self government and self report
we have been a standalone entity
regular meetings are held in
compliance with the open
meetings act there's a set of by
laws and regular elections to
help.
Instigation for partition coming
to the government was because of
the challenges posed this
experience in receiving.
Watershed restoration and fire
prevention from the state.
State forestry division had
approved funds to reduce the
risk of fire to the Watership
status but certain status of
course is the late in the funds
into action.
Additionally it goes to
successfully defend itself in
court against not state Landel
nor.
Access on the road to the area
oral.
This prevailed the district and
appellate court at eight
sacrifice with members with no
support or help us because Land
Grant.
Summarized a few bullet.
Support the partition grant.
Governmental it will enable us
to apply for grants to to
support state.
Improve habitat for wildlife
produces force fires and make
fire with available.
Public our.
It's very badly needed in some
areas we have four hundred trees
per acre or forty to fifty
should be or.
This secretary thanks for which
is a drinking water to the city
of Las Vegas and the second
water for farms.
Government compliance to the
OPEC meeting practical.
Fiscal oversight but say.
By the state.
Public officials regular meeting
I lost attendance there is
accountability for public
officials all business must be
done at regular meetings.
House bill forty one.
It's very important to us and
that are steamed Representative
Garcia said earlier this past
committee.
How's this.
If you go back to governor's.
That has been happy.
Organized entity with a self
governing structure since
eighteen thirty five.
We would like to become a unit
of government it allows us to
defend ourselves in court thank
you very much for your time.
That will allow for S. three
questions.
You Mr the.
I'm not seeing any of the
attendees change per at all on
the list and so I think at this
time we can go ahead and turn to
the members of our committee so
members if you do have any
questions please feel free to
raise your hand as well and I
can.
I can call on you as I see them.
Madam chair members of the
committee I wanted to let you
know that I was just able to
taxed somebody who had been
trying to get on to the hearing
the information I guess they
they couldn't access it through
their email so they may deadline
and I will try to look for them
and alert the committee as soon
as they're on.
Thank you Gary we appreciate
that I'm so looking at the panel
and please I see that we have a
folks are we getting are there
any questions from the
committee.
I'm sorry I was.
Got a call I'm I.
I guess a couple of questions
madam chair
Mr chair.
Sorry I'm I guess might my
question is I I know you briefly
touched on why the the governor
had had pocket vetoed it.
I mean do we think that that's
going to happen again this time
Madam chair representative.
Madam chair and representative
black
I don't foresee that happening
you know we've kind of a.
The governor was appreciative of
the fact that we did set up that
meeting on December twentieth.
Or in your framework a win win.
Situation and the and I think
she is a understanding that we
have reached out and pursued
that
so I don't foresee another
detail on this legislation.
Thank you okay thank you
madam chair Mr chairman.
I guess my my I'm trying to get
my head around okay so the
purpose of this is just
basically to include these other
land grants.
To consider them equal is that
correct madam chair Mr chairman
that's correct madam chair
representative back so madam
chair Mister chairman I.
I understand that the premise of
the.
Want to be be created equal.
And I guess you know I I really
I go back to the property tax
thing you know it's always make
my question madam chair Mr
chairman so basically if if
these will be included then they
would be.
The end with the then not pay
property taxes to you now.
Madam chair representative blank
that's a good question it and
and we dealt with that and asked
years keep in mind that for
example those that he less and
lower guiding us they have
approximately three thousand
acres.
They've been paying property
taxes.
On those three thousand acres.
ever since they were granted of
partition land grants that is.
That is not gonna change.
When we give them if this new
status.
They they will continue to pay
property taxes on the comments
that they all three thousand
acres.
And the reason for that is
because land grants to this day
are not exempted from paying
property tax.
That was an issue and this is a
this is not typical about
political subdivisions.
Municipalities and not pay
property tax county governments
and not for a quote for
tax Conservancy destruction of
property tax school boards and I
think property tax.
But the land grants did not
wanna go there.
until they were solidified in
their governance authority as
land grants.
And that and I don't think we're
at that point to even begin to
look at that.
Presently.
So no.
These land grants that are going
to be coming in to the mix.
Are still gonna rate with
property.
Thank you madam chair Mister
chairman I appreciate that
I just really having a hard time
getting my I I.
Madam chair Mister chairman I I
hear from.
My colleagues that
A lot of the land grants
properties are are delinquent on
their property taxes and there
seems to be an issue with the
property tax division actually.
Following statute on how to
collect that I'm so I'm I'm
really on the fence on.
How this is going to play into
the mix and it may not be an
issue at all
madam chair Mister chairman I
that's where I'm just really
kind of struggling on and I
don't know how I'm gonna vote on
this because of that and and I
I'm I'm just trying to get that
cleared
So madam chair Representative
Black on that point
there are there is no land grant
that are delinquent property
tax.
Our land grants that are
political subdivisions.
take that issue of payment of
property tax
seriously mainly because in past
years.
From the twenties through the
sixties.
We saw that Madam lost because
of delinquent property taxes.
And I think what you might be a
looting to is the fact of the
the reporting having to do with
the audit.
There are you know like a lot of
political introduce some us some
audits
fall into certain categories in
terms of reporting.
And there there might be issue
with a handful of land grants
that maybe are not quite up to
par in terms of that reporting
process but.
There's maybe just one line
grant that I know of the modern
and grant that is totally
irresponsible in terms of that
reporting process
but then that group opted out to
not be part of of of the the
land grant community
but for the most part I think
that's where you might be
confused regarding.
The
the the the the reporting
process
for delinquency process or not
to come for the compliance
process that's a better word the
compliance process on on the.
On thank you Mr chairman and
madam chair I'm no actually I
was and and from what I'm
understanding is is speaking
with some of the county
treasurer's that actually have
land grants in their communities
I'm.
Portion right so I guess it
wouldn't be the common land part
of it because the land grant
from my understanding is is
that.
Members the land grant can
actually be deeded a first a
section of it will say section
I'm and so once that that it's
needed to those individuals some
of those individuals are not
paying the taxes so.
You know that that you mentioned
earlier that what was it called
where it goes automatically goes
you know the land grant has the
authority to buy it backwards
first offered it back if if that
happens so that that's where I'm
trying I'm just trying to get it
all put together in my mind so I
appreciate that.
Mr chair madam chair
I think that's that's where I'm
at I'm I'm still kind of unclear
I'm trying to get there okay.
Thank you Representative thank
you Representative I let's turn
it over to approve and
Representative black if you can
put down your hand that we know
if you have any additional
questions no it's and then
Representative stands.
Thank you madam chair.
All representative Garcia so how
are these are.
These partition lands
how the approved or where they
deeded property from the mother
grant like from the Las Vegas
Grant or was it just
Something where the mother grand
said here three thousand acres
you can name it those guys
nozzles he does Land Grant you
don't have a deed if something
happens reverts back to the the
mother grant or was it something
that was needed in court it's
documented or was it just word
of mouth from the Las Vegas
board at that time.
What interests he's well that
madam chair and Representative
Castellano.
Mr buddy I kind of gave a real
lab rat example of how this land
grants.
came about in terms of that at
issue of of the the mother grant
kind of beginning to sell off
comments and where they then
maybe the the the
The page to be the that there
three thousand eight percent
that that community and
historically dependent on.
and in there there has been
efforts by someone's partitions
to this title
Through the court process like
for example the.
The
Oil in the north of Townsend.
again the same scenario there.
You had the mother grant selling
up the land and the the
partition the a lot of this
community and going on the
remote community.
make that request of the course
and was granted the deed mainly
because they did not want to
lose that.
And that to outsiders.
So yes that's been the process
with these partition requests.
What has made that and
any other there there has been
conditions that.
At the that
If the partition grant.
No longer is community they
cannot sell off they can not
basically subdivide that common
that.
But if it ever reverts to the
mother grant that's going to be
problematic because these
partition requests whenever.
I have a lot of common sense
reverted back that's why they're
wanting us political status to
solidify their authority and
plus we have another grant.
in.
In that are under a lot.
We have another grant in the in
the motor.
And the mother granted less than
us yes.
This call Raul this controlled
by the District Court.
There is no board of trustees
that makes decisions for that
grant.
And so these requests mother
requests.
In today's status are basically
dysfunctional mother grants or
nonexistent.
And.
These partition grants do not
want to be.
Existing in these kind of
precarious
Marginalize status.
So I hope I answered your
question madam chair and custom
thank you yes and no madam chair
Representative Garcia my my
concern is that if this was to
go into litigation where let's
say the District Court in Las
Vegas first would say okay the.
The grant from the heat as we're
going to you know you something
happened that say something
legality whether they sold off a
portion of that grant and the
District Court comes and says
okay we're gonna take control
back of that grant was
partitioned off to those he
years or it what residences
asset.
For you know any legality from.
Them having that property
stripped or those like stripped
away from them and if they're
political subsidy what does that
do you know what those requests.
A that the District Court and
madam chair Representative
Castellano in the case of us
maintenance grant is aware of
this legislation.
They are not opposing it.
They basically will do what the
will of the legislature decides.
So they're not gonna challenge
anything having to do with these
partition requests with that
were once part of the Las Vegas
thing.
Thank you
madam chair one more question
as far as you know if we were to
pass this bill now we're we set
precedents for future partitions
to be allowable.
If if we were to pass his bill
like let's say that they're
going up the land grant says
okay because I'm a member of the
table dig Land Grant let's say
say okay in Japan you guys gonna
get two thousand acres and you
can name at the top a land grant
whatever the case may be well
this presents for the.
Thank you madam chair Senate
because they I know that's a
very good question and the
answer to that is no.
This bill basically caps.
The abilities of.
Partition requests.
At the number of that we're at
right now and in the future.
There cannot be any more
partition requests.
allowed by.
Requests so to speak our
regional requests.
Thank you for okay madam chair
representative thank you it just
like I say I'm part of the land
grant in I hate to see that
happen to our my number I'm a
political of the land grant holy
very dear to my heart thank you
Representative Garcia thank you
madam chair.
Representative Santa I believe
we have a question from or a
comment from Representative lane
is that correct it just has you
listed as the chair so.
I'm not sure what my name is is
listed incorrectly but I am
indeed Roger Montoya
Representative any representing
district forty.
I have a concern about to access
and madam chair chair of.
In less than a month I excuse me
but I need to address this
because we don't want to do this
again madam chair I think.
Sentiment boy a name is showing
up as Representative and you get
Garcia.
Because he asked.
That I email him.
The the link.
So what he's using is to to hook
up to this meeting he's actually
using my email.
Thank you to be so.
That's why our members have to
sign on your own individual link
that marries and you.
so I just want to raise that I
just want to address that.
Representative I'm sorry
Representative Diana can you
also put in your hand a list of
the questions well thank you
sorry sorry Representative
Montoya please continue.
Absolutely I will amend this
challenging name issue as soon
as they can.
As a freshman.
And.
Representative of citizens in
this region.
I want to ensure that I have
enough knowledge these are very
very deeply complex issues I
think the notion of equity and
hearing from all sides I
understand that the opposition
for some reason cannot be heard
today or can't seem to come
through so hearing one side is
certainly giving me confidence
on one side of the story but I
just need to.
You know that this is.
Forty two B. and equitable.
Constitutionally compliant venue
and we haven't been able to hear
from them for whatever reason.
On fees and from the
documentation here it looks
really reasonable you know that
everything that has been
outlined my questions lie in the
two vetoes from a Republican and
the democratic governor.
And the this contention that is
in place.
In the interim committees over
the last six years and certainly
this last summer what were some
of the critical issues to that
and since those opponents don't
have a voice today.
Madam chair representative
You're asking what
What the the oppositional points
are.
They
Thank contend that
That it's kind of an abuse of
power.
To kind of give these.
Partition grants the supporting.
I think feel that it kind of a.
The liberals the mother grant.
That it diminishes their
authority and their power.
And
And I think those are the main.
You may nations that they
stress.
But
But they never kinda come close
to understanding the settlement
on these partition land grants
find themselves in.
And the ability of the mother
requests to intervene on behalf
of the partition requests.
Regarding the problems and
issues that they have in terms
of managing their comments.
Of.
Protecting their comments.
And seen community economic
development initiatives.
In these partition management
communities the the mother
requests are totally divorced
from anything and everything I
mean to do.
With addressing the needs and
issues of the partition
requests.
So.
So the that's that's you know if
if our food are to let the wants
to kind of add to that chair I
yield to him but if I pretty
much kind of covered but some of
the main points are them you
know we can just move on with
your questions Representative.
Okay.
Is there.
Chance to have that that answer
or.
Thank you would you like to
address that question.
Madam chair
Representative Lente yeah I
believe that the the chairman
did a good job of sort of
summarizing what I think most of
the concerns of.
I believe there was also some
concerns raised about on the
these this bill impeding federal
authority over land grants and
that is some happens affecting
treaty rights.
We're we're both of the value
waited by both the house
Judiciary Committee of the
Senate Judiciary Committee on
those are concerned
Representative I'm returning to
not be an issue it will be
within the legislature's right
to create political subdivisions
of to recognize them on the tip
recognize local units of
government which which is what
land grants are and always have
been.
The federal issue the roll the
federal government Education and
treaty was to recognize property
rights and although there's some
debate as to whether or not that
Judy cation process was fair and
connect for a lender.
Federal government once the
education process completed they
were done recognized property.
they do not deal with you know
recognizing introduce as as in
terms of the government status
that is something that included
state and.
Recognize when state recognized
units a government so for
example when the legislature
created land as provision the
feds and agencies of the federal
government recognize that an
allegation government to
government relationships with
communities.
You don't.
You don't have any of there's
federal law that deals with how
land grants organized again they
were understanding Mexico
they're creatures the
legislature they started in your
corner statutes recognize land
grants in the current form that
they have to date in the
pharmacy statutes on the really
and the courts even set the
creatures of the legislature
there are used by the
legislature and governance
status is something that is a
program which is.
In.
The.
Thank you and committee members
and everyone here can you please
make sure your mikes are muted
so that we could hear all those
we're speaking thank you.
It is quite difficult here for
me so I think I grant most of
that one of my other concerns
was the notion of federal
jurisdictional you know being in
this year and understanding the
complexity you know the
historical importance and and
the the outcome you know the
implications are are enormous so
as I prepare to make a vote I
just simply want to hear the
bigger picture.
From the in here from the
opposition because I think
they're voices do matter in this
context and so I I I will yield
back.
Madam chair and.
Chair.
Thank you miss masters can you
mute your Mike I believe it's
yours that's putting in the.
Side note thank you I'm I
believe we do have someone who
is up from the opposition that
Gabby had mentioned earlier had
trouble signing in during public
comment so I'm gonna go ahead
and turn it over to them
considering all the issues we've
had during public comment to
help I'm sorry actually I'm I'm
my apologies I mess this I will
actually go to Representative
Fajardo so we complete our
members questions and then I
will go back to the public
comment that was listed so
president part of my apologies
for that thank you.
We can't hear you.
Thank you madam chair I move to
table.
Thank you.
Okay so then very we have a vote
on that then.
There's been a movement motion
to at to set table and we had a
second so merry can we have a.
Madam chair before we vote.
Yes.
Thank Representative Fajardo I
think it's imperative that we
might table this because I'm
getting texts from both sides
they cannot log on and give
their
Their piece on on this bill and
I and I think that we have to
offer and that their peace of
mind and let them explain what
they feel on this bill and you
know Mr chairman Madam chair on.
That's All I Want to say before
we go to is I think it's the
right just be.
Point of order and I appreciate
your comments but generally
speaking in the committee and in
this situation you would want to
reserve his comments after the
vote you can always do a
a yes or no and explain your
about afterwards
and that's just general
procedure I just not trying to
do anything but.
I'm always in this committee
there's always a lot of
freshmen.
Representative part of the.
That kind of educate with a long
long Representative bye bye
status of thank you.
So merry can we take a roll call
please.
And the vote on the table will
currently is to table this HB
forty one.
Representative.
Black.
Yes the table.
Representative Castellano.
Yes.
And I can explain my vote madam
chair.
Representative.
Representative Margo.
Yes explained by the.
Representative lu Han.
Noted table.
Representative Montoya.
No to table.
Representative said I don't know
to table.
Mr chairman.
No.
Thank you very what was the.
Yes the table and for now.
With the needs you.
With the forty three will
continue debate but well given
moment for Representative to get
there comments.
Representative okay madam chair
a Representative Fajardo still
has the floor so.
Thank you I'm a the reason I'm
moving the table on on this
particular bill is it's
basically as I'm listening to to
all the conversations going on
and watching the chats that's
going on there seems to be a lot
of people that have not had a
job opportunity to to speak on
this bill and as a member of the
legislature you know one of the
things that's extremely
important to me of transparency
and accountability and I'm
always of of.
Of the opinion that we have to
be we always have to have digit
due diligence so when you have
people who want to start you got
a bill and they're prohibited
because of the technology that
we have that's always concerning
for me we can always bring this
back up we don't have to pass
this today but I'm always very
very hesitant to pass something
where there's people who want to
speak on it and we basically
prevent them deny them push them
off whatever you guys want to
say and that's my reason for
going to table this bill.
Madam chair
And Representative Fajardo
I kind of a sympathizing you.
But
But this bill has been through
the mail.
You know and it has passed
unanimously from both chambers.
but I I do wanna.
Kind of
Propose that we that we kind of
our reach out.
To the opposition.
in the next committee.
If this bill passes this is our
committee.
In terms of
How to make sure that they're
able to connect.
And also
to maybe present printed
testimony.
The committee members in the
next committee in terms of what
those concerns are that way we
don't run into the problem that
we did on this committee so
where there was no print
testimony presented and where
were just not able to kind of
link
electronically so I am I I
sympathize with you and I feel
that those concerns should be
heard.
But but move the bill forward
and have that formats that are
identified in the next committee
which would be Judiciary.
Thank you.
Thank you for that I'm at
Representative and thank you
madam chair you know and and Mr
president what you said about
moving it on to the next
committee here here's what I
have a problem at and I've said
this time and time again in all
the committees I've ever served
on.
That is our responsibility in
this committee to do it right we
are the Land Grant Committee it
is our job it is the is is our
duty to make sure things are
done correctly before we send it
on to the next committee this is
kind of an on going think I keep
hearing well we'll just push it
with this question and things
aren't getting fixed that's my
problem it's our job to send
good legislation on it's our job
and our responsibility in the
committee to make sure that when
we go to the next committee it
is done right it's not our job
to give them our problems so I
don't know I don't like I don't
appreciate anytime anybody says
they're gonna fix in the next
committee our responsibility and
our job so thank you Mr Mr
chairman and and that
thank you Representative chair
and chairwoman and I really so
far thank you.
I believe we have one more
question from our panelists are
committee Representative Montoya
and.
I'm sorry my.
If you if you
order madam chair
Representative.
I wanted to explain vote.
Thank you Representative because
Santa.
Thank you madam chair thank you
have on yes you know I I'm just
the only reason I did that is
because I've been getting text a
lot from people that are for and
against and I think there offer
the right maybe we should stop
proceedings till we got people
online so they could say they're
there because but
That's why I voted the way voted
a madam chair and you know if it
comes back to this committee we
can hear both sides and I
greatly will take that into
consideration but.
Thank you for that.
Thank you Representative
quest'anno we do have one more
comment from the attendees
again we have been speaking with
Mister king Donna very if we are
missing if we can move Mr
consented to be able to speak
that would be very helpful thank
you.
Can Mr king thank you can now
and you yourself.
Thank you.
Mr done we I don't believe we
can hear you I can't at least.
Can you hear me now madam chair
yes.
A good morning madam chair and
the rest of the committee
I like the begin with that the
motor Land Grant is alive and
well it's been alive well and we
entered into a the status in two
thousand six to become a
political subdivisions the due
to the divisiveness of the.
Representative Miguel Garcia in
particular about this bill and
other bills we have opted out
because we do not want to be
represented by somebody that is
constantly opposing our
viewpoints in the legislature
and helping his political allies
the motor that grant is alive
and well in I saw it just what
you mentioned that you mentioned
that the Las Vegas land grant is
is another unique and we've had
meetings with both the model and
guidelines based Land Grant
present with Mr Garcia and then
former representative Tomas
Salazar in which he knows that
we are alive and well the Las
Vegas Land Grant and they're
trying to get onto but they have
a difficult as we have had
difficulty we finally got in
thank you so much but
the Las Vegas lagrone is unique
in the fact that it is governed
by a District Court judge what
they have out there in their
field is a lot mentioned that
the testimony heard from Mister
by the on on the land grant
their their allotments and
double the Las Vegas language
has the opportunity to every
time resend those allotments and
the I think they should have
contacted the Las Vegas Land
Grant board of directors and
asked him to take a presenter
information today because there
were presenting this information
we see a lot of of of.
Loopholes and the downright
misleading information that
there are Representative Garcia
is giving you about the model
Land Grant the Las Vegas Land
Grant another nine runs right on
the eastern side of the some of
the priest about.
an example
is better job is on the screen
could you see that you know we
can't see your screen we can
help.
While you again and you will
you're talking to okay we can we
can see that okay okay thank
you.
Eight a map here that was pulled
out of the.
New Mexico state Supreme Court
archives on land grants.
This is the the land grants and
so drugs that work partition.
during the petition process in
in eighteen and eighty three.
The.
Surveyor general and the court
of private land claims denied
this one land grant that Mr
Garcia continues to insist
existed but does not exist the
ones that existed we're all did
not just similar to what
happened to that that read this
can the current bill all up in
Taos County they were denied
confirmation so we are creating
new land grants and creating a
Pandora's box.
They're one of the
representatives alluded to and
we can't afford to do that.
The court cases that have been
hurt before the United States
Supreme Court.
The law that governs land grants
through the federal government
the federal government has the
sole authority to change or
recognize the character of any
lack of those identified.
Only they have the authority to
do so the state of New Mexico
legislature does not have the
authority to change or alter any
character any that grant those
recognized under the treaty of
Guadalupe Hidalgo and
subsequently under the server
jails report that went to the
court of private thank you to
nineteen oh three and that's a
problem the ones I just
mentioned what are we're all
denied I took a lot of them are
being denied you cannot recreate
something that happened through
a historical treaty we're
talking international all and as
you are all aware of.
The Argall they're not just up
to that's up in the air that can
be recognized and the testimony
provided by Representative
Garcia and.
Their expert Mr doodle are
connected are completely
misleading and we like to sit
down at the table at late
because with this is a
miscarriage we had to fight this
bill it's house bill forty six
as as house bill thirty five and
ten House Bill.
Ninety four and today we have
forty one we're gonna be running
out of numbers I agree with the
Representative say we don't have
a good legislation that benefits
the people of New Mexico not a
certain group of people and
that's the difficulty that's all
come from from both sides of the
aisle both the democratic and
the Republican side of the aisle
I don't believe that the
governor's both former governor
Martinez and current governor
show long Grisham abuse their
power they were recognized in
the law understood the law as it
stands the sole authority of
this process and this law is
illegal because only the federal
government has that authority so
that's how come they use their
power they recognize a
responsibility and PocketBeagle
this bill this bill should not
be if it gets further any
further it should be alright
veto this bill has to stop this
is not just the legislature
cannot be wasted its time on
these issues we are in the
process of trying to develop
ways to the federal government
to get back on that.
Federal resources both BLM and
US forest through our current
elected official US senator Ben
ray lu Han and our Congress
woman that is alleged Fernandes
so we're well on our way to
proceed that way and we're not
only doing it for the what are
we doing for all that.
Headland subsequently taken away
from them during the the
partition process it and move
this whole issue it to that
level of think it will help all
land grants not just hard so
members because this bill is
definitely going to harbor Act
drugs there's a lot of
misleading information that has
been justified by Representative
Garcia and experts local expert
witness are too large and that
the and I wanted to know that we
got we want a copy of this this
presentation because those are
critical critical misleading
information to you as
representatives are making this
decision and I applaud the
representatives that say they
want to hear all the information
all the facts and then make a
the program.
And in a proper decision on this
bill.
On the.
Representative lu Han you had a
concern or a.
I thank you madam chair Mr
Kitatta woody are you available
for questions.
Yes I am thank you very.
Thank you thank you madam chair
thank you Mr that can you tell
us how this if this is enacted
or made into law how this would
harm our land grant.
First and foremost it's gonna
harm the treaty of Guadalupe
Hidalgo because that's the basis
on premises all the Spanish and
Mexican and individual land
grants are given under the
governor of the United States
government it will jeopardize it
and probably even damage the
legality of that treaty not only
do land grants use that treated
but our native pueblos in New
Mexico we have problems in the
northern half of those in the
south they have told me
personally that they use this
treaty to protect the lead right
privileges as pueblos so that
would harm their ability to use
that particular treaty in the
process of getting back or fight
in the cause under the
legalities of this bill.
It will also damage.
Regards to bring court decision
on these issues of land grants
in an example in the motherland
grant.
Lot of people don't understand
that the.
That's great to hear more about.
Have been impacted significantly
by of a template that was used
by the infamous Santa Fe reading
to to to to take away the land
from the people.
And grant was stripped of all
its land similar to what
happened to get a money a
because we bordered some
valuable resources some
timberlands of US forces and so
on so for valuable resources so
we're trying to gain that back
and yet this individuals are
trying to create a Berrier from
us moving forward in terms of
trying to regain our our land
says back so what they say so
that the water land right
doesn't exist that is a and then
after a false and outright lies
by the representative saying
that we do not exist I'm here
live in well our board of
directors level well we have
members that are alive and well
we want to do justice we we
expect that the New Mexico state
legislature protect us and the
people here are right to want to
violate the treaty we've all
late Supreme Court decisions
court decisions such as the
thank you know three quarter
private land claims we would
violate Supreme Court decision
not to go with their Senator on
the books so we can show you we
get a discussion we are gonna be
violating the law we do not want
to violate the law we do not
want to pass a law that is still
legal to the people of New
Mexico.
And Furthermore why these these
parties went out to the land
grants that are in Colorado or
somebody other land grants
throughout the southwestern
United States and ask them for
their input why haven't they
went to the pueblo tribes of New
Mexico and asked for their input
on this bill because we're doing
something in the back to the
station the state legislature
does not have the jurisdiction
to great or recognize or confirm
any land grants that's the part
premise of our argument in
opposition to house bill forty
one and the how the previous
bills because they're all
basically the same bill.
Thank you thank you madam chair
thank you Mr Ken Connor
under my understanding of the
conversation today that there
are that there are land land
grants to have the political
subdivisions status and that
that not all land grants have
that status and that's what this
bill would do you.
Is that your understanding of
this Mr can Madam chair.
do this by madam Representative
lot madam chair yes.
Okay.
There are some of you would look
at who all the land grants in
New Mexico may be.
Maybe one third of them but
there's two thirds out there
that have.
No desire to become a political
subdivisions status as I
mentioned earlier in my
testimony my statements we were
a political subdivisions we we
establish ourselves and the
staff is ourselves and two
thousand six when we saw the
misleading lies and direction of
the land grant movement in New
Mexico led by these individuals
are testifying on your behalf we
opted out we want no part of the
chapter forty nine because it is
a controlling.
A controlling tool by these
individuals to control land
grants the news reporter
political benefit it's still
legal it's a proper.
They
they're going to use a few land
grants to make their way in the
land grant movement.
All of this thing is now we see
that you bill they they put in
a.
Representative gold Senator the
real Colorado they had no
interest at all but I imagine Mr
due to what happened Dr Mrs
Garcia before yes there are two
passed away but she rest in
peace but to get them to get
involved in this land grant
because this is ridiculous and
they're one of the land grants
that claimed that they were
knocked over by the surveyor
general they like to be put
under chapter forty nine but as
I mentioned people don't want to
go into this because they know
of all the detriments it has in
the controls it creates with a
few people in the state
legislature and a few people in
a lab manager Community.
To work against anybody that has
any believe different from
theirs our differences that we
have a legal point of view
Representative Johan and that
point is critical that the
legislature realize and I think
our executive body is already
realized that issue as well and
that's a good despite the votes
on this bill is always has been
pocket vetoed it died before in
the Senate are in committee so
it's been as page as easy way
for us to stop this bill let me
tell you they should focus on
something else besides this
particular bill in the land
grant movement besides trying to
get into the political bodies
political subdivisions status
are if the phone land grants
have not been confirmed how can
they be in this.
Bill okay.
Thank you thank you for that
information and
I would like to just ask the
sponsor of the bill you madam
chair just one more question
would.
Representative Garcia
madam chair.
With this bill.
Make it make it law that all
land grants would would become
political
so to do it
subdivisions and status or when
they have the option not to.
Madam chair representative Hon
We're talking about the
partition land grants.
I kind of mention them by name.
And
It's the our oil under the law.
It's a loss but he less.
Yes the lower dina.
It's a car then.
What are some good on the mall
and the sun and was staying.
one of those apartment is not
within the boundaries of the
modern Land Grant.
So I'm running my own son I was
thinking.
North nine nine of the less are
within the last thing this
grant.
And Rep Andrea was is within the
boundaries of the nonexistent
mother grant of oil on the.
It's only these than rents were
talking about because the
overwhelming majority of land
grants posted thirty are already
political subdivisions.
And have been sold since two
thousand and four and prevailing
years thank Madam and that the
school ninety eight months on
one but not the that came on
board.
After two thousand and four with
individual statues just like
these land grants are doing now.
Vice through the six land grants
that and I mentioned.
That would be given the status
yes.
Madam chair
Representative Garcia so.
Would they still have the
capacity if this bill is passed
made to up to opt out of that
status or would it this is I
understand that this is just
even in the the status reference
they have equal status are all
around but what they have the
option to not
participate in that status.
Madam chair.
Today this land grants wish to
participate in that status.
The only way the land grant will
not can not participate as a
political subdivisions if they
become inactive Land Grant.
And basically stop having for a
trustee meetings.
Abiding by the statute itself
and they become on non active.
Our land grant that are is not
bound by by the statutes
And
so.
Your answer is no the.
His name is coming to us with
open arms and Henry are being
embraced by our Attorney
General.
Testified you know Tania Maestas
you're not in the and if this
bill in any way whatsoever
impacted federal law or the
treating the Attorney General
would be the first to admit that
this is what this bill is doing
but they're racing this.
In the end the L. and R. win and
are wanting to kind of embrace
these new it needs these new
political subdivisions into a
treaty Division a lot of things
that go because what we're doing
with this legislation is exactly
enhancing.
The treaty.
Because that's what the treaty
is all about protecting
comments it's continuing this
traditional
Communal ownership.
A benefit to not only current
owners but there's to come.
You know so so I hope I hope I
answered your question madam
chair representative.
Madam chair representative
Garcia thank you you you did
answer that question for me
and I just a.
I'm trying to understand this
this information that we're
getting all here today and I'm
you know I'm.
Been doing so my homework on
this for awhile but the thing is
in trying to understand both
sides of this argument today
Do you find that there are there
are any any any way that this
would harm.
The the.
Madam chair Representative
Garcia the treaty.
And
I I know you said you talked
about the Attorney General and
speaking to this but do you find
it do you find any.
Any
I can send and and what
Mr canton I have said today and
and the concern about as we're
hearing it because it is a
concern it's it's a country
Concentrix as this is you know
relatively new information for
us thank you madam chair
Representative Garcia.
Madam chair representative on
I can understand the hesitancy
of you know our rookies.
In terms of how to kind of
trouble some of these issues and
some of these matters and and I
really appreciate that Mr
Clinton was able to come on
board.
Because it lays to rest the fact
that this committee has always
been open.
You know what to all use on
legislation and we've gone over
and beyond in terms of ensuring
that that happens when a good
example is this meeting that we
called and asked thank us from
December twentieth of.
Twenty nineteen.
And this legislation.
And the analysis of the Attorney
General.
Well that tested the fact that
this in no way.
Well hamper the treaty of
Guadalupe that go it will
enhance and.
It worked it would basically
bring in a new land grants that
will be elevated in status in
terms of abiding by the laws of
our land grants in chapter forty
nine.
To one of what was mentioned by
Mr by the transparency
governance reporting protection
of comments you know and so.
this way this in no way is going
to impact the treating and has
no bearing on federal law
federal court decisions.
Madam chair representative
Garcia thank you.
Thank you Representative
representative Garcia would you
like I I only looking for time
in our panelists our committee
members Representative Fajardo
did you have an additional
question.
Madam.
I'm sorry about to turn that
down I apologize recently the
new theme of twenty twenty one
for all of us
Thank you so much Representative
Garcia would you like to close.
Madam chair
No I don't wish to close I just
wish of passage of this
legislation and thank you for
the comments the debate in the
input from the public.
Thank you Representative Garcia
so now what is the wish of the
committee.
Move the table.
There is a move to table this
bill
let's be it would seconded as
well by Representative part of
I'm Mary can we go into a roll
call.
I'm actually a.
Let me check and I are we able
to do a second table we've
already had a question okay
thank you American we do roll
call Representative part of.
Representative Black.
Mr table.
Representative Castellano.
No and I'll explain my wheel
chair.
Representative.
Where do yes the table.
Representative.
Representative where.
No to table.
Representative
Representative Serrato.
No to table.
Mr chairman.
No.
Yes.
Yes the table and.
Your.
The speaker excuse.
Thank you with a vote of at two
to table and I not to will
continue to debate on the but I
will first allow Representative
quest'anno to explain his thank
you thank you madam chair so I I
think it will be suspended so we
can get more people to to talk
on both sides of the bill I was
confused as we all know I'm a
freshman and I'm learning as out
as I go so that's why I voted
not to table eleven chair and I
thank you for that in the
extreme level.
Madam chair I do pass
recommendation.
Is there a second.
Thank you we now have a motion
on the floor for two passed
misting can we do a roll call.
Representative.
What
about.
Representative Castellano.
Yes.
Representative.
Representative Fajardo mount.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representatives are also yes.
Mr chairman yes.
Yes to be passed.
Thank you with the.
I'm sorry was that too now.
No and I yes.
I thank you with a vote of five
in favor and two against H. B.
forty one duly passes Committee.
And now if we can hear from
Representative Black.
Thank you madam chair I'm I have
after hearing the testimony
today from both sides in the
questions that were raised from
the other legislators I don't
think that
I couldn't vote for this I don't
feel like it's ready to move on
you I think it needs more work
I'm and and more people that you
know sit down the table and get
it going so that that would be
why I had to vote no on this I I
think you know it could be a
good piece of legislation but at
this point it's not ready thank
you madam chair.
Thank your president of black
and now it is I'm happy to hand
this back to chair Garcia thank
you.
Thank you Representative Serrato
and you did a good job I really
have to commend you
Representative Serrato in
during the meeting and members
that does it for today we.
Representative R. Lee yes thank
you I just I just want to
clarify something just for the
for the sake of the freshman
Representative Castillo said
something like
The bill cannot move forward or
something like that I just
wanted to clarify so all the
members understand that a
tabling bill means that we're
putting the bill on the table
doesn't mean the bill is dead
when you do a do not pass the
motion it means the bill cannot
move forward all of tabling
motion does is expected on the
table and it can be brought up.
So I just wanted to bring that
that clarity my other concern
and it's extremely important to
me and I I'm gonna I'm gonna be
the one that always says this
because we're going to keep
doing as we're gonna keep
passing that legislation on
because it's easy.
That's not our job is to do the
easy thing our job is to do the
right thing it would have been
better for committee to stop to
put on the table bring everybody
back X. the bill did and passed
good legislation I'm tired of
doing the easy thing it's about
time we do the right thing thank
you Mr chairman.
Thank you for calling.
That many the let me kind of are
gonna conclude the conversation
Representative Fajardo now
recognized to rescind the on.
You know one thing that we kind
of felt madam and.
and and some no fault of
anybody.
Is on these do not passed
motions.
whenever there is a what I mean
I'm sorry whenever there is a a
tabling motion.
Whenever there's a table in
motion.
and the second.
There's no debate.
You know so we go straight into
the motion.
And
And emotions are made you know
based on.
On the.
The perspective of of the of the
of the member that's that's
bringing for the motion so we
don't question.
And members Motors.
For putting forth motions.
We at the quarterly in terms of
our own take on what's being
beat up with before us but I do
want to make that clear for the
rookies that because I know that
there was some kind of input.
given on the motion and and we
didn't go straight to the whole.
Of the but Representative
farmers right in terms of the
difference between them table
motion and an ****.
And
Representative huh you wanted a
on.
Thank you thank you on that
point
just
Representative gross Castellano
not Casteel this is.
Representative Castellano just
it's just that to to say that
and also that appreciate a
Representative part of
information in education today
and
are we are learning we are
learning the order of things
but some of us are student and
have information and are doing
our homework so to speak so I
really appreciate that as well
from from our members and and
Just want to thank all our
members today and all the
participation and discussion
thank you.
Thank you representative on and
for the member states
You know even though we might
differ a philosophically on some
issues on.
Representative Fajardo some
other Republican the committee.
I have taken it upon myself
during the course of this
committee to actually call on
Representative are the to chair
meetings.
You know mainly because she is
ranking and sometimes other
ranking Democrats are not in the
room they're either out putting
on bills or whatever so I give
people the courtesy you know of
of their position in in our
committee and in the legislature
and kind of recognizing.
their role and their ability to
also be able to lead.
So members of we don't have
anything else
Which is going to gear up for
next hearing on Thursday.
I'm I'm gonna try to really kind
of get with them.
With the sponsor to make sure
that the witnesses are kind of
lined up.
And and definitely on the
passage of this bill over to
Judiciary I kind of really wanna
also reach out to the
opposition.
In terms of maybe having some
printed documents available for
that committee just in case we
have the difficulty.
Because they did mention that
there was another land grant us
make us board.
that three member board that
that also wanted to go get him
but wasn't able to sell members
thank you share.
And.
Representative Fajardo for a
little bit of a lesson today and
I want to thank you all in the
come thank you all on the
committee and you know it it's
interesting that you learn as
you go and you know if we we
we're not taught we come here we
learn as we go and I thank you
guys for the support and I'm I'm
very happy to serve on this
committee thank you all.
Thank you and and that's get
some screen them today even if
it's a.
On the side but then the
Catholic.
When were or by zoom.
Is being.
That's that's what I was seeing
folks on their state of miss you
all Mr quick question yes this
committee are and where we able
to resolve all the issues that
we saw on the comments is timing
of Gabby was working on them in
real time for this but I want to
make sure that with such you
know again less than sixty days
left that we're able to.
Resolve those issues earlier
were we able to or that an
ongoing thing we'll have to look
at before next week's I think
that I think as we we learn as
we go.
So that's not to say that we're
not gonna encounter this in our
next committee on terms of a
bill.
But at least we're bringing
these issues to light you know
with the with the proper play a
proper players that are involved
in the the presentation of a
bill which includes opposition.
The technology aspect of it if
we were able to resolve what
went wrong in the comments this
time or if we if we may have
that same technological issue
next time as well so we can be
aware.
Yeah.
I think we have that I'm gonna
have to get would go brown.
With Gabby and just see how
exactly we can kinda.
Maybe tighten up some of the
disconnect.
Thank you.
When.
We see folks god bless you all.
Hi Mary.
I'm still here.
Hi there hi.
Are you received the call the
email the work that I sent you
yes yes I did I guess about that
that's okay I know it's not your
issue are buying I I try to pick
