Senator.
Find.
And Representative Alcon yes.
K. so we'll start with the first
ended in the Representative
Garcia background artist stats
the the how do this year's
whenever you're ready.
Thank you estimates chairman and
when I start as an ambulance
Committee.
Mr Chairman house bill twenty
three.
The phone actors.
Bill arrives.
you know of the German members
of the committee
And we have any kind of great
strides the economy is just one
of the.
Movie industry in our fine state
of New Mexico.
Our tax rebates or tax benefits.
Our loan programs.
Are the best in the country.
In many communities throughout
the state.
Our top three in the country for
we friendly locations.
So we always regards of really
building up and beating
industry.
Unfortunately Mr chair finally
industry games.
Short sighted.
Our background actors.
Twenty three.
Then at the this forgotten in
important sector of the film
industry by.
Standardized compensation rules.
By improving set safety.
By improving conditions for
children older adults and
persons with disabilities.
And.
By providing the violence safe
from sexual harassment.
And physical abuse.
The vote life.
I'm not the expert.
Rudy Garcia she is the president
of the New Mexico background
actors Association so I yield
the.
To we'll be Garcia to elaborate
on the significance and the need
for this legislation.
Mr chair committee reps.
Applied Representative.
Ten thousand years to.
New Mexico I and the
organization that is a resource
for background actors and I and
the.
Trainer educator mentor along
with my board for all those
involved in the background
artist at.
I'd like to read a letter from
our founder the late bal Shelton
passed away about a year ago and
I took over her position.
If I get teary eyed Susan as she
has to wait without this.
An open letter to the New Mexico
film community we are a
community of New Mexico
background performers and allies
who believe in the same
professional standards that our
fellow actors who work as
principal performers have come
to expect while working on sets
background acting is hard work
and it is an important first
step for talented performers as
they developed careers as full
time professional actors
Furthermore assuring that
background actors fair and equal
to create excuse me creates a
solid foundation for the
maintenance of high professional
standards for all actors as film
and television productions
continue to flourish and expand
in New Mexico background actors
must be treated with the same
professional dignity and respect
onset as the rest of their
colleagues to that end we are
asking for directions to adhere
to a new house bill twenty three
background artist at that
establishes consistent standards
for fair compensation safety
working conditions right toward
us the growing community of
senators in New Mexico's
professionally trained and
equipped with the knowledge
needed to work out set
background actors are entitled
to the same consideration and
respect others working on set we
asset producers agree to treat
background actors has
professionals and we believe the
new house bill twenty three will
be a tool that can help them
achieve that goal.
It's a great day for background
artists in New Mexico today
Oscar nominations were announced
today and so was house bill
twenty three.
So.
Compensation it will provide
posted twenty three will
provide.
Stand by.
Compensation rules and with that
said.
I have taken reports in the past
year since I've come up for some
non payment issues.
A lot of the media stating that
these in the movies are.
The ones that are not be my
background actors that's not
true I have big wigs that have
not paid.
Eighty plus and more so that
have been reported wage claims
of workforce solutions for fear
of retaliation and fear
blacklist.
It's taken eight months myself
included to be paid from that
production started in April
twenty twenty to utilize a lot
of the State Land.
Did take their tax incentive and
rebate and still some of us have
not been paid.
I have another production
company I'm still working thirty
plus.
Of it with.
I've had several reports from
that said I've had save Senator
shoes from that set.
I had not payment issues from
that.
So the big problem is non
payment this is been going on
for years and our voices need to
be part.
it will also.
Hello us to be paid within sixty
days in a timely manner so to
say we have children providers
that have not been paid.
Adults elderly adults and two
been paid a lot of people do
this as a career has a second
income students.
We are professionals.
We are community we are
taxpayers we deserve to get paid
in a ten cent manner of this the
system is disjointed disjointed
payment structure by the
production company and apparel
companies they are all of the
state all the one that we
utilize eventually when the
utilized elevated New Mexico it
would be nice to have the panel
companies one of
the state of New Mexico.
Also.
A few others that have taken
four months two to three months.
I followed protocol are going to
the New Mexico state film office
asking them to review my list
with the unit production
managers of those that have not
been paid they have done that
now if they are held the tax
incentives or rebates I don't
know there's no transparency
there's no accountability.
So.
I work on that on a daily basis
and now that we're coming back
into February March the
projections are going to start
coming back into our state it's
going to get busy and I am going
to be very disciplined more
reports top one non payment
another of top report that I
have and house bill will prove
set safety.
We have that are disabled.
There ADA rights or not
accommodate we.
Have no handicap parking we have
no handicapped restrooms.
We have no rules.
Access to nothing that would
accommodate us we have elderly.
Fact on artists who have to
stand in long lines that.
They're not accommodate taken
from I am literally if I'm on
that set I will take all the
albums I will ask permission
from the protection system if I
could take handicap from the
lines.
We also have.
Working conditions that house
bill twenty three would prove a
lot of times we Film Office
coke you see now yes but
sometimes work out without
shelter without anything hot to
drink of one propane heater for
fifty plus background artist.
Sometimes in the heat we've had
back up powers that have had
heat exhaustion for instance in
July twenty twenty two we were
filming a big production
downtown one of my background
orders collapsed from heat
exhaustion.
So this bill will improve
working set conditions that will
keep them safe.
It will get us paid.
Also we will of.
Be free from sexual harassment
as we know there's.
Things that happen in the film
industry on sets people that
Mexico.
And do something that onsets as
far as interesting.
also.
It'll help us.
For them to hear our voices
because we fear blacklisting I
have as well as the blacklist
because what I am today to and I
advocate for it would help us of
not fear retaliation.
But we also enjoy what we do we
would love to.
Be included we figured we feel
that we're segregated because
you and we are not.
So therefore we're at the bottom
of the total but we are really.
Well let me community we love
what we do.
And we work hard we do fifty
sixteen hour days so I'm asking
you to everyone.
To please vote house bill
twenty.
Thank you so much.
The committee chair
representative for question.
Mr
chair.
The guy respectively I.
Representative the the you in
this.
No not on a lot of the okay.
Okay the state will we will go
to the audience and Alaska who
is here in support of this
legislation.
Who is here in opposition.
So I want to ask the those of
you there's one of opposition
right yes okay so just be the
only one I will give you three
minutes for those of you who
will wanted to speak in support
you checked the minutes if you
don't have to the you don't have
to speak to somebody else so we
said what you're thinking the
same the let somebody else go.
Scissor offices in the building
so for me of all ages and there
are several issues Senator help
you get just a public Solomon
PhD must be faxed Mexico.
my experience sponsor has been
pretty much run this.
Situation where our potresti
rooms are little more than type
structure cross Paul's and
they're to string together with
gas anybody to look through.
this is problematic when I was
on the set of a Disney
production in which our children
present and I was changing my
costume well for little girls
for their no matter where it
we can do that will dressing
room close quote there was no
where that was not or in this
and visual range of the shop
with girls or maybe for me I
usually went change to my
vehicle
There the two leaders this has
no T..
the penalties are only
misdemeanors and they're going
to say oh well thousand dollar
fine and then write it off what
has been here and I am able to
work on this and wake up against
such production.
US where their needs are he
still wanted paid for that date.
In terms of the language state
and healthy helpful workplace
user vagaries of what kinds to
choose from one production maybe
what's called the wedding well
another production and maybe
avoid stopping to help together
with shoe strings and you
branches and I'm not joking
about that on the set of the
aforementioned dust we recapped
in basically was called to order
with nope no means of putting
ourselves in a hundred three
degree heat.
Let's see and we tried to use
the toileting facilities we were
told that our school is
officials here but we were
allowed to leave the set to go
to base camp because it would
disabilities that were available
for for for of the line staff
anyway.
so yes I agree what what what
what he says but there needs to
be some sort of accountability
and transparency.
Adoption companies.
More than a thousand dollars
convener they need to we need to
enforce the loss of that tax
revenues rebates and benefits.
Trying to that's one to be
overcome we need to find a way
to make them realize that New
Mexico background actors are
professional and we don't need
to be treated like second class.
Thank you for.
The let's keep that to another
place with that being sure okay
okay so who wants to speak with
the support go ahead and.
Yeah.
Okay other per year yeah stand
up and do it.
Okay M. D. chair and members of
the committee I want to thank
you for your time for listening
to this very important first
first meeting HB traded my name
is Claudia box for I with the
background actors Association of
New Mexico it's an organization
in which I represent the
handicapped for and that is for
the disabled I am here in
support of HB twenty three the
background part is act I would
like for everyone here for just
a moment because that's all we
have to imagine you have a
broken foot right now you can
get a job as a background actor
for a movie you're right and
your background holding parking
area with your handicapped
parking sticker only handicap
stickers have been made placed
over them so they are not
available your this hope that
there is no parking for you must
park with everyone else and
sometimes it could be a life or
two away there's no working for
your designated spaces and so
when you were brought back to
set which may be a long distance
before you check the buses and
vans are provided for you to
shoot that's going to be by but
some of them get their handicap
at a level the average staff of
seventy inches high to enter I
want to think about that so it's
not I would just fix it just is
awful it's seventeen inches
seventeen inches to step up to
about twenty seconded that step
I've got this offer twice Hey
pusher but why don't know how
many of you with your program
but what some guys some girl to
push your **** but I actually
don't and I've been told that
before and what's your said the
area you may not have chairs to
sit or what are you waiting for
many hours remember you guys you
have a broken foot the average
person uses a restroom six to
eight times a day when you need
to go to the restroom but being
a background actor both sets
have what is called.
They are portable restrooms with
Katie in staff.
Maybe one right now to help you
get there if you could not step
us because of the disability
there are no restaurants for
you.
Working all those hours with no
restaurants the buses.
I got back from lunch but the
disabled person could not get to
lunch because the handicapped
transportation is not provided
there are laws already in place
for rights for the disabled but
they do not include the needs of
the disabled for mateship sits
what what we go to our holding
for background I'm asking you to
vote for H. three twenty three
remember your foot is often.
What I'm asking is that for
those people who have broken
apart from the base in their
physical bodies and vote for H.
B. twenty.
Thanks who's next.
Go ahead.
Thanks for listening to us.
My name is Donna Anderson
Fernandes are background actor
and also a real estate agent of
twenty five years so I'm a
professional offices.
I'm gonna ask you anybody was
home San Juan County can see
anybody because by gonna trying
to reference is if there was
here licensure share.
I'm person like everybody else.
we have retirees for new
enhanced.
Authors we have sorry for us.
We're not like she Hey.
We are professionals I am a
professional would you be
against New Mexico being the
most professional state in the
union.
Professional background actors.
That we had professional
standards the movie industry and
they came in had to follow.
We have taxes like recess that
we can only pay our taxes and we
get our paychecks.
Senate bill that we have enough
money.
Eight
is always get as we have our our
less people that work for us we
have older people I mean I
realize that I'm falling into
that age group to it I still get
around
So that's pretty much my state I
I didn't know the.
Thanks are you the chance.
HB twenty three.
The working set for us the
citizens of New Mexico.
Next chairman Richard there.
Right.
Mr Chairman representative thank
you for having.
Thank you John for your this for
ten years why do we need this
bill because it's like the wild
west out there little.
We can tell you for stories
about being upset a couple of
examples.
We're not scorch trials ransoms
along with the study group my
hair a cost you and my loans
were altered on that shoot the
difference was that I was paid
ten times less than the some
people on the there are also
turning automobiles furniture
what people don't realize is
that it comes outside.
We ended up with several extras
in the hospital after all that
funny independence day
resurgence we don't do we
Coliseum it was over a hundred
reserve horrible.
Literally had to take a friend
with you to the bathroom to help
you get out your costume your
jumpsuit because it was sealed
queue because of how much you
would slam there was no air
conditioning during the long
profit sixty alligators there
was water but since it was
sitting out in the parking lot
it was also very
on trend centerpiece of building
housing the extras caught fire
we had to evacuate put in
several other people also want
to thank you all on teachers and
other western.
Just look at that date so they
put human cholesterol in your
hair it makes it greasy and
gross the problem is when you
sweat it runs in here all rights
causing actions and sites.
Also on that.
Production.
They may also sing the national
anthem which is right and it
made on scene and everything but
we were never paid if we were in
LA we what we got a bump in
their pay for that
We have to wait for months.
We don't get paid for mileage
you know one locations are
hundreds of miles away
turnaround times approval
sometimes few hours back on set.
As a disabled veteran maybe I'm
coming to this from a different
perspective when I was due to
the and then of course.
He had the bases that we require
we have food water shelter and
we have healthy worst ships and
that's all we're asking them to
be treated with a minimum of
human decency and respect also
as disabled person you I'm sure
F. and diabetic I can't even
tell people that.
I have these disabilities
because I'm afraid of being
blacklisted and number one.
We hope it is the worst thing
that I've ever been called on
set that's.
Please help us prove that we're
more than glorified then
consider this business thank you
very much for your time.
One L..
Right in.
My name is Clarissa coffee on a
long time business owner in
Santa Fe in fact I am the
longest running original all the
revenue to our business and the
state of New Mexico I'm in a
business and staffing for thirty
six years.
I'm also a very active member of
this organization the background
actors Association of.
for House Bill Murray for.
Floor of the house and vote yes
on this particular bill that
will greatly benefit the
background factors that work on
various movie and TV projects
occasionally I work as a
background person.
I work on a Kevin Costner film.
There's a close about the and
that I also work on a college
feral of the unit you may know
that Joe his movie at the end of
sharing film was nominated also
today's space really was saying.
We are not asking for funding
for this bill.
We are not we just want to have
our people paid.
There are many productions most
recently I would say from the
independent producers that take
perfect okay.
That is ruby said you have a lot
of these.
We have people that have
disabilities these people depend
on those checks coming in the
mail and to pay them for their
time.
Please vote yes on this bill
please take it to the poor and
encourage everyone of your
fellow representatives to both
yes thank you.
The ability to do this.
Yes.
My name is Adrian Chavis senior.
Hey your and also qualify for an
act.
To do this for a better part of
five years and I can attest to
all the stories of people are
talking about how I got involved
with the background actors
Association ritually was this
past by this is the.
Study your to half of the of.
Come and help that so as a
responsible business owner I
went to speak for them to find
out what their prices are
complete your issue.
Also known for handicapped
parking except for in the
service that I provide for
security vendor for the film
industry.
Four and I knew for a fact
everything they said was a
hundred percent accurate because
we're out there dictating where
these to forward traffic flow
etcetera etcetera and not one up
until that point that I know was
an issue is not really told me
other than the people that were
upset because they could be
parking close right but in the
industry is really not a lot of
guidance and it's really
important that vendors and
people in the background the
association work together to
raise awareness on issues such
as this now we need to talk
about rate things like that that
affects me as well I've got
three or four different
productions I I hope there's
seven eight months old that
have paid this seems to be about
increasing problem throughout
the state of New Mexico let's
not forget and this is something
that I I can't even stress.
Tell everybody you know make
this bill just because these
people are not presented are not
represented by the film industry
they're not Representative I.
Bill office.
The film office has no
transparency.
Yesterday what are you doing
that checked all we have to
check out.
But no.
There's people yes this bills.
In the film office.
In you.
Because they know that this bill
goes through.
Hello.
To us.
But you go by.
The state of New Mexico.
And that's what needs to happen.
So I implore you all.
To see what.
Tell your fellow members of the
house and Senate to vote yes on.
Because the only.
Your constituents there are
background one U. S..
Thank you for your time
appreciate anybody want to add
anything that's in the that.
We have one.
One outside sure there's a
number of outside that.
See the or everybody is just
come in.
Right now
if we do that for this group
plan would be for everybody and
if this works.
Okay this is the way we're set
up and there's something else we
can do.
We are pleased.
What.
Learning this process got exited
this business for a very long
time nineteen ninety here in
Albuquerque and I've been on
many many many many.
What these people are talking
about is is so true.
And I to sometimes what I've
watched on.
When I started out thirty five
dollars for the day I don't know
what I was getting into once I
got into it I lost the slide and
focus everybody else.
But what I've seen on staff.
Those were we sat out in the
dust heating is damaged nothing
practice
in a tent with no walls and
rating agency and we're freezing
but we're doing this live and we
show up every day and we
continue to go on I see the
older people who are they said
jump on that wagon this was
years ago and they jumped on the
wagon is moving and fall and get
hurt also just be yourself
you're fine.
That's why I haven't been paid.
And if it wasn't for ruby
helping us behind us from hobby
stand behind it the survey we.
The handicap years ago I would
jump on that wagon Josh what was
the fuss but now I have to
artificial knees.
What partial one all we need to
get on a bus your in your
software on your that
constructs.
So I understand what she's
saying that she it's harder and
harder even about.
And we have options out wide.
And to be out there in the cold
each of the nursing program.
Is fighting
to.
You don't have replacements or
something in the.
But I hope that you all for the
still thank you thank you
anybody else that has anything
to add.
Hello my name is JJ Jimmy Johns.
I've been working in the
industry about ten years is
actually.
Referred to actor sometimes
standing I have a production
that was involved in and it was
I the huge company up to US
twenty six fox on well there's
tons and tons and tons of money.
And it took me literally seven
and a half months to get fully
paid.
I don't know about you but if
you work you can expect to the
state.
All of this and what I think
happens is the production costs
and the the production itself is
so huge that has so many false
is that they are paid
off we can pay the custom to we
can do this we go to the
characters okay we'll get to
that later and it seems to be
like a after all of the services
available to thank god this you
do that but before that I was
call is a production company
called.
For calling the casting company
in all of them were putting it
off of some of the people of
color yeah you should be this
way why is it has how come is
that initial one understanding
huge tax incentives to do
productions here and I'm proud
of the reduction in the rate
reductions on the map because of
things like better call Saul
breaking bad.
Of
all district of visual all these
things have been done here and
my friends that live in
California comes.
Mexico because it does such
great work.
Small.
This type of support.
So it to me it kind of reminds
me of you can have a five star
restaurant it can look perfect
on you can have lines out the
door as far as of of reservation
system.
If you're not paying your your
dishwasher if you're not paying
you're lying because if you're
not paying your maintenance
people the people that you think
more about this report.
In the end eventually is going
to come back it's all going back
you'll stop getting reservations
you start getting that rating
the customers will we'll find
out about it so for for someone
so we're all I'm saying is that
something that comes on the
stock should be in place that
protects us from COVID the
elements from he from not
getting paid on time for being
at the top because they are just
themselves with the finished
product is done to see how it
looks fantastic yeah it will be
like a reporter we get people
for the people doing if you do a
this is maybe Cervantes of CEO
you get people have been all the
actors are actors are there are
some questions to get that
about people making up things
look.
So we have an important part I
think you can get this bill
passed it would at least let
them know what is that still say
Hey wait a minute we don't have
stock because we have to make
sure these people are taking
care.
Thanks very much
we have not testimony in
woodland said sitting over and
over again I don't think anybody
else can change anything that's
being said.
go to
The server here and if anybody
that's on there would like to
have a couple of minutes to
added to this reason.
Those rates.
Okay Mr chair this of those
trying to tell you you can't
hear it I that's what I was
trying to tell you can hear it.
Videos on the videos on but
they're not they're not hearing
the testimony cells but my
point.
This is yes and there's four
Hey.
Okay so at this time then I'll
go to the committee
Representative Mr chair
representative on I was happy to
see this bill.
I just kind of in my work
experience of started have
really familiar with the film
industry and and what kind of
have on film industry as
but I did notice and what I've
heard a lot of testimony on is
there are a lot of fat
accommodations
long hours I noticed the timely
non time.
That he heard a lot from people
this the safety issues that you
deal with offset and again also
to retaliation if you complain
about it and the possibility of
being blacklisted it seems that
often is it these movies just
tend to want to get done as
cheaply as possible and I think
people like you are the ones
that suffer for that often so I
I think this is that a good bill
I would also point out that in
your bill Representative under
the penalties I know some
mention it would be a fine but
because it is misdemeanor would
also carry three hundred sixty
four day jail sentence up to the
judge's discretion four
misdemeanor so there is also a
possibility of jail time in this
you know thirty one dash
nineteen dash one is referenced
in line nine so just something
for you to know that that is a
possibility of jail time and so
I I appreciate all of you
speaking and I appreciate what
you are doing Mexico is is
really being in the movie
industry and a lot of people
come from the local community
I'm so.
We speak in this is going to be
able to support.
The representative working this
Mr chair representative.
Garcia just one thank you for
bringing this forward the full
support of this
I did have a question or a
couple of questions with your
permission Mr chair that's what
we're here for how how what's
the process is there are
a contract signed.
For each actor Health how does
the employment for work so would
have been service there's a
casting agency.
I'm sorry Representative
Martinez Mr chairman I answer to
him sorry the representative the
actual solution.
Chair I feel the to my experts.
Concerning thank you so what we
call in the film industry as a
casting agency they are hired by
the production company to gather
as many extras and then back on
this that they will need for
that movie or series so what
happens if you're selected from
that casting agents you are then
given booking notice and
information to report to to the
set on a certain date as a
specific role so when you check
in the morning or afternoon
whatever it is you are given
about.
In the voucher is what is
completed and your field you
fill out a nine nine W. to
whatever it is they ask you to
fill out.
On the adventure is a payroll
company listed in Burbank
California empire four sessions
in Ventura California so that
payroll company is then higher
for hire by production company.
To be their payroll company for
the back on orders.
Actions has the R..
Mr Chairman representative
Garcia
my last question.
Well what did you just make it a
misdemeanor.
Chair and
Martinez you know.
This section.
The one nineteen dash one.
It is difficult in these are
wage
disputes.
For example.
which that bill that we did
which I sponsored back in twenty
nineteen makes reference to that
statute and and that one carried
similar penalties as what we
have in this legislation.
Surely the motion for us.
Let.
Right.
Representative doesn't answer
questions I did Mr chair thank
you Representative for me this
week Representative Garcia
really thank you for sharing
your stories in those we share.
I also had some questions
concerning this bill and it was
just you mentioned a couple
things you on you for you guys
Sarah the UNM nonunion workers
always happen is I just remember
you saying that.
Mr chair present us and some.
This legislation is nothing to
do with the.
Shin.
The authorizing
that
The that pathway
we're basically focusing on.
On the issues of the concerns
that have been brought forth
that makes the.
The ball Copeland the meat of
this legislation Mr chair
representative of I think my
question was more
the not that there this is to
promote them to do one or the
other but the differences of how
they were being treated if they
were you on I think is what was
a question mark which is.
I yield to the.
Do people question.
Understand Mister chairman
Senator Representative arms.
We are not.
The crew and production
companies and.
This bill house bill twenty
three.
First in the nation is yes for
background artist at.
So Mister chair representative
my question is if we're social
and all this because these are
what you're describing here our
full show violations.
In order to understand wondering
where it worded that piece of
the puzzle why wasn't it
reporter was reported it was a
follow up that's my question.
Mr Chairman address us on.
That's the essence of this
legislation is that those
complaints have not been
followed up.
And the the government.
In the X. expedited manner
regarding workforce solutions
and interventional shop or shop
but I'd like to yield to move
further.
Mr chairman Hanson Mr.
Representative us.
I do co chair when I get these
messages Bob is the
Representative Representative
that I I generally nobody
returns my calls we don't have a
hotline that answers the phone
so I.
Working on my own my board and I
take care of the problem what I
do is I followed protocol on set
the production I will go with
production assistant it doesn't
help me I would go to the
assistant director if they can't
help even the director and the
producer lots of times under
preventive ocean so I generally
is never answered my calls when
I get there's two reports so SAG
AFTRA has a phone number of a
representative named you'll love
remember who I can contact and
you'll call the director
directly but they won't allow me
to directly contact them without
for you permission.
Mr chair without objection.
I didn't ask your it's okay Sir
your your.
So Mister chair representative
of the other question I have is
for the the impact these
individuals who are working as
extras all comics is would you
mind
other receiving a W. two or ten
that.
Mr chair.
With the message yes we do.
Receive a W. you receive.
All of so Mr chair
representative
That just I mean that changes
the way I'm thinking right
because I mean I I I hear all
your concerns and that kind of
just
Also makes me think of there's
already sections that are
supposed to protect you it
concerns me that they're not
that that those are being
After upon.
And so I I just sort of looking
at all those.
Looking to see what the other
departments and because I know
that we passed different
legislation Sir chair already
that already exist is.
It baffles me that that were
having this I want to bring this
bill
which
was to put K. what what should
already be in order right.
I think it's a Mr chair
representative of the it's a
good bill I just distant to
table confused on how we're
going to the gallery of having
the.
Where there's existing
legislation that's already
supporting your cost Mr chair
where we I wonder how this is
going to be different
how this is gonna be how this.
What is a good a good
differences economic and I don't
mean that disrespectfully Mr
chair I just want to know we
already have existing
legislation that should protect
these individuals and I'm in
support of the bill but I'm
confused on how that that that
would be handled can do you have
any answers to that Mr chair
representative.
Mr chair in the restaurant
sales.
What what we do in terms of
legislative bodies to create
policy.
And when we see that there are
holes in the lawn chair we try
to correct that by putting teeth
into the law.
And that's what you're
addressing your actual address
Mr chair this fall law that
should be dealing with these
issues are on the on the.
The expedited manner within the
fashion standardized late.
The thing is that it's not
happening that's why our family
now share that there are certain
conditions certain factors that
this state law has to
deal with and then.
When it comes to.
The background actors background
artists rights.
And if those are not being met
Mr chair and we have provisions
in this bill for action.
And and that's what we start
will the people or the star only
because feet to the fire in
terms of that action.
Because if there's somebody's
and violations of the law.
And
in the proper parties to
implement that are not carrying
that out.
The business disconnected.
And that's what's happening now
this is the to these are the key
to that the people that what
we're seeing that the people in
the audience so out.
Mr chair representative I think.
I think the the statutes that
the existence of I want to get
down long.
Representative it'll but the
exists for every industry every
every employer across the state
and I don't think that this
industry is examined but I am in
as for the bill I just I hope
that those agencies help them I
hope this actually makes a
difference thank you Mr chair
representative thank you.
What else.
What did you.
Mr chair representative Garcia.
I want to thank you for reading
this bill and and the testimony
because Mr chair whenever I do a
things were going to be paid
for.
And.
I would just like to know is if
any court action has ever taken
place and what the results of
that was.
Mr Chairman representative
I know for a fact the.
the
There is a state senator.
Who is an attorney.
Representative.
individual.
They issued.
And then.
The association.
As members.
individuals that percent.
That
would be to address that as
well.
Mr chair representative.
Since.
I submitted on occasions
to the New Mexico our workforce
solutions which claimed plans
when I get reports for non
payment I will then forward
those claim forms to any
background artist who has a
report with me
for instance Waco started
filming in April of twenty
twenty two I have over eighty
people.
So they all submitted those
platforms an investigator did
contact me and ask me why and
what happened so even children
minors included in that the
station off of the of course of
course nope.
Investigators did contact me for
questioning me about that and
she asked if there was any other
reports out there that needed to
be of this needed which claims
to be filled I said they are
afraid because they don't want
to be blasted.
So there's probably many many
more out there that we should
fear and just let the checks go.
Thank you Mr chair the.
At this time your call is that I
have is that houses we.
After a few weeks we up in this
office.
And over the looking as well as
bill does is put P..
It do whatever we need to do is
existing law now with this bill
we have to do that to the fact
that these people have to be
taken care of I would do is
basically so I think it's a good
build both with and I'll with
that almost New Mexico for two
years for lows in Mr chairman of
the commotion the compacts
thank.
On twenty three.
The correct yes.
The second on the motion second
and second vice chair here.
Do I have any opposition to that
motion.
The.
The diversity of.
Thank you.
Of I do have.
Okay.
Los.
Your other.
Right with.
I guess.
Every time.
This is.
After.
The ability to call you.
At night that's what I.
Can you
forget.
They made it.
Sorry it increases how are you
in on.
I just try to pull.
Is
going.
Yes.
You can use it but it is good to
have.
Session.
Madam.
As of right.
The names first.
Current
legislation.
They would
targets.
We do the same thing over to.
Right.
The same thing.
What kind of business that.
Yes hi.
And then also.
Just look at.
Right yes Sir.
Legislation.
What.
My son.
Those are the.
Can a lawyer right.
So but.
Senator so.
Well it was disappointed to hear
that.
A lot of.
Chairman.
Chairman can I get a copy of
that amendment I have the draft
was in my.
If you don't.
Present.
The.
You have to call clear and yes.
We've are we going.
I
think that everybody in here
okay you ready to go.
The teller house bill twenty
five I see this year's thank you
Mr chair I just first want to
knowledge some of.
By
zero is a co sponsor of this
bill my colleague district
nineteen I've just saving
doesn't terrify
relating at the end there.
Representative Janelle and in
order.
And then again annual nor do
okay.
Practice rails.
And Representative role is also.
Peter Wirth is my Senate co
sponsors so very pleased to see
you all here today.
This is
I hate to say this because of
the cruciatus of pres some L..
What can I do.
Of the zoom in those people here
today but it has developed with.
Thank you thank you to vote in
the.
Thank you I just wanted to hear
I don't want to be on her.
And then.
Okay go ahead the bill does two
things.
Well actually three.
It raises our current minimum
wage which is twelve dollars to
sixteen dollars an hour.
Yes.
As a.
Indexing component or cost of
living components are consumer
price index you can see it many
different ways but it does that
implies that indexing to the new
minimum wage a year from now and
it applies the indexing to the
section that relates to the to
worker what can.
Before I talk in more detail
about how the bill works I want
to acknowledge that we made
great progress in twenty
nineteen when we finally raise
the minimum wage after years and
years and years thing to do so.
It had been seven fifty in the
state for.
Ever
and I was told that that one the
state actually raise it by
twenty five cents.
We heard many of the same
arguments that are you are all
hearing in various emails and
like it's gonna cause businesses
to shut down.
You know the world is going to
come to an end and it did and
and we have since been able to.
Incrementally races and I you
know I want to commend this body
for having done that.
But things have changed since
twenty nineteen.
And we think.
And I think we need to turn the
switch in our head.
And acknowledge that we're not
living in the same world that we
were them.
And that.
Workers are facing tremendous
challenges in terms of costs and
like we're seeing that on a
regular basis we're hearing that
people are hurting.
So what my intent of this bill
is to bring the way.
Closer to what would sustain a
single person if they're working
forty hours a week so the
sixteen dollars I will I put in
the bill specifically so that we
can have a common.
About what the why that's
important and what it's about
and there's a calculator that
people rely on that calculate
what it takes K. to meet your
basic needs state and.
It's called the MIT living wage
calculator.
Yes.
And and takes into account our
cost of living in cost of
products and cost of
transportation in those kinds of
things that meter via base needs
for New Mexico it's more than
sixteen dollars for a single
person.
Counties very of course it's an
average so some counties are
higher some counties are lower.
But all of the counties that
I've looked at are higher than
the twelve dollars an hour that
we are now at they are closer to
fifteen dollars an hour the
smaller more rural counties the
line and they're higher in where
areas where there tends to be a
lot comic activity or wealthier
people we County it's over
seventeen dollars an hour the
living wage Los Alamos County
I'm sure you know we you know we
have the labs there is someone
it's over seventeen dollars an
hour so.
Contrary to what you know I I
have been getting feedback oh my
gosh four dollars an hour it's
you know if that's a big deal it
really is a modest suggestion if
you take into account what it
takes to earn a living wage and
to pay for your basic needs and
just for yourself if you were
single mom this bill is not
covered so I would argue to you
it's a conservative number.
I know other states are looking
at fifteen dollars other states
have in that in that
neighborhood are making
proposals along those lines.
So the first part of the bill is
that and the second part of the
bill is the
Calculation of how you do and
that's on page four and.
If someone would my amendment
number is two two four three one
one point two for discussion
purposes I'd like to explain
hello I'm amending this section
about the amendment at this
time.
The
second and most of the members
of the special.
In this proper second so other
than the
that I don't think so.
Thank you to everybody's got one
hand we can continue.
Thank you Mr chairman.
The
the bill as written.
Doesn't do what we want.
Because.
It is an oversight in the
drafting or if there was it's a
complicated thing to try to put
together a CP are.
This provision would not.
Compounding the CPRE meeting it
would always apply the cost of
living every year on the sixteen
dollars so one year it could be
you know it could be a two
percent cost of living that in
sixteen let's say that's twenty
twenty four and twenty twenty
five at the cost of living is
one percent it would be one
percent sixty dollars well
obviously that was not the
intent of this bill of this
provision and so the drafters
and I am consulting and.
Economist and
the Legislative Council Service
and sat down and they walked me
through the provision that would
get us to where we think we want
to be and that's on the last
page page four of the.
And if I may Mr chair talk a
little bit about it yet on page
four.
What what we we are suggesting
you all do is you go to line
seven on page four you strike
the words increased all the way
down the line seven line eight
line line so starting at
increased right after the B. the
strike all of that the language
three line line.
And line tend you strike.
And you strike part of line
eleven stopping at with agencies
across out agency where you are.
Can you add in the language that
is on the bottom of the page a
just and this is it's going to
be confusing I'm gonna do my
best to explain adjusted by
multiplying the minimum wage as
of January one twenty twenty
four.
By a fraction the numerator of
which is the consumer price it
and that in September of
previous years in the
denominator of which is the
consumer price index ending in
September twenty twenty three.
So.
We know the minimum let's for
our purposes of discussion
minimum wages sixteen.
Sixteen dollars.
The numerator.
Is.
What the consumer price index
number is determined to be as of
September.
Twenty twenty four.
That's right.
And it's divided by so the
numerous the denominator.
Is the consumer price index
ending in twenty twenty three so
it's divided by the twenty
twenty four is divided by twenty
twenty three.
By by the economists like no
this is complicated I am because
get the sit me down about ten
times and I was calling in panic
every time I had to think about
it.
The consumer price index is not
what we're used to what we
normally think of where we hear
the one percent two percent it's
actually a dollar number.
So they say it will cost three
hundred dollars let's say to go
shopping at the grocery store
and get the certain collection
of items so let's for the
purposes of argument say it's
three hundred dollars the top
number in twenty twenty four
let's say that that number is
actually three hundred fourteen
dollars.
But in twenty twenty three the
previous year it's three hundred
dollars.
That is the formula that you use
and you multiply it by the
sixteen dollars in the sixteen
dollars is always the multiplier
but what you're no no it's not
because and it's going to be
let's say I don't didn't do the
math but this state that gets
you sixteen twenty.
So then you take sixteen twenty
and you multiply it by.
A different numerator and
denominator that's determined by
the previous years this does
that make sense and twenty
twenty three that is how it's
been explained to me by the
economist in.
The in the Legislative Council
Service.
They tell me that is the correct
way to do it and this other bill
would not get us to that place.
I hope that help is helpful we
define consumer prices because
there are many different forms
of computer consumer price index
on the front page and that's the
the added language on their line
on the front page of the feel of
the proposed amendment Mr chair.
I hope that was satisfactory in
terms of explaining to you all
what
What we're doing with that it
took me a long as I said it took
me awhile to get.
But I think I basically
explained correctly.
And I see you pondering Mr chair
but that's what the bill does
it's a clean up really to get
the consumer price indexing done
correctly.
Everybody is confused as I am I
know.
So go ahead and members which is
was that places the members
might be able to try to I
always.
As always the amendment the
admin.
All right.
Maybe they're right.
Author that us Mr chair I think
up.
Whirling Mr chair members only.
Well that's before us.
By things there are you plan.
I'm ready to go.
Last.
This is.
Well I think I think you know so
the price in this Mr chair is
just a way of formulating how to
so most experts to help how to
increase of.
Payroll of their the minimum
wage obviously from here for
it and and what I've read in
here Mr chair is Representative
is that it has as a committee
composed please basically
factors what is it's a factor
that that will increase federal
as we go along depending on on
on what.
The the but the.
Issue because basically our this
is basically what's happening
but Mr chair
It goes up and my understanding
from reading this Mr chair.
Down in other words that we have
which which as I understand
it just we make you know bring
that to the to the to the front
of our our of our talk here Mr
chair I did
See the you for quite a bit in
here Mr chair representative on
the amendment I think it was.
One of the last line
to fifteen sixteen a few quite a
few pages here
one of them I.
Can you explain why you why you
choose to employ includes.
So for those this process is.
Mr chair representative right.
Mr on the amendment on the first
page Mr chair I'm not amending
that is not for.
That that is not the language
that is language that is in the
current law okay the only
amended part is he underlined
on the front page okay and then
about the fourth.
And if you okay.
So Mr chair representative
that's focus what I was it seems
to me that this whole portion
and I see where you should come
down more than two.
To fulfill that that that change
and Michael Mr chair Senator
maybe I.
This.
But.
The seem to.
The call was.
Yes your bill.
That's where I got confused.
Mr chair.
Of and representative.
This bill is more than just the
hourly wage and William it's a
long it's a long provision in
the code and has pre existing.
Typically when we exact when we
then the section this is just
one section of fifty dash for.
You find the whole section and
show where you're inserting the
amended language and that's the
on the line language and then
yes we re number all the way
down which is also typical but I
can assure you Representative
all the languages off except for
the top paragraph remaining
pages until you get paid for
this existing language in the
minimum wage.
Mr chair representative I'm sure
you're right.
We're burning up first week of
the first bill so thank you for
helping with that I just I think
Mr chair representative.
How does this.
How does this function with
relative to I'm gonna bring up
inflation okay how do.
Inflation how how is see if I
can rephrase this how is this
going to affect the person
that's on on a fixed income so
scary risk recipient but they
gonna are they going to receive
Mr chair representative the same
inflation rate to keep up with
the inflation rate of payroll
which is a huge component in
most businesses and I think
that's a very good question.
Try to get Mr chair I don't know
what and Representative I'm not
talking about in terms of okay
so Mr chair representative here
we are two men were just talking
about this the price index.
Yes Representative so we know
this price index is going to be
a factor for number that we
multiply a multiplier will call
back.
In the last but.
I went to law school.
In
the.
Right so the so this multiplier
that we have that will be that
will be used to calculate the
future
The future of minimum wage.
It's going to depend on what
this inflation what what the
relation factor is right that
the that you're calling the up
coming from his eyes states city
average all items or or from
urban consumers you know as you
go up one of the in other words
you get a factor from from from
the National.
Issue Representative you're
straying from the amendment long
history faced with the amendment
is to that you wanted to the
bill itself you want to those
just address the amendment and
then we'll go into the field
after we amended bill would go
the men to be also Mr I will be
amended to we just go into this
later on that story about yes
ma'am that's fine I'll just feel
that we could do if you're not
expecting the amendment not only
I was just trying to understand
this but I think I'll wait till
it's been should not believe the
amendment you're going into the
whole field okay okay and
another question on the bill
itself but I got to get to the
amendment from thank you Mr
thank you for being patient I
was trying to stick to that
point we can we to Lisbon number
of our kind nothing so.
Okay but we still
Representative digital it has Mr
chair thank you I think that the
answer was already answered the
question will for members of the
wanted to just how do I just
part of us the first page is
called us right right here six
seventy four thousand line and
this is our second base path.
K. what is the last month.
Because we're going back on
affordable once it's like this
one and make sure that
of the factories affectivity
features a formal teacher every
workgroup to perfect changes to
the by whatever is there about
once and seven cents to this
expectations of the.
But I think it was thirty five
before I got a chance to speak
so thank you Mr.
The working this Mr chair
representative.
I'm trying to get this to try
with.
The bill yes
under section one.
Session on the bill of sale the
amendment okay I'm gonna start
with the bill okay line six.
Page one page one.
This line sixteen point of
section one.
And this is section fifty dash
four dash twenty two in the
amendment says.
Section one section.
Dash four dash twenty one four
this is a different section of
the gentleman.
Yes Mr chair and representative
so
the actual minimum wages you
know the numbers.
Mr chair representative are
contained in fifty dash for FY
twenty two if you look if you
had the orange books open and
you were looking at the whole
act right above it would be
section twenty one fifty and
typically laws start with the
purpose office and then there's
a definitional section that
often Mr Chairman representative
that is about contraception is
part of it so
The definition section is being
modified and then.
No
we go fast pace for.
The last page of the amendment
and then the last page of our
bill so it in and section.
This forecast one to.
Sure Representative can you say
that last part again yes four of
the amendment paid for any of
them
where it says.
it's number three you know go to
page four of the original bill.
You know the bill proposed.
And then tells you where to
strike it out you know it's a
straight after the words easy to
go through the various lines.
You stop striking and then you
insert the section in to the
section.
Bill.
Thank you representative for
sure.
These
are.
The.
With
the motion to accept the
amendment.
In those in that second Avenue
opposition to.
See more okay right here look at
we have one of those
Representative representatives
of us to offices it's okay.
Everybody else okay.
We got right okay.
Okay let's go ahead and then
this time on the the video that
explains are you ready for the.
Yes although Mr chair at your
discretion I don't know if you'd
like the other co sponsors to
say a few words or two years to
you here it's up to you you
wouldn't have the funds or say
something oriented functions
it's up to them.
Was.
Thank you Mr sheriff thank you I
just received a lot of email
something to me like I was going
to be more.
But I have to say able to ninety
five percent of the New Mexico
tech people who may have the
support is the and
I could have one mental.
Market one email.
Thank you Mr chair.
But if you go Mr chair
representative and committee
members I've not got a lot of
emails about this bill but I
will say that this bill has
significant impact to my
district specifically where the
number of residents I have
worked minimum wage jobs often
more than one minimum wage jobs
and the struggle so hard to keep
their families afloat this is
often single parent homes with
multiple children who need
day care and feeding for I now
this making twelve dollars an
hour for.
On top of rate increases on top
of
the necessity of having to pay
for things like internet and
phones
twelve dollars an hour is just
not cutting it so.
And I heard that.
All through my door knocking
just
how much people are struggling
and I know that this would go
take significant steps to help
with family so.
That is land you can live.
New Mexico led to thank you yes
Mr chair and thank you Mr
chairman thank you to sponsor
the sponsor Chandler and the
other co sponsors and all those
individuals that have reached
out in support of this bill I
I'd like to just recall everyone
that I've been the one that's
been sponsoring the fifteen
dollar an eighty our minimum
wage for ever.
And pre pandemic post pandemic
and I've done so because at the
time of before we have this
horrible inflationary period of
time.
It was very clear Mr chair that
persons in my district for more
persons throughout the state of
New Mexico in every district
that we represent we have
individuals that are earning the
local minimum wage and below
living wages by far and we have
individuals throughout the state
that are represented in every
one of our districts throughout
the state and there.
And we don't divide the state in
terms of poverty and income
based on Republican or Democrat
you know that and I think my
Republican colleagues on this
committee for also recognizing
that throughout the years.
It is imperative that we get our
populations earning minimum
wage.
To as close to a living wage as
possible because as you
mentioned Representative
we're not even addressing
inflation at this time we also
are not addressing the the
terrible impact that are
populations earning these wages
were affected by the pandemic
which still in service of the
city that going on right now and
so it's absolutely important to
me to get us to that point so
when you Google.
The increase any increase that
we can and of course I always
wanted to make higher increase
if we couple that with our index
as has been explained then we
will take our populations that
will be aligned because it's not
align itself to what we just.
Tumor price index which is
actually the measure of what
consumers use to pay for the
drugs.
We couple that with the sixteen
dollars and we're gonna get
closer to a living wage faster
than if we keep it at the twelve
dollars.
Right right now and that's what
was important the most important
factor in this piece of
legislation and of which I hope
that through the discussion we
can convince everyone situation
just because as I said every one
of us have rations that are
earning
the low living way just and also
we have populations of persons
that are working two and three
jobs still.
To be able to pay for basic
necessities.
In their lives I have still
single mothers working two and
three jobs the post and then I
pre pandemic even with our
rebates even with all the
assistance we had they still
cannot pay the higher rents and
the pay the high cost of food
and.
That is associated with what
we're facing now in our.
So thank you Mr chair thank you
Sanchez other sponsors those
that are listening those that
reached out we hope that we can
be able to pass this legislation
thank you so much thank you Mr
chair.
The
finish Sanchez nobody else of of
the audience who is in support
of this legislation.
Montoya who is in opposition.
Right let's put it will get
again decided earlier I would
love to do this for anybody who
wants to speak again I'm asking
you please do not read the
the to what else it gets boring
to hear at all or no.
So if you have the same that is
the LCS already heard it's one
of the New Mexico was the baby
feeding the as a little jobs the
more the attorneys would longer
at the easier it will be ruled
against.
Cool cool.
So good to those that non
decision and we'll start with
the the June election right
there your name please hi.
Funding is Bronson corn New
Mexico governor orders
I would like to bring if the a
little bit of a different
perspective I suppose I
understand how what this bill is
intended to do but I would like
you to step back just to touch
and look at what on the
agriculture side of things
A sixteen hour for sixteen
dollars an hour minimum wage is
based off of forty our work our
culture.
Our work with we're lucky to
we're looking at a hundred hours
most of time it's well over
that.
I'm on the renters of the for
the Mexico and all that good
here actually did a myself and
all that good I'm hopeful make
six dollars.
And so I urge you to think about
what it does to the second
largest industry in New Mexico
this this is something that is
very detrimental to our
workforce in it it's frankly
gonna cause a lot of issues for
being able to find.
that we can afford.
Another thing that this bill
kind of this imposing upon is is
it's stepping up its wanted to
make the wage.
Follow with inflation what
everybody has a standard living
if I'm not mistaken I don't know
what I would be instead of the
confusing numbers that are
thrown into one not just for
your ten percent inflation the
ten percent.
that make it a whole lot easier.
Where like I said I said I
understand with the intent of
this bill
but I ask you to think about
what it does to agriculture.
Because this is not forty our
work week.
Industry.
Thank.
In the.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members the committee chairman
state rest of this New Mexico
Chile Association choose to
oppose house bill twenty five
New Mexico to the districts are.
Tax increase the minimum wage
and this drastic increase to
sixty dollars an hour driver
industry out of New Mexico down
into Mexico where worker
protections of the safe you're
not priorities.
our farmers will be impacted by
this and will prove to less
labor intensive crops in the
field our process is
manufacturers will be required
to pass that increasing expenses
to the consumer making New
Mexico into an automatic drugs.
Thank you to properties so with
that we ask you to support New
Mexico by the house.
Thank you Mr.
Going to.
Go ahead thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee my
name's JT all intent and I'm
speaking on behalf greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
which opposes this legislation
this bill proposes to create the
highest state minimum wage rate
of any state in the nation at
some point these induce minimum
wage increases become inflation.
A greater occur if you chamber
of commerce believes this
proposal process that
information line will contribute
to ever increasing higher prices
which really served to offset
the positive objectives of this
bill is trying to achieve.
And there appears to be a
presumption of with this
proposal that the state's
private sectors will cost at
that small businesses are flush
with cash and that is simply not
the case so the greater
obligation of Congress please
it's more prudent to let the new
twelve dollars an hour Madam so
the facts of small businesses
and prices can be measured
before we embark on the path of
significantly higher thank you.
Let's go and then in fact right
right there's a raise leisure
time.
Chairman and members of the
committee my name is probably
out to preserve this is part of
my sort of euro for the oldest
are full station in the state
representing more than twenty
thousand families again we would
like our agricultural producers
are already struggling for the
for the full hour you minimum
wage also Garcia is we talk
about.
A lot of our
agricultural I take on
That chairman members of the
committee Jason Espinoza staff
director of the national
federation of the business we
represent thousands of modern
pop.
New Mexico I used in opposition
to the proposed legislation many
of our small businesses The New
Mexico include you know of home
healthcare providers a lot of
providers around
the state of New Mexico says
Medicaid right what we've seen a
lot.
Reese's the minimum wage
increases the state
reimbursement doesn't follow the
law and so we're one of the
council's is we can see a
decrease access healthcare to
the state if those state
contractors of Medicaid
reimbursements are not done as
well so that's a huge concern
similar to chapters.
There's a state as well of one
of the other things to talk
about the cost of the new it's
all yeah members of course are
also paying taxes this is an
increase on the social security
tax Medicare tax well so it's
not just that fixed rate in the
nation.
Arsenal increases the small our
elsewhere last
if I'm understanding the
amendment correctly I I was a
little confused as well it's
still designed around the urban
CPI index and and I'm gonna read
this from the US bureau of labor
statistics that the CPI urban
index designed to measure
inflation for the US urban
population and thus may not
accurately reflect the
experience of people living in
rural New Mexico given our
little states has the potential
to really overplayed and Tax
world Mexico causing more harm
to pay for small businesses.
Thank you review okay next go
ahead.
Good afternoon Mister chair
members my name is Chelsea have
and I'm the director of public
policy at the New Mexico chamber
of commerce we respectfully
oppose house bill twenty five
among other reasons of why we
oppose we believe this into the
consequences that will affect
you simply may early career
folks employers will be inducted
by a higher high school students
also before the state looks to
increase the minimum wage again
this is a we need to make sure
that our reimbursement rates for
genes likely child care and
healthcare cost increases is
currently small businesses are
having a really hard time still
in this gap this year believe
that creating high paying
careers not attracting more.
Workers the state thank you what
else is going.
Thank you for the opportunity to
state that this my husband and I
do not director Sarah Thomas.
My husband I are one restaurant
in Santa Fe and wanted
Albuquerque lost when
restaurant to endemic in
Albuquerque of the past few
years it's been extremely
difficult our food costs have
increased our way back over
twelve percent
our payroll expenses last year
that sixteen percent of started
repeat but I will we're also
paying that this is not just the
right revocations of this just
not paycheck we have to pay
Medicare social security of
state unemployment went up for
insurance went up twenty seven
percent because this has a
direct you know the the the
payroll is our biggest expense
that goes up our insurance rates
go up a margins are very small
my husband I I have released
this coming up in Santa Fe we've
been in business since two
thousand six we get over two
hundred thousand dollars a year
sales receipts to you guys and
we will not renew our lease.
At this year's stated that if
this goes for.
Yes Sir.
Mr chairman and committee
made some suppressed from Santa
Fe Albuquerque
I'm here to speak to you as a
Mexican this bill would hurt my
business but also how.
This
Samath from the CBO report
number one of the CBO's report
the fifteen dollar federal
minimum wage Senator one point
three million people out of
poverty.
And we're also made one point
three million jobs okay.
is.
Right states of our state we
need a thousand family run
businesses.
And this all the stuff that you
guys do purpose for businesses
and not like mine I ghosted your
tractor I'm talking about new
businesses businesses that don't
even exist yet okay you're
starting out a hundred thousand
dollars in capital fifty
thousand dollars in cash.
People who work for cheaper to
produce a product people come by
this is really good for
corporate America.
And.
Will probably understand
fortunately I know you're
referring to touch things like
this the sick pay all of it is
just.
Businesses and we're going to
stay for state if you guys don't
change what you're doing.
Well being is fine I want to
serve I'm locked.
Never leave what is no accident
that during the pandemic people
fled the most progressive state
the most progressive what's
California New York and they
want what laws more friendly to
business because there's more
opportunity and there's less
poverty.
Just look up what number look at
Utah just above us the seventh
richest state will forty nine.
So
you guys some of these kids here
they want to start a business
on.
And this makes it hard for them
to.
So I respectfully ask posed.
To
chair members of the committee
I'm Carol by and CEO The New
Mexico restaurant association
and as you all know
Representative suffered
immensely during the pandemic
you're still having a hard time.
just to do the math for you.
For every dollar increase of the
minimum wage the cost to a
restaurant her employee is two
thousand dollars.
If you have a small restaurant
you probably have twenty five
employees yes and that is that
that one dollar increased is
going to cost you fifty two
thousand dollars and that's not
taxes on top of it.
If we're increase for a small
restaurant is a hundred
thousand.
More than a hundred thousand
dollars they don't have that.
I know you think we just.
Monsters break in the capital
and take it home and we will and
this is just not what happens
restaurant most restaurateurs
make less than their servers.
They make less than fourteen.
They're doing it because of
their love for the industry your
love for serving.
And.
This kind of legislation it's
just.
And he's right of the larger
corporations Chasey these things
putting out the small business.
They don't necessarily care that
the minimum wage goes up for
that sick leave goes down
because they know that the small
businesses are the ones they're
going to separate and go out of
business able to.
Thank you very much.
The ability of losses.
The forum here who the body is
offices wants to speak of the
race and if it couple hands up
full start with Mister Mason
Mason.
I think you should.
Madam
chairman.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Dick Mason
I'm on board member of the
league of women voters of New
Mexico at the regular doctor is
New Mexico supports a passing by
state legislature of minimum
wage law tags the cost of living
and we define an adequate
minimum wage is the minimum
required to avoid poverty
without government assistance so
we stand in strong support of
this legislation thank you.
This law that.
Carl.
Yes Sir thank you Mr chairman I
have been opposition are you
taking opposition right now.
We're looking this up okay thank
you I'm car less on tax CEO of
the New Mexico business
coalition we represent
businesses and individuals
throughout the state focusing on
making New Mexico a better place
to live and work we respectfully
oppose this bill because it
truly is hampering economic
development in our state when
you look at new companies coming
to New Mexico they are often
getting huge sub subsidies to do
so.
And when the subsidies run out
so do day they don't stay we
need to be taking care of our
home grown businesses and this
is not the way to.
We support free enterprise and
you can see it working well
Walmart just raised its national
minimum wage in order to attract
employees that's of great
importance to let the free
market system work without
additional government mandates
it happens well in New Mexico I
don't pay minimum wage in my
office.
If you visit hops for Carlsbad
in that area none of them are
paying the state mandated wage
because they need employees that
they pay much higher that's the
value of free market and the
value of not having government
mandates.
We're greatly challenged in our
state and I ask you respectfully
please say no to house bill
twenty five thank you.
It is not decision Mr Macy.
I'm here to speak on behalf of
the.
this bill for the C. W. A.
seventy seventy six
thank you committee and Mr chair
okay.
I.
I can't you're not coming
through clearly.
What.
We are for this bill
We really believe in this bill
because you work for a miss
because the people I don't have
the money they need
to make and I'm witness to this
I lived next door.
To a dwelling of two bedrooms
two baths I families live there.
The floor and the place was
nothing but costs for people to
sleep on the children to sleep
all our seeing three families
living in a one are you one
bathroom.
That's the kind of pricey.
And our live down Los crucis.
This minimum wage would bring
people up out help your people
started us out of poverty it
doesn't get him completely fair
but at least they would could
live nicer.
We're way behind other states
and I I see WA.
with the communication workers
of America seventy seventy six
we represent state employees.
We also represent labour in New
Mexico because that's what you
are about as labor.
And this is something that will
really help New Mexico.
Four people up.
And so we are definitely for
this bill.
and thank you Mr chair and
members of the committee for let
me state today.
Thank you okay I'll go to the
audience now and those of you in
support I want to speak the
latest that go ahead.
Thank you Mr chairman joggers.
You should teachers New Mexico
we're here for right reasons
we have some questions committee
representative for this bill
represents a very
straightforward last year the
legislature thought is we're
going to raise the minimum wage
for hourly workers are forced to
fifteen dollars an hour that was
a very welcome change in relief
maybe if you general income
however it's not complacent
statute a sixteen dollar minimum
wage for school workers like
educational system awestruck
clerks secretary with the people
that see angry our students at
school teacher every day what's
your favorite.
If of often shop when we talk to
legislators thank
you for.
We'll talk about what we jobs
the value that's the time to
work through just wanted you
have to remember these are
people with your students so we
greatly support this bill it
needs to move forward this is a
value statement where we put our
nascent budgets are statements
so we stand strong for thank you
you who's next would.
Chairman members of the
committee chair candidate with
the national association of
social workers New Mexico
chapter
on which we stand strong support
of this bill just want to let
you know we may social workers
who are making with the masters
level degree are not making
fifteen dollars an hour they
qualify for services sixteen
dollars an hour still in that
compensate them for their
patients.
But and what we feel that this
would be a great start in
helping raise raise the wages
for all of our New Mexico thank
you.
Thank you Mr chairman members
the committee John with use with
the New Mexico federation of
labor we Representative thirty
four thousand workers across the
state are unionized but we also
like to think that we are going
to a voice for the non unionized
workers as well as was mentioned
by my colleague Mister we do
have a number of union members
that are still making minimum
wage across the public sector
the private sector as well you
know that we hear a lot of
talking and I want to be very
clear we are certainly not anti
business in any way we do hear a
lot of talk about how
implications of this effect
being costs going up and we are
all free market place kind of
Valentin wages you know I think
when we think about this in a
different way these these are
facts year old business is
always have the option of big
business called is the option to
has faster to the consumer you
get Hey your your workers a
little each if you want the ones
who don't really have a say in
whether or not they get more
money Walt everybody else is
getting more money and paying
our minimum wage workers their
wages are flat it is it is down
to twelve dollars an hour.
Know what they are the last
workers to ever be thought of as
far as you know right off all of
the features involved the Mike
that is in the system.
All for that reason we believe
that we talk that we're here
Representative the workers that
really don't have the voice to
come here and represent
themselves so we strongly
encourage you to support this
legislation and helpful twenty
eight which will also be brought
up as well I thank you very much
of the sponsors for doing this
the next.
What else.
All the ladies in the back of
Roy.
For additional incentives
for the village.
One thing listed in the new but
Daniel I don't Representative.
I believe that is how it is.
Order.
He's on that Mr chairman members
of the my name is Roy yeah that
I am a community organizer Act
is essentially how how is it
almost four yield I statewide
organization present habits I
think what we see.
Capital oral sedative was.
Yeah.
When we.
Yes we need.
He was those that are hazardous.
What I do always almost in two
thousand seven when they were
fighting in the range at that
time I didn't understand.
About how to develop.
But there I hear that age we
want to hire a here wages are
workers we have to fight for it.
These
are the people that use what is
the attitude thank you you want
to know what I will
be presenting the needle will
guarantee the Salem just are
harmless but.
And there's not need the it was
so that the that as.
So this year I have seen the
address advancement in the work
of my County workers who had
made that change into that we
have achieved leading rating
communities like Santa Fe I have
been defeated many workers but
is not enough fortunately the
cost of the past price into
high.
Our.
The.
Before that handles United
United
yeah rules are but what is the
impact of the act.
Thank you thank thanks to the
general.
Investment act.
That federal incentives must its
annual golf said yes.
You know what your score is
intial workers here and then
make it went out and worked in
rural areas workers face more
straws
few protections a mask that this
unfortunately still in use.
But at higher wage would be
better option.
Of course he was
actually a safety record
activity RBC Chevy dealership
the most eight is this is one of
our.
Okay happens when out of his
**** equities this is our
workers center support AG twenty
five age twenty eight
one thing that is important for
our members
of the things we have seen
exactly that it works thank you.
What else Mr by.
Paul Gibson I chair.
The co founder retake Our
Democracy for.
Statewide.
Advocacy organization off.
To speak in support of
legislation as a single parent I
experienced many of those times.
I'm sorry I experience many
times when I didn't have the
house compared my.
Those are my friend so I can
empathize with people who today
New Mexico single parents and
the two parent families
that point two or three jobs
just to pay their rent and what
what we're basically I would
like to call that we a child
abuse wage because those parents
are paying are not fake be able
to pay out of potential kids and
that's going to come back and
buy this report I think that
I've never been in a committee
hearing record chamber of
commerce of Business Association
speak in favor of a wage
increase family or sickly
there's never a good time but
these people living on living
wage they they're they need that
for you to stand up for them I
strongly support this bill thank
you Sir.
Anyone else go ahead.
For.
Good afternoon of chairman and
members of the committee my name
is not in the set up and I'm
with the sense of the word that
it shows yes and the ability
axiom both are lab the nexus
that organizations in
Albuquerque New Mexico and we
focus on workers and economic
justice we have a rare I have
fifty.
Five thousand five hundred
members the majority of our low
wage workers comp and we did
statewide poll that the issues
related to thousand twenty one
which found that one third of
let the eagles were included
rents were struggling I
comically and alarm the showing
that twenty eight percent of
Hispanics across the state
reported making less than twenty
thousand dollars in twenty
twenty before taxes and I'm on
the finance out was thirty five
percent those super long for us
to see and Beijing with our
community and in totally we have
heard that many Mexicans
continue to struggle
financially.
Source of how inflation and that
the numbing continue to have an
impact on the purchasing power
of our community that for.
Making it harder to cover basics
of survival and self low wage
workers have always kept our
country that cares and safety
and this is Health through
during the bull that are
virtually as a nation we do that
essential while many of them
were extended and we're
experiencing poverty we have
made great strides in New Mexico
the the work must continue that
poverty and our New Mexico and
much recognizes Bassam
traditions that essential
workers and putting in Mexico
forward as we rebuild our
economy we have the opportunity
to include low wage workers half
of media just in New Mexico for
that to be able to try so we
sent support will bills age
between five and twenty eight
any effort that will raise the
minimum wage and do analyst
estimates to cost of living and
social we will live itself as a
sound economic policy and the
only Mexican families September
to to drive thank you very much.
Yes Sir.
Mr chair of a and then workers
returned to Mexico said I'll
poverty within the Sanchez
refusing to support the we stand
for this bill because it raises
the minimum wage for the week
workers New Mexico to sixteen
dollars per hour and for the
cost of the new forward
facilitating you know which
works to provide for themselves
and their families the minimum
wage New Mexico no longer
increase and twenty four seven
at twelve dollars property
complicated many low wage
workers the so I these difficult
economic ties Mexico should
raise those rates minimum wage
to ensure that are low wage
workers make adequate funds to
put food on their tables clothes
on their backs and Mondays are
because for all the necessities
health insurance housing costs
by raising the minimum wage is
sixty dollars per hour twenty
twenty four and then by the
costs forward New Mexico City
that we're supporting workers as
the COVID nineteen pandemic
showed us are central to our
economy and well being and
eserver it would be to provide
self defense Furthermore
national studies have found a
seam on our house with making
fifteen dollars per hour does
not usually earn enough to
address the cost of the average
American family it is imperative
that we need a high minimum wage
such as a sixteen dollars off
this to ensure that this may
many times as possible
especially just act so I for
these reasons and all of these
images workers.
Station reserves for these are
just thank.
Hi Mr chair members the
committee I'm going out for a
long term Services Department
increasing minimum wage would
help older adults in New Mexico
according to the US Census
bureau in New Mexico in twenty
twenty one twenty six percent of
our older adults to age fifty
five years and older were living
in poverty.
increasing the minimum wage
would also assist are aging
network providers so this means
our senior centers so this would
mean that our senior services
program so for example billing
physician so
recruiting retaining his
presents for positions in our
senior centers would be more
attracted.
Recent minimum wage would come
to fruition.
Also in New Mexico particularly
in rural areas we have a current
lack of paid care givers you the
year where
Because this is basically over.
Risk institutionalization
because of the lack of necessary
here supervision
so care giving is often of low
wage.
Job the proposed increase to
sixteen dollars an hour makes
this much more attracted to
caregivers so aging a long term
Services Department supports
house bill twenty five however I
would like to point out there's
a fiscal impact
with this bill it is still here
twenty twenty three if you long
term Services Department receive
general fund appropriation of
one point two million dollars to
operate the New Mexico senior
program this program provides on
the job and other vocational
training to low income New
Mexico New Mexicans aged fifty
five years and older and part of
this program entails assignments
to older adults in this state
Hey wage so we estimate that
this
Given the proposed increase in
minimum wage this could costs
are HSD increases six hundred
thirty five thousand dollars
bail TST does support house bill
twenty five thank you.
But.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the Josh Anderson with us terms
which means our amazing
testimony so just want to thank
you for sponsoring this bill for
that includes not to suffer
Representative Garcia create
everyone bringing this issue
for.
Representative Katie to us
these.
For
anybody all right let's go back
to the board over here.
Anybody in support of the bill
wants to speak you got a couple
of minutes go ahead Mr Matthew
thank you Matt.
Hey Mister chair and committee
members good to see the
returning members in the new
faces on the committee thank you
to the sponsors for bringing
this much needed increase to
wages in New Mexico my name is
Judy Matthews I'm with New
Mexico working families party
yeah I was watching the debate
in two thousand nineteen and a
lot of the same opposition
points to this we're said then
we shouldn't even be existing at
the state right now if you
listen to them in two thousand
nineteen and I'm glad that most
of you did not you know the
biggest job creator in New
Mexico is people having the
income to spend in the small
shops and restaurants in our
communities inadequate wages
means no spending on our economy
it means no saving for our
future and the ability of
families to save means no saving
for emergencies which puts more
stress on other government
agencies and services I urge you
to vote yes on this bill today
and raise the minimum wage in
New Mexico to an adequate level
so that we can have a stronger
economy for workers here in New
Mexico thank you.
That I have of for.
Thank you very much Mr chair my
name is Michael Sperber McQueen
I'm a volunteer with retake our
democracy I live in Rio Arriba
county and I'm here to speak in
support of HB twenty five.
Mr chair my father was a small
business owner.
And when I was ten or eleven
years old the minimum wage went
up by about twenty five percent.
And he was very angry and he
impressed upon me that it was it
was wrong it was spendthrift it
was verging on the immoral for
the government to expect any
employer.
The rate that new minimum wage
because a dollar an hour ought
to be enough for anybody.
Mr.
Chairman of the committee I tell
you the story for two reasons
first of all.
Although he was unhappy about
it.
The minimum wage increase did
not put my father out of
business.
And second you know.
A dollar today doesn't by
exactly what a dollar bought in
nineteen sixty five and that is
why I think the CPI indexing in
this bill is very very important
please give this bill a new path
thank you.
The other two maintenance
agreement.
There is.
Yes.
Well yes sorry I right clicked
on mute but it does not work.
Thank you Mr chairman committee
my name is Megan green and I am
the executive vice president of
C. WA seventy seventy six we
represent approximately twenty
five hundred positions across
thirteen agencies in the
executive branch of state
government we are in support of
house bill twenty five what we
made great progress last year in
moving all state workers up to
fifty dollars per hour both our
members and other workers in the
state deserve a living wage as
Representative Chandler
mentioned the living wage in New
Mexico for a single person a
sixteen twenty five per hour and
it is higher for those with
children or families to support
I am so sorry at the department
of health alone we have about
two hundred members who are
right now making less than sixty
dollars per hour and many of
them were direct care aides
would be directly benefitted by
the passing of this new minimum
wage raising the minimum wage
will help our members continue
to provide services to New
Mexicans across the state I
thank you Mr chair for your time
and thanks to the sponsors for
putting forth the spell.
Jake of the hill.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members.
Sorry.
Hello can you hear me is it
okay.
I'm Jacob Vigil with New Mexico
voices for children we stand in
support of HB twenty five and I
won't repeat what a lot of the
other supporters have said we
know that as prices have
increased and families
purchasing power have has eroded
they have sunken deeper into
dire straits and but we believe
this achievable policy will
lessen poverty across the state
as many others have said but we
also believe that our local
economies will also reap the
benefits
multiple studies highlighting we
put out a report in twenty
eighteen that in both rural and
urban communities wage increases
improved employment when workers
get higher wages they're more
productive it correlates with
heightened morale decrease
absenteeism and fewer lost sales
and when families and
individuals are more they can
spend more money local and local
businesses increase tax revenues
so we hope that this committee
will show New Mexicans that
they're worth more by increasing
the state minimum wage and
ensuring that that wage
continues to be a living wage
and we also I support the
efforts of representative Garcia
and in the upcoming bill that he
has HB twenty eight as well so
thank you for your time.
Mothers.
Good afternoon chairman members
of the committee my name is
miles token now deputy director
at Ole
we are a membership based
organization representing
workers in all kinds of
industries throughout our state
are we believe that all workers
deserve wages that reflect their
dignity.
In our business our lost
employee makes well above the
current minimum wage and even
the proposed minimum wage
because we value our employees
and we center our shared value
as New Mexicans that no one
should live in poverty in our
great state please support this
bill.
Thank you.
Michael Pearson.
Hello thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Michael Peterson and I am
also with community.
A communication workers of
America I'm gonna take this in a
little bit different
admitted that was done before
because the way I see this boat
you're looking at who you are
going to empower with choice.
One side of your vote no get to
make more choices than they
would if you said yes to my
servers and supporting of this
bill we are supporting those.
There are single parents those
that are you know just barely
getting by and giving them more
choices so as with everybody
else I would like to encourage
you to support this bill thank
you.
Yeah we're done.
The the the magus is already
done things okay so we should be
done at this time
Do you have anything to add that
just a few clarifying points
because of some of the comments
that.
This bill is not.
Raise the tip worker wage other
than to apply the CPI to it when
the CPI takes effect so I just
want to be clear about that.
I just want to be clear about
that Mr chair because they were
comments I understand that in
the restaurant business not
everyone is a tip workers so
there will be workers who are in
the in the restaurant industry
who are but I want to be clear
it will not touch the tip
workers they will not be
receiving sixteen dollars an
hour
there are exemptions in current
law for many many aspects of
agriculture so to the extent
they were comments on
agriculture certainly it may be
impacted to some degree but as I
noted that many are already
excluded at because many of
those seasonal workers workers
and the dairy industry and there
are other exemptions.
The sixteen dollars dollars an
hour would not apply to them
either
Also Mr chair we hear a lot
about home care workers is they
were comments in the audience
and what we've been hearing yes
they're not paid enough we need
to pay those folks more well
this will help us do that do we
need to do something about the
way the state contracts and
reimburses home care workers and
and those kinds of activities
absolutely we do and I'd be
happy to work with
the representatives of those
industries to come up with a
bill to actually do that but
let's not have the tail wag the
dog there are many thousands and
thousands and thousands of
employees who do not work in the
home care industry should their
wages be determined by a bad
contracting practice that we
have here in the state I submit
to you which they should not we
should address the problem of
some of this contract issue
stuff no question.
and lastly I.
In.
Some of this in the newspaper
when this bill was being
discussed from the New Mexico
chamber of commerce many many
many many players are paying
this for more.
So what it tells you is it can
be done it will be done and
those businesses did not rogue
they did not shut down the cost
can can be absorbed Mr chair
thank you very much the.
The committee whose for.
Representative Martinez.
I have I have a couple of
questions first of all you you
just Mr chair representative you
said that.
There are in of the existing
exemptions for tipped workers
and those working in the
agricultural.
Before I.
Okay
Mr chair.
It's in another section but it's
in the section that fortunately
we have in front of you so if
you look on the amendment Mr
chair.
When you go to page.
The.
These three and you go through
section eight or subsection.
An employee employed in LFC
agriculture and then at this a
number of of things.
The employees employed by
employer did not during the
calendar quarter eating here
more than five hundred person
days agricultural labor there's
there's a list
doesn't cover every aspect of
them I can't say that because I
don't know but I will tell you
for example and employee
engagement handling drying
packaging processing freezing or
canning any agricultural
horticultural commodities feels
employees are also exempted from
the minimum wage law in in
general so just wanted to make
that later with regard to the
the tip for further questions Mr
chair now I direct you to house
bill twenty five.
there K. section twenty special
provisions relating to
employer for missing food.
what excuse me
an employee who customarily and
right now sorry yes regularly
receives more than thirty
dollars a month into paid a
minimum hourly wage I was you'll
see
from page to.
It if there was a step up in
that as well when we passed the
bill in twenty nineteen Mr chair
representative and you'll know
the last one on number five on
page three on or after January
one twenty twenty three at least
three dollars so we are now at
three dollars an hour
and that I am not changing Mr
chair representative other than
to add consumer the indexing or
inflationary component to it.
Sure thank you very much for
clarifying that one.
I'm still trying to match.
To the bills so and and I'm a
freshman.
Mr chair there are veterans of
the questions you very.
just a couple more questions
there
This this the central you would
raise the minimum wage Mr chair
representative or from twelve
dollars.
To sixty dollars.
By.
The twenty four.
And by.
Thirty five according to the
projections of would be above
twenty dollars.
If I I have not seen the FIR if
that's what you're.
Yeah that's that's from one off
of the production.
Question Mr chair Representative
is.
How much would affect this this.
Mandated wage increased affect
those parents that are on fixed
incomes that are not seen.
Their social security what this
fast is everything else is going
but still I could one have a
hamburger in our are not paying
twenty Bucks I took my my
parents up to.
One of the little restaurants
and Espanola and I was shocked.
Yeah.
When we doing about that I
realize social security is a
federal issue but are we taking
that into account all of because
with the right.
Rise in in wages it does get
passed on.
Mr chair and Representative
Martina I'm glad you brought
that up because.
I've also been on a perplexed by
the term fixed income.
Up there are provisions in
social security that allow for
inflationary increases to social
security income you're probably
too young to know that but of
this year we're almost getting
the social security recipients
are getting almost a nine
percent increase in their
budget so actually the federal
government has taken this into
account they have a somewhat
different formula
Just speak to that.
But social security recipients
get of benefit increase Mr chair
of Representative I I agree with
that with that nine percent
increase the cost for copays
goes up faster additional
medications goes up so.
I mean I I help my parents as
much as I can see.
At all it's by the grace of god
that the or able to survive
which worries me about and I
thought twenty five years for
veterans there are some veterans
are unable to to.
The import.
And the thing that I always used
here was you know I keep going
up.
Wage goes up my benefits aren't
going up fast enough to keep up
with and now with the the.
Inflation Mr chair
representative.
It's hard for me.
For somebody on fixed income
the.
I understand I understand the.
The use of the term.
Mr chair representative.
I want everybody to succeed.
I I will but as we all.
Mr chair.
Representative I want everybody
to have the chances that I.
I had a great career.
Career that I should maybe
should have.
But I work hard and I taught my
kids the same thing Mr chair
representative.
Work hard work and persistence
will always pay off.
but mandating some small
business.
To have to raise that.
I told my son's.
Mr chair representative if
you're not happy with what
you're making at this place.
Shop your skills of rules.
And find somebody who will pay
you for the new field your.
And I think just letting the
free market push these.
Mr chair representative you
yourself said that you were
there or businesses in
Albuquerque that are paying a
higher wage and sixteen dollars
an hour.
But they're not being forced to
do that that's that's my biggest
concern is.
It's hard enough own business Mr
chair representative.
For your the one waking up at
two o'clock in the morning
wondering going to be able to
make.
Or do I lay somebody off I've
had to do that.
There are people at this table
who have lost sleep.
That I didn't lose my hair for
the Mr chair.
Representative that was a whole
lot of.
These business owners have laid
their lives on the line to to.
All of their dream.
To limit the choice of yes a
somebody sixteen fifty an hour.
The old.
Those are tough decisions
business owners have to make Mr
chair representative.
And that's what I struggle with
with this bill I want I would
love in a perfect world
everybody make twenty Bucks an
hour everybody was happy.
Unfortunately we don't live in a
perfect world so those are my
strolls Mr chair representative.
Chief of.
Representative.
Thank you Mr chair
Representative Chandler.
As as.
That the state agencies I'm just
running this over my mind in the
the districts that are are the
district that I represent.
just in red so we lost twelve
restaurants.
One of will be in jail where
they have a completely closed
but they can't find money to
work.
There's nobody there.
And I I feel.
I feel their pain I am a small
business owner myself.
And just like I heard in the
crowd.
I feel for the at a feel for
the.
But in my in my business I've
got an asphalt business.
And what happens with my and
small business is it's not
really a popular kind of work to
do so it's really hard to find
what when I find people.
And I hire them.
For the minimum wage that I have
to offer if they show me what I
tell them if you show me your
hands you show me your good
employee I'm going to reward you
for.
I work off performance based
pay.
Performance based pay means if
you find that little diamond in
the rough and it's hard to find
but when you do find them
they're gonna make that sixteen
Bucks an hour they're gonna make
a living wage.
But sometimes as an army of the
Senate for the people that that
have a hard time making a
living.
But one of my colleagues said.
You know of your skill maybe you
have to shop maybe you know
maybe have to take a little bit
I started out as of the fireman
they pay me five dollars and
eighty six cents an hour that's
what we started out at of
firefighters now will make
sixteen Bucks now.
If they're lucky starting out
sixteen Bucks an hour and they
were the hundred twenty hour
work week but that I used to
almost I have them on a
performance based pay so every
two hundred hours of training
that you got I'm gonna give you.
And I'll give you another phone
when you get some more training
but just hiring people right off
the street that have no skills
at sixteen Bucks an hour I'm
just thinking if if I hire
somebody sixteen fifty an hour
for sixteen dollars an hour.
And and.
Mr chair representative you need
a new driveway and I have to put
it in guess who's going to pay
the price you are I'm not about
that wage because I'm having to
pay more for that employee so
costs are going to go up and and
you know with what my colleague
said a hamburger.
I never thought I'd see the day
that the hamburgers fifteen
Bucks.
If you if we go to a sixteen
dollar an hour wage what's the
hammers of the cost I promise
you it's going.
Mr chair thank you.
Did you read Mr chair
representative
I I know you talked about the
exceptions and I'm obviously
from an agricultural community
and it's a very concerned.
Session I also notice said we
will cover all of us.
And I am just concerned because
again you know inflation and to
me this is really just
Recent inflation and it's
actually up to be a tough at
times right and it's going to
raise the cost of this is me
terrible for agriculture
industry engine areas it sounds
like are separate but can you
can you elaborate a little bit
more I the the chilling farmers
so
all the different agricultural
products that come from the area
that I live in all exempt.
Mr chair and representative well
if the if you look at the
amendment and right on page
three.
We for you and agriculture in
there's a long list of
activities now
we can go through each one
Allen's
Debate whether or not we covered
the individuals in the crowd I
think that's a hard thing to do
Mr chair the this language
though and there were some money
I know that.
There's more on this for a long
time as well he can speak to how
this language came to the but it
was certainly Mr chair
representative response no doubt
to some of the concerns raised
by the gentleman in the audience
and.
For example if an employee is
principally engaged in range
production of livestock or built
to you know that's a that's a
big business I understand that
so their employees are not.
I'm not subject to minimum wage
handling drying packaging well
that sounds like activity that
occurs in the chilly industry.
So how how much of the
agricultural I tried Mr chair
and representative I try to be
prudent and how I express myself
I don't want to exaggerate and I
always know that a statement is
never doesn't cover us an
activity a hundred percent and
that is why I am always careful
to say does it cover everyone in
that business I can't say that
but it sounds like the bill was
drafted to cover a large portion
of the agricultural workers in
the state Mr chair and
representative can you tell
what ever culture industry or
these exceptions which people
are not accept Mr chair now I do
not work in an agricultural area
and I would suggest to you that
probably ever culture varies you
know some kinds of productions
are one way and somehow or
another so I think that level of
detail I'm not answer for you of
but certainly the industry must
because they have for these laws
and they are applying the
appropriate wages to whatever
workers fall within these
categories are and Mr chair
representative at so I I guess
what I'm struggling is we're
coming out of COVID and as he
also you can go to a restaurant
and you'll see this restaurant
is closed for two days because
they're you know are not enough
employees for this and I want to
tie this a little bit too and
the increase in the minimum wage
to actually getting people to
work and
and I think there's a problem
there because is we also there's
talk of this loss with cars and
forties and and so we looked at
the study
And I wanted to there was a
study done by the national
bureau of economic.
Result of what it did is it
basically examined just recently
in twenty twenty two.
Researchers.
Looking at raising the minimum
wage and then how it affects
women's and what it actually is
that
there was clear evidence that
for a reduction in overall
performance and it also found
reduction deployment is stronger
for younger less educated
workers so it appears that
increase in the minimum wage is
actually getting in the way
which is obviously a problem
that we have here currently in
New Mexico I believe and so
would you like to comment on
that issue in relation to raise
the minimum wage Mr speaker
Representative and how this is
going to help people get let's
get back to work.
Of Mr chair and representative I
am not familiar with that study
in France.
To understand the assumptions
that are in that it is
I think we all know that one can
find.
Almost any topic and that
proposes almost any conclusion
so you really have to validate
the information before you
accept it the whole cough Mr
chair and Madam as
Representative Eli I agree and
this is from the national bureau
of economic results and it
really did do an in depth study
on this recently and so you know
I understand you have read work
researched it I just wanted to
bring that to your attention and
and thank you.
Can I have the yes.
And I have nothing
else
Representative.
We'll have.
Well first invests public
disconnected but the funding
process just like somebody say
and it's not easy for our
workers thank Mr chair Senator
perfect weather the status to
the.
thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative is not an issue
for that work at the thing that
I have nothing to see here I
don't know but you.
Representative speaking for the
workers because it's taken our
our of four is not full I
appreciate your that is speaking
for where somebody as mentioned
above is not a first the state
for the strong language but I
think it is thank you operations
to the kids with I guess on the
New Mexico
choosing to work in different
places change Senator but right
leaning is a privilege and
normal people have the privilege
some people doesn't have the
choice that is something that I
learned from coming and this is
just an experience I wouldn't be
able to back it up with with the
recession but driving to my
house after because that opening
there's an opening up higher
salaries of these because they
wanted people to come in for
part and I think it's called the
charts of the west the worst of
the worst choice.
Why wasn't before because people
nobody asked them to do it so
one more does have the choice to
find a better job than.
So do that given the opportunity
to bring
of the EDD and and and the not
for to their tables is this is a
previous but not everybody has
that I don't think sixteen
dollars.
What is actually
at least three Michelin
Representative the state is very
conservative and very
conservative the amount so I
just want vacated thank you for
coming this because for the
workers and giving us a key
suffer childhood that kids
private parties how to work
three jobs because they have to
focus on the ways it is
important goals thank you.
So
that's.
You're reading my mind yes I'm
here years.
By a large.
The committee to this system in
the focus would be to add on
so that this will work at the
scene in the
I is it and we don't think yes
he was ladies the Senator is the
author again and Los rules
frontal suppose so this
committee late the the of the I
will on the line now I think
this is because the house so in
the end all of these the mail a
lot of those one thousand
dollars all transition.
With that maybe you know a lot
of money though I'm a source of
money
but at the end of the how to in
the a year and lower but a
discussion with the.
Okay so I just stayed.
Total go rail but I do for it's
awful you so the at the Carson
the so how to do it all of the
tools to mention that will show
up on the first one I thought so
what I'm saying thank you Mr
chair representative of what I
was saying is I I really am
grateful for those people to
come I totally understand this
is a this.
Me I think we need to understand
that this is a very very of
serious.
This is a matter that it's not
it's I think what happens we all
identify the problem people are
struggling to pay their bills
and that's but that's not just
people that's also businesses
we're all struggling.
And that's because when
pollution it's not just because
of one thing or another
situation and I'll talk about
that in a minute what I was
telling that that individual so
my dad came over as a twelve
year.
Came to this country my
grandmother would put them out
to two working feels as we
thirty five cents an hour just
that I don't want to do it is to
thirty five cents a day I don't
our date that's a while and and
and so but to is are working
education service country and so
forth he stepped up and pulled
himself out of that.
Now.
You more to the next generation
this money.
I agree to a three dollars and
thirty five cents an hour
myself.
So I understand and through this
those same principles of working
and if you can myself and really
having a goal of where I wanted
to be I went from that to
opening my own purses age twenty
seven.
And now that multiple businesses
but.
And payroll is an extremely huge
obligation to business for
people never made payroll they
don't really understand how much
money it takes before you can
actually met enough money to get
bail.
General general is the largest
the largest liability the
company has.
I can I can build a million
dollar bill building and borrow
borrow that you get Mr chair
about eight thousand dollars
today a month.
That probably doesn't for two
workers to workers today make
more than a thousand dollars a
month.
Even three workers all have an
illustration I want to share
with you in a minute.
So I think what we need to
understand is I don't think it's
so much that I I'd struggle
because sometimes this one
against the other that's not
really how I see it I see it
truly is we're all coming
together and we we
Representative we we Mr chair
that we recognize that there is
a problem that people cannot pay
their bills.
But that also spills over it's
not it's not just isolated to
workers.
I live in the in and I part of
my district were so many
businesses are.
I was I was just doing some
working a single phone of the
disrespectful of you I'm doing
my homework and work on it
because I think it's very
important for Mr chair for us to
get give up real real words of
real numbers and and ideas I
think all my colleagues that we
all have the same thing in
common we want people to see to
thrive we want people do well we
want people to be able to go to
Disney I don't know once a year
I guess Mr but you know.
Mr chair
Metal Representative.
My district two years are very
very different.
Your district has a median
income of a hundred nineteen
thousand two hundred sixty six
dollars a year.
In my area.
It's it's only on the phone
number here it's only like the.
Just whenever you're over thirty
two thousand two hundred fifty
one dollars.
It was a fair run down the
street Mr chair run down the
street take a picture of the of
the menu.
And at the restaurant near us.
I'm showing I'm showing the the
the Representative store Nord me
just look if you look at this
menu.
You can still buy a.
For real real can still get a
combination plate three dollars.
You can get that in in Santa Fe.
So why am I really that update I
believe that what happens is we
have different areas that have
their Commerce and and are more
of you know half a better
economic back back home to state
things like this and that's what
you see Mr chair representative
you see places like yourself
before you can afford to pay.
Seventeen dollars an hour
present Luna County for instance
where I got this deal the store
will be twelve dollars an hour
as a business.
And so when we when we bring
these bills across the board
although it's meant in good will
it also it affects every does
business differently.
And so you know I think.
We're we're we're we're
addressing some of those six
years of on going on about that
but Mr chair representative.
Inflation the labor force is one
of the factors that causes
inflation.
And I when we always hear the
hamburger's story and all that
and not not to put anybody down
Allen was not a good
Mr chair representative.
But but in real reality when I
was talking about when I was
talking about or fixed income
people and you said Mr chair
man Representative I that
You just didn't understand you
know how what what that really
meant.
Mr chair that's not I'm sorry
I'm sorry should be approved so
I'm just gonna explain the
average the average of.
American makes sixteen dollars
sixteen eighty one dollars.
for full security.
I personally secure people in my
area that that's all they have
to live on and that's actually
high that's an average.
So it's all based on their on
their wages I know Mr chair
representative there there are
people that that really are are
making twelve hundred dollars a
month additional security.
So when we pass bills like this
although the the mean wealth
they do cost money to settle
into a business only.
And and we think.
This is four.
Because it's because you see the
cash register just coming in and
as a as a as a as a young man Mr
chair representative.
Started my first business I
understand at first you think
only and I'm gonna be a
businessman I'm gonna earn so
much money and then the bills
coming.
And then the responsibility of
what you have to pay any of them
of the month when I would when I
would net my my my money and I'm
account unaccounted to.
Deposit four hundred dollars a
month.
Mr chair representative.
It is a huge obligation for us
commitment not just come up
usually it's a commitment to
give to hire someone first of
all.
It's an additional commitment we
give a raise.
One of the worst things Mr chair
representative of the U. as a
businessman is give someone a
raise and then have to pull it
back.
To the grace of god I've never
had to do that.
But I calculate myself properly
and I and I ate and and Mr chair
representative I have to charge
my customers more to do business
I guess the only way.
I'm gonna I'm not sure Mr chair
representative if if the
representative has ever had to
make payroll have you have to
make.
Mr chair and representative.
This is the second time I've
presented a bill on labor where
the tactic has been to inquire
about a person's background and
history and I raised the concern
about in that period of time and
I have reset again it is
personalizing the conversation
and I think it's completely and
utterly inappropriate.
The with the representative
should understand that you do
not go after me or anybody else
personal care I I I apologize I
wasn't my intent was just so
that the representative could
understand what what it takes
and what is included in payroll
above and beyond the sixteen
dollars an hour Mr chair
representative and and so you
know when we right now
currently.
For those people maybe have
never made the roll Mr chair and
my apologies Representative I
didn't mean that as a taxes
at twelve dollars an hour.
This is Kerry David this is for
five employees this is just for
five employees
we would have a twelve dollars
an hour this is a two week pay
period okay every other week and
so it would when you calculate
that out that's gross wages of
forty eight hundred dollars
every two weeks for your
business.
In addition to that you have
personal security which your
budget taxes which is two
hundred ninety seven dollars and
some change chair sixty nine
dollars and some change federal
employment twenty dollars and
some change the state
unemployment forty eight dollars
and some change this isn't it so
a total payroll expense of fifty
two hundred and forty four
dollars.
That's a lot of money.
And so that's what we're paying
at twelve dollars an hour I
employees.
That doesn't take into account
Mr chair representative what we
have to pay when it comes to
R. O. R. a.
Our insurance for.
Workmen's comp does it take you
to this is and I'm only going to
talk about payroll isn't take
into account any of the other
operations of your business only
payroll there's a lot of other
things going on with this one
changes which we this is a
thirty three percent increase Mr
chair.
Senator that you're asking for
and we just sustained an
increase just twenty some days
ago okay.
So this is probably more but we
can go from twelve to sixty.
Mr chair representative if I
changed it to them so I
employees at sixteen dollars an
hour that base pay before I have
to pay all for all whatever
business owners to see myself
because I'd be more yes
has to pay I could taxes and so
forth is sixty four hundred
dollars that increased from
forty eight hundred dollars to
sixty four hundred dollars just
from the rate increase.
On top of that you have your
social security and Medicare and
I don't want to run through
every number what what it ends
up costing the an individual for
this race for five employees is
forty five thousand thirty nine
dollars a year.
Now.
so we're not talking about a few
dollars we're talking about
forty five thousand dollars this
is just for five employees.
In addition Mr chair this is an
include again the insurance.
When you tack that on top I can
assure you this will be closer
to closer to probably fifty
thousand dollars.
To give you an idea Mr chair
representative of what is the
impact when you hear these
business owners standing up and
saying oh my gosh this is tough.
Because in order to do this this
this.
I'm around up to fifty thousand
dollars and I'm talking about
the increase in payroll for five
employees.
In order of those fifty thousand
dollars you have to make
generally three times that
amount to cover that.
In the next fifty thousand
dollars to get it you have to
multiply that times three
because you still that means
you've you've got to
workers or more time form you
have to increase your prices
somehow it has to come out the
increase that and that's just
the general the general numbers
is three times so you know
I understand you.
Representative we we need to
address this I think what we're
when we talk about inflation we
can all recognize if you just
drive around town doesn't matter
where we're at you can see the
empty parking lots of of of of
dealerships you can see the the
the interruption of hours and
times of people.
Is whether it's tractor supply a
restaurant you seem all across
the state all across the street
Mr and so what this does for
small people small businesses Mr
chair representative is it
triggers the business owner into
a slave of the business because
now there's up there I can't
afford to pay this guy and I
know what that feels like
because that's how I started.
And and I had to work my normal
job they don't have to go Mr
chair representative at midnight
to sleep but I go to sleep have
been a woman there's a could get
up to work from midnight till
two in the morning to work on my
car wash and and those were when
we first is well my first
business.
Do that and then after work
before work and I was always on
there on Saturdays and why
because Mister chair I can
afford anybody to help me clean
the the cost for for making the.
Any repairs and so what happens
of small businesses when you do
when you.
This stuff like this.
Priester costs they then in turn
have to put in more hours and
they become slaves of their own
business.
Because I have to work extra
can't afford to so the person
but we stopped to wash dishes or
still have to whatever work on
the truck or whatever it is.
And so that that is something
that I think this is very
important to know what was.
When it came to the CPI the
Indian education as a multiple.
It's it just compounds for doing
and and so.
I'm not just for for you to
understand what businesses are
going through.
Your average New Mexico seven up
for status.
Times recession.
Our state as we think Mr chair
representative of all those
people like Representative
Martinez as moms or dads we all
have parents are on fixed
incomes and maybe so security is
only half when you see it is
eighty dollars.
We've got problems.
And so Mr chair representative
I.
I know this is going to.
But through.
But it's going to affect
everybody across the board and
so I I just although it I want
to see people advance I there
are there are places in in in
our in our in our town so you
can see have closed are have
altered their their their hours
and and so my question is that's
my questions share what.
I have a question I just thought
of it.
We raise Mr chair Representative
the last time twenty nineteen
you raise you raise the the
excuse me the moment minimum
wage have you read it out the
window sixty percent sixty
percent.
Although today we see that
people are still struggling to
ask yourselves I mean I'm not
going to give you the answer I'm
not going to go ask ourselves
yes sixty percent increase.
Before this started with the
paying their bills are the
better than they are today.
What happens because I know what
happens is I've I've had long
conversations with my with my
CPA or this Mr chair
representative.
Where we know that.
The small business guys always
look the last guy I'm sorry we
were always Alaska's to just
because we go on all my
checkbooks getting then.
And so so I'd give a raise and I
and and I grabbed my breasts a
little bit I don't really want
to hurt my customer.
And then also the the C. Mr
chair representative that
they're struggling financially
to make that so the only starter
Justin by the time we live in
German Tax ninety days three
three three months or as of
corporate people Mr chair
representative happy people
listening and they have a
counselor you have economics and
the Santo Domingo that are just
ridiculous our our payroll and
so you can see Walmart have more
self checkout you're gonna see
less hours from COVID you see
also.
One more within twenty four
hours only.
Whatever the time is so those
are so my question is Mr chair
representative did you see the
actual.
Why are we having problems with
the script this over why are we
having problems non off with the
the the lack of participation
rates when it comes to employees
right now.
Mr chair and Representative.
That issue has been studied
extensively.
And reported on extensively and
there are multiple factors since
COVID workers.
Have decided that.
Quality of life.
And other issues are very
important to them secondly many
working mothers found that they
could not afford to work anymore
and pay for child care so they
simply have chosen to stay at
home.
There are multiple factors and
now and I away it affects just
about every state you in terms
of the inability to draw workers
into the workforce those paying
our wages works dollars an hour
and those paying federal minimum
wage seven twenty five so to try
to draw some connection between
wages and you know to higher
highways and some are that is
affecting the economy I think is
a false concludes all of these
issues.
Are more complicated than I
think we would like them to be
and they're all impacted by
multiple factors but certainly I
mean there's this is been mall
discussed mall you know
extensively and all kinds of
literature in in the news is
comment was a big deal.
And it really changed people's
attitudes and about work and
what they're willing to tolerate
and I think that's part of the
reason why people are have been
slow to return to the work force
and that's kind of what's been
written about and so on but it's
also a very individual thing.
Mr chair representative I think
forth we're senior day with
restaurants having listings to
operate with the stores have a
list is operate those are those
are shrinking their their their
ability to meet their demands
their their liabilities and so
we're not even giving them a
chance to get back on their feet
the gist of COVID and and we're
not giving them a chance to get
back on their feet and bring the
destruction during the COVID was
so huge imagine when you're when
you're building a business it's
like bringing a team together
you're building a team like also
faulty and they have to all work
together understand each other
so they work well together you
can just go for you know what
with the fact that extended as
come in the door work because
sometimes it's it could be Mr
chair they just don't work
together exactly right that's
what you have to build a team
the teams were disrupted they
were dismantled.
And so to bring those by the
time we we brought them back on
board Mr chair representative
they were the bring back the C.
team they brought different
people and so they're
struggling.
To meet the demands that's what
we're having that's why we're
having the shortage of the cap
quite get their team back
together to to to fulfill the
hours of operation of the
normally what and so Mr chair
I think we think we we see here
what I want to pull this is this
is a huge drink increases from
from one hundred thirty five
thousand dollars it almost are
on the run a hundred thirty six
thousand dollars from paid to
appear before a hundred six
thousand dollars available books
in our two hundred eighty
thousand dollars the payroll to
huge increase I think it's going
to be very very hard our state
Fund on small businesses there's
no there's no tearing in this
bill
Mr chair representative for that
person and has five employees
you can think of a lot of places
that I employees this is been a
massively disrupt and they'll
have to figure out how to make
this money and I can assure you
part of the reason is they start
cutting their wages and I'm
gonna tell you what I've seen
was Mr chair representative the
well I'm just going to work you
twenty five hours a week that's
what I can afford not fill in
the rest of contracting with
those twenty five hours a week.
Percent cap in my bills are well
I can't afford to have the forty
hours a week as always this wall
required to pay sixteen dollars
or we're all does not so that
caught between this and now what
is happening is we've in
balanced it because we
artificially Mr chair
representative inserted all
these things that are that are
getting things out of balance.
I think this is going to be a
very difficult thing I I I hope
that we can
In power not everybody in in our
state to do better
without getting off track I
think we need to Mr chair
representative of health order
for you in in additional schools
and give them extra work and and
and hopefully I was too so
we're.
So they can share us Mr Mr chair
representative of a smart
businessman.
Okay that was a stay in business
is not going to lose his it's
good employees to to his
competitor for lack of paid.
I'm gonna hold on to my
employees because I need them I
can't fall to
and I want to appreciate those.
So those.
Through the normal market those
people Mr chair representative
that do not follow the rules of
taking care of their of their of
their employees will will will
then end up losing.
Thank you Mr Johnson will end up
losing them.
What is and so I think I think
I've made my case Mr chair
representative.
So
don't.
Well
this is a.
No problem the the.
I was hoping to keep it down the
list of thirty minutes but.
That was one of those but for a.
Representative Johnson.
Table.
Thank you Mr chair and that my
dear colleague representatives
process.
I got.
Right right discussion and
Representative Chandler and co
sponsors thank you for bringing
this bill forward it is true it
is it is very important and it
affects all lives I represent a
rural New Mexico and I'm
thinking about everyone of my
constituents during this
discussion and to my
constituents entail the very
people who need Hey racists the
need to make more money so that
they can have a comfortable
livelihoods my constituents
however also Representative
fifth generation business
owners.
many who are native American
minority they're starting their
businesses they're getting
interested.
In the end of the nor ship.
And so I'm thinking about those
individuals who come up to me
and say you know anti I'm
starting my own business I
started my own business look at
me look what I'm doing.
And
I also have a story about
you know starting my life making
minimum wage and one day I was
having coffee with my dad and he
said well.
When the going gets tough the
tough get going you better get a
in the morning and you better go
to school.
And that will improve your life
so we all have our our stories
are our livelihood experiences
but I'm gonna cut to the chase
because I am thinking about.
Both and and everyone and and
my anti status I'd like to
propose.
Where is this bill going next.
Posted issue House Judiciary.
I'd like to I I'm wondering if
we could propose or consider
Doing at thirteen fifty.
At thirteen fifty and then
progressing to the fifteen
dollars and one of the reasons
I'm thinking this too is because
I have some entities in my
communities I think who are
going to kind of they're going
to struggle in the transition of
kind of a quick rate increases
and the rate compression.
Because we're in a rural
community.
We all know one another we kind
all know where we started how
much you make how much I mean
it's just going to cause a lot
of.
The.
Those types of situations are
also gonna rice so Mr chair and
representative Chandler.
Can I propose that are up.
I had to do that yeah I think
it's called a friendly amendment
we.
So Mr chair fans I don't know of
of what you're talking about
doing an amendment on the fly to
thirty fifty a dollar yes Mr
chair.
Well Mr chair
what I'd and you also mentioned
and then stepping it up so what
I would like to suggest talking
with Mister chair and
Representative is thirteen
fifteen perhaps in twenty twenty
four in fifteen fifty perhaps in
twenty twenty five
that is been cell number cell
numbers at some of the
you know the talking of course I
get input from many people on
this bill.
These are the kinds of numbers
and I think we.
Consider Mr chair representative
Johnson.
The twenty twenty four.
Yes and then fifteen twenty
twenty five.
Plus the call I had called at it
on.
In twenty twenty six.
Just went after the fifteen
fifty has has taken effect for
you.
That is still within the.
I'm sorry if that's an expensive
commitment but.
I.
The we're not allowed to
recommend this.
I think they're still let me
just go ahead and hold you hold
on to your for a while they want
to the rest of the committee and
the contact okay okay in the
meantime you can start right now
your members or whether a.
Representative Chandler.
So who else has to be any
thoughts that the one in the
west.
Yes Representative Roybal
Caballero the last on the.
Thank you Mr chair.
First of all
Representative Chandler I just
wanted to make sure on our bring
bill it says that this is going
to commerce and economic
development education money I'm
sorry so I just wanted us to.
Yet to clarify that.
And
Second of all
I just wanted to
The state of.
For the record.
to.
One there's been a lot of
discussion today about the
employers and I appreciate that
I've been an employer Senator
several times small business.
Employer.
And I am very dedicated to the
small workforce that work for
the various businesses that I.
Corner was my husband.
And there's a lot to be said
about Representative assistant
to a wooded killers mention.
Respecting the employee and
respect both of the business and
understanding Mr chair that the
backbone of the business is the
employee.
I would not have been able to
work.
With my husband even with my
husband and the teen the number
of hours of required.
And so
and have small children.
In our household.
And so it was imperative for us
to make sure that we put the
numbers together properly.
in order to be able to make them
work so our sales mouth.
Took into consideration.
What we wanted to pay living
wages on in the border town.
It also took into consideration
what we have to pan I have what
we have to pay for insurance
what we had to pay all of that.
And we were young couple.
With the start of business.
And we were able to manage.
With five employees.
You prefer to.
And our business flourished and
our employees are happy and they
came to work and they appreciate
that we do not Mr chair
exploiting.
labor just because we live in
now hold on full border town
that was
That had the reputation of being
cheap labor.
So.
You're absolutely correct Mr
chair.
If we want these things to work.
There's a way to make them work
and we is employers have that
responsibility.
If we want to stay in business
but also the most important
thing is that every single
restaurant.
Every single business every
single angle cultural for.
Everything everything that was
referred to here today.
Mr chair would not be in
business today if it were not
for those employees.
But because they're in that
position.
Mr chair it is really wrong for
us in my belief system.
To us see
That they're gonna stay working
for us no matter what because
they need the job so it doesn't
matter how much we pay them or
doesn't matter what we find in
terms of conditions for budget.
Because we have them here in the
news they have to work and so
therefore.
We have to that they're going
to.
For far too long Mr chair.
This country.
The state among all the other
states.
Have.
Exploit.
Our work.
And so when we got slammed with
the pandemic.
And when the workforce
understood.
That they were frontline
workers.
And even just frontline workers.
Mr chair that we're not
appreciate it they were
essential workers.
And they were not appreciated
enough.
The business's chose to close
down anyway rather than defined
the way but I'm gonna tell you
something Mr chair all of us I'm
gonna share something.
In my district and I know in
districts in Las crucis and
going on and just other
districts.
Yes what businesses stayed open.
It was the last building on may
he Connell loan businesses.
That never closed Mr chair.
They're still thriving.
There's something about the
cultural.
The importance of how we treat
our workers.
That is associated with what we
have to face as a population.
So the mesquite restaurant in my
district that the number of
restaurant in my district and I
can name the the tire companies
the small business mechanic
shops
the funeral services all of
those businesses that were owned
by let the now maybe Dawn of
business.
And they're still in today and
their employees are the same
employees and not only that they
increase their employees.
What does that say about our
cultural.
Practices and believe them.
Versus what we bring to the
table.
Appreciating.
What we understand is the
backbone of our success.
Mr chair the backbone of our
success are the very workforce.
There working for us.
So I say all of that because.
I am bothered
when some sorry to the
population that that came the
people that came I'm just.
The conversation that we just
have.
To talk about.
Putting ourselves in a.
Because we can't.
And let's see.
That whatever decisions we may.
Are going to be accepted Mr
chair by the population because
they need a job.
Because they have now they have
to pay the rent or whatever.
It's it's it's just not
It's just not principles for.
To make that assumption so they
have Mister chair us discuss
whether thirteen fifty or twelve
fifty or fourteen fifty or or
whatever it is we already know
the data we already know that in
order for a family of four to
pay for an apartment
two bedroom apartment in
Albuquerque.
Three years ago okay have to
receive seventeen ninety one and
our.
For three years late is it three
years of four years later and
that has.
Increase probably too I don't
have the latest data in front of
me twenty something dollars an
hour and we're sitting here
throwing out what we think.
They can handle because we for
whatever reasons we we have the
we're in the position to do it.
And I don't think that's right
we heard from the workforce.
Mr Chairman heard from the
workforce coming here taking the
time today and those
communicated with telling us.
That they're still struggling at
twelve dollars an hour to work
two three jobs just to be able
to afford a basic roof over
their head not to mention that
they lost whatever budget they
had to help supplement their
household whether that was
childcare whether that was food
stamps whatever was they lost
it.
And twelve dollars an hour if
they can't make those ends meet.
So for me it was very hard to
slow sixteen dollars an hour.
Because as I mentioned when I
did my introduction of the bill
as a bill sponsor I wanted to
raise funds we could possibly
raise that because we're already
behind.
And so I just wanted to make
make those comments because it
just really it really hurts me.
It bothers me to subject the
very workers that were
attempting to.
I of living.
That we give them something that
they can look forward to reduce
their burden from three jobs to
two jobs maybe or maybe even in
some cases to one job again.
That they have to sit here and
listen.
To the the conversations that we
have it really hurts.
And I'm ashamed.
To have them in the audience and
what's.
What we should be saying is can
we find the way as legislators.
Can we find can we go and argue
for that Mr chair before the
Appropriations Committee before
whatever committee so we have to
do can we find it in ourselves
can we have the courage.
The goal before these committees
and our colleagues.
And representative what they
want us to Representative we
have that courage.
That's what that conversation we
should be having okay sixteen
seventeen whatever the proposal
is eighteen how can we make it
work.
Instead Mr chair slant.
For all that they can find ways
and comments that were made how
we should be taking a whole
different approaches legislators
and this committee and other
committees Mr chair and we
should be saying how can we find
a way to make this work and the
way we find this work order
process is yes.
We get this out of our
community.
We go on to become advocates in
the next committee because
that's what we believe we should
be doing.
And then we go to the floor and
we defended well all the.
I everything that we have in
S. because without that
workforce we literally would not
have.
Anything going so these were.
Mr chair work.
Representative Chandler.
You think your conversation
outside please I'm sorry Mr
chair I'm trying not the the way
to handle a committee meeting.
Hello to do well here the
committee Mr chair my sincere
apologies I was speaking with
Clinton you know the economist
okay sec not the way things are
done.
You're going to order Sir for
orders we just you just tell the
dilution the
Putting each other legislators
down I think we all have our our
our.
All you have to to speak our
mind and and although I hear you
Representative Mr chair think of
a I don't think there's any fund
here that doesn't address the
real issue here that all people
include businesses are
struggling right now is it is
going from all angles we
understand that that the workers
let's let's let's let her.
To respond to those who had
years I did not interrupt you
did yours.
Well but I did not.
So on things for us to do yours
completely without stopping and
I think in all fairness I.
I gave you every just every
minute the side in the I think
you should do the same.
Thank you Mr chairman and I was
I was getting ready to run off
and I couldn't I was looking at
you could mean to personalize it
and I don't think I called you
out on it so I want to just
verify that but anyway
I just wanted to say that
because again just a close Mr
chair I felt embarrassed.
I really did feel embarrassed
and ashamed
I know that we have the right to
make these kinds of
conversations have these kinds
of discussions
and I appreciate that we have
that right and I'm and I'm
grateful that we are privileged
to be able to have that but our
audience is not that privileged.
They don't have that ability
at all times to address at the
level that they wish us to
listen to them Pat and this is
the level that I believe they
want to have us have a
conversation otherwise I would
be having today.
I feel Mr chair that I refer.
Communities that folk of the
communities that are working two
three jobs the communities that
are working for less than on
minimum wage right now and those
that are looking at tips and
those that are important markers
so again Mister chair I wanted
to just up I guess.
Not a not necessarily apologize
to articulate
How I was feeling because I was
I've been a single mom.
I've been in there in the shoes
I've had those same lived
experiences on both sides.
I found the way is a single mom.
It was hard to have to hold them
clean of someone's Care salon in
working in a restaurant.
And at the same time when I had
the opportunity to become an
owner.
I health my responsibility as an
owner and I paid for this and
budget.
So I'm going to those half as
most have articulated.
And so my boss Harding how many
his if we can find a way to
dignify.
The work.
That puts the food on our table.
That cleans our hotel rooms.
That maintains.
Our services.
That drive the trucks.
The buses.
And all those.
That without whom there there
may be working we would not be
able to thrive.
All of the service staff have
here in the roundhouse everyone
without whom we would not be
able to have the privilege.
To sit here today which is nice
homes.
And feel privileged so I just
thank you Mr chair for and thank
you committee members.
Let me just go ahead in just
make a few comments on the.
Dungeon one of the things that
the commission Andrew anything
is said the my emails I got a
email from the restaurant
association.
They're opposed to this bill
today which is this being the
case what is the okay they say
this is what Senator a me E.
mail eighty seven percent of New
Mexicans are earning twenty
dollars and higher.
And only two percent of New
Mexicans are making minimum wage
this is what the restaurant
association said that the bill
opposed to this legislation.
Hello posed to the proximity to
percent of the population that
works getting a pay raise.
You know I heard the numbers of
how much money you.
How much it was going to cost.
Do would give the space race and
like the numbers that were given
out we're like everybody was
going to jump from twelve to
sixteen dollars an hour.
And not that many people making
minimum wage.
The restaurant association say
that only two percent are making
minimum wage today and they send
that out in the email all posi
this legislation and I wrote it
down except we all day I'll have
the Senate do the.
that's exactly what they're
saying the.
Most people that are hiring
today in today's world are
paid sixteen dollars more an
hour right now.
Very few people are paying the
twelve dollars.
Very few.
So that's where I have these
problems with the heard the
numbers that will be published
and said that the I have a
nonfiction Representative that
is are we to think I need to
have the numbers you had the
number for use in the I am
pleased with cost you this much
well
apparently all five of your
employees that you had listed on
that list for the fate that
awaits that's not the case.
Not everybody is the paid the
minimum wage.
But I just don't see what I
heard from you.
And the so that's where I'm
coming from somebody that you
all of the stories that have
never really told anybody what
done I was working three jobs.
Is working to job just to exist
I have four children in my
house.
Over fifteen minutes for the
committee to more so I.
This is really cool because one
day this older couple came by
to the courtroom we had a
speeding citation help to move
the secretary.
So I went to the and after that
they went to the buyer that
would be celebrate the fact that
the doesn't help the loan with
the fact that uses.
so remember here.
That was that was sitting in the
judge's chambers.
Next morning with the car
dealership to look at a car we
did it with the car dealership
the state the that was the judge
that so do the beer with the
same guy that was at the chart.
The three dots districts is that
poor kids really it was tough it
was really tough.
We we lived for the even at that
we have to pay to think too.
So it didn't today's world you
know I mean I I am grateful for
that for that eight point seven
five percent pay raise we got
this year of social security.
And that is a loss of the race
we got two percent the year
before that zero for the
previous two years.
So you can see I'm this is the
first time and I don't know how
many years us old timers that V.
Sydney Rick's.
So
what I'm thinking about if we go
by the index it's going to go up
to twenty dollars an hour
even at the burdens of of which
I don't think it'll ever happen
again.
And the building like.
But number nine here in forty
enough not fully booked.
No less so we would like I said
I mean we had eight point seven
five this year two percent zero
zero let me do the year before
that it was like a one point
two.
So I mean that's really
basically how life goes that
will tell I I don't think
they're going to happen again I
recently.
Later that we are we really
would.
But so I just think about that
and I'm thinking how.
The the numbers just don't match
to respect women look at these
numbers when they said eighty
seven percent of New Mexicans
earning twenty Bucks or more and
only two percent of New Mexicans
are earning.
Minimum wage and I know everyone
and you've got that email.
This will center on the
legislature's.
At
thing to do so with the military
idea.
So that was my thought on that I
guess the.
Representative Thomson now and
see if Representative Chandler
is the.
Is.
Dot situated up to since you
question my numbers for not only
did not I need just a good place
to numbers I just stated good
numbers of.
The the two numbers are left you
have I do Raul used in the state
that you're going to think of
all the minimum wage today
that's what it's going to cost I
would that's remember state
right but then the all the other
ones also Mr chair get shuffled
up well so it's not just those
two but I I do want to we will
get into that later that that's
a major thing if you could give
a pay raise to somebody else to
this is but this is the way
things are right now.
So Representative doesn't
represent the teller I am going
to hand it over to you.
Thank you Mr chair
Representative Chandler and
colleagues I concur with the.
The thirteen fifty and then
incremental okay so then I
propose this I don't know if
it's just these are still
relatively simple changes to the
bill I could find that out thank
the figure out a way to test for
Mr chairman.
Appropriate chastised so vivid
the amendment and if you look
through the page numbers for
okay the amendment and both of
the banks numbers proposing
amending very then we'll go
forward okay
beginning on so we're on page
two lines on.
The ending on one twenty four
at.
The speed of the thirteen fifty
yes thank.
And then adding the new
paragraph three.
And it would say the beginning
on January on twenty twenty five
at least fifteen fifty dollars
an hour.
And then we would re number
Wait for the right that down.
To get the right putting thirty
five would be number four yes
and that means we would change
online lesson that we lines but
we're just as number four that
will become number five the
relief that a low.
well known because Mr chair if
you look at line eleven it will
be a new number I it says on or
after January one of.
One.
I think so we need to change
that.
Two twenty forty six.
And
And that would be thank you
change the six dollars that's
online twelve right and change
that to fifteen fifty one.
I think that
Corrects that and chair
Our our economist is here
because he can see.
I appreciate so far so good Mr.
Committee chair.
Senator.
So tell me if I say.
And and then Mr chair we if we
go to the amended bill on page
four.
You'll remember we amended it so
line seven now says adjusted by
multiple.
wage of January.
One.
It should be changed to January
one twenty twenty five for.
Of a for the admin.
What is that page four.
For us the last after just a I
worry what to okay.
Twenty five thank you.
Okay Mister chair
This is what I've been and by
Fund on page four.
Line four point is January one
twenty twenty five see that it
should be twenty twenty six or.
Shin.
On the.
T. right okay so projects.
Correct so that that's one
change and my colleague here is
helping me as well so what else
Representative.
To change.
This page one regional and sub
regional L. page this is the
return of so as of January
twenty twenties what's that
number so.
So.
Everything here is yes twenty.
This kia so when we get to the
line seven adjusted.
Nine eight January one twenty
twenty five.
That group if you can yes.
Mr Chairman has put next to me
so we can tell the right numbers
thank forward to the.
What.
So it for members of the
committee Mr chair this is
Clinton Turner he is an
economist Legislative Council.
You can have a six bills are not
being if they were working.
Thank you Mr chair
For all of you from the
Legislative Council Service I'm
not here and in opposition or in
favor of this bill just at your
pleasure to provide technical
support it can.
Thank you so
As I understand the
When we need to change online
for January one twenty twenty
five January one twenty twenty
six.
Representative Chandler and Mr
chair if the indexing is
intended to begin on behalf on
January one twenty twenty six
yes that two to four of the
original bill money for.
Change to channel one.
Six.
Page four of the bill.
Page for the bill.
Online for you'll see it starts
with the paragraph needs.
Thank.
On it says January one twenty
twenty five right now and we're
changing up to twenty twenty
six.
Thank you.
And then moving to stand as line
seven.
Tested by multiplying the
minimum wage of January one
what's the right day.
Twenty five twenty twenty five
so.
When we amended the bill we said
twenty twenty four so now we're
changing that fight here and
we're saying twenty twenty five.
Representative fixed amount that
you right.
Going to line ten of our amended
bill there's another reference
to September twenty twenty three
and I'm now it by debt that
should read twenty twenty four.
the ticket okay thank you so
much for your patience.
Thank you Mr chair.
And that'll be done it is going
to be sent out to.
Mr chair my understanding is
problems also.
Then we'll get it I'm having
with the state with all the
amendment that we're doing here
I'm having a heck of a time with
you sure.
The holy land I am going to.
Even though like to.
Everything I put in the world
for Thursday.
I'm gonna have a roll this over
bring back a it is believed to
be a I mean I just I just can't
see that we can pass this
without being totally confused
and being fair or unfair to
anybody.
Mr chair if I could get the
written amendments ready for you
while you're listening to miss
Representative Garcia is
a of self or your
okay do that okay we will also
the only thing that would help
because we're just no I
appreciate your concern total
total.
To confuse.
When we're real quick on that
stress leave that the the rules
allow us one of bills already in
this what is being amended again
should go should be done we will
have to but it's really should
have only a committees up okay
will we get a case of the board
member I want to bring it back
yes okay.
Okay thank you for chair we will
do our best but is.
Full I understand but I will do
our best.
Just wait two months this.
Representative.
Yes
The latest place to work with a
lot of that.
Is it okay for me to ask current
so thank you Mr chair so Clinton
might what I would like.
It would be in the analysis
what like to see the.
Amounts that we're proposing
that are being proposed in the.
Are substantive now of thirteen
fifty and fifteen fifty.
Fund those years I'd like to see
what that people to in terms of
on the cell and what the online
equipment with CPI.
That's very important for me I
want to see the alignment how
those wages online with the and
I know that we can only protect
the stamina.
But to the best of your
abilities and your projections
would you project.
thank you.
Thank you so much Mr chairman.
Representative.
Hi Terry.
Right I think
right.
What research.
That.
Thank.
As.
Page.
The.
It is to be in this.
There's an office.
To do that.
We only.
One major powers.
Okay.
So much.
The.
This for.
Howard I see you.
Legislature.
The.
And what you guys would.
All work based.
Representative.
This
is.
Programs for.
These
days.
This generation.
We're.
I
was.
This is.
Is
that.
It's
been six years.
Your reserve their
own state.
Yeah.
Colorado.
When I was.
What was.
What was.
What I want.
A good number.
This is here.
Have any.
Thank you water but we give us
for like.
Keep running out.
Here's.
The.
What was.
You.
Here's.
Right.
This
the.
Do is.
Right now what I would.
Thirty.
A lot of these.
Yeah.
These.
One.
To just.
Yeah through.
Our movement for different types
right yeah.
have.
The forecast.
Thank you bye.
For all I have.
As.
There's.
Doing
Your.
The rest of my years.
We.
Percent
Hey.
Was.
This.
Yeah.
This one and maybe.
As.
The we have.
This is.
It was every.
Again.
Is.
This
is.
Not to worry.
It's
is for.
I see.
Yeah.
Is still.
The.
Okay.
Get everybody back in.
The key is.
The end.
There is yes ones worked in the
hot seat is yours thank you Mr
chair we're on house bill twenty
eight the state minimum wage if
the attendance pass out that the
handcuffs.
With the.
This.
The possibility eight.
And
And.
This first hand to this.
Looks like this.
And this is basically the
vaccine.
Factor.
And no.
That's why I have in the
classrooms that my order.
Clinton explained that table.
And
But this is the formula.
That we're using in house bill
twenty eight in terms of.
the index formula for.
for our minimum wage.
the second the
attendant in New Mexico last
pass out the other two handouts.
The New.
Nothing you have to more than
that.
Yeah.
What's the best out of the
package.
Okay on this first sent out.
I show you
the state minimum wages of our
fifty countries and territories.
And you can see.
that.
There are fourteen states that
have a higher than the twelve
dollar minimum wage.
And there's thirty five states
that have lower than our twelve
dollar minimum wage and then we
have for states that matches at
twelve dollars and I just wanted
to show you that spread of what
we have is a minimum wage in the
country.
the second
and out.
Is a front and back.
It shows the states that have
indexing in our country.
And and that comes out to twenty
one states have an indexing
formula in their minimum wage.
And
Mr chair before I go into my
bill presentation I'd like to
present on the amendment.
At the press about the.
The would look into is the
expert they'll first nobody
amendment okay.
Would there be a.
From the rules and with.
I
your hand okay
manias Mr chair the amendment
bill and.
So I can explain.
The bill as if we had just
amended.
That's why I'm asking that we
can entertain first and then go
into the complete presentation
on on the bill as amended.
Through this will do that.
What you're telling me is here
then the whole deal I'm amending
our bill but in essence the
amendment is the bill.
Some of the.
The fact.
The total number on the bottom
is two two four three one five
point one.
You two four three one five
point one.
I have a two four two eight
eight point two.
Is thank you we have the point
to what.
Fuse we start.
First we have a this is rob how
house bill forty hello.
Twenty eight twenty eight
thousand dollars.
My.
My.
For those of twenty eight majors
as a.
This is.
Forty six.
We're on twenty.
After.
That.
So also twenty eight.
The amendment for also for the.
I need a job prime minister.
It's forty six.
To do for.
One.
Forty seven we're just using
we're still getting forty six
can you stop the process.
So we are on funding is.
From her.
So this is
okay.
But I.
Four one five.
Sure we don't have that it will.
I.
The financial.
The state is one.
Twenty eight is stable multiple
pages yes.
Hello this.
Three.
Okay.
Mr Chairman all the members have
a the amendment.
Does it have a when.
This is the five page amendment
so I said you're making coffee
make sure there's five pages I.
Yeah.
Side note this is
a single day.
And make.
Three practices.
One.
Two two four three one five
point one.
Yes.
If there is.
Yes.
Session I.
With the.
Well
makes the visit two four three
one point one yes that's correct
okay I have one.
One that I have read awful from
with so is I'm sorry Mr chairman
and I think all confusion.
Is only amendment that's been
proposed yes the one that's
being proposed on us the twenty
okay thank you.
Solar yes Sir I'm good I don't
have one there there for
everything.
Good.
Okay
Mr chair.
Look at the.
The amendment for a decisions
affect okay
thank you Mr chair
The amendment of the twenty
eight.
Basically we are are we are
changing the day of the initial
and subsequent cost.
Of.
In the in such a good cost of
living increases from July one
twenty twenty three.
To January one of twenty twenty
four.
So that's why the amendment is
so long because throughout the
bill we have July one twenty
twenty three and then we have
twenty twenty three.
So the amendment both to all
those places in the bill.
Changes basically the needs all
mention of July first twenty
twenty three and our twenty
twenty three and then references
inserts January one of twenty
twenty four.
So what we're doing with this
amendment basically is that that
the the cost of living
increases.
I'm gonna start on January one.
Of twenty twenty four the reason
that I did that.
Is.
Because of the twenty nineteen
legislation that we passed of
which I authors.
we did an incremental increase.
From the seven fifty two the
twelve dollars but we did it
incrementally.
In terms of generating was
twenty twenty we did a nice.
In the daily one twenty twenty
one we did a ten fifty.
In general a one twenty twenty
two eleven fifty.
And then generate one twenty
twenty three we did twelve
dollars just two weeks ago.
And so my amendment is kind of
tracking this incremental
growth.
The minimum wage.
Starting on January one.
And and that's when the indexing
location on our bill.
Forty one point four which is
one year.
Prior to one year after this
last incremental
increase the twelve hours an
hour.
And
Also Mr chair
We're inserting again I mention
if we're starting twenty twenty
four and striking only twenty
twenty three the amendment also
as a definition of consumer
price index hold on hold which
is not what we thought was
really important.
To the to do and also.
And that changes the reporting
period from September to
September of so this is the area
that we're looking at in terms
of applying index what was the
cost of commodities across the
board in our country in terms of
of of of the the incremental
growth in the process of getting
funding from this period of
September to September.
And and then lastly we also made
a change to the time frame when
the department of workforce
solutions has to actually post
website.
What the minimum wage will be
the the following year and that
will be November first.
And the
and that's what the amendment
does a Mr chair.
and I know it's lengthy but
those are the four components or
five components of the
amendment.
Make sure I understand this is
the new charges I would to the
committee first but basically
what we're doing is we're taking
it one year to the next.
Three just wanted to leave for
at in terms of the the actual
cost of living increase.
We're changing that from the
original bill July one twenty
twenty three would be leading
that can putting in place
January one twenty fourth
everything existing the twenty
twenty four yes.
The.
At this time any questions on
the amendment anybody and.
We have a motion to accept the
amendment.
The
is upset that
the bills okay thank you and
continue with your mother
presentation.
you would like to Division with
those of their body knows we is
and what he does.
Thank you Mr chair if you don't
mind again as with this you have
to do your job well explained
Turner for the Legislative
Council Service and with every
bill in front of you if I'm
sitting here I will not fear
support or in opposition to the
bill but to my best to provide
safe distance and answer any
questions I can Mr chair a.
Clinton is your economist if you
you for anything added to what
the Congress issues or questions
or whatever there's a man that's
what he's here for.
With that these minimum wage
workers we're really standing
up.
Not only for more a but also for
better.
For better benefits.
And what this indexing.
Process does it basically kind
of kind of a restores that kind
of integrity that that the
minimum wage workforce.
Historically has five four.
Which is dignity at work site.
Dignity of the workplace.
You know and and what better way
to kind of acknowledge that
productivity value for minimum
wage workers.
It's not by even then these
annual.
Cost of living increases.
And
I want the.
Clinton reflects on the.
Table of the formula the Clinton
discover.
And their own process in terms
of how we've been riding.
At the indexing all these years
we've been very.
Minimum wage bills.
There's been a flaw.
In terms of the language when it
comes to the indexing.
And and I like to kind of turn
it over to fund I have explained
table.
What the what the what the
projected increase will be
twenty four which is in the
middle of the table.
And the and the projections of
what that might be also in the
the twenty twenty five.
Fund over the.
Thank your for the first year
and Mr chair of.
Off of just gonna do my best to
explain briefly heard a similar
index
I didn't hear exactly how
representative cannot explain
but I'll do my best to be brief
and clear
I think in very few words the
what this does is it just the
minimum wage for inflation
going up from twelve dollars.
I.
Twenty twenty four
and every year the twenty twenty
four.
The problem with that is you
have to be very very precise
when you say how to do that so
there's only one way to
interpret that and there was a
very clear message in statute
the federal government tries to
do this for Social Security they
take pages and pages and pages
so hopefully renewable the
paragraph but it should be
emphasized paragraph what this
bill as amended does is to
provide you have to take some
measure of inflation.
Start.
Find that.
But for the manager of this.
From the national.
And the national level inflation
the two.
The one that you can see the
fine here they'll to provide K.
minimum wage and your base cost
of living.
In a given year and every year
cost of living goes off.
Will address that way by that
same amount of the cost of
living goes are going to get a
little bit farther into the math
I can do that if that helps but
in general if the CPI rose up
from say it was really expect a
hundred hundred one.
And you try to take that
hundred to a hundred and one
change to one percent change
multiply twelve by one point
zero one B. twelve dollars
twelve cents and then
the way this is defined in
statute.
Do that every year but it says
twenty years later if this was
still statute and the cost of
living index off.
Choose the cost of living today
is the excess of three hundred
it was six hundred twenty years
from now you take six hundred
over three hundred double to
multiply that twelve dollars an
hour wage.
It twenty four dollars an hour
with your cost of living have
doubled.
I hope that's my best shot it
for free for explaining to.
Now you know why brought those.
You know these a.
The end of a figures when it
comes to.
The indexing is this bill
complicated you know to a person
but not so complicated to in the
communist and the.
What we are project in terms of
of generally one twenty twenty
four would be an increase of up
fifty nine cents based on the
projection that the that the
index yes four four.
So.
Of it but that's that could
change as well yeah stand
Representative Garcia Mr chair
that's just a current forecast I
use the public forecast that
anybody can go full.
for free the.
Energy information
administration published.
Chairman outlook can get
conflation for a couple years a
bunch of other.
macroeconomic things.
A forecast.
We keep in mind that are very
at.
In the the index of the
September.
So Mr Chairman with that the.
Senator questions I did address
the issue of our workforce
solutions thank doing the
posting what I the minimum wage
will be up for the following
year and that is on November
first and the first of twenty
twenty three and subsequent
years of the.
Well.
So Mister chair with that was
that profession.
of this you will go to the
audience.
See who is in support of this
legislation.
Thank you hands up there anybody
wants to speak up go head start
gentleman here.
In front.
We just and support thank you
the name more strength I think
that.
The lady in the very best.
Raise your hand back there.
No okay right here thank you
very much Mr chair members to
the New Mexico desert for.
General Mills you definitely
support as well well we hope
that this the a little bit of an
increase in the rate that we
right away the biggest thing
that you get from both of these
cells as we want to stop talking
about raising the minimum wage
we see that we have had.
Public.
The bills are looking at
indexical we but this.
When I would say if you offered
access thank you very much.
What else.
Workers returned Mexico Center
on poverty today is introducing
this bill.
This bill because it raises the
minimum wage for the cost of the
technology which would cost
increases should be addressed
but
every day we hear that often
that such.
Receive support to which New
Mexico but many of the parts of
the country we also spends a
drastic increase in mortgage
interest for other housing costs
with this being the situation
out of the time being impaired
Mexico does whatever necessary
to ensure that which families
are able to address are always
increasing costs the minimum
wage for the cost of living we
take a step in the right
direction to ensure this and we
try this New Mexico for this
reason we support this bill.
What else is for no and.
Of medicine and this that and I
work with is the one that
disincentive what Hicks and we
sent as part of this legislation
thank you what else.
It is four to the people that
are on the screen there is money
in support.
Mr Matthews.
One.
Okay Mister chair and committee
again
we take every opportunity to
raise wages in New Mexico and
this is one of them thank you
representative Garcia for
bringing another increase to the
minimum wage bill we urge your
support and hope we can end up
with higher wages in New Mexico
tonight thank you.
Mr.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee Josh Anderson with
us Council eighteen I just want
to echo my comments from earlier
and think the sponsor for
bringing this bill forward we
always take the opportunity
support raising wages as those
previous speaker set for workers
across New Mexico and we urge
the committee to support as well
thank you Mr chairman.
Screen.
Okay we'll go to opposition
anybody in opposition to the
bill okay go ahead Sir thank you
Mr chairman again aligns and
speaking on behalf of the
greater occurred in chamber of
commerce and greater Albuquerque
chamber of commerce believes
possible
that wages just to handle the
legislature verses.
Questioner Spence this
legislation continuously
escalating labor costs for small
businesses automatically year
after year small businesses are
currently facing higher costs
the shipping the towards the
lights and everything else you
can think so it's not a that
policies to continue to lead the
legislature seven minimum wage
right allow small businesses to
adjust and settle into.
Adjusted over time after those
effects of measures thank you.
Little S. commitment.
Good afternoon Mister.
Reserve the committee Mitchell
is the director of public policy
at the New Mexico chamber of
commerce
Representative percent of the
holiday season we respect
respectfully.
This.
Twenty nineteen to not include
annual increases based on an
index wage businesses are still
recovering from the impact of
COVID during the same time
businesses.
Anymore is that for the past few
years.
Would increase justice thank
you.
No one else in opposition.
We will not position on the
screen if not.
Okay.
Yeah.
Subject.
The first is.
West Yorkshire.
Let's do it.
I would have been a lot faster
share the roughly of legal.
It does not do you love.
Mr chair representative.
Thank you always
listen to you again.
I'm not going to go over what I
said the last time but I
understand.
And I want to repeat it's so
important for us to respect each
other in our interviews
experience because Mr chair we
all have different experiences
that have up to this date
Senator whether we started
business we didn't we will
always work for start.
It doesn't matter all of us have
or experiences that I think are
important table my my
I think one of the things that
stands out to me is because I
know this twenty five percent
when you say Mr chair
representative that you're gonna
increases that's twenty five
percent of the minimum wages act
how I understand it Mr
Representative Mr chair
representative of us us
The way that the
Sen Bill creative structure.
The is that we are just not
getting.
the cost of living increase.
To the state minimum wage
workers we're also giving a cost
of living increase to a are
tipped.
employees and increasing their
tipped employee minimum wage
which right now.
With the twelve dollars kicking
in on the state minimum wage
that tipped employment wage went
up to three dollars so the way
that we have a structure Mr
chair legislation is that
whatever amount.
Please cost of living for the
for the standard and then wage
workers we take one fourth of
that.
In and then added to the
deployed minimum wage Rudolf.
So if we're projecting in one
point twenty four a little over
sixty cent increase.
You know the point of that
twenty five percent of that is
what we would add three dollars
the statement
for to the.
Thank you Mr chair
representative I I just want to
make sure so so my question is.
If you look out because I'm
sorry I thought the legislation
was passed in.
In twenty nineteen.
Last year were you know whatever
up all come to your home.
The next year what is the next
minimum wage increase if nothing
happened Mr chair representative
there is no we kept up already
we got about a twelve dollar Mr
chair because that's what I want
to understand Mr chair
representative so there at this
point right now again as one
matures in order to work
there's no more the minimum wage
increase for the state of New
Mexico has has topped out
correct Mr chair thank you Mr
chair representative okay so
but if we pass which is reversal
negative talk with I'm tired.
The lotus.
Mr was.
Before you lose that and then
forget the weather Moss always
is.
From the estimate.
Two hundred thirty probably not
even all right Mr chair
representative I think the only
thing that worries me and and
you're not address the dressing
any other things of this bill
the price index rate increase
that correct that's correct
in some sense in this
legislation so Mister chair
representative of the only two
that Mr chair representative of
the the one thing that I was
looking for and I just wanted to
make sure the five hundred
hours of people being sent to
senator bill Mr chair
representative.
for agriculture we are working
our reserve was at work is
because we have to chair
representative that I said we're
not touching anything else.
Minimum wage bill but the
indexing factor yes it.
We're not adding
workers were not sending
workers.
Mr chair just straight and.
Now that I understand.
Fully with all of all the
amendments and all that Mr chair
representative so I'll go to my
my regular questions also have
which one was.
As this index is this the same
index Mr chair representative of
that is used to that is applied
for social security recipients
Mr chair
Center access ideal too often
the thank you Representative
that's Garcia in chairman the
social security uses a CPI it
actually applies to fewer wage
workers only applies to ones
that are focused on
those that are clerical workers
were way to close this CVI
focuses on captions about ninety
percent of
all consumers in the United
States when they're making
consumption so Mister chair
representative we're we're we're
talking about this price index
and it includes these ninety
percent so your top so make sure
I understand this right Mr chair
representative.
That includes other states and
across the country.
Where possibly the CPI is a lot
higher maybe in California or
New York or other cities or
other states that have better
commerce in New Mexico so that
wouldn't apply I guess that CPI
wouldn't just be for New Mexico
so we can
in other words Mr chair
representative so taking the
whole United States and see what
that is which is very different
than our economy of course in
New Mexico.
This is particularly in the
count the whole United States
rather than just a CPI for New
Mexico is that right share our.
Representative that's correct
that would be talking about.
In the red states and the poor
state of the union the same into
the.
Well Mister chair representative
I don't know the in two thousand
Senator a lot more expensive
than the ones and then I can
tell you that so that's why this
is why bring this up Mr chair
representative is is exactly
you'll usually need love thank
you all right here in Santa Fe
is not the same as in as in
of use a W. X. force were city
the July and in when I go to
some of these restaurants in in
California is twice the amount
so the CPI in this where I'm
going would be hires is is a is
a larger number with that be
right Mr chair representative
when we take into account the
the whole United States rather
than just New Mexico.
Mr chair of.
The process of thank you
personally I don't think so Mr
Chairman because you're
basically taking into
consideration the consumption of
all goods.
From both the poor and the rich.
Entities and state so it's not.
Just from Santa Fe but you know
you to claim that the.
Because I I if you want to
Representative Garcia chair if
you want to go down the
alternate choices
there's pros and cons of
attempting to use a more
geographically limited the
Care labor statistics publishes
one for the western United
States that includes California
and Washington state
some people use that and cost
that escalation agreements here
in New Mexico I said is
definitely a disadvantage is
that it also includes six
weighted more heavily towards
California and Washington state.
She was always on the taxes
different regions in the south
region Mexico prices and having
lost resource my follow taxes
that one specifically for the
mountain state might reflect
prices and Arizona and Idaho Mr
chair representative present you
get the picture.
Hi.
And I love it that's going to
present what someone with my
mind Mr chair representative.
I'm a numbers guy so it helps me
understand what we're doing here
so and I was just getting I hope
you understand chair
representative it's the
difference from like you
explained a mountain states one
of his followers most likely
than the western states
regardless what I'm where I'm
going with this is I wanted to
understand how again how it's
gonna affect our social security
recipients those.
Income that there are maybe this
may be a wash to their social
security maybe the government
groups of of two percent or
whatever this this CPA members
as a teen this this factor that
we use and that.
What would a fair question be Mr
chair representative of how how
would that affect school bustle
security.
Extent come individual with
their increases the receive and
the increase of this minimum
wage how CTE economics this is
good how would it when it
filters through the economy in
New Mexico how does affect the
the the.
Sixty five year old the the the
person that that's all the cost
percent chairperson there's no
relevancy.
With your question.
This this and the receipt from
the state minimum wage has
nothing to do with social
security Madam chair Glenn
already stated that so security
as it uses a different
measurement than what we is here
with our
our our our measurement of
consumer goods that constitutes
ninety percent of consumers of
the state so there is no
relevancy there is no
relationship between what we're
doing in terms of the indexing
the state minimum wage to the
elderly and and their social
security benefits.
Mr chair representative I think
there is a risk relevancy there
anytime you're raising cost
anything there is a role to
businesses I just explain how
that.
Dropping the rock in the middle
upon how it how it how it
expands and it does affect
businesses both small and just
trying to understand how that
would affect I have a lot of
people's Mr chair representative
that I that I represent area
that are on fixed income.
And then so I to me that's why
it's relevant to me on court I
worry about those people that
that that's really where I'm
going with this I like the idea
of the New Mexico I think it's I
just wanted to understand other
affect my whole street people in
my area service.
Mr Chairman sent us us us on.
I already stated that there is
no.
I can your plan if you wish.
Kind of further leverage on it
to answer.
You know your specific question.
Representative Garcia Mr chair
Representative Francis I have a
few some follow up information
but very briefly now
the two slightly different for
the traffic.
Closely with time and adding one
important thing is that the bill
as amended thanks and all
happened January first the same
date that the social security
persons are increased
and see if they're looking back
at a similar period growth as of
the most recently available data
the end of September published
October the make that public
make that calculation.
January that's the same time
line as the social security cost
relationships
the slightly different time
contract but Mr chair Senator
health occupations you sure and
I think I think any of question.
Yes Sir Mr chair representative
rose I was just that's exactly I
think we're stated on maybe not
explain.
but that's exactly what I wanted
to to so my point was as they go
off both involved washes itself
that was my my point in what I
was trying to express our state
and and so on.
This.
These people pictures come in
fixed incomes Mr chair Argus
increased will be stuck every
time goes off the index was up
that was my only point I was
trying to get of that job of
expressing that and asking the
questions that's what was going
thank you thank you Mr chair I
think the the lasting only last
question I have is
we're dealing with a lot of
them.
medical compression we're on.
We're we're if places like.
use damning of we're.
Twenty percent of the.
Roughly twenty percent of our of
our
Services are reflections are
making less than fifty thousand
dollars a year and that Mr chair
representative it's just because
there are a lot of those people
are on social security alone.
And we all know here that
fifteen thousand dollars a year
nothing it's enough and so I
just as I was speaking earlier
Mr chair representative of what
happens in Albuquerque what
happens and
we'll sign postal services at
the top of the food chain when
you just read the the the
Average wages in comparison to
other other areas legible are
even now.
Luna County where we have a lot
more meat medium income is a lot
lower so effect some more in
some places have Mr chair
representative
people that are making less than
fifteen in the pop of fifty
thousand a year already in in
that poverty bracket and if it's
higher than some of those areas
and so I I worry about how
because they're not workers
those are those are fixed
incomes from social security and
so when I when I see that if it
does worry me for four years
because military historians.
It is.
This is what just happened about
a month ago went to my sister's
house for business.
And as always in there these two
ladies coming off of the door.
And we're close we're just
talking.
They asked can we.
Can we and these were older
ladies older ladies
and I ask sure I can help you
and she said can we have the
ballots the bacula ballots with
for the developed act to move up
I don't know off groceries or
whatever the use of storage
room across the board for items
can we take those so we can we
needed to hear all.
And so that just really really
shows the that all of our areas
are different and in my in my
rural New Mexico my area have
very poor areas that that really
suffer and that hurt my I mean
it really hurt me to see that
and in a populated to they were
even said come the house with
you what but the the point I'm
making is that we do stuff
across the board
it just worries me for of those
people that in that system
situation thank you Mr chair
representative shop Mr chair
representative that are assessed
you know it's not appropriate to
generalize the second metro area
as being wealthy.
You know I represent are open
areas southbound while the
fiscal impact of sixteen point.
You know and
Corporate.
And I think the whole
neighborhood my district so from
us these are communities with
nine ninety for Spanish
population.
You know the most unable.
Are working fast you can
remember ninety five percent of.
Population.
I have.
Three.
Of the of the top ten.
Since.
Lower income I had three census
tracts in my district in terms
of the lowest income New Mexico
the top ten.
And I don't know of anybody else
state Rep they can claim that
many census tracts in terms of
the lowest income.
You know.
So I just want to make that make
that point because my my
communities similar scenario as
your rural areas.
In the in the south valley is
semi rural I mean we still have
a cultural their farming and and
orchards in the whole gap you
know but one last thing Mr chair
You know that it's been brought
up about the twenty nineteen
legislation that the legislature
basically
And it did not include a
indexing.
The bill.
The final bill that passed the
house.
had index.
We took out the indexing as part
of that negotiation in the
conference committee.
Also.
The final bill that passed the
house.
On the way to the governor.
Act did not have.
A student.
Despite that.
All high school students only
getting eight fifty.
And that ever reaching the
twelve Bucks.
You know
that.
Was then put in the conference
committee.
That student wage.
You know against the wishes of
the legislature.
It was just those six members of
the conference committee that
made those adjustments.
We were able to negotiate that
in order to get.
And to the governor and that was
part of the negotiations with
the governor's well.
So we should be understanding.
You know how that twenty
nineteen piece of legislation
about in that it had to give and
take from both.
Industry.
And the minimum wage worker.
Mr chair
I just want and that is the kind
of
Reflect on what that really
transpired with that piece of
legislation Mr Chairman
representative I'd like to the
district I think we have similar
feelings of our people were just
trying to take care of people
I'm focusing on those others
you're focusing on others and I
I respect that.
I just wanted you to understand
your chair representative of
that.
All of our our districts are a
little bit different in in and
sometimes are different callers
thank you very much respect.
Senator Munoz.
Mr chair representative Garcia
on.
Your bill's always.
Been very instructional from.
Thank.
I mean the Mr chair.
I have I just have a couple of
questions all this talk page
mothers get.
because you have.
The type of the CPI is there
ever a scenario for that the
lower one Mr chairman my ****.
The what we have in the
legislation we have that
protection the minimum wage can
never drop.
Now if we have.
Basically I a subdivision.
That goes into the negative.
That will have no bearing on the
minimum wage because the minimum
wage will never drop as for.
You know so
I don't know the thing that you
want also on the gesture
Representative Garcia in chair
and Representative Martinez the
that does not change in the
management as in the original
bill and just has a every time
that calculation is made this
month trough has happens in two
thousand nine after the housing
bubble burst in that larger
recession it didn't happen
recently
it's happened three times in the
last fifty years so I think.
Chair representative Garcia so.
You so it's only about.
Is only of course there's never
a danger that it.
People's.
Is that correct Mr chair
representative.
Mr chair the second question I
have.
Is.
The CPI the to use the nation
one one was not limited to the
state.
Is Mr chair is the reason it is
our our our measurement.
RCTI measurement is all
encompassing.
It involves all fifty states.
In nineteen in the territories.
If Mr chair yeah I understood
that Representative Garcia but I
thought that when you broke it
down.
Your expert with broken down he
said that there were.
You know subset of that one of
them being the mom state.
It was I was chair
representative anything I
Representative.
Martinez
the the the pros and cons of all
of those the.
Many states use the national
level it's going to be less
volatile this is a sample it
looks that
thousands and thousands and
thousands of transactions but if
you limited to only what happens
and shares of the New Mexico
Colorado.
The Montana Idaho it's a subset
of that
and I think as we mentioned New
Mexico's experiences often in my
opinion looks more like Texas
and Oklahoma and Louisiana and
what's going on in Arizona and
Idaho even if it is that it's
state is so Mr Chairman
representative.
so what was the volatility issue
that.
Was taken into account there's.
It's a little bit less volatile
taking the thank.
A sample Mr chair Senator.
And representative Garcia
armchair Representative Martinez
definitely less volatile and
the there is in New Mexico
specific some state big states
have a Mexico specific
the way that the census is cut
up the the US we're not in the
same group of Texas or Oklahoma
even though a lot of times are
prices my fifteen year Texas and
Oklahoma.
Santa more that Idaho and
California.
Chair representative thank you.
And we have.
The question myself I think it
was pretty much a lot easier to
understand the last.
They have a motion on the floor.
We will
have a motion for the house.
Amended all right thank you and
have second.
That.
That was the I got two seconds
okay with that
I will have to call the roll of.
Representative thousand if.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Yes.
Representative Johnson yes.
This.
Representative under right now.
Representative was.
Representative ordinances note.
Vice chair.
But.
Yes.
And chair.
Yes.
Mr chairman.
Just.
We will go to.
The.
What.
What is what is it.
The voice.
With all.
Care will try to make it.
What the.
Thank you water because of under
the table.
Our goal
was.
Federal Mr.
The the.
This the the.
This.
Representative.
C..
Are ready to go.
Thank you Mr chairman it's a
pleasure to be here today to
introduce a house bill forty.
The public works project
contributions of for our
wonderful new people it's so
nice to see new faces of this
bill passed the house and two
Senate committees twenty twenty
one however the sixty if they
came and it could go to the
Senate floor
and with me I have my expert
witness Steven Curtis to.
Chairman of the committee my
name is Steven.
Practicing in.
And if necessary right kind of
the building trades will also
speak for a start does everybody
have the amendment.
It's two four two two two.
To would you like to
the middle of the New.
Discussion of us just give us a
rundown of the bill and then
moved into Williams okay so
Mister chair key points I think
everybody knows there's there's
tremendous move in our state to
re ignited Division career
technical education and to
recognize the tremendous
importance of pre apprenticeship
and apprenticeship opportunities
so house bill forty six the
public works project
contributions which is as I said
I think it really recognizes the
importance of.
We're really striving to expand
the job opportunities across our
state in all industries when
they're shortages highway
hearing equipment such as
operating engineers laborers
ironworkers traditions are
printers this is the expansion
of apprenticeship programs that
I state it requires
contributions to the apprentice
and training programs with each
industry or to the public works
apprentice and training but if
they don't have their own
opinions programs mess notice he
what public works commission
training for all public works
construction projects the
purpose of the P. what funding
is to ensure funding that
ensures adequate training during
economic downturns increase the
number of New Mexicans of who
have the skills that will
enhance their opportunities for
reemployment employment and just
to maintain the high standards
of craftsmanship in our state it
encourages industry to join
start or support existing
apprenticeship programs I
believe it's a win win for
everybody the fall of the bill
does remixes exceptions to the
existence lock up for streets
highways bridges roads and
utilities and maintenance
contract you pay into your own
registered apprenticeship
program or if you have a choice
to rate what on at the end of
the year the P. White funds
split among law registered
apprenticeship programs but
these were education training
apprentices and instructor I
want to note that at the end of
twenty twenty two just a month
ago there were fifty four
registered apprenticeship
programs and these include line
you and you it doesn't matter
with two thousand one hundred
seventeen apprentices I know
that that's an increase of
thirteen more programs from
twenty twenty one when the roll.
The forty one programs at three
hundred fourteen more practices
than eighteen hundred twenty
twenty one when I first
introduced this bill it was
twenty nineteen it was a lot
lower.
and so I think this is a bill
he's wonderful with.
Service to one as being
yeah I mean from my perspective
as a sorry terminal from members
of the committee from my
perspective as a slave.
There is currently a shortage of
trained apprentices and
journeymen several of the trades
and and increasing
participation and the P. White
funding which would increase the
programs because we all know
colleges not necessarily for
everyone this is a that way
removes essentially a loophole
that reduce the potential
energy's plans.
And with that Mr Chairman do you
want to look at the look at the
amendment do I have a motion to
the two will be.
That question is yes thank you
and have a second okay good we
have proper motion second go
ahead and spend your amendment.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee I think the amendment
adds on page one one thirteen it
as creating a scholarship fund.
And then it adds if you see on
the amendment of section four
and section of the public works
of fitness and training at it's
an apprenticeship scholarship
fund created.
Regular college students have
the Pell grant of that can be
used for anything this is kind
of the same thing it's created
as a non reverting fund there's
not an appropriation for this
fun at this time the fund
consists of appropriations gives
grants donations request income
from the investment of the funds
that are.
for solutions shelf administered
funds and money in the fund is
subject to appropriation by the
legislature of it can be used
let's see if we go down to the
purpose of the fund on the
second page of the amendment
number one purchasing making
available folks spokesman can go
up to eight hundred dollars if
you were aware that plus tools
and materials computers
electronic equipment needed for
their mentorship program
secondly please for the program
related licenses cations and
three covering the reimbursed
expenses incurred by premises to
successfully complete and
approved apprentice and training
programs such as child care
transportation that's.
Is a fund
to the rest of the bill.
Any questions on the amendment
the committee.
The.
Mr chair the best yes.
Is
the second.
I need to go to the audience now
and we will ask for those of ten
opposition to this legislation
right here.
Okay go ahead senator one
opposition.
Hello Mr chairman
my mic Sandoval Representative
associate contractors of New
Mexico I think a lot of you know
I was formally cabinet secretary
for D. O. T. for the last four
years the first always had a
great relationship with the
unions and the supporters of
them always was able to help
them find things also big
supporter of president from
these programs are great what
what this bill does is it now
forces all the hiring
contractors to contributed to
this fund and although I support
the printers programs I don't
know that that's the best way to
support the construction
industry I think it works for
but construction and think it
can work for a lot of things
just passing this bill I don't
know have some for the highway
industry so once the job right
now and I'm putting you know
about a hundred people
regardless of their eighteen
nineteen twenty years old within
the experience from zero to ten
years I have dozens of
contractors who hire them
tomorrow put them through
training that the okay for on
their own and get them to the
place they want to be in order
to do their job without having
to the presence program or
anything like that support them
I think our fear is sixty cents
on the dollar for every
for contractors subcontractors
in the construction industry was
going into this fund and how
this.
New program will support
construction industry on
highways is unclear so although
I support unions supported
practice programs I'm not sure
this is the best way to support
the construction industry have
the answer to question.
Okay those in support the money
wishing to speak go ahead Sir
for a.
Thank you Sir mark strand IDW I
was one that went to their
pension program I am turning
online in India I have been
working in my field for almost
thirty years now I went through
their partnership is a credible
experience is a great way for me
to earn a living be able to
support my family it also kept
me safe as a journeyman linemen
I don't get a whole lot of
second chances as an apprentice
you get from work one on one
with the gentleman and make sure
that you get all qualifications
if you need to make your job
properly return home yes ma'am
thank you.
That.
thank you Mr chair remember the
old in with the firefighters
local support for arises
for this legislation support of.
Years and years of program as it
will serve myself
the next project.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
members of the challenges with
the New Mexico federation of
labor within insurance with our
building trades brothers and
sisters and think that sponsor
for bringing this up yet again
really appreciate it what is.
Planning.
The secretary secretary
designate for the department of
workforce solutions we all part
of the sport and take the
Sanchez for bringing this bill I
never committee members earlier
talk about the labor force
shortage in one of the ones that
strategies for getting people
off the bench in the labor force
is very graciously also
wholeheartedly support the
amendment which will enable all
New Mexico participate in these
programs even if they can't
afford this and this is like for
foods for travel on.
Mexico is.
This is an issue with the sheet
metal workers.
This.
We started strong support this
measure doesn't just support you
ships are on impression programs
or benefits.
From this type of program the
increased
We see.
New Mexico finished programs
offset.
Education is happening.
Supporters.
Budget.
chairman members of the
committee just last as a
registered lobbyist for the
mechanical contractors
association.
The sheet metal contractors
ciation.
After the electrical contractors
association we stand transport
provided this bill really
discreet parents make sure that
all of our contractors of course
we all know our workforce
development efforts are.
Thank you for all the future so
we stand strong for.
To speak.
Although it Mr chair committee
members monies out of all of
this a business representative
with you a little for twelve and
we use that insurance for this.
But.
Mr chairman the committee
Matthews was garbage you but
this is present for this bill
for training and operations all
the workers would be you're not
thanks.
Thank you Mr chairman of the
committee my name is Gerald yeah
one of I am the local president
for the laborers International
Union of North America local
sixteen we spent on support of
this bill if you.
Windows created body here and
on screen part.
Your maker.
Yes thank you Mr chair and
members of the committee my
name's John Baker
I have four apprentices here in
the car with me unfortunately I
had to get them back to their
families and we can stay in the
committee room but all of us
stand in strong support of this
bill
the amendment makes it even
stronger and better for our
economy and the high rate of
contractors really need to start
paying their fair share
and the US department of
commerce.
As a study where they show that
for every state dollar spent on
apprenticeship.
It's a twenty eight dollar
return on public benefit and for
that myself in the Four furnaces
with.
Instructs or thank you.
that J. you're going.
Good evening Mister Mr chair and
committee James R. and again
with the New Mexico utility
contractors association and we
are against house bill forty six
many public works contractors do
not have access or have
apprenticeship programs in place
and therefore would be forced to
pay into a fund that they cannot
receive a benefit from funds at
approximately sixty cents an
hour sent to an apprenticeship
fund will take away funds for in
house training and in house
apprenticeship programs and
other training by the businesses
due to limited funds industry
and crafts that do not have
approved apprenticeship programs
are still highly trained and are
held to the same high safety
standards as all public
contractors including state and
federal safety standards forcing
contractors to contribute to a
fund that they cannot benefit
from is wrong we would implore
the committee to keep the type a
prevailing wage exempt and vote
no thank you very much for your
time.
Josh Anderson.
Mr chair members of the
committee Josh Anderson with us
Council eighteen I just simply
want to stand in solidarity with
our sisters and brothers in the
building trades and urged
committee support and also want
to thank the sponsor for
bringing this forward thank you
Mr chairman.
That that everybody's already
committees in.
Representative market is.
Representative.
Question
chair of Representative.
By the.
I am with you the apprenticeship
programs.
Creating that path creating
career paths I think
If we don't if we don't.
Point that.
We are we losing.
Future workers are going to be
born out of state.
We for farming or state.
My question Mr chair
representative.
The
ship programs work however the
working now.
Mr chairman and Representative
Martinez thank you for that
question they're working well
actually you can see by the
gross I I just give the growth
from twenty twenty one shortly
after the COVID and to now we're
making three hundred apprentices
and it's it's relatively easy to
register friendship program with
the state if you have your own
program you'll pay sixty cents
an to people and you get money
back at the end of the year so
the going there robust there's
actually and again we're we're
not talking just about you talk
about non union I think and
Farmington they have for city
centered apprenticeship
programs.
I know it exactly as sorry.
Chairman from.
In the Martinez
The.
Just as the representative
indicated.
The the bill
Requires either country and this
is only for public works
projects this is private so much
the state is the.
The state our subdivision status
such a general contractor the
purpose of our minimum wage act
is to ensure that as a business
entity that's engaging business
the state isn't diluting labor
costs higher wages but also is
encouraging the growth of the
labor pool in the state of New
Mexico they are functioning well
this adds funding to it and with
that sort of equal as removes
was essentially loophole
allowing certain contractors not
to contribute to the Pequot fund
but you are there any public
works contractor has the option
of either I contributing to the
registered apprenticeship
program that they are
participants in or at the sixty
so currently sixty cents an hour
to the what fund.
Mr chair representative so there
the P. what is already.
There yes already that Mr
Chairman representative yes it
is so my next question was if
it's working so well why are
what are we doing where while I
introduce this bill but from
what I understand Mr Mr chair
representative.
It's to get the room the road
construction.
The rate in the.
Of Mr chairman and
representative yes they've been
adopted other type of these have
it's including the equipment
process for public works
projects only a typically
somebody who goes to some of the
training programs offered by D.
O. T. and some of the
construction company's most
companies get eighty cents back
for each trainee our so they
would get the sense back and
they would get the money back
from the P. what fund as well.
Mr Chairman representative shows
that last broken confusingly so
they're gonna put money in sixty
dollars sixty cents on the
dollar and then they get eighty
cents back no I'm sorry Mr chair
and representative if you have
your own apprenticeship program
you do not pay into the P. what
fund which is sixty cents per
trip for up you know pay into it
because you're supporting your
own program.
In the case of the
apprenticeship of person Miss
Vigil in workforce solutions
pointed out that someone
starting apprenticeship program
in a you know a road
construction company they would
get that P. White share which is
divided between all the programs
and if their trainees
participated.
In a D. O. T. program the D. O.
T. pays their eighty cents a
trainee our so they're not
giving up that many.
It's getting a little bit into
the weeds yep that's come up.
Mr chair representative.
I if you and I.
Were at a meeting and we we
actually talked about friendship
and and career technical
training which is some of the
very important to me an
important important to the.
Area that you want to come from.
I just don't understand it if
it's already working and we're
seeing apprenticeship programs
parole.
In my it we're still punishing
the road construction industry
Mr chairman and and
Representative Martinez that's
one way that a person could look
at it I don't look at it that
way I look at it equalizing the
fact that we have these public
works projects and everybody
involved in the public works
project is on the same playing
field that's my perspective.
Which means that at Sir chairman
our own Representative Martinez
the programs are working however
they're not working quickly
enough and that we do have as I
mentioned earlier shortages of
skilled labors in certain in
certain gentleman flavors and
several of the building trades
industry so the expansion is
something that is from my
perspective resorting.
Mr chair representative so.
Our construction industry.
Or participating in this already
he's just the only industry
that's not participating is is.
Road construction.
All can I have a sickness for
spring put it just in to that
question related to the Germans.
So so it only slightly to the
right.
Mexico building trades council
so that the current product by
law.
B. C. NH either have a register
program they pay into it the the
rate is set by the department of
workforce solutions sixty cents.
Taipei contractors that do
basically highway construction
exempted themselves from about
fifty years ago they never so we
don't have really I know that
there are sub contractors that
operate in the highway space
that bring registered
apprenticeship programs with
them because as part of the
business model are we
contractors have a training
program and these these.
They can do what we've done the
research to find that it does
not disqualify for them from
their existing training they're
satisfied.
But what it does do is when we
originally passes way before my
time we did a setting creased
the participation by the
contractor community to support
partnership programs so you saw
electrical mechanical arm were
you saw projects grow because
they got a little bit it's not a
huge amount of money I think
some of the larger ones might
make
They might and a quarterly basis
the twenty five thousand dollars
Committee that's just not going
to spoil the support program but
it offset some of the cost to do
it.
Mr chair and representative.
On that close to.
For this.
your experts said that however
long ago if this happened the
highway construction industries
exempted themselves.
And everybody else was in.
Mr Chairman representative I
don't think anybody living
currently really knows what
happened fifty.
And why it was accepted I have
my ideas that.
I think it also I'm I'm I just
want to add to the committee I
think.
In the high school level we're
really developing pre
apprenticeship programs and I
think that this also gives a
pathway to a very robust
industry in our state and coming
from the west side Sandoval
County in Bernalillo county we
live it every day.
Mr chair representative I
appreciate your support.
Thank you for your.
Thank you Mr chair
Representative I mean would you
pass on house bill forty six as
amended.
The second the second year I
second that.
One question.
On the scholarship fund who
decides who gets the money how
did they make a decision is
going to receive this money is
rented out in the spaces or how
do they make it uses.
Question Mr chair that would be
determined by rules workforce
solutions.
So what set up reserve the
determination will be by from
workforce solutions.
Just looking for to ask a
question.
So the determination will be
workforce solutions but out my
question of course is how do
they decide.
gets.
With how how was that decision
made I mean just like I'm going
through the last bill that we is
not a tonight discussed about
the the the street the.
The Romero teachers that ends up
being a needs assessment bill
so isn't going to be that the
the people that receive these
are going to be in need of this
or is it going to be at the
people that applied for this and
are eligible for to go to get.
Mr chairman it would be
determined by the department I I
will they would design how to do
it.
Mr Chairman comment the
committee I mean I will go into
this this passes and right now
it's in and do estimate the fund
we're working at when the big
numbers cut we're going to go
around the world try to get some
soft and put it in the state the
appropriated six hundred
thousand dollars for the entire.
Relationship community in New
Mexico which we think that's all
so we would envision and be
suggesting working with
workforce solutions to that it
is completion based going to
school and you're doing well in
your and your.
You're performing well in the
classroom your form will of the
job of your meeting usually
every six months and the
different apprenticeship
programs offer differently of
some of the more every six
months if you met the all the
completion criteria which would
be your your school work and
your job performance then you
get to that box five percent
increase so we would be
suggesting for a more site that
they're based on this first year
promise to make it the second
year if he did then he should be
in the bucket to be able to tap
into having his books of and
other unreimbursed costs
it just makes life just a lot of
we have a principal in the bill
in New Mexico and driving to Los
Alamos National Laboratory and I
mentioned here in about forty
five minutes so if we get back
on.
I left it for fifty this morning
they're hard workers we're damn
proud of our country our state
really depends on so a little
bit of help little bit of help I
think this might raise maybe a
million dollars a year
But it's a good gesture and it
will I think help us attract
more people into the grass.
Mr chair I don't know if you saw
the range I have it I just ask
people way
of this fire report does it
reflect the amendment.
No it doesn't okay.
Okay so it's kind of just
wondering just overall what is
going to cost the tax payer and
it like for this it says would
be substantial cost and I
wondered if someone could maybe
describe what the substantial
cost with Mr Chairman
representative there's no fiscal
first going to be nothing.
Okay thank you.
Level two for a new plastic
improper second the.
Representative correct others.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Garcia yes.
Senator yes.
Yes.
Representative Martinez yes.
Representative roof yes.
Representative Barreras.
Representative Dixon yes.
Vice chair for the program yes.
And chair yes.
Committee with government.
Thank you everyday.
The card.
Okay.
The only.
And that's what.
We have a list of.
Thank you.
Please read the conversation
outside.
but of the I am but alas this of
not to.
Representative official
scheduled for Thursday.
So much.
The target.
It is.
We will have that much
discussion on Thursday because
there's just a vote Thursday
with that we're going forward
because we got the lead that we
would look at Thursday.
