That is correct speaker yes
okay.
Good afternoon New Mexico I'm so
proud to be here with you today
leadership our executive offices
in our holders across the state
I want to recognize a secretary
of state making Toulouse Oliver
our Attorney General Hector
last but not least wish a very
Happy Birthday to our state
auditor Mr Bryan Cologne so
we're grateful that you're
joining us as well as the
members of the legislature who
rebuild the state in New Mexico
I believe that we can do that
with the hard work of the
legislature during the sixty
days that are ahead of us we're
grateful for all the staff
resilient in dealing with the
issues of the state in New
Mexico some half of the New
Mexico state Senate president
pro tem me Stewart majority
this joint session and I turn it
over to our wonderful speaker of
the house Mr Brian Egolf.
Thank you Mr lieutenant governor
for joint sessions but like so
many other things this year we
are
trying things in a new way and
the I regret that we're not able
to be together four two
the house sure Williams
Stapleton our Majority Leader
during I go surgery with wanted
Johnson our majority caucus
chair as well as Jim towns that
hosting this web event today and
are very excited to hear from
the honorable Michelle lu Han
Grisham our governor and with
Mexico the honorable Michelle on
Chris.
past year for any New Mexican
experience loss or loneliness
we're just.
I would ask you to join me in a
moment of silent reflection or
prayer.
Thank Nico if their peers so
please bear with us and we'll
get right to the governor's
address.
our weather report from solar
city G. much snow
from the storm.
We we got plenty of snow
probably the the most now that
moisture but at the same time
I'd like to just give a shout
out to our state police all the
people across the the department
transportation working to keep
New Mexicans safe.
For the thousands we of course
to the virus in our state for
their grieving families their
friends and loved ones for any
New Mexicans who suffered this
past year for any New Mexican
My fellow New Mexicans grief is
helpless you might ask any power
that may be listening to change
it and do it dealing new set of
cards but in grieving we learn
to accept that pain and loss of
deeply we learn and re learn who
we are how strong we are how
precious and temporary
everything is we see ourselves
as we are as one of many as an
the new and valuable
perspective.
As a state and as a country we
have felt more than our fair
share of grief this past year
the lives lost the families and
we are still standing wondering
how will we hear where do we go
from here how we go on but we
have already shown now if we are
strong enough to see yourself
nothing they can beat us nothing
we may get knocked down but we
will never be knocked out New
Mexico has never been stronger
tougher and more resilient than
parenting set up with systemic
inequality ready to build
something better and new after
this year of the people and
sorrow but more than anything
beginning right now and although
the pandemic has been
emotionally draining for all of
us and as required our full
attention and energy the work of
building a better New Mexico has
save New Mexican lives doing
that work in protecting New
Mexicans and our state as a
whole we have made ourselves
first state in the country to
establish a drive through
testing site we remain steadily
in the top ten nationally for
COVID testing per capita we
prevent out breaks that
correctional and juvenile
justice facilities we will
continue to rapidly safely and
equitably distribute vaccines to
health care resources we got
more than twenty six million
meals to school kids all across
New Mexico doctors nurses
caregivers first responders
dedication and grace we stepped
up all of us as New Mexicans who
love our state and look out for
our neighbors already we have
delivered hundreds of millions
have more to do but we can do it
because throughout this crisis
we maintained our financial for
we planned ahead we invested in
cuts to life saving state
resources and programs that New
Mexicans rely on every day we
will deliver almost half a
billion dollars to New Mexicans
have another decade of forced
austerity New Mexico's economic
recovery will not lag behind the
nation's as it did under the
previous Republican
last year and have retrained
thousands of workers even amid
the pandemic and because we will
choose to have the courage to
break ground in new industries
investments we have a road map
to a rebuilt and diversified
economy and we have the
resources to both take care of
our own right now and keep
reminded us that New Mexico
cannot wait any longer to invest
in reliable high speed internet
for all in our state.
is the most urgently needed
infrastructure investment we can
make as a state and we must make
it together we must put in place
this essential building block
system undone by the vandalism
of the prior stated ministration
demands robust reform CYFD this
year created the nation's first
text only abuse and neglect
humanity to the services and
expanding.
And my budget calls for eight
hundred percent increase in
funding for suicide prevention
needs no matter the circumstance
and we will keep working to
expand coverage this year when
we launch the new health care
affordability fund we will get
compassionate investments in
people and families in their
opportunity and ability to lead
healthy and happy lives that
will help us create a better New
health emergency in a century we
can change the narrative there's
progress all around even if the
pandemic has made it a bit
move to New Mexico and expand in
New Mexico ascent aviation and
aircraft maintenance storage and
support business and Roswell is
moving forward with construction
manufacturer shows Los crucis
over Texas Arizona and Colorado
will double its workforce next
year a host of manufacturing
the north American market the
department of transportation is
at work on more than two hundred
infrastructure projects
statewide including priority
the national average with more
than a billion now in total
annual income for New Mexicans
we issued forty two thousand
construction permits last year
almost seven hundred brand new
have licenses covering fifteen
million square feet of indoor
growing space and almost ten
big difference last year we gave
seventy five thousand dollars to
the state office of natural
resources trustee which was
under funded and indeed
corporations responsible for
harming New Mexico communities
and our environment a fifteen
fold return on investment and
twenty was not a lost year in
our essential efforts to protect
our natural environment and
diversify our energy economy in
two years we've doubled our new
right in the top five in the
country for per capita wind
energy production we're driving
down energy costs for you and
reducing emissions property
begun to make a difference this
is still the place to be.
The greatest state in your.
As dark as some days have been
compassion by an ambition to
create justice and equal
opportunity in our state we are
and must be as the inaugural
interrupted by intimidation
because we know our inaction and
inertia will be the inheritance
of the next generation.
We are brave enough to see the
day out with renewed energy and
focus with a sense of urgency
and purpose that will honor the
strength and sacrifice of those
who gave so much this year.
mile this year and then the
extra mile after that to I'm in
all of your commitment and your
integrity and I will say clearly
been methodical and tireless in
working with superintendents
charter leaders the department
of health the medical advisory
And there's no negotiating about
the health and safety of
students families and educators
and I believe the planning and
hard work has paid off and our
groups supported by union
leadership we will get this
right and we will move forward
and every school district in the
state would be able to welcome
disrupted classrooms in New
Mexico and indeed across our
whole country but dealing with
the virus must not and will not
derail our focus on improving
We will enact in equity first
budget for public education
ensuring money reaches students
and schools in proportion to the
no matter their zip code their
family circumstances with the
color of their skin.
With the collaborative
leadership of the legislature we
their families and we will this
year finally move forward with a
constitutional amendment to
invest a portion of our straits
make a generational investment
in New Mexico children.
And we will deploy funding to
realize free higher education
for all New Mexicans helping
opportunity scholarship despite
having to leave his job when he
became a father.
Receive money from the
legislature this year we were
able to reach almost five
If the legislature will commit
the full twenty two million in
funding I requested for this
program this year thirty
go to realize the potential of
this program but it deserves an
investment of our attention as
policy makers New Mexico
institutions of higher learning
opportunity and we must do the
work to get there this funding
is a vote of confidence in New
Mexicans a proclamation of faith
in their potential in colleges
that connect young learners and
adults directly to the work
force and we will.
Because our work force is our
lifeblood and our small
continue to step up for the we
can wait for the federal
government to get its act
together we got grants and
stimulus checks out the door we
will always take care of our own
forward thinking investments
that will create the diversified
and thriving economy we've
always needed transforming how
New Mexico does business and how
the special session last summer
unlocking more than two hundred
million dollars in direct relief
for New Mexico small businesses
and two hundred million more
owned businesses and to ensure
more New Mexico dollars are
spent with the Mexico owned
companies we will continue to
percent more jobs last year than
the year before helping small
businesses get off the ground
and helping larger companies
expand.
should celebrate those big
companies and big industries
with the film and television
business in our state now
employing more than nine
twenty five thousand square feet
of frozen warehouse space hiring
dozens more employees and
boosting sales and like Los
Mexico farmers and ranchers a
win win for state agriculture
and producers we can and will
regain the momentum of twenty
moved to New Mexico specifically
for jobs we can be aggressive in
recruiting new workers and
creating new jobs all across our
But we will avoid an extended
period of economic stagnation
only if we are forward thinking
about the future if we keep our
eyes on what new companies and
invitation to re think the
status quo to be ambitious and
creative and ball that kind of
thinking includes of course
recreational cannabis and the
Mexicans eager to get to work
and make their future in this
industry being told no just
because that's easier than doing
future or we can roar back to
life breaking new ground and
fearlessly investing in
ourselves in the limitless
potential of New Mexicans I know
sustainable future as I
mentioned implementation of the
landmark energy transition act
is moving ahead speedily with
we're making solar energy more
affordable for New Mexicans
we're installing electric
charging stations all along
popular highways spanning the
And this year we will enact the
country's toughest methane and
air pollutant rules in the oil
and gas industry finally Cat
cracking down on waste and
schools the sanctity of our
natural environment our clean
air our water our beautiful
maces and force and mountains is
do by taking swift action New
Mexico will once again be a
model for the country.
In closing I will tell you my
fondest hope.
experienced together will pass
and soon.
What we begin after that that's
our choice.
Our lives have been upended all
are already already healing.
And the new day will come.
What we've been through the
We are free to think differently
to Rehm bigger and be bold.
We share is New Mexicans the
collective trauma and loss of
the pandemic.
difficult year in our own
individual ways with compassion
for our neighbors with
generosity of spirit with a
clear understanding of the
the next year the next five
years the next hundred years
it's hours to dream up and build
together.
twenty as a low point or turning
point.
And I know our best days are
ahead of us and as we defeat
the climb toward a thriving New
Mexico a healthy and happy the
Mexico better than ever before.
Thank you let's get to work and
Thank you governor for your.
Marks thank you for your
leadership thank you for sending
out a path for New Mexico's
vision for New Mexico a reality
Mr lieutenant governor thank you
also for joining with me and
this first of its kind event for
the governor say in the state I
it's time to get to work thank
you very much for being with us
today.
Stay safe wearing masks and we
will see you back here in the
legislature very very soon.
