Representative Gallegos.
I'm someone here can you see my
picture.
Not ma'am okay well as I as you
can hear me I guess that's fine.
Thank you Representative my
part.
Representative Ortez president.
Representative.
As it.
The
I'm here
Johnson.
Hi Mister Johnson.
Good morning president thank
you.
Share this year.
Madam chair we've reached a
quorum.
Thank you sure raise and good
morning again everyone thanks
for joining us today to the
members of the public as well we
will begin with Representative
Rehm.
Are you ready Representative.
Yes madam chair I'm I'm ready so
house bill sixty one is a is
legislation to allow the law
enforcement academy to supervise
and discipline our reserve
police officers in New Mexico
almost every police agency
within the state.
R. has reserve police officers
however the New Mexico Law
Enforcement Academy by statute
does not recognize
reserve police officers they
basically will have to meet all
the standards that a police
officer needs to become one are
you a reserve police officer
there are three levels in here.
The relatively what we would
have it so level one I'm just
making up numbers because so go
ahead and determine at the level
one maybe they can do courthouse
security and prisoner transport
with X. number of hours of
training.
Our level two they can ride with
another police officer and
assist him in the field at level
two training.
And at level three three
training which is five hundred
hours of law enforcement
training thank working out in
the field in a patrol car by
themselves as long as they're
supervised.
This legislation is endorsed by
the courts and corrections
Committee and it was passed two
years ago it went all the way to
Senate Judiciary where it ran
out of time it never received a
hearing.
And madam chair with that I
think I'm ready for questions.
Thank you Representative Rehm
and if folks can bear with this
we are going to try to do a poll
which we will start for the very
first time in this committee.
And that we will and now plays
and a pool of coal in the zoom
so that attendees can vote.
Whether or not they oppose this
bill or if they supported so
Let's go ahead and get that.
So we have.
The poll in progress right now
and it's a little bit over
thirty seconds
and folks can say this are you
for or against house bill sixty
one.
So I'm gonna close it now.
In ten seconds.
I think it actually closed for
us so the results of the poll I
hope folks can see this at home
is equally split.
Seven four and seven against so
with that.
We are going to go to.
Public comment for those that
want to speak.
Okay.
So currently leads have anyone
that wants to speak and support
if you would please raise your
hand and the attendees box if
you want to speak in support.
Okay so we have a dynamic cash
and you are now and made it.
Okay now I'm I needed.
Representative re my no I talked
to you on a number of your bills
before they didn't agree with
that this sounds like it's
something that would actually be
helpful and I really appreciate
that I know
At here trying to be helpful and
hard and although we disagreed
on a lot of things I think this
sounds like something that would
be helpful so thank you for it.
Thank you Mr cash and are you
speaking on behalf of yourself
or.
An organization.
I.
We have a myself thank you.
Okay announce that would like to
speak in support.
Okay seeing and is there anyone
that would like to speak in
opposition.
Okay we have.
Ms combos you are now and it.
You'll just have to me on your
end.
Good morning.
Yes we can thank you perfect
thank you more good morning
chair and members of the
committee my name is Lucy let
them both I'm a policy associate
at New Mexico nonprofit
organization bold futures.
I and we have both features
oppose H. B. sixty one.
I currently live in Albuquerque
but I grew up in Espanola and I
have strong family ties there
still.
sadly I know all too well what
over policing and police
violence and limited avenues to
accountability look like in our
communities.
At the very young age of
thirteen I would miss my brother
who was sixteen at the time we
see the most brutal beating at
least eight police officers
right outside my home.
The beating was so severe that
he spent four days hospitalized
in hand cuffs recovering from
broken ribs internal bleeding
severe head injuries and many
other issues.
New Mexico already has
significant police forces across
our state.
Allowing for the commissioning
of reserve police officers will
provide even less accountability
and oversight.
We need to investors state
dollars and are you education
our health care substance
dependency programs housing
economic and community
development programs to
strengthen our communities
instead of the more officers.
Thank you and I urge you all to
vote against HB sixty one.
Thank you.
And do we have anyone else that
would like to speak in
opposition.
Okay seeing then we are going to
the committee.
And first on the list as
Representative Chasey.
Thank you madam chair R.
Representative green I I thought
maybe you might want to address.
Some of the issues raised I
think right now what what you're
trying to do is provide for some
kind of supervision.
Is it training to for people who
are doing this work but aren't
supervised or trained.
Madam chair and Representative
Chasey you're correct currently
reserve officers third no
standards for their training and
there's no discovery action that
the cat of me can.
placed upon a reserve officer
it's solely up to the agency
that they work for as to the
training or the discipline that
they may or may not receive.
So Madam chair representative
you're trying to sort of set a
standard a minimum standard.
Is that correct.
Madam chair and Representative
Chasey yes this will be a
standard that all reserve
officers statewide would have to
meet.
Okay let me madam chair and
Representative ring I have a
balances that I haven't I don't
have every document in front of
me right now so I'm just going
to let you know.
I'm going to get better at this
but I'm kind of what I will do
that.
Issue section five B. it says
that some licensing that will
allow reserve police officers to
work independently well
elsewhere it says they will be
required to have supervision of
a certified police officer and
only for specific clients so if
that's actually I'm clear if you
wanna look at that and then I'm
not suggesting but I would
posted at this point that we
might want to clarify that
because I I my impression all
these years that you've been
trying to work on this is it
your you are trying to have more
standard procedures.
Yeah Madam chair of the Senate
Chasey you're talking about the
I do too.
That's what I'm saying I'm only
reading my analysis I'm not
looking at the
the bill otherwise I have to
make all of you really small and
so I I.
I would give you an opportunity
to address that.
Yeah I totally understand I've
got two computers open let me
address that what so what we're
saying is is if I read if a
retired police officer wants to
become a reserve that they can
just move him over to a reserve
status so he's been a police
officer for twenty or twenty
five years you get technically
required retire under either one
of those or so you have all the
training standards and then
there's in service training
standards that he would have to
beat as well as do all reserve
officers say after me by annual
training standards set by the
cadmium as well.
Chair so Representative Rehm and
then also I do indicates just as
you said if they're coming over
from
The retired police officers to
become reserve.
There's no
Right so let's say somebody
retired twenty years ago and I
don't because I think you can
have some fairly early
retirement
And then I do so there's no.
Time frame within which that was
happening also it seems like you
probably want to have a
requirement and I can't say for
sure that you don't but it might
be elsewhere if they were in
good standing.
Okay so what madam chair and
Representative Chasey let me
break that into two questions
one is our so by rule the law
enforcement academy will set the
time limit for you to transfer
from a regular officer to a
reserve officer remember that
they have to complete by annual
training to keep their
certification current so we have
if I don't complete
R. Y. A. I'm not let's see I'm a
regular officer and I don't
complete my bi annual training
when the two years is up my
certification is in it is is not
correct so.
What the academy adopts is M.
I'm not positive what the rule
is currently but it's been if
you've been out of
service for three or five years
somewhere in that period then
you have to go back to full
Academy.
So that's the one half of that
and then
I forgot the question on the
second part that I was dividing
the.
The good standing.
in a good standing if you're.
If you're not in good standing
then your certificate is not in
good standing so learned by rule
not going to allow you to
transfer over as we've seen in
the last so about week ten days
the word force many kadam is met
and they've taken disciplinary
action against somewhere between
four and six officers that I've
read in the newspaper.
so madam chair and and
Representative right.
I.
I suggest that as this goes a
long you keep.
Track on other reforms that are
being suggested regarding the
police and training of police
because you could to make this
conform as it goes along because
if you recall during our interim
committee hearing in early
December we heard from the chief
of police and.
Actually was the chair for the
chief of police in Dona ana
county and then the former
sheriff in Valencia County and
what they were saying is how.
Your I'm here probably member
this how long.
Our what the wait time is before
the board actually does what you
just mentioned where we read
about the paper recently some
were suspended or the licenses
were withdrawn and both of them
sat.
They were.
They were.
She grew that the proposed Civil
Rights Act had incorporated what
we're going to do.
To improve that situation
because they said it's
potentially dangerous because of
somebody is in one community and
has been suspended or fired and
it doesn't even the word doesn't
even get around and some other
police force or or sheriff's
office hires that individual so
they were saying we need to
address that too so I'm just
expecting that there are other
things coming.
This session and I I want you to
be able to make this that as it
goes but I I will support this
and and thank you madam chair
that's and my questions.
Thank you representative next on
the list as Representative
Gallegos.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you representative
I I do like your legislation I.
E. I did have some of the same
similar concerns as chairman
Chasey regarding
Maybe problems officers moving
around from one place to another
and so it if you could.
Talk to me a little bit more
about how that's going to be
Maybe contained a little bit
because I don't want to say is
is there there is a disciplinary
issue you know the the shares
side they goes you know when
line are decide to retire take
two years off and then I mean is
is that record going to be
available to anybody that would
hire them for this type of
position.
Madam Representative guys when
you obtain your certification or
in this case it's wise since the
law enforcement academy is asked
that use a different word than
cert cert will only apply to
full time officers and license
will refer to reserve officers
so that they can separate.
Just by word of who that person
is.
Those certifications are all
held up in Santa Fe so when I am
a.
Agency and going to hire someone
I now have to notify the law
enforcement academy that I'm
hiring bill remain if you will
and I the law enforcement
academy will notify me we have
one disk pending disciplinary
action against of bill Rehm and
this is the subject of it
the law enforcement academy
board.
The chair of that board for the
disparity and for other for the
training as well is the Attorney
General now I think that what
we'll probably see is some
legislation this time to
separate the cat Amanda
disciplinary actions but right
now they're all under one area
so it is the our Attorney
General who calls the board in
the meeting and then goes ahead
and starts these hearings on
officer discipline.
I I appreciate that had long
conversations with bills my
share and achieve good of police
down in one of my.
One of my aunt some of my areas
and that's that's definitely a
problem that they feel that the
people sometimes move around and
they're hard to.
To the bad apples are hard to
get out and so I just don't want
this to be another way for them
to continue to to be involved if
they if you know if they're not
following the standards that
they should be doing because I
think there's many good officers
out there that that are getting
repercussions because of the bad
apples my second question is is
your
Appreciation attached to this.
Madam chair Representative guy
is no there is not okay I'm do
you think once this program gets
up and started you would ask for
an appropriation.
Madam chair and
Representative Geiger's I think
that that would be the function
of the law enforcement academy
to go ahead and say we need
whatever and currently the law
enforcement academy I feel is
under funded.
Not only for instructors but for
its operation as well.
And and just based on that
statement would just be at
another layer of an and I'm
mandated
our unfunded mandated
yeah madam chair and and
Representative guy a ghosts you
are correct but we've got to get
it passed before we end up
actually knowing what is going
to cost or that that there is a
need for that money okay I I
mean I do like the legislation I
just think that's something that
we need to stay very cognisant
not because I don't want to
continue to put more burden on
law enforcement without giving
them the funds because and that
takes away from I think that the
intent are setting those
standards and making sure that
officers are well trained.
So at this is my my comment is I
I think that we we continue to
do that and I I want to make
sure that that that they have
the.
Really need to make sure that
the officers that are out our
industries are properly trained
and have the tools to be able to
respond so is that I like your
registration I did see that we
there might need to meet some
trees down the road.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you Representative K.
goes.
Is there anyone else that would
like to speak on the committee.
Is there anyone else like to
make a motion.
madam chair all move or you pass
it.
I'm I believe that was
Representative neighbor that
motion Friday passed and a
second by Representative Chasey
Can we get the roll call please
thank you madam chair.
Representative Chasey.
Yes.
Representative Eli yes.
Representative Gallegos yes.
Representative night yes.
Representative Ortez.
Yes.
Representative Rehm S..
Representatives.
Yes.
Vice chair Johnson.
Yes please.
Thank you.
Madam chair yes.
Thank you.
Then in favor.
Representative Rehm you have a
due pass with everyone in
attendance voting in the
affirmative thank you.
Next we are on to house bill
seventy four Representative
Chasey do you have any experts
that we need to promote to
panel.
Hi yes madam chair Justin Allen.
Okay.
If someone can put Justin Allen
as a panelist while we are go to
Representative Chasey to explain
the bill.
Thank you madam chair.
Committee members we have talked
before about the fact that we
have had restoration of voting
rights for felons former felons.
Since the year we passed it in
two thousand Senator Richard
Romero carried that bill and
governor Gary Johnson signed
that bill there who have just.
In twenty years that we've had
the law we have a lot of
confusion there about.
How to carry it out with
evenhandedly because the bill
required of the law requires now
that there be that completion of
probation and parole and all the
documents have to be presented
to the county clerk or to the
secretary of state and we've
actually tried before to just
simplify it so that when an
individual is not no longer
incarcerated that individual is
eligible to either re register
or this is not canceling
actually the voter registration
at the time but it would be
reactivated at the time of
release so
What we proposed here is to make
a fairly simple
what is it it is up nothing's
ever simple built out one page
or anything but it would allow
individuals to vote if they are
no longer incarcerated and they
are eligible for that so
With that I'd like to let my
experts Justin Allen speak he
has spoken to our interim
committees and
He makes a good case for
enacting this legislation Mr
Allen thank you Representative
Chasey Mr Allen you can make
yourself and speak.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Justin on I'm working with
America votes and I'm a student
in my final semester at UNM.
As a formally our rate of person
I am advocating for this bill
because civic engagement and
social inclusion as how I've
been able to reestablish my
place and purpose in society I
finally broke in the cycle of
recidivism.
Are provided me with the
opportunity to prevent
participate in the functions of
society I have become a
productive member reinstated my
voting rights means that I am a
Senate that my citizenship and
humanity has been restored and
that I belong here in this
community I am all I no longer
feel like a commodity that other
people make decisions for and
about because I finally learned
the value of my voice and I can
advocate for myself.
I'm asking that you will for
house bill fifty seven as a
reinvestment and humanity I
believe that
allowing individuals the
opportunity to participate in
the functions of society it is
how we become productive members
thank you.
Thank
you.
Before you go to the for public
comment let me just say that
Right now I mean I had always
thought we had to make this
simpler I think we were trying
to do this around two thousand
seven or eight and we were just
I think people do we're not
convinced that that we couldn't
fix it otherwise.
But in the last few years that
I've been working during abuse
and neglect cases as a court
appointed attorney
I've come across the number of
individuals.
Representative parents sometimes
are Representative children.
so I.
I actually I was at a
visit of a child that I
Representative baby and her
parents were interacting very
appropriately with her and and
we were visiting and the dad
said well I can't vote in I'm a
former college and I said well
how long ago did you.
Everything he said seven years
ago he said what was one time
for me I did one thing and I'll
never get involved in the system
again he said that he had been
to the county clerk he had tried
everything and we actually got
him.
Figured I hope because I think
the chief clerk.
Called you know got his paper
work for him just like we would
do for it constituent service
and what research shows is that
What.
Helps people.
Not recidivism is to stay
engaged with their communities
and as Mr Allen sat it was the
civic engagement that really
made a difference for him so
that's why we don't want to make
phone calls exorbitantly
expensive for those who are
incarcerated so they stay in
touch with their families and
this is another important tool
so I'm with that in and I want
to say to that America votes the
organization with whom Mr Allen
is working hard suggested some
technical changes the secretary
of state's office don't think
they're necessary and I told Mr
Allen that will sit down with
the American people and
secretary of state for the next
committee it was just about
clarifying that it can happen at
M. B. D. and so forth so with
that we're ready for questions
madam chair.
Thank you Representative Chasey
and Mr Allen before we take
public comment that we are going
to hold the audience so we'll
keep it open for about thirty
seconds if we can get the pull
up now.
So folks can vote for and
against without having to speak.
So the pool is going to close in
fifteen seconds.
The poll is going to close in
five seconds.
And the call is closed we have
thirty four to individuals
voting for it and one against.
So now we would go to public
comment.
And Representative Johnson is
going to chair for well we go to
public comment.
Thank you madam chair so I will
vote for that for for.
Comments against
For the bill.
Do we have any
Thank you sorry I didn't know I
was on mute do we have any
comments in support of the bill.
I can't see it on my and do we
have any comments in opposition
of the bill.
Okay we will go to the
committee.
Chair yes I can.
I just want to say one thing and
that is that the secretary of
state told me that she's here
but he has any questions.
Okay thank you.
Madam chair.
For some reason I am having
trouble here Representative Rehm
do you have your hand up.
For committee.
Madam chair yes I did.
Okay.
the floor is yours Mr.
Mr chair
madam chair and Representative
Chasey our.
A few years ago we passed the
legislation to allow
Convicted felons to vote at
after they had completed their
of parole time in their
conditions of release and if I
remember correctly I believe I
voted for that but
I think that the.
Parole period is their re
reintegration into the community
time and for that reason I can't
support this I think once
they've completed their parole
then there re integrated into
the community and they have a
right to vote anyway thank you
madam chair.
Thank you Representative Rehm
and
Representative Chasey I found
that that attendee listed I have
eleven individuals who'd like to
speak in support of the bill and
so I'd like to ask the president
participants to make your
remarks at concise and I will
start with
Erica.
Is there a cap on the line.
How about we move now to Mr
Charles shoemaker.
Schumacher sorry about that.
Hi representative to members of
the committee Charles good
marker
Speaking representing C. SME
Committee for secure Center for
securing modern elections and we
strongly support this bill will
leave that the current system
were probation and parole has to
be completed
which often includes payment of
fines and fees are it basically
amounts to a poll tax and and
that is in on under this bill it
brings up the matter more
justice to the situation thank
you very much.
Thank you Charles next we have
Eriko with Ole.
Yes good excuse me good morning
madam chair members of the
committee my name is Erica and I
have some of policy director
Adelaide we stand in favor of
house bill seventy four we see
it as a racial justice issue the
prison industrial system
disproportionately criminalizes
incarcerate black indigenous and
people of color the racial
disparities in the United States
criminal punishment system
demonstrate how restoring the
vote to people of color with
felony convictions would be a
step toward dismantling
dismantling institutional racism
and sentencing projects twenty
sixteen data indicates that
twenty four thousand two hundred
and eighty six eligible voters
in New Mexico are silenced due
to felony convictions.
We urged committee members to
vote in favor of house bill
seventy four thank you.
Thank you next we have sherry
Bellson with forward together.
You are now and it.
Hi good morning can you hear me
good morning yes okay my name is
sherry bassin and I am a fellow
with will work together
strong families New Mexico.
As a voter engage
And organizer from McKinley
County I see that this is one of
the biggest problems that people
have when they come out of jail
is that they lack education and
direction of where to get re
registered or have information
about I am I still able to vote
I also to tribal elections for
the pueblo of Zuni and that is
one thing that we support as a
native tribe is that we support
our community members who are
convicted and who are registered
at this different categories of
felons but we still support
their right to vote in our
community it is no one gets left
behind and don't want a lot you
have a place and a purpose so
even though these people have
had their setbacks in life we
still honor them as humans and
on that their dignity and
respect through honoring to
voting rights so I would say
please support the bill and that
people have to write and verify
envoys to vote thank you.
Thank you.
Next we have Fernando Trujillo.
You are now and made it.
Chair members of the committee
my name is that of non look to
heal from Espanola New Mexico
and I am a policy associate with
gold futures for many young
women United.
And both feature stands in
support of HB seventy four.
I am a person living with
convictions and I have regained
my own HSD tribal which has
meant the world to me means that
I now have a voice in this
country and state that I live in
I didn't feel like I am now
human being and just more than a
simple non very disenfranchised
Matt has disproportionately
affect affected people of Kali
Inc including high numbers in
New Mexico there is a huge
number of the in my own home
town of Espanola that has been
by from will be in or has a
loved one that has been impacted
we urge you to support H. B.
seventy four thank you.
Thank you.
Next we have Mario equipment
with common cause.
You're now.
You also have to admit yourself
when you're in.
There we go apologize but it
chair good morning madam chair
and members of the committee
again modest minister coming
because New Mexico of the
constitution guarantees every
citizen of the country the right
to vote without cob yachts or
contingencies and coming because
supports that no eligible
citizen should be deprived of
this constitutional
constitutionally guaranteed
right to vote this legislation
allows for a simple transaction
as the bill sponsor hello
alluded to earlier and between
election officials and
corrections is simple I that
transaction this process fixes
what has been significant
challenge to citizens upon their
re entry which has consistently
failed many in their efforts to
become registered to vote and
participate in elections we
would like to thank the bill
sponsor representative Chasey
and Justin Allen for his voice
in leading us out of it advocacy
and we strongly support house
bill seventy four and we asked
the committee support this as
well.
Thank you.
Next we have Diane the catch.
You are now I needed.
I'm yes I'm dynamic cash I'm
speaking for myself our history
of disenfranchisement is a
pretty ugly history when coming
out of reconstruction as a way
to take power from new citizens
black citizens African American
citizens who were freed from
slavery
and with the shortage of free
labor of this whole thing came
about in an effort to squash
that power
the effects of the history
continues today and negatively
impacts poor communities and
people of color
disenfranchisement has no
function except as a
discriminatory tool disguised as
criminal punishment the criminal
justice system is charged with
punishment of crime through it
census finds parole and
probation it's not charged with
confirming nor denying
citizenship the right to vote is
a cornerstone of citizenship
voting is that right and
responsibility of all citizens
the power of the vote is the
basic right that allows us to
feel connected to our our
democracy please vote yes on SB
seventy four this is one thing
we can do to decrease the
alienation forced upon people
who have been convicted of
felonies thank you.
Thank you next we have our
secretary of state.
Madam secretary.
You are now.
And made it sorry that's okay
good morning madam chair members
of the committee Maggie Toulouse
Oliver secretary of state
I won't
To repeat a lot of the points
they've already been made this
morning in regards to at that
the historical the systemic
racism at underpinnings of this
current law the the injustice
that's been base that that
challenge with that you know
potentially having to pay a poll
tax just the overall for a
constitutional issues I'm in
complete agreement with but what
I I want to just add from the
point of view of of an
administrator is that even
though I think the law that we
have on the books right now
really should work much better
than it does it doesn't and the
reality is that both our office
in the county clerks around the
state you know depending on
their time and bandwidth than
ability end up having to try to
run down information to correct
records for individuals who have
already completed the terms of
their felonies and and often
that's not able to be done in
and often the individual
themselves has to go and jump
through hoops to to track down
people work you know the data
and the
the data that we get from from
corrections you know they're
they're making really great
strides to improve that and I
really want to commend that the
secretary of corrections and her
team for for trying to bring
their their data into the twenty
first century but the bottom
line is the reality is that
there are any number of
individuals in any election that
are being disenfranchised
because unfortunately the system
doesn't functionally work the
way that it should so this bill
is going to make great strides
in correcting that issue we
should never be denying the
right to vote to any individual
who has met the terms of the
completion of their felony and
so this bill is just going to
make it so that we never half
two dozen franchise anybody
again and as as that sure Chasey
mentioned I I will be here at.
To answer any technical
questions that the committee may
have thank you so much.
Thank you madam secretary we'll
go ahead and promote you to our
panelists just in case there are
questions that need your
technical assistance.
And next we have Eric.
Chamado.
Yes you are muted.
Yes thank you madam chair and
committee members my name is
there to mamodo I'm a member of
a lake and I stand in support of
HB seventy four because the
basic theory of American
democracy is that governments
derive their just powers from
the consent of the governed that
consent comes only from
elections and denying the
ability to give that consent on
the basis of the conviction
deprives those who are most
impacted by the awesome powers
of our government and it
undermines the legitimacy of our
Republic we need to remove every
unnecessary obstacle for
returning citizens to
participate in our elections and
our government and there's no
good reason to the way that
participation so I urge you to
advance HB seventy four with a
do pass recommendation and thank
you again.
Thank you next we have angel
Martinez.
excuse me that's angel Garcia.
Hi good morning madam chair
members of the committee.
I am in full support one here
representing myself.
But I also work for more ten
caters violence intervention
program.
As a four time convicted felon I
know personally how it feels to
be released.
And still feel like outcasts
from society.
It's it's it's hard enough to
get a job when you're convicted
felon but to be told that your
opinion doesn't matter in this
country just because of that
conviction it further
stigmatizes us and makes us feel
right well we're not wanted
anyway what's the incentive for
us to stop the revolving door
recidivism for ourselves.
Passing this bill will at least
put out a welcome mat for the
individuals getting released
from incarceration and
For rural information is the
process of reintegration but I'm
not of the times we don't get
the services that we need to re
integrate back into society.
Without those tools.
And without be feeling part of
society what's the incentive for
a person to want to stay within
the parameters of that society.
So I fully support HB seventy
four and like I said this could
be the first that.
Upon release the welcome mat
back into society giving
somebody their voice bank is
very empowering.
I fully support HB seventy four
thank you.
Thank you next three have Kelly
Garcia Chavis.
Good morning that Madam chair of
the committee members I'm in
support of our eight HB seventy
four I am here as myself
I am a person living with
convictions and.
and what help me become a
productive member of society was
getting my voice back and be
able to
Participate in civil engagement
You know this this wall if if
you if you pass this bill it
will give people the voice is
back it will also
allow.
You know people to re integrate
back into society you know
people are getting out of prison
and then and not be
we engaged in animal.
Ninety five percent of these
people are coming back into our
communities and we want to
become productive members of
society and get back into the
communities and be productive
and what better way to to do
that is we civil engagement and
giving people their voice back
in allowing them to participate
in their communities and and in
our state so please support HB
seventy four thank you.
Thank you next we have Richard
Mason.
Madam chair.
Members of the committee my name
is Richard Mason chair of the
action committee of the league
of women voters of New Mexico
the supports policies that
increased voter participation
and from members and personally
going out and doing voter
registration it's painful to see
people want to participate in
voting
in the obstacles that are put in
a way because they were
incarcerated so we strongly
support
H. B. seventy four.
Level you know my first career
in corporate America I took a
year off to run a vocational
training programs for people at
a parole date and into place
some in jobs once once they were
released and one of the reasons
I did this I believe just like
in voting so quickly you can get
people back into the mainstream
of the the sister this is
straight the less likely they
are to repeat so I want to thank
the sponsor Representative
Chasey for bringing to spell out
and the league of women voters
and personally I stand in strong
support of HB seventy four
an urgent two passed thank you.
Great thank you next we have
miles to canoe.
Hi members of the committee and
madam chair my name is most
o'connell and deputy director of
les and I'm gonna be speaking on
behalf of one of our members
and unfortunate had to get in to
work at nine thirty so without
further ado madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Alyssa a member of a lay I
grew up in Albuquerque New
Mexico was convicted of a felony
in twenty eighteen I
successfully completed my parole
twenty twenty and was able to
vote in this past election I
think it's important to
automatically restore voting
rights in New Mexico I think
it's important because it is our
constitutional right as citizens
so why are why are there still
people without the right to vote
with their voice is not being
able to be heard.
It's a downward spiral for our
black native and ground
communities who suffer the most
having our voices and our votes
silenced in two thousand ten
there were five thousand two
hundred and eighty three New
Mexicans convicted of felonies
out of that five thousand four
four thousand six hundred and
thirty four came from Hispanic
black.
And native communities and the
numbers get higher every year
there are a lot of voices that
are still being silenced and we
have the right to be heard
voting to me means I can support
candidates who want to raise the
minimum wage and create pathways
for citizenship from
undocumented family members
please vote to support and pass
HB seventy four thank you.
Thank you next we have Barron
Jones.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Barron Jones on the ACLU of New
Mexico for the reasons stated
very excellent testimony today
we support this on this those
common sense piece of
legislation and see it as a
first step to so ending the Jim
crow era laws and punishments
that have torn marginalized
communities part and this is a
good step to restore those
communities thank you very much
and I I'm encouraged you all
urge you all to support this is
wonderful piece of legislation
that thanks to the sponsor and
Mr Justin Allen and all the
folks formally incarcerated who
came up here to share their
stories about why this piece of
legislation is a stepping stone
to you know realizing a more I
thank you all very much.
Thank you next we have Brenda
boatman.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee on brain
development a registered
lobbyist for Americans for
prosperity New Mexico we believe
that every individual has unique
talents and should be allowed to
realize their full potential we
support house bill seventy four
because we believe in people and
we believe in second chances
thank you.
Thank you next we have Austin we
king.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee.
I'm sorry I pushed mute by
mistake Austin go ahead of you
could begin again please okay
thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Austin
we act you have a our political
director with and in need of
both and for all the reasons I
already described this morning
for the sentencing disparity
here that racial equity funds we
support this bill we we think
that it is important that better
becomes consistent
and and more regular that people
have their rights restored our
current system just doesn't
frequently makes sense our and
it it really does also affect
those who work in non rural
communities are non urban
communities those who are less
familiar with the systems it
really does serve as a poll tax
to make sure that they cannot
get their rights restored
because it becomes more and more
difficult trying to navigate the
system without you're right so
restoring that voice to those
who have been most affected by
our current systems is essential
and we stand in full support and
hope that all members of the
committee will support this as
well.
Great thank you.
So before we go back to the
committee I just want to make
sure that we got everyone that
wanted to speak especially those
that didn't have a chance to
speak in opposition.
so I'm gonna open up just if you
want to raise your hand.
I think this is a support that
we have Holly Beaumont.
Good morning.
Madam chair members of the
community interfaith worker
justice New Mexico supports this
bill because as people of faith
and people of conscience we
believe in the central value of
our faith traditions in
salvation rather than permanent
retribution we believe in
restorative justice and this is
a step toward restorative
justice as expressed in.
The lord's prayer forgive us our
sins as we forgive those who sin
against us so we very much
appreciate this bill and we
supported whole heartedly.
Great thank you that concludes
our public comment so we are
going to the committee
Representative Ortez.
Thank you madam chair chair
Chasey Mr Allen and thank you to
all of of those of you who
voiced you know your support for
this bill thank you for your
stories I want to make sure it's
my questions related to court
fees and fines I just want to
make sure that that is not
something that will be a barrier
for.
Former challenge in their in
their right to vote on is that
address I don't think that's
addressing this legislation but
I just I'd like for us for
someone to answer that question.
Mr Allen can take that madam
chair and and Representative.
Okay protection with your lies
Jr during the Jim crow era and
currently pull taxed exist
through the probation and
referral requirement that all
fines and fees must be paid
before voter eligibility this
bill eliminates full taxed in
New Mexico by removing the
probation and parole
requirements.
Thank you so much Mr on madam
chair chair Chasey.
Thank you representative next we
have Representative.
Johnson.
Thank you madam chair I don't
have a question Representative
Chasey but I did want to thank
you for your work on this bill I
think I see it as a bill that is
going to help many individuals
who are working hard to re
integrate into the world of work
and education and making a
contribution back into our world
after serving their terms in
recovery programs.
Whether it's in combination or
after their terms and I think
this is another step towards
that transition and making a
positive contribution for those
individuals because I think
while they're in the recovery
programs I think they're looking
for something positive and I
think this is an added incentive
and it's very important
especially in northwest New
Mexico we have several.
Right programs.
Right now so I just wanted to
make that comment and thank you
Representative Chasey.
Thank you madam vice chair next
we have Representative Eli.
I thank you madam chair I moved
to pass.
We have a due pass motion by
Representative Eli and I'll
second that motion.
before we go to roll call
Representative Chasey would you
like to close.
Yes thank you madam chair you
know I really appreciate
listening to all the comments
and even they critique by
Representative Rehm but what
what became really really clear
to me in just reflecting taking
the time because I make notes on
the comments because it helps me
later when I'm preparing for for
the debate.
That.
We did hi costs
Restoration of voting rights in
two thousand we've had it for
twenty years now.
So this bill is a response.
Cool Committee years of
experience this that shows us
how worked at all.
Because I'm it is our what we
have learned in the last twenty
years and not that it was
perhaps the secret van but
and that is to reduce recidivism
so we're not only correcting.
The
bureaucratic hurdles we are
actually trying to make our
society safer so without noted
chair I'm ready for the vote
thank you.
Thank you Representative Chasey
again we have a motion by
Representative Eli and I
seconded that motion the clerk
to call the roll please thank
you madam chair Representative
Chasey yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Gaydos yes.
Representative night.
Representative Ortez yes.
Representative Rehm okay.
Representative.
No.
Mr Johnson.
Yes please.
Madam chair.
Madam yes.
That we have six.
And three in the negative.
Thank you with a vote of sixteen
affirmative and three in the
negative you have a do pass
Representative Chasey thank you.
And next on the agenda is house
bill seventy nine
Representative Ely will
representative Garcia would be
joining us or will you be
presenting the bill I will be
playing the role of right sure
Garcia madam chair she's the
prime Billsponsored.
She will not be here thank you
Representative Eli does he mean
does that mean he's
SpongeBob SquarePants yes that's
right somewhere else he's.
He somewhere else in that role
he's not here so he spent
correct square pants right
whenever you're ready.
I yes I do have an expert Bob
for rules if you could be a
panelists great we have just
promoted him.
I'll be very brief madam chair
this bill has been before the
committee before and passed
this would be in franchise are
currently disenfranchised voters
for primaries who are either not
affiliated affiliated with a
minor party and we ship out in
one of the major parts it is not
a completely open system in that
Democrats can vote in Republican
primaries and vice versa but we
do have other voters the
opportunity have a say in who's
on the general election ballot
and I know in the house analysis
which was helpful that
are they actually of numbers
attached to it if this bill
passes it would open up the
primary election system to
approximately two hundred ninety
nine thousand seven hundred
fifty six potential voters or
twenty three point four percent
of all registered voters so it
would be a huge and productive
change at present twenty two
states allow for open primaries
and so with that madam chair if
I if I could I would yield the
floor Mr pearl's that you may
have some comments.
Welcome to corrosive you like to
make comments you're welcome to
do that now thanks so much madam
chair members of the committee
thank you representative Ely I'm
the founder and executive
director for New Mexico open
elections this is been
of much of our life's work over
the last five or six years I'm a
former New Mexico state
representative and former US
diplomat with state department
and this is all about democracy
is all about engaging as many
people as we can
just to kind of level sat.
Is expectations about elections
we need to remember that
political parties are not
mentioned in the New Mexico
constitution of the US
constitution
many court cases of have handed
down decisions that political
parties are private
organizations and so we really
shouldn't have a system in New
Mexico that requires somebody to
join a political party to vote
in a public election and just as
a reminder as as we all know.
I'm reelections are public
collections are funded by our
tax dollars.
And in my mind allowing a
political party to control who
can vote in a public collection
is sort of like allowing a
private company to decide who
can compete in their market
place political party should be
a participant they should be
setting rules and so the whole
idea behind an open primary
system would allow twenty five
percent of New Mexico voters and
frankly sixty percent of newly
registered voters all of whom
now are independent or
unaffiliated voters to
participate in a primary that is
publicly financed and as we all
know primaries are often the
most important election in New
Mexico in fact ninety percent of
all political decisions are made
in primaries and yet we're
excluding twenty five percent of
voters and we're excluding about
sixty percent of millennials who
who are registering by and large
as independents so with that
I'll stand by for questions if
there is if there are any for me
thank you.
Thank you madam chair with that
we will stand for questions.
Great thank you representative
let's go ahead and open up the
pole again for thirty seconds
and we will have those that one
of those in favor and in
opposition of health bill
seventy nine.
The poll is now open.
This.
There is now ten seconds left in
the poll.
And the poll is.
Now closed.
We have a vote of eighteen of
the attendees and favor and one
against.
So now we will go to those that
are would like to speak in
opposition of health bill
seventy nine please raise your
hand.
So again we are looking for
those that want to speak in
opposition and I don't see
anyone so we will now move to
those that want to speak in
favor.
And we have Mario Jimenez.
Yes hello madam chair members
the committee money's minutes
again with common cause coming
because supports the inclusion
of all registered voters in
primary elections nationally we
continue to see newly registered
voters not identifying with a
major political party and as a
result our voter rolls contain a
large amount of registrants what
defies no party or as a minor
party additionally we often
nominate our elected official
during the primary election with
no candidate in the general
which means the vast majority of
a vast amount of registered
voters do not have a say in who
represents them house bill
seventy nine gives all New
Mexicans the opportunity to have
a voice and who should represent
them and we see this as good a
good government piece of
legislation and urged the body
to pass house bill seventy nine
thank you Matt.
Thank you next we have John
house.
Good morning madam chair
committee members and experts to
participants.
I'm a resident of Santa Fe and
speaking for myself and also as
president to represent us New
Mexico nonprofit organization
that supports democracy reforms
and protections.
Today and America's Mr pearl's
alluded to earlier more
registered voters identify
themselves as independent than
those under the defy themselves
as either of the with the the
democratic or Republican
parties.
So and so it is in New Mexico
also it is been shown that the
outcome in the general elections
are for all practical purposes
decided by the results in the
prime so that means under our
current closed primary system
controlled by the two major
parties a very large number of
registered voters are not able
to vote.
And that constitutes an
unacceptable decision fries
disenfranchisement of these
voters.
In addition statistics show that
because the voting percentage of
primary elections are are
typically much lower than in the
general elections.
It is mentioned that the result
of that is that the primary
elections are dominated by
voters on the political extremes
this contributes directly to the
polarized divide in this country
that is crippling the ability of
government to solve problems one
cure for this defect in our
election system in Mexico would
be to open up the primary
elections to independent voters
whose idea eight ideologies are
characteristically Morrison.
Thus their participation in the
primary elections we're not only
restore the right to vote of a
substantial number of New
Mexican voters and I any public
collection the the election
results would better reflect the
collective voice of New
Mexicans.
For these reasons and others
that have been raised by the
speakers today are tuning issue
a do pass recommendation for
Bill number seventy nine.
Thank you Mr house next will go
to madam secretary Maggie
Toulouse Oliver.
Thank you madam chair members at
I am very much in support of
this particular piece of
legislation as you know I've
been before you many times
before advocating for the for
many of the reasons that have
already been discussed before
you this morning madam chair
members have I will just echo
those as well as to just because
I always do briefly from the
administrative point of view
ever since I started running
elections back in two thousand
seven as Bernalillo county clerk
and every primary election but
I've been responsible for either
managing directly are overseeing
any number of individuals and
we're talking in the thousands
will come and attend to vote in
a primary election in New Mexico
often times they will not
realize that they have to be
registered with the majority
party in order to vote because
we're one of the very few states
left in the nation that does not
allow participation in our
primary elections I every
registered voter
and often we will have
individual who for one reason or
another usually because of just
some sort of at clerical error
have you know previously been
registered with the majority
party or think they are
registered with the majority
party get to the point these
discover that they are not and
then they are just flat out
unable to participate at the cap
the provisional ballots that
will be counted in the also
create and Bernalillo county
clerk to have an increased
number of provisional ballots
that they have to the process on
the back and but that they are
not able to count because that
individual is not registered
wasn't registered in time with
the majority party so from an
administration perspective not
only is this better for county
clerk simple official but it is
also better for the voter and
for participation for all the
reasons previously stated and I
am very much in support of this
legislation thank you.
Thank you madam secretary.
Thank you madam secretary next
we have J. Edward calling done.
Can you hear me Madam.
We can hear you thank you thank
you madam chair up my name is
that all I can on internet and
and it Albuquerque New I would.
Up initiated the lawsuit back in
two thousand fourteen.
On behalf of independent voters
to gain access to the primary
elections.
This one all the way up to the
Supreme Court the Supreme Court
basically he said that was a
matter for the legislature and
we're back before the
legislature seeking to get that
right to vote.
When the primary election laws
were first implemented there was
a very different purpose for
which the primary elections were
held then today because as it's
been pointed out by a previous
comments and support that today
overwhelmingly most of the
elected positions are decided in
the primary election meeting
that significant numbers of
voters are being at
disenfranchise from having any
say in who is representing so
this is a matter that that
as the public attention has
become very sensitive to.
Measures that restrain or
restrict voting this is an
opportunity for our the
legislature to step forward and
demonstrate the difference to
the right to vote in particular
in the primary election so I
support that.
House bill seventy nine and
thank you for the opportunity to
speak.
Thank you.
Thank you next we have Liam
Paul.
Hi
Madam chair members of the
committee
Hello can you hear me sorry.
Sorry about that yeah we could
just get panelists to lower
their hands that would make it a
lot easier
so Liam go ahead and go you're
on mute it okay hi you madam
chair members of the committee
manage the import I'm here
behalf of the UNM colors UNM
college Democrats not of any
sort of partisan ground rather
as a result of experience and a
matter principal we do a lot of
voter registration work I
especially for younger younger
folks and the
our vision our position is that
this bill would increase voter
participation among among
younger people and people that
are generally disenchanted with
the electoral process
What we've seen is that people
don't want to get involved with
the electoral process for
generally as as well as just in
the in party politics because of
of of of the way that the
primary election works and it
would make it a lot easier to to
enfranchise voters especially
younger voters in our experience
thank you very much.
Thank you Jim next we have Bruce
Berlin.
You're on mute it.
Hello can you hear me we can
hear you thank you madam chair
and members of the committee my
name is Bruce Berlin I am the
chair of the legislative action
committee of Representative us
New Mexico and I strongly
support this bill as does our
organization
you know it it's really
important that we get more more
people involved in the political
process so that as our name
suggests represent us all all of
the members of all voters are
are represented all citizens
Representative and the fact is
that the citizens of taxpayers
paid for these primaries and
they should not no one should be
who's the taxpayer who's helping
to support these elections to be
excluded from them we want more
participation more participation
bringing in independence and and
anyone who has the right to vote
would help make our democracy
more vibrant and the more
representative of of what the
people really want so I strongly
at support this as well as the
does organization thank you.
Thank you saying no more hands
raise we will go to our
committee.
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair just a
just a couple questions madam
chair representative the first
question as I understand our our
laws that we.
Now.
Kind of opened up more
opportunities for people to
register may be closer to the
elections and things all right
is it possible for someone to
participate in the primary by
changing their registration
early close to the primary
election day and that a beat we
change back.
Madam chair representative at
met Mr parole since that
question just make sure I'm
accurate about this.
Madam chair representative yes
they can change their
registration and I think the
issue is is should we be forcing
somebody to affiliate with a
party should party affiliation
be requirement
to vote and people can do that
now they can change registration
and change registration back and
I think the idea is.
It but anyway yes you're you're
right somebody can change their
registration and decide to
change back if they want to they
cannot do that on the
yes that's the answer.
You know and then if if the if
madam secretary wants to comment
to write she is she is she can
in terms of the technicality we
all know that Senate bill for
the last session I had a rushed
amendment that that is a rather
odd amendments this is partially
trying to fix an amendment that
that basically says somebody can
walk in and vote but they can
only vote if they decide to
change party registration so I
think it goes back to come of
the fundamental question should
you have to align with the party
to be able to vote in a publicly
financed elections and madam
chair and representative my
mistake I was the secretary of
state year and I should call her
I'm still a little rusty did the
same thing on the floor I did it
again today so what yeah Madam
chair representative the
secretary state may want to
weigh in as well and then
briefly everything that's been
that is correct the only thing
that I would add as as again as
always from the administrative
some perspective it is more
burdensome on the county clerks
and their staff after I do have
to at that facility a same day
registration during early voting
or or now on election day as we
get into this year just for the
purposes of enabling somebody to
register in order to participate
in the primary and then if if
they don't want to remain a
member of that party to then go
ahead and register you know
we're just creating more work
for the county clerk staff to
deal both during and after the
election process and I think it
really does come back to that
you know should should that have
to be necessary Representative
neighbor you're not wrong they
can do that but but should that
be necessary both for the voter
and for the election
administrator and and we just
don't think that that it should
have to be.
Thank you.
madam chair I'm pleased to hear
that I'm not wrong that's a.
Stated very often
My second question.
Is really goes to the the
funding argument if if the
argument is that we don't want
public money to go toward the
financing of election of I
believe the word was private
entities the what I would just
do away with the the primary
election system all together.
I'm Madam chair representative
are two different bills so let's
take one battle at a time okay
today we're just opening up the
primer if if I at some point you
want to propose a different
system that's a whole different
bill.
Representative the madam chair
and Representative yes either of
the major parties or frankly if
some of the minor parties the
growing and the.
Have their own primaries.
The.
They themselves can choose to.
Select their ticket so to speak
by avoiding the primaries
altogether anyways are not
correct.
Madam chair representative that
is correct.
So.
If this bill becomes law.
A party could choose to selected
so it's ticket.
And.
Not even.
while.
Yes the one to to engage in the
the primary election
being no.
The twenty days before the
election changer change your
party affiliation to this party
or that party it will be done
basically and
the in a caucus type situation
the work with the only party
members present are probably
representatives from each of the
counties a much less
Broad group within select the
ticket and and so you know
there's some real consequences
to this that I have I think we
actually opposite effect of what
you're trying to promote here
and and I I just want people to
realize that there there's
potential adverse consequences
to to taking this action
particularly of your the
parties want to.
Have only there are.
Party affiliated members have
the ability to participate in
that process so I are I just
raise those two concerns are I
not been in favor this
legislation passed by the your
on I'm convinced we have to go
this route anyway but the just
want to point those two things
out I'm glad to hear that I'm
right occasionally thank you
madam chair.
Thank you representative next
we'll go to Representative
Chasey.
Your your muted.
Thank you very much so I just
madam chair and representative
Ely and Mr pearl's just sort of
walk me through it.
Any time that there's a primary
election coming up of a voter
who registered voter who is
either declined to say or
independent or green or any non
major party whose.
Not doesn't have a candidate who
is not eligible to have a
candidate on the ballot.
Applies for
to for it
is to the.
In the one of the parties it's
on the ballot for that election
really is that right.
Madam chair and representative
all of Mr Perot sensor that.
madam madam chair members of the
committee yes a and an
unaffiliated voter or voters
affiliated with a minor party
that does not hold a primary
simply walks up and requests the
ballad of their choosing
Republican Democrat or
libertarian ballot.
Democrats can't vote for liberty
look for Republicans Republicans
can't vote for Democrats.
So I that's madam chair thank
you that's why I want to clarify
so.
A person who's a Democrat do not
go to new Republican primary.
Because the the Democrat doesn't
it wants to pick who the.
Opposition is going to be for
his or her party president
that's not allowed okay and I I
think that
you know there were there were
more opportunities for
She validating during the
pandemic and that gave rise to a
lot of skepticism about the
Integrity of the election and I
just want to be sure that
you're going to.
Be able to affirm that the
security that we ordinarily have
in our
Election will prevail.
Let me just comment and then
perhaps Madam chair
representative Ely we might turn
it over to the secretary of
state Colorado just passed this
virtually this exact same bill
in twenty sixteen Colorado has a
reputation among states of being
of running some of the most
secure elections in the United
States very very very low rates
of fraud and it was very easy
for them to track who the
independents are allowing them
via mail or via in in person
polling location to to make sure
only the independents were
allowed to request a partisan
ballot of their choosing and I
am confident that madam
secretary in our county clerks
can execute an election as well
as Colorado that madam chair and
representative I don't think
that should go unchallenged I
think that the secretary of
state with that bragging rights
over Colorado eighty days a week
and I'd like her to have a
minute to talk about this.
Well at thank you very much
madam chair and and
Representative to the we we are
among the most secure election
systems in the country as well
and I I very much I appreciate
the work that my colleagues have
done in Colorado they really
have led the way and a lot of
ways but our system here in New
Mexico.
Mexico it just as if not more
secure there is we have the
technology we have the system to
be able to enable and this
process without and you know
allowing people to vote in in
multiple primaries or or
multiple time and and that
should not be a problem and.
Thank you madam chair I have no
other questions.
Thank you representative
Representative Rehm.
Thank you madam chair and madam
chair and Representative Eli
What it's already been brought
out that you can change party
affiliation up to twenty days
prior to the election
so I think that that Avenue is
there for anyone to go in decide
Hey I want to vote in this
primary might.
My other big objection to this
is.
I receive a lot of comments
about the cost of elections if
we're gonna open it up to all
non affiliated parties in each
election that means I now need
to either mail them or somehow
contact them and I have now
basically will spend about the
same amount is I will in the
general election meaning it just
double the cost of the election.
Anyway that's my comments and
why I can't support it thank you
madam chair.
Thank you Representative Rehm
Representative Johnson.
Thank you madam chair I move
would you pass.
We have a defense motion by
Representative Johnson is there
a second.
We have a second by
Representative day goes click to
call the roll please.
Thank you madam chair
Representative I think yes.
Representative Eli yes.
Representative Gallegos yes.
Representative night.
Our.
Representative or test yes.
Representative.
No.
Representative.
No.
Price Johnson yes please.
Madam chair.
Yes.
Yes.
Madam chair with that we have
six in the affirmative three of
the negative.
Representative Ely with the
motive sixteen informative and
three in the negative you have a
do pass thank you madam chair
thank you members of the
committee.
Thank you everyone thank you to
the committee members as well as
the public that concludes our
agenda for today and we look
forward to seeing everyone at
eight thirty on Friday morning.
