Three A Hello.
Roll call is closed. We have a
quorum.
Please rise for today's
implication.
By tomorrow. Simpatico Award
winner gentleman from Italy,
your percent of the La Cruz.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let's bow
our heads and pray.
Our father who is in heaven,
Glory to your name, Father. We
recognize that February theme
and Scripture is strength and
courage and we are to fear not
for you are with us and you will
strengthen us and help us
through adversity.
Father, May We always appreciate
your gifts and the blessings you
have bestowed on us and our
state.
As our work is here. May we live
up to the creator, son? Our Lord
has asked of us to fulfill
As we are privileged to be
included in this body on behalf
of our people. Let us never
forget who we labor for, and
that in this difficult task that
we are always mindful that we
are not here for ourselves.
As we work for the people, Lord,
we ask that the outcomes of this
labor reflect the example of
your son.
Work for the common welfare
charity, Mercy, patience,
kindness and lastly example by
our own humility.
Father. Please soften our hearts
and let us forgive one another
If we feel offended as we pray
that you forgive us if we offend
Father as we depart from this
annual union to all the corners
of our beloved state.
We ask that you keep all of us
safe.
We pray in your son's name?
Jesus Christ.
No glory in all things and in
all places in in
The gentleman from Eddie Chavez
and Otero Reserve. Townsend,
lead us in the Pledge of
Allegiance.
I pledge reagents to the flag.
And with the general lady from
McKinley INS and Juan
Representative Johnson lead the
salute to the New Mexico flag.
Gentlemen from Dona Ana
representative Lara.
Mr Speaker. I move that order
business announcements and
miscellaneous business.
So, you know? Objection. It is
so ordered.
Gentle lady from Berlin.
Mr Speaker, I will We go to that
order of business messages or
ordered third to read.
Message from the Senate. Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the house that the Senate has
concurred in House amendments to
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Health and
Public Affairs Committee
Substitute.
For Senate Bill 129 as amended
by the House.
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 161
as amended by the House
respectfully submitted Sherry D.
Luhan, Senate chief clerk
entered
Message from the Senate. Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the house that the Senate has
concurred in House amendments to
Senate Bill 165, as amended by
the House respectfully
submitted, sherry dealer wants
and Chief clerk message will be
entered.
Message from the Senate. Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the house that the Senate has
passed house Bill 29.
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee substitute for House
Bill 33 as amended by the House.
House Bill 165, as amended by
the House House Labor veterans
and Military Affairs Committee.
Substitute for House Bill 236 as
a minute by the House House Bill
253 as a minute by the House and
return same here with
respectfully submitted. Sherry
D. Luhan, Senate chief clerk
message will be entered.
Message from the Senate. Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the house that the Senate has
passed house Bill 181.
House Bill 298, as amended by
the House House, Bill 302 and
return same here with
respectfully submitted. Sherry
D. Luhan, Senate chief clerk.
Message will be entered message
from the Senate. Mr. Speaker,
I'm directed to inform the house
that the Senate has passed house
Bill 270 as amended by the House
and return. Same here with
respectfully submitted Sheri
Dillon wants and a chief clerk.
Mr Be entered.
General lady from birth to Leo.
Mr Speaker. I move. We go to
that order, business
announcements and miscellaneous
business. Objection. It is so
ordered Good morning members.
Good to see you again.
I'll miss you over the next nine
months.
Some more than others.
But for the most part, I'll miss
all of you.
Are there announcements
gentlelady from Santa Fe
representative Luhan.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Today I'm
rising to introduce my
Little girl here, Olive.
Who is was here on the first day
and insisted on being here on
the last day of the session to
close things out with me.
And I also have with me. My l A.
This is Alexandra Wiley. She is
this is her first session and
She impressed me and our other
staff members here in the house
of with her ability to just
catch on and just do things and
help everybody And I just feel
very proud to hear that from
your own staff in your office,
Mr Speaker, So I wanted to give
her a very big thank you and to
recognize my daughter and
I also have one more
announcements announcement since
I started working
Even on the Senate side.
For six years and then now as a
as a representative, my
My eldest child. I talk a lot
about his name is Javier.
His birthday is always during
session, and today is his
birthday and he can't be with us
this morning. We are all very
close to him and are thinking of
him and love him very, very
much. So I was just like to
To announce that it's his
birthday and just how incredibly
proud I am of him and to remind
him that
He is probably the main reason
why I decided to become a
representative. So to him,
Javier
Okay. Oh, Mr Speaker, Um, happy
birthday in his 23rd year here.
Happy birthday to my Tokyo.
Javier's Thank you.
Regrettable plus
Police complain use
Generally from earlier percent
of Thompson. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. I want to take this
opportunity to thank everyone
who makes makes this all
happened are sergeants are
wonderful. They take such good
care of us. They're much
appreciated. We know they work
even longer hours than we do Our
housekeeping staff. Our office,
folks, Mr Speaker, you and
leadership on both sides if we
could give a great big round of
applause to everybody who helps
make us do this applause.
For
Hard working staff.
Clinics office sergeant at arms
because stowed Ian's Legislative
council
Legislative Finance Elliot C.
Our board operators. Thank you
guys.
General lady from
Algo and Luna representative
Jones.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have a
point of personal privilege.
What is the purpose? Report?
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have
news from our southern border.
Um, here on the last day of the
session. I think most of you
know, I represent 3/4 of our
southern border as 100 and 55
Miles.
Of the international border with
Mexico, and I stay in close
touch with law enforcement and
my constituents.
This week, I received news from
the border that you'll likely
never hear on TV.
I'll give you a little
background first. There are long
sections of border wall in my
district, whether we like it or
not have truly provided
increased security to my
constituents.
This border barrier has been
especially important.
During the current
administration because
Ah!
Quite a few of the border Patrol
agents who normally would
protect and secure New Mexico
border had been reassigned.
They've been taken off the
border, and they've been
reassigned to a paso to process
asylum seekers.
So Mr Speaker and members by
their actions. It's no secret
that the current administration
no longer prioritizes securing
the border.
They no longer prioritize
seizure of criminals, terrorists
sex trafficking traffickers,
human traffickers and drugs such
as fentanyl, which is killing
Our Children and our young
adults.
So I'll give you a little
background built in to this
protective wall or numerous
large emergency gates, which can
be opened in the event of heavy
rains and flooding.
And so I want to share with the
body. What happened on Tuesday?
Just a couple of days ago.
Because, like I said, you won't
hear this on the news. Much of
what happens on the border goes
and reported Tuesday without
regard for this difficult task
facing our border patrol.
And without regard for the
safety and security of the
livelihood of my constituents.
And other new Mexicans and US
citizens. The Border Patrol was
quietly ordered.
By the federal government to
permanently open the floodgates.
To provide a path for the
Mexican gray wolf, too across
the international border.
I felt it was important to share
that while we're here in the
Legislature work hard on behalf
of new Mexicans to address
crime.
And the fentanyl crisis, among
many other things that are needs
for our constituents.
That the floodgates
On the border are open.
Speaker.
Thank you ladies. Your lady from
McKinley, San Juan,
representative Johnson, speaker.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
members of the house at this
time. I just like to take the
opportunity to thank House state
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee members.
And my role call is
representative Onion or new
representative Block
representative Hawkman V. Hill,
representative Little
representative Ream ranking
member, representative Zamora.
Madam.
Majority floor leader and my
right hand, Vice chair,
Figueroa.
I just want to thank you
colleagues, friends.
You did a great job. I
appreciate you. We had our ups
and downs. We had our fun. Not
so fun times.
And we had our quiet and not so
quiet moments.
So from the bottom of my heart,
I just want to thank you and
The hollow.
Juan Dana Cotto. God bless you
as you return to your homes and
your family's Thank you. Thank
you, General Lady.
Do you remember from Brittany?
You representative de la Cruz?
Thank you. Mr Speaker. I want to
Notify the body that this coming
Saturday on K and W. 89.1 FM
Our very own speaker of the
house, Mr Javier Martinez will
be the Simpatico Award winner,
which will be announced
throughout today.
Congratulations to the speaker.
Thank you, Mr
Thank you, gentlemen. I'll be
listening in while I'm cleaning
up my house on Saturday.
Generated from Burnley
representative Gorilla
Gracias. Mr Speaker. Thank you
so much. I want to join
everybody Who's thinking?
Whoever makes everyone who make
this possible all the people in
the staff that leadership but
also I wanna think people back
home.
Our families, our neighbors who
watch their houses pick up our
mail, my coworkers, coworkers
who took time from extra duty so
we can be here today. So all the
people back home who help us to
be here today? I just wanna say
thank you to everybody. And we
want to be seen. So Thank you.
Thank you. Gentle lady. Round of
applause. All the people back
home.
Make it possible for us to be
here.
Gentlemen from Chavez
represented Hembree.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Um, I
just want to express my
gratitude to every member of
this body and all of the staff
sergeants at arms. Um everyone
for how supportive they've been
welcoming. Uh, and the great
friendships I've made in the
last 30 days.
Thank you all. It's been a
privilege to be here with you,
And I hope that I will be here
next year and see many of you
again. Thank you. Thank you,
gentlemen.
Generated from Dona Ana
representative Ferrari. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Um, I just
wanted to announce that my son
My youngest son's 41st birthday
is today so we get to see him
soon, And also to thank I'm not
only the CPAC committee for
having an extra special meeting
so we could get a bill through.
Blast night and also to thank
the sponsors of our committee
dinners that, um, but you know,
just were so special to bring us
together and help us celebrate.
And, um, also, you know,
different staff and people who
have helped make our committee's
work so
Thank you.
Thank you, General Lady round of
applause.
Anything announcements Julian
from earlier percent of Hawkman
healer.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Um
I all I to rise to Thank the
House transportation, Public
Works and Capital improvements
Committee. Um, we ended up in
the middle of it all this year,
and every single member of that
committee put their heads down.
Did the work did the right thing
and we all made decisions in
power together, and it was a
really special experience, and I
feel very
Lucky, um and grateful to have
been chosen as the chair of that
committee, and I'm very much
looking forward to hoping to be
the chair of that committee
again next year. What's truly a
collection of special people? So
thank you. Thank you, General
Lady, certainly big round of
applause.
Generally from Dona Ana,
representative of Diego's Thank
you, Mr Speaker. I rise today to
also say thank you to the staff
to the leadership to you, Mr
Speaker. I want to especially
thank the Commerce Committee. Um
You know, I This is my second
time around with this and I
think we did. We were did well
together. It's a It's a fun
committee. But it's also a very
serious committee in the sense
of so many really important
issues come through, and I hope
to continue having that good
working relationship with the
committee so we can continue to
produce good things for the
state of New Mexico.
I also want to make sure to, um
really think the staff they have
been amazing your staff, Mr.
Speaker, Um
Just very accommodating to when
we had guests. I mean, it seemed
to it was like Los Cruces month
there for a while, so I
appreciate that everybody was on
board with it and helping. And,
um just it's been such a
pleasure to serve in this
chamber with you also, Thank
you. Thank you, gentle lady. Big
round of applause.
Jesus.
Although I must say it was
Maggie Day every day last
Thursday everyday, but I still
didn't get any because ons,
which is weird, but
Maybe we'll get some next year,
Gentlemen from Rio Arriba
Sandoval, San Juan,
Representative length. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Good morning.
Good morning members. And I have
to just simply reiterate what's
already been said earlier. But
what an honor. It is to stand
here is one of 70 from around
this state fulfill the
obligations that we were sent
here to do on behalf of our
constituents, but also
Uh,
I feel I would be remiss if I
didn't also give a shout out to
the tax committee and all that
They have done. Um
From my number One neighbor
here, Ambrosio. You're you're
always solid and keep me in the
loop.
And always full of humor, but
also represented Townsend
Representative Scott Thank you
for your insight. We're going to
miss you on the committee. I
know that you have other plans
in mind. But honestly, I
appreciate your your tolerance
of of me and tolerance of of the
of the subject matters, but also
what you bring to the committee
to. Ah,
Represents Serato representative
Ortez Speaker Martinez. Thank
you.
Representative Hernandez,
Chairwoman Diego's
Represented Duncan. We talked
earlier and how you bring really
a breath of fresh air to a
committee when you can be funny
without being funny is always
the best thing.
And how you can
Lighting up a room just by
saying something.
And I appreciate that. So I hope
I hope to see you back again in
that committee representative
Chandler represent for Diego.
Our ranking member, Mr Harper
and your beautiful wife.
Welcome.
Thank you for for your insight
for your intellect for your even
handedness and for your
friendship in this committee, I
think it's what makes it work in
terms of a bipartisan
Friendship that we have in a
partnership that we have, and I
last, but not least, obviously
our vice chairwoman, Donna, who
is blossoming, and it's like
Kick ass legislator that has a
has a heart of gold and and is
learning to find herself in this
in this place. And so to you, By
Sherwin Thank you.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
I said I said your name, So
thank you again.
No. You said another word that
you probably shouldn't have said
on the floor. But
But it's okay. Nobody heard it.
Generally from Braulio. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Since we're
doing committees, I really want
to thank the Health and Human
Services Committee Vice chair,
representative Herndon,
representative Ferrari
chairwoman Ferrari
representative Chavez
representatives of Penske, Our
whip representative Harmony Oh,
Representative Cates,
representative Jones, R ranking
member, representative Vincent
and representative Lord and I
have to say this committee has
made representative Vincent's
heart grow to sizes too large as
He told us last year.
So he's not the tough guy he
always portrays. We've had him
close to tears several times and
our staff are my committee
assistant, Jennifer, Um, Hill
and and all of our analysts.
it's been wonderful. We get hard
things to do in that committee
that are really, um
Emotionally, sometimes draining,
but we've we've kept on working
and we're gonna do some. What?
What the tax chair said. We're
going to do that. I won't say
it, but we're going to do that
in the interim, and we're going
to really work on making
healthcare and especially
behavioral health. Better in New
Mexico. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you. Gentle lady round of
applause for the hard working
committee.
Gentlemen from civil McKinley
representative Alcorn,
Mr. Speaker. I just wanted to
announce that your house labor
and Veterans Affairs Committee
is not going to meet after the
floor session today.
But honestly, Mr Speaker, I want
to thank everybody and my
committee for putting up with
me. I have the best committee
and the house. It's the best
community because you're the
chair.
Mr Speaker because in New
Zealand, or is it true
But Mr Speaker, I have the best
best community. Really, I do
because everybody is very
patient. We work together.
Sometimes we just take a look at
each other in a different way.
But
Everything comes out for the
best, and the best is the best
for the state of New Mexico
speaker in the one thing I do
want to thank is my right hand
My wife's tear is being with me
right or wrong forever, and
never. So Thank you, Mr Speaker,
And thank you members of my
committee. Thank you gentlemen.
Round of applause for the House
Labor Committee.
Members were going to go to
third reading for a little bit
to do consent calendar and then
I'll come back to announcements
there, Lady from Berlin, Mr
Speaker, and when we go to that
order of business, third reading
of legislation ordered
Gentlemen from San Juan.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I move
adoption of the items on consent
calendar number one, and then we
vote for
All of them at once. The
following items, including House
Joint Memorial one House Joint
Memorial three Senate Joint
Memorial two as Amended House
Memorial 10 House Memorial four
House Moral 33 as amended House
Memorial 34.
House Memorial three
House memorial 12.
House Moral 39 House Moral 30 as
amended House Memorial 45 House
Memorial 46 and House Memorial
20.
Thank you, gentlemen. Let me
make sure that the board is
reflected accurately.
And everybody has a copy of this
on your desk.
Is the debate.
No debate.
That's okay.
We are on emotion.
Two little passage of houses.
Joint Memorial one. How's your
movement? Memorial three.
Senator Memorial two as amended
House Memorial 10 Housing Moral
four House Memorial 33 as
amended House Memorial 34
Housing Morial three twice. No,
that sounds Mario three Housing
12 House Moral 39 House Memorial
20.
How's moral 30 as amended House
Memorial 45 and House Memorial
46.
All those in favor signify by
saying, Aye.
Suppose, nay.
The eye is, have it.
We just did it.
You said the speaker can do
whatever he wants.
The lady from Braulio.
Mr Speaker. I move. We got to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business in order generally from
Virgilio.
I'm assuming this speaker that
means me and you just point it
so I appreciate that. Thank you,
Mr Speaker, So I want to thank
the House Education Committee. I
always brag about house
education. I felt compelled by,
um
The gentleman from McKinley in
Cibola that he was bragging
about him having the best
committee. I always bragging
education that we have the most
experience on our committee that
we have those that have served
in every different capacity.
Some multiple from school board
members to current educators,
too.
Um
Administrators all up and down
the line. And with that sort of
experience on both sides of the
aisle. We work really well
together because we know the
work that we're doing is so
impactful for the current what's
happening now, as well as the
future of this state, and I
couldn't do it without any of
you on that committee. It's such
a
Great experience to be part of
that committee and to work with
each and every one of you during
our standing committee and in
the interim and then to my vice
chair, Um
Representative Garrett. Um, I
really appreciate your help Your
guidance, your wisdom. Thank
you. And thank you all House
education. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, gentlemen.
Applause. Our house education
Gentlemen from early usable
McKinley, San Juan's of
Valencia, representative Garcia.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think
you think this opportunity to
thank everybody in this house
for all the work they have done,
Mr Speaker. All the staff
And, uh,
What I really want to express is
all the support that was shown
for veterans Man. There's
144,977 veterans in New Mexico
and the all thank you. Thank you
for doing, gentlemen. Thank you,
gentlemen.
General lady from really bad
Sellable Center hotels
represented Barrera, Mr Speaker
and members of this body I have
to. I have to rise and say how
proud I am of the AG committee.
And if you're on the AG
committee, which I feel sorry
for the people who aren't on the
committee, it becomes your
favorite committee of the house
and I couldn't
I couldn't have a better
committee. We have a lot. We
have a lot of expertise on this
committee, and I certainly want
to recognize our vice chair
representative Allyson for all
of his help and all of his
wisdom and all of his insight
into the issues we look at on
the committee. He has been a
most valuable member of our
committee and I want to
recognize, uh representative
Armstrong, who
Did a lot of work this year and
we know it.
Representative Zamora. Thank you
again for all of your help. It's
always a pleasure to have you
served on our committee and for
representative Cates, she brings
a no perspective to the
committee. That's very valuable,
and we always have to recognize
our vegetarian member,
representative Matthews, who who
talks about meat issues from a
different perspective.
And of course we have. Rep.
Cadena who is a brilliant
Order and, uh and has a keen
perspective on issues impacting.
uh, not only the agricultural
committee but certainly
agricultural issues in the
south, and she brings that to
us, and certainly last but not
least in sometimes you save the
best for last. We have to say
Sub sub goodbye representative
himself.
She is our ranking member. She
teaches us all something every
day and I will try not to cry
here, but she will be dearly
missed on our committee but will
still have her around. We hope
On the other side, and I think
she'll bring a breath of fresh
air to that side, and I welcome
her going over there. And that's
what I have to say. Mr Speaker.
I'm so grateful to have these
colleagues as my friends as my
mentors as my teachers, and I
thank everybody for their
service.
Thank you Congratulate House at
committee.
General 80 from Eddie and be
representative Brown. Thank you,
Mr Speaker. While we're on the
subject of expressing
appreciation, I would just like
to thank the state police and
the entire security team here at
the roundhouse. Um, they are
always cordial, always taking
care of us.
And I know that we all
appreciate their watch care. So
please join me in a round of
applause for our security team.
Thank you. State police.
Enforcement.
Generally from Dona Ana present
of Rubio with a certificate.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. It only
took 30 days to get called on,
so I appreciate it.
Mr.
Mr Speaker. I rise today to
recognize Representative
Figueroa. Um she is leaving us
to that other chamber that I do
not want to name
Um, but I just wanted to just
say a few words. Um, I've had a
chance to really get to know.
Representative Figueroa, as many
of you may know, a few years
back, Um, when the pandemic
first started, we recognized
just such a need for broadband
and not having people access,
especially our young people who
were
Having to, um, be educated in
their homes where many did not
have access to any type of
Internet service. And there are
a few of us who were her. We're
talking and chatting, and um,
eventually became what we call
the broads because we were
Um, focus so much on broadband,
and, um and representative at
all. I was really a part of
that, and eventually, that group
really decided shortly after a
few of the special sessions that
we had around how to better
address a lot of the quality of
life needs that our communities
was that they were highlighted.
Because of the pandemic was this
need to also modernize our
legislature and represented
Figueroa has been such a
champion on this issue. I really
respect her because as you all
know, I'm pretty
Um, radical in that I want
things to happen now and, um
Representative Figueroa is like
the person that tells me to pump
the brakes and to really think
about things methodic in much
more methodically, And so I've
always appreciated that about
her. I'm not gonna look at you
because then I'll start crying.
Um
We're gonna miss you because
people change when they go to
the Senate, and, um I hope that
you don't change. Um I say that
to representative is l as well.
don't change. Um, but, Natalie,
we're going to miss you. Um and,
um, Mr Speaker, Um, if we have a
certificate for certificate for
her, and if it's possible to get
that
Read out. Thank you, gentle
lady. Um, I think what we're
gonna do if it's OK, everybody,
I think we're going to have the
certificates and maybe we'll
present them and not read them
out so that we don't run out of
time concerned with time. Um,
but I do want to express my
gratitude to all of the members
that are retiring and going to
the dark side, um, to bring
light to the dark side.
Um
Thank you Presented figured out,
we'll miss you.
Gentlemen from San Juan.
Resembling. Thank you. Mr
Speaker. I rise today to to
recognize and and pay homage to
the gentleman from Chavez, Arian
Otero.
Ah, Representative Townsend.
We have a certificate and it's
got some things in there, but I
just want to share a few things
on behalf of both our caucus and
me personally, So, um
As many know, I called
Web Townsend off of the bench
back into leadership, and he was
he was kind to be willing to do
that. Um, he has been a great
help to me this session and more
of a mentor role and helping me
to understand the role as leader
better, and I appreciate that. I
know that you didn't have to do
that. I do that That is not lost
on me. So I appreciate you doing
that.
There are only a few times that
he cursed at me for bringing him
back his website. I appreciate
that as well and they're all
well deserved. Um, I also want
to thank you for the work that
you've done on various
committees over the years. As I
recall. I think you've served on
finance tax. You weren't sad to
leave judiciary as I recall. And
And, of course, the tremendous
work that you've done on the
energy committee.
Speaks volumes for New Mexico.
Um, I think we all recall along
floor debate from about I think
it was like two in the morning
at five in the morning and a and
a vote that
That ended at least friendly for
us. I think that's memorable
moment for me watching from the
back seat.
And so I just want to thank you.
His lovely wife. Paula is also
here. If you've had the pleasure
to meet Paula, she's always so
warm and lovely. She gives me a
hug at the right moments. And I
just really appreciate you to
Paula for for how you support
Jim up here in the roundhouse,
So thank you, Jim. For all years
of service, I know you're not
going away. Hopefully you'll be
on the other side.
And we have a good co sponsor in
the other chamber. So thank you.
Thank you.
Gentlemen from Chavez. 18.
Otero, you and I came in in the
same class back in 2015, and it
has been a tremendous honor for
me to serve with you as well.
And I know that you'll join the
general leader from burning Leo
and bringing light to the other
side.
Thank you.
Gentlemen from Santa Fe in
Sandoval. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Mr. Speaker. I just like to
recognize the house, energy,
Environment and Natural
Resources Committee. Some of you
might not know, but we are a
three day week committee we meet
Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday.
Um, we like to talk, but we get
the work done.
And I would just like to say a
special shout out to our vice
chair. If she's listening, we
miss you. We hope you're feeling
better and we'll see you soon.
Thank you. Thank you, gentlemen.
We misrepresented Narayana give
her a big round of applause.
And all the good wishes.
Gentlemen from Dona Ana.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr.
Speaker, I rise to say a few
different words. First. Mr
Speaker. I want to thank our
house Appropriations and Finance
Committee. It's 25.71% of the
body, So I'm not going to name
everybody. But Mr Speaker, I
first want to start with our
ranking member, The general lady
from Catron, Sikora and Sierra.
As the general lady says, we try
to do what's best for New Mexico
and I think we see that. That's
what I hear. Every time we talk,
whether it's in committee on the
phone in an office on the floor,
Mr Speaker, I also want to say a
very big thank you to our vice
chair. Ah, The general lady from
Berna, Leo.
MEREDITH Economic
diversification, Dixon.
Uh, her work, uh, in many
different areas, the least of
which is supporting me and
making sure that when I make a
mistake, it gets corrected
quickly. Her work in so many
other areas, I think does
extraordinary benefit for the
state of New Mexico for our
members.
Some of whom are leaving. I want
to say briefly to represent
figured out. This is the first
year that we've had the
privilege to have you on house
appropriations. You asked
questions you dug in great job.
Um
Our colleagues in the other
chamber and in another committee
in the other chamber will do
well if they welcome your work
ethic, your insight and your
dedication into that chamber and
onto that committee, Um, Mr
Speaker with the committee, you
know, we asked more questions.
We heard more public comments.
We spent far more hours working
We listened more, especially
during the interim, which I know
that we're going to continue the
excellent work of our chief of
staff. Amanda Dick Petty. We had
high expectations, and I believe
that we've delivered pretty darn
well with the help of each and
every member in this chamber, So
I want to say a big thank you.
I want to recognize Rick May,
the minority staff who does an
excellent job and brings decades
of wisdom with to the committee
also want to say a quick shout
out to Charles Salih, the new
director for the Legislative
Finance Committee. This was a
session for the ages when it
comes to LFC and under director
Seles. Steady, insightful and
forward thinking leadership. I
think we're in very good hands.
Um, finally, I want to say a big
farewell and thank you to the
members who are leaving.
Certainly the gentleman from
Chavez, Eddie and Otero, The
gentleman from Lee, for whom No
math problem is too difficult.
And whose work in the energy
industry benefits us all
greatly.
We've talked about
representative Figueroa, who I
give a special shout out and
things to I want to say a big
shout out and thank you to the
general lady from Chavez. Mr.
Speaker. I've had the privilege
of sitting across from her.
Perhaps appropriately to her
left, Mr Speaker. Uh, we're
closer than it may seem, and I
have learned a great deal. I
look to you as a model, New
Mexican voice who stretches back
to the beginning of our state
whose work
And whose voice was stretch far
far into the future. What I mean
to say, Mr Speaker.
The general lady is a timeless
Mexican.
Gentlemen. Maybe you should stop
while you're ahead.
And thank you getting in deeper
and deeper.
His voice is certainly shake a
little bit.
Just like I started when I first
got questions from the general
lady from Chavez.
Gentle lady from
Generally from Catherine's
Theater, Valencia and Socorro,
Representative Armstrong. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. We have a
certificate. I know we're not
reading them, but I would like
everyone to
Guess who I'm talking about.
Mr Speaker.
This person began their career
as a champion law and order when
he when he joined the Bernalillo
County Sheriff's office in 1973.
Um, he's been in this house.
Since 2006.
He's
He's been an instructor at the
New Mexico Law Enforcement
Academy.
A private investigator and just
with his stature you can tell
he's from law enforcement.
Along with his beautiful wife,
who is always by his side.
When he needs her.
Always supporting all of us.
And, um
Is also a big part of my life in
the national He's the national
vice president of the Sportsman
Caucus.
He loves hunting and fishing.
He's been a soccer coach.
And
He would really like.
To retire.
And spend more time with his
beautiful wife, Ellen, his
Children and his grandchildren
and like to recognize Bill rape.
Mr Speaker and members. Thank
you. I've got some great
memories out of here.
And Ellen and I are not going to
change our phone number. So if
you need to call do thanks
again. Thank you, gentlemen.
One of the first times I came up
here to advocate um against the
bill. Um, it was actually your
bill.
Um, I'm pretty sure I testified.
120 times against
Your bill and you never gave up
And you you still have not given
up and we almost had it.
We almost had it. But maybe next
year we'll do it in your own.
You are
Um
In the next 60 Day session.
Thank you for your many years of
service. We will miss you.
Gentle meant from San Juan.
Representative Duncan. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. I, like many in
this chamber have enjoyed
cookies in the corner.
As well as many fine mills in
our caucus, and I would like to
thank the wife's of those who
have served us and Ferris does
not go lost on my stomach.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. You and I
want to give a special shout out
today Be Samora for feeding me
throughout the session and I've
got to tell you folks, I You
know, Obviously, I love my
mama's cooking.
Very, very close to my mom's
cooking. Thank you Appreciate
you round of applause.
And also a special shout out to
the baby up in the gallery,
baby.
I don't know your name, but
Hi, Aiden. Welcome to the house.
Generally from Burnaby, your
representative Herndon.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and Mr
Speaker. I rise today to give
recognition to the fact that New
Mexico is the only state in the
entire country that has filled
its state director positions in
the National Organization of
Women in government across the
aisles, and I'd like to
introduce them to you now and
all of the great work that
they've been doing,
Representative Gail Armstrong,
would you stand representative
Catherine Brown, Would you
please stand representative
list? Thompson and
Me, representative Pamela
Herndon.
So we're really happy that we've
been able to share ideas and get
ideas working together. And
thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr.
Speaker generally and thank you
for representing us. All four of
you so well.
The lady from Santa Fe represent
everyone.
Mr Speaker. Thank you, Um
We're saying goodbye to a lot of
our members and our friends and
our family in this chamber and
I don't think many know this
one. But, um
Someone who has influenced me
for a long time now and I've
known
Before I started in this chamber
is
Going to say, uh
Farewell to us as well.
Someone who is influenced all of
us and his brought
Wealth of knowledge and wisdom.
And who I look too.
As my elder as my friend.
As an advisor.
Is going to be leaving us, too,
And I want to say it with all my
all do respect in all due honor.
Um, thank you for your service.
Thank you for always consoling
me.
And being there for me and being
my family.
My friend.
Representative Anthony Ellison.
You're going to be greatly
missed and
There's going to be a void for
me when I look for that resolve,
and just that friend that's
there to help me.
Um
And give us your wisdom.
But it's not lost. It's going to
continue through.
All that you have done all that
you are going to continue to do
through your community because
you are community.
And compassionate leader and I
will continue to look for
For advice and influencing the
things that I do here. Um and
I'm sure the rest of us so Mr
Speaker, body, um
We are going to be seeing our
farewell as is to our good
friend and family member, Um
Anthony Ellison.
Thank you for your service.
Gentlemen from San Juan.
Mr Speaker. Thank you.
Thank you, representative Luhan.
I have learned a lot in the past
five years.
I came here.
Not knowing too much about
politics, and I have learned a
lot.
I think it was the first time in
a long time where I was able to
Converse with my sister,
Representative Johnson in our
native language across the
floors. I think we set
precedents and that
We have set precedents also.
And saying the opening prayer in
our native language I have
learned so much from both both
sides of the aisle.
Suggestion to you with me, as I
have said.
Look out for the five fingered
people. The 500 beings is who
you represent.
Not represent parties.
And please one last suggestion.
Don't act.
Like the animal.
That represents your party.
That is my final suggestion. I
have enjoyed everything.
God bless you all.
And as I would say my prayer
Walking beauty.
Before you
Beauty after you.
New York around you.
Beneath you.
Beauty above you.
In beauty. It is finished.
In beauty. It is finished.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen.
We will miss you, gentlemen. Um,
I'll add my voice as well. You
are beloved Elder and somebody
to whom many, many people in
this chamber and many people in
this building looked to for
wisdom and advice.
Um
Thank you.
No.
Hermano.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Godspeed.
Any other announcements. Anybody
else? I mean, should I announce
my retirement to Cali?
From any chairperson of
Thank you. Um, Mr Speaker, Um
I rise today.
To recognize the
Work.
Of a good friend.
Many of us have the
Opportunity to serve with good
friends and
Representative Scott nine, have
Well, we've had the opportunity
not only to share work.
But we share a lot of other
stuff outside of this place. We
we traveled together and, uh,
He has been, um you know a real
Steady, Um, voice to this group.
And
You know, I'm reminded of
Saying, I think it was Mark
Twain that said.
Do what
Do what's right.
It will gratify some
And that will astonish the rest.
And I think that's what his
calculator
Has done in this house. It's
astonished the rest.
And Mr Speaker when
You have the
Opportunity.
To serve.
As we all do with people that we
have great respect for it
empowers this group to do what's
right.
And I think that was probably
Readily apparent this session.
Um
More than one occasion we did
what was right.
And, uh,
And that's my
Friend from San Juan said while
ago and I know Rep. Scott
believes this that we come here
to do
Is to
Make the lives.
Those that we serve.
Better.
Not too
Do anything else. That's our job
is to make the lives that we
served better.
And
I can say without
Reservation that I believe that
when
Rep. Scott
Has, uh
Stood and, um
Tried to run the battery's down
those calculators for us.
He has done it for the main
purpose.
Of delivering us
Facts.
The empowered US to make a
better decision and I am
I look forward to continuing to
serve with him and on the other
side. Um, as some say, the dark
side. I don't think it's gonna
Change any of us, Um
But I'm sure there's will be
68 others That will tell us if
it changes us, and we I look
forward to that. But
I hope everybody will take the
time to
Tell rep. Scott was he has stood
for
In this body.
It is worthwhile.
And, um
What he has done is represented
his constituents very well.
Thank you. Thank you,
Representative Scott. We will
miss you.
He is yet another member of the
infamous class of 2015, and
they're dropping like flies.
There's like two of us left.
Three.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, they say
The older you get.
Faster.
Time passes.
And this last 10 years.
For me have been and I blank
No, I'm fairly confident.
That there are 64.3% of you that
will miss
The analytics that I have tried
to bring
To this chamber.
To those of you.
With whom I have crossed swords.
And there are many of you.
In that circumstance.
Alright. Certainly.
Appreciate the passion that you
bring.
To your positions.
To those
That have stood with me beside
me in the battles.
I can only hope
That you believe I've made
A difference.
It's been an honor to serve.
Good luck to the body.
And Godspeed. Thank you.
Congratulations, gentlemen.
Thank you.
Gentle lady from Santa Fe
representatives, Opinsky
Mr Speaker.
Maybe some of the most difficult
words I will ever
Say on this floor.
But I rise today.
To recognize our House Majority
leader Gail chasing
And at this moment, I will at
least say what I can get
through.
Right now.
Gayle has been a mentor to all.
A friend to all
A leader that has improved our
state and so many ways.
You are a visionary.
And you
You are legendary.
You talked so many of us what it
is to never give up.
You have been a friend and a
mentor.
To me and you have cared for me
and my family.
Um and kill. We will have more
time to celebrate you and your
legacy and I do want to make
sure we do that.
But for now, I just want to say,
um
I have never known the house
without you and
And to me, you will forever be
and I congratulate you and
Um
Look forward.
To all the incredible things
that you're going to do.
In your retirement.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. And if
the body would please join me in
recognizing our house majority
leader, Gail Chasity.
Mr Speaker. I'm not going away
just yet.
I'm going to finish out my term.
I want to
Just tell you what we have a lot
of work to do during the interim
Next year is a 60 Day session
and I am hoping that some of the
things that didn't make it over
the finish line this time.
We'll make it and, um, don't
lose heart. It's hard. It's hard
work and I am really thrilled
this morning. I have my my son
came in and surprised me, Tyler
reduce Stand up. That's Tyler
Bean.
My Children were anxiously
anticipating this day, so they
were texting me last night.
Have you told anyone yet? So
Um, So I have written to the
members of our caucus. And and I
finally representative Miguel
Garcia is going to be the senior
member here, and I'm sorry.
who's not sitting right there so
he could start celebrating that?
Um, I'm I'm just going to leave
you with one thing I It has been
the honor of my life to serve
here. I kind of wish it had been
my career because I couldn't
afford to have it as my career,
but I was better at it and liked
it better than everything else.
I did. So I want to, um
Let you know that place continue
to honor this body. Don't let
the
Difficult time stand in the way
of that.
And I'm just going to leave you
with a quote from one of my
heroes, Bryan Stevenson.
Hmm, who founded the Equal
Justice Initiative, and I first
met him and heard him say this
after we repeal the death
penalty.
There were people in Hollywood
who wanted to honor Governor
Richardson and we went to a
party in Hollywood and
literally. Governor Richardson
gave credit to those of us who
were actually carrying the bill.
But it was really wonderful
because Bryan Stevenson spoke
about event.
And what he said has been my my
guide post, although I had
already served in the
Legislature for
More than 10 years, he said. The
opposite of poverty is not
wealth. It is justice.
Generated from earlier If I
don't accept this letter, this
doesn't count. So
Message will not be entered.
Message will be entered minister
Speaker
Lady. Uh,
I, You know, I could not have
done the last
Two sessions.
And the last two years.
Sitting in this chair.
Without you.
Your counsel, your mentorship.
Your friendship.
Um, you holding me accountable?
Has meant the world to me.
In my own leadership and
I was shocked and very sad.
To know that you are departing
this house.
Like the whip, said. I have
never known this legislature
without you.
Um, And it's going to be a very
strange adjustment that many of
us will have to make.
But we also understand. You
know, as I see your son
Um
You know, for a great deal of
his life.
You have been here serving the
people of this state.
And it is only fair that
He and and your entire family
now get you all to themselves.
It's the right thing to do so
We love you. We appreciate you
and please keep holding us
accountable because we will need
your guidance and your voice as
we move forward in our own
leadership. Thank you.
Gentlemen from Chavez area and
Otero. Thank you, Mr Speaker. Um
This will not surprise you
because I know you have had
More than one occasion to wait
on me, too.
Yet my thoughts so I might
speak. I
I typically
And probably
More today.
Am impressed with the diversity.
And the passion.
And the resolve.
That is so different in this
body.
Yes, it's uh it's amazing.
And Mr Speaker. I think it
speaks.
Uh to this body, and that's
something the body should always
remember. And I
I just can't say thank you
enough to
My friend, my friend from San
Juan, for his kind words to my
My shadow.
But as
As almost every person in this
room has
Or has had
A shadow.
And they
Family.
That has
You have an much
That we might
Participate.
And something that we think is
terribly important. My friend
from Bern Leo drinks there.
Are things that went unfinished
that should be finished next
year.
I respect that.
Quite frankly, I hope some of
them never see the light of day
again.
But that's what makes this place
great.
Um
I told someone sitting on the
fourth floor one time that
Governors come and go and the
Legislature lives forever.
And
That's what this body
Master Remember?
That the sanctity
And the responsibility.
Yeah.
Is on this body.
Should never be given up.
Whether you're in the majority
of their minority.
That
That responsibility that we have
to represent our people.
Is is very, very important.
Um
So
To echo the words of my friend
from Lee to say that this is a
Hey, honorable place that we
have been privileged to Serbian.
Ghosts.
Without saying.
I don't think anyone in here
Takes from that, and it has been
A privilege and an honor.
But it has been a job.
That we all take very seriously
and I just want to thank the
body.
For all of the
Kind words and the, uh
Lively, robust debates.
I thought my friend from Daniele
was fixing to get into a real
robust one while ago
But he survived it with the hug
and probably a cookie. So that's
what makes us good.
Thank you all very much. Thank
you, gentlemen.
Members. I know I've got a
couple more mix here sending up
I am going to take a little
chair's prerogative because I
want to make sure I get my thank
you's in before we leave
members. I want to thank members
of both leadership team's
leader Che Si whips the Penske
chair Lada. Peter Lane, Whip
Townsend chair Armstrong.
I truly have appreciated working
together collaboratively with
you the last two sessions, you
know, win, lose or draw. This is
a family. This is sacrifice that
we all make together and, um,
not very many people get to do
what we do. And so when we walk
out of these halls
And we talked about what we did
Very few people understand the
how tough and how difficult in
the countless hours that are
spent here together, and so I
consider all of you brothers and
sisters in this journey of
public service, and I want to,
make sure that you know that, um
and and to our leadership teams,
as I said.
You are my conduit to a lot of
the things that are happening,
and you are my conduit.
To getting things done. And you
are my, uh, you hold me
accountable and and and and you
hold me when I need to be held
sometimes. So I want to thank
you for that 12 chairs and
committee chairs and ranking
members. I appreciate your work
in our committee work in our
committee process. It is
incredibly important. That
committee process is incredibly
important and it's how we get
Um, it's it's how we advocate
for our communities. It's how
we prepare ourselves for debates
on the floor. It is how we
Exercise our right in this
democracy, So I want to
appreciate all of you.
Um, for all of you work on your
committees.
I want to thank my staff. Um
You know, we just can't do
anything without our staff. I
mean, that is just the reality.
one Think Joseph Veronica Aaron
Mark.
Claire David.
Megan.
The two Jessica's
Simon Leanne, Camille, Daniel,
Pam Walter Amanda.
And of course, my my, my work
wife, The person who makes me
look at least halfway decent.
Um the person who prepares me
day to day and my partner on
this leadership journey. I still
remember the 15 calls I had to
make
When I became majority leader to
get her to work for me, and it
took it took a long time. But
thank God she said. Yes. And,
um you know, Alicia, you know
this work is not possible
without you without your
commitment to our office to our
staff without your commitment to
the entire body.
And I want you to know that your
sacrifice and leaving your
little one behind
Day to day is not lost on me.
It's not lost on us.
Thank you for serving your
people.
You know, we're on two year
cycles. Um, some of you are
moving to the Senate. Some of
your retiring
Um
Some of us think we'll come
back. I mean, I I haven't
started my petitions yet. So
We'll see what happens.
Uh, you know, we all have a
shelf life, and certainly the
speakership has a shelf life.
And this is my first term as
your speaker and I am blessed.
In grateful to you for for that
honor, and, you know, hopefully
I'm back here next year. Um,
it's not, uh, we'll see you on
the flip side. But the plan is
to be here next year. We'll see.
Um, Lastly, I do want to thank
um my family. Um, my wife,
Deana, my kids Camillo and
Marie.
Who
For whom we do this work. Um
And being able to hug them and
see them.
Um daily because I get to go
home and it's a lot to me that
many of you don't
Many of you are here for those
30 days or 60 days and you don't
see your families.
And I can't imagine how
difficult that must be.
But know that I think of you
often those of you who leave
their families behind. Um and
every time I hug my kids, I know
that I'm also hugging your
family.
Um, you know, and I know Leader
Lane you leave them behind for
for a good chunk of time.
Um, so it is a tremendous
sacrifice for them as well. And
if my family is listening, or
they might be in the building, I
don't know.
Um I love you and I appreciate
your sacrifice as well.
To our chief clerk's office. Um,
can't do this without you.
Thank you, Robin for teaching me
that the speaker can do whatever
he wants.
It's a good It's a good perk of
the job.
To our sergeant at arms. Richard
Senna, the sergeant at arms.
Thank you for your work and your
entire team keeping us safe.
To the people who watch over US
security police officers to the
people working in the kitchen.
To the people who clean our
offices and clean up our space.
Um, after we leave so many of
you did mention you know who you
are. We shake hands on the daily
and we went at each other and we
talk football or baseball. Where
the politics of the day Thank
you all for your work and your
sacrifice as well.
Lady from Eddy and Lea.
Thank you, Mr Speaker in the
minutes remaining, I'd just like
to take a couple minutes to rise
in recognition of representative
Candy spends his L
Mr Speaker and members when I
came to the Legislature and
first heard representative as
Ellen Action in committees on
the floor, I was just a little
bit shocked.
Because of her candor, her
forthrightness.
Hmm. Um,
Plain speaking and I think I'm
making the point there
represents L is known for
Just being very open about what
she believes. And I believe Mr
Speaker, she has represented her
constituents.
Amazingly well and
Mr Speaker, Representative as L
will be leaving the house but
hoping for a seat in the Senate.
Godspeed.
She has just been an example to
us all of doing homework,
getting ready for bills
understanding the issues.
And, uh and then speaking her
mind and I just really
appreciate all that She's done
and especially for rural New
Mexico, her advocacy there has
been stellar.
She makes sure we always
remember that agriculture,
ranching water. All these things
are very important to the state
of New Mexico.
And Mr Speaker, Um
I'd also like to thank her for
Just being a voice of reason.
Um, sometimes we get caught up
in the politics and
representatives l could always
cut through to the heart of the
matter.
So I appreciate her so much. She
is an expert, not just in
ranching and water and all those
things but also in many, many
other issues, And I love this
lady. I will miss her in this
chamber. Um, but just really
want everybody to know what a
great representative she has
been. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Candy is our issue.
Mr Speaker, This is my 20th
session up here and my time
flies whenever you're having
such fun, doesn't it?
Mr Speaker.
Have made some wonderful friends
up here.
And come to find out. I didn't
realize this Mr Speaker until
two years ago, a lot of the
freshman including day, Hartman
vehicle helps told me this I
scare people.
That is true.
Mr Speaker. There is no denying.
I don't sit on the fence on any
issue.
I'm either for it or against it,
And whenever I do make that
decision is to benefit all the
people of the state of New
Mexico is not just for one
reason region. It's for all of
the people.
All of the state, Mr Speaker.
Has been a ride up here.
My first year up here. I was
scared to death. I served on the
House Labor Committee and
I was usually the only
dissenting vote on the committee
wasn't a chairman Garcia.
I love my energy Committee of
served on the Consumer and
Public Affairs Committee. I've
been on appropriations. I love
my education committee. Keep
pushing for these kids to learn
cursive writing.
Mr Speaker.
This isn't about Albuquerque.
It's not about Santa Fe. It's
not about Las Cruces.
It's about like Arthur. It's
about Tatum. It's about Roy and
New Mexico.
It's about all the people of the
state.
And in spite of what
Chairman Small over here, said I
am not as old as the state.
I tell people I look pretty good
to be 92 years old, Don't I?
Mr Speaker. I am looking forward
to going home for a while. I've
got lots of duties back there. I
need to see my dogs at the end
of the day. Usually they are the
only ones that are glad to see
me.
But I'll tell you what I
appreciate each and every one of
you for the sacrifices you have
made to come up here and be your
constituents. Boat voice up
here.
Just keep in mind use some
common sense.
That's all it takes is used
Common sense work across the
aisle. I'm looking at both sides
of the aisle work across the
aisle.
For the betterment of all new
Mexicans.
It's been a wild ride, and I've
loved every minute of it. But
one other thing one other thing,
Mr Speaker, I got criticized one
time for my candy dish, okay?
I want you all to know that
every bit of this is recycled,
okay?
I found this big, old drafty
horseshoe out on the ranch. I
welded the stays on it.
And this is recycled. No animals
were hurt in its creation.
Okay. He had already passed
away. But it did. It did come
off my grand champion Bull that
I did show at the state Fair.
Mr. Speaker. It is going with me
as well. It's right here right
now.
I love in each and every one of
y'all.
You take care of your family's
Thank you so much.
Mr Speaker, Mr. Speaker from
Berlin. Thank you. Mr Speaker. I
should have mentioned, um, that
I want to recognize our staff.
My chief of staff, ELISA lower
and a majority analysts, our
analysts and the majority
office. Veronica crop. Nick, our
chief analyst is Priscilla
Garcia.
And all of the wonderful people
who the majority analysts
throughout the building. I hope
they've been helpful to now and
our receptionist Donna human, so
it's been great to work with
them. And we thank you so much
for your work, Lady and
Mr Speaker. I think maybe the
reason that, um
The lady from Chavez was feared
was perhaps
Candy container on her desk.
That is probably true. I know I
certainly was.
Couple more announcements, right
real quick to folks for my staff
that I admit I failed to mention
Marissa Esquivel, who kept me
fed and keeps me in line as well
as Leanne Leaf, who is somewhere
in the building. But I don't
know where she's in, but
hopefully she hears me. Thank
you both kindly.
Gentle lady from burner Leo,
representative Chase, See
anything?
Mr Speaker. I just wanted to
thank everyone for embracing me
so wholeheartedly during the
first session coming in in the
middle of it, Um and I am
humbled by the incredible legacy
that so many of you are leaving
behind, and I was I was born in
96 of which is the year that
representative Casey came in and
I'm grateful to have had Hello.
I am grateful. I am really
grateful to have had someone
throughout my whole entire
lifetime who represented young
people and Children in this
body. And I'm grateful to have
had one year with you. Thank
you, Mr Speaker.
General lady for Brenna. Leo. Mr
Speaker. I move that the chair
appointed Committee of three to
inform the Senate that the House
has completed its work and it's
ready to adjourn. Seen a D a. Mr
Speaker, I second the motion the
chair will appoint
Representatives Figueroa.
Scott and his L to go meet your
new colleagues and tell them
that our business has concluded.
Number Leo, Mr Speaker.
I move that the house would I
move that the chair appointed
Committee of three to advise the
governor that the House has
completed its work, and it's
ready to adjourn. Seen a D A
chair will appoint? I'm sorry.
Go ahead. Second. The motion. Mr
Speaker, I second the motion.
The chair will appoint
representatives
Horn, Hembree and Thompson.
You're gonna have to leave them
because they pray don't know
where the governor's offices
yet.
To go inform the governor that
our business has concluded and
we are ready to adjourn.
So go. Go do that now.
At the beginning of session. The
folks who were supposed to go
talk to the Senate didn't go and
it was
There's a lot of confusion. Mr
Speaker, I move the house
postponed action indefinitely
and all bills remaining in the
speaker's table on the calendar
or in committee except the bills
and the enrolling and aggressing
committee.
Mr Speaker. I second the motion.
Sure about that.
Okay, Mr. Speaker. I move that
the house adjourned. Seen a D a.
Mr Speaker, I second that motion
in the house has adjourned.
Oh, wait a minute.
Mr Speaker. Who is that
gentleman?
A few days ago, I came over here
and was received with booze, but
I hope that you'll be happy that
the Senate has completed its
work and, uh, Senator Pinto and
Senator do it. Tell me that they
are bringing me back.
So so.
We've completed our work, but
they're taking me back and I
don't think you guys will have
me. But anyway, we have
completed our work and we have
adjourned Senior D a about five
minutes ago. No refunds.
The house.
Thousands has adjourned scene
did
