Not the expert at anything as
many of you may know chief
Gorden it is on here to kind of
discuss that but I'm on here
should you have any questions.
We.
Hello answer anything that you
have I can tell you this is our
number one priority this session
and your support is is very
important to us on this piece
and all that sort and talk about
the specifics thank you.
And she sort of welcome.
Your muted Sir.
Okay can anyone hear me sorry
about that.
Representative my last is and
members members of the committee
Mr chair members committee I
just want to echo what Mr Gomez
and what Representative Maestas
it said earlier in two thousand
fifteen S. I. D. and into the
officers were murders as Mexico
state police officers that were
commissions New Mexico state
police officers at that time
they were made in a separate
retirement and with that
retirement all there wasn't
there was no issues in two
thousand twenty Senate bill
seventy two was passed was a
Paris all the to deal and with
that bill there were several
other agencies that were added
to the bill
that put them into the state
police plan which was fine but
what excluded that was are in TV
and just I you officers that
wear the same uniforms at the
same job and responsibilities as
a traditional state police
officer has and they do the same
job every date of one of the
things I want to bring up is
that you can have it also
revenue into the officer and
another state police officer
that actually do the same job
their K. nine officers and those
two individuals go out to the
same job day in and day out but
at the end of their into their
career when they decide to
retire if this were to remain
the same they would not receive
the same retirement which I
don't believe it is correct and
they they work alongside us they
were merged a state police
officer and I think this need to
be recognized that and that's
what we need to do as far as
moving them into this bill and
the state police realizes that
it is the right thing to do and
that's why we've pressed really
hard to make sure that we did
our homework over the last
several years talk to LFC talk
to DFA we also talked the perils
well in regards to how this bill
I need to be laid out a move
those those officers overs and
and to make sure that the
definition was exact in the in
to ensure that the property
receive the retirement that
they've worked hard for just
like Mr Gomes said is about
ninety four employees have been
affected by this and we are
asking that director act will be
put in as state police.
Officers from twenty fifteen to
the current date which is which
would put them to make them
whole asked the police officers
and as we go along and as being
the chief of this department I
think it's only fair that these
individuals receive the proper
time when they we plan to do so
our presented this to the
Parramore last month and we did
get a ten to one vote in support
of it that was you know that
they they did support what we're
trying to do with this bill and
it was important to us
Department in imports those
individuals that that currently
are in this situation those
officers and employees it'd also
affect the regarding health care
if they remained in the
retirement that they currently
are which is a civilian
retirement and I just want to
reiterate one of the biggest
things that we noted as we look
to this is that the state police
plan is overfunded at a hundred
twenty seven percent which
doesn't pose an issue for our
for our retirement plan and
dollars very minimal amount of
employees are looking to get
into into that this planet and
fills the right thing to do as
well and it was overlooked not
it is easy once fall but I think
it we definitely need to make
sure that that it's it's right
sizing into properly thank you
for your time yeah stand for any
questions that you may have.
Thank you that will with that Mr
Chairman will stand for
questions thank you.
You Mr chairman staff
go to the audience at this time
and asking anybody wishes to
comment on this bill if we do so
I see some race fans I would be
approximately eleven speak up so
if you're ready a house I'm
looking there I will go with
Jackie you'll on mute yourself
you can have about a minute to
tell as the bear side of the
story.
Thank you.
We're here.
We hear okay so let me check you
can get on there let's go to the
next one which is a I just have
it is MSP New Mexico state those
association.
Yourself in the.
Go ahead we'll miss.
I don't know if you could not
hear you okay many missiles
technical thank you very much
for allowing me to speak I'm the
president of the New Mexico
state police associations are
and I'm also one of the members
that it's affected by by this by
this bill and hopefully if this
bill if you guys are gracious
enough to to pass this bill I'll
be able to retire not soon but
I'll be able to retire and with
the right in the right
retirement fund as a as a
cabinet secretary said and ended
she said earlier or before it
was in
oversight that that was caught
and I didn't even know about
this to last year and that's
when we started working hard on
getting this corrected and I
would like to think that the
cabinet secretaries achieve his
chief staff everybody that's
been involved in this thing that
to make it right and Mr until
you Maestas for cosponsoring
this bill and I would urge
everybody and and and ask
everybody to could you give a do
pass so it moves on and so we
can all get corrected and be
able to retire thank you.
Thank you thank you would.
The in two D. and S. ID officers
who transitioned over to state
police who do the same job that
I did who do the same job as
every other state police officer
does every day I would reiterate
what Mr Gomez and Judy Fortin
said.
And I would ask you to please
make them whole give them what
they deserve they give the state
of New Mexico they're all every
day please give this to do best
thank you.
Thank you Sir.
Okay thank you your hand still
up.
Get on there.
I'm sorry but I just wanted to
give up.
we also have Greg Trujillo who
is listed as an expert witness
he's the director of para he's
also.
Analysts now Mr hill would you
like say a few words.
Yes good morning Mr chairman
members thank you
as the sponsor in the experts
noted we did work with the PS
throughout the interim to come
up with the cost of this
legislation of the pera board
did vote to endorse the
legislation however I must note
that legislation dating Cloete
Recreation to properly fund it
of previously the appropriation
was cut in half in will the
parable ward stands behind the
intent of this legislation we
just respectfully ask the the
change be funded and we are
working with the Senate finance
committee to try and get that
appropriation restored not
against legislation all Mr chair
but we are we are hopeful we can
get this change fully funded and
I'll be available for any
questions if needed.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Sir I will go to the committee
now and I have a I see I have
one hand raised Representative
deluxe us.
Good morning Mr chairman and
committee and Representative
thank you so much for this
legislation
I think this is wonderful I only
wish there was one more thing we
could add were so I've got a
question how many officers
during that time.
Retracted Lee from twenty
fifteen to present.
retired and didn't have this
opportunity.
Thank you Mr Chairman
representative that I says no
great question I I don't know.
If the chief knows maybe a dozen
or two about G. secretary
Johnson.
I.
Mr chair
Representative psoriasis I can
get that number but I would
imagine there were several that
have retired since then I know
and just this last year I can
speak to what I know
specifically that there's about
there were several that retired
that we need to do but on we
work on getting the number right
now.
Going to the analysis I'm
looking at the numbers as are
there in two thousand sixteen
there was a hundred and thirty
four.
And.
There it goes down to where is
today's world too quickly
because the funding there are
now ninety three so lost about
thirty some that probably did
not qualify would did not
qualify for the.
For this retirement.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative I guess the only
thing that that I I'm in full
support of of this legislation
the only reason I'm bringing
that up is maybe.
The I and I I don't know that
it's time because of the budgets
already done but it the next
round we it sure would be nice
to carry a bill that Sanchez
those individuals that served
services for the serve the state
of New Mexico between twenty
fifteen and as to the present
day that were that kind of fell
through the cracks on this
outside of that I'm so glad you
guys brought this up thank you
so much for all your service to
our to our state god bless you
thank you Mr chairman.
I have a Representative
Hernandez.
Thank you Mr chairman
this bill to me seems like a no
brainer I push for a do pass.
Thank you Sir I have a problem.
I have is thank you for who.
The last us
you have anybody else on the
board.
Anybody else no further
discussion also you know this
little thing if you people that
you know because we haven't
service magistrate judge I used
to see these most of the
gentleman in the
Right vehicles rate courtroom a
lot.
And not just when ladies and
gentleman.
And us some of them are still on
the force.
A.
So I I really.
This is happening because they
do the service think there's a
lot of thought the merger should
ever happen well over the.
Twenty or thirty year I don't
think this is a little ring and
you'll need to begin with.
Hey while being state police all
the way through because the deal
included the state were on just
about forever the state police
was doing so with that promotion
is improper second is and I just
feel so comfortable that I am
willing to say that I don't have
any objection to this motion to
apply.
No.
All.
What are you what I'm sorry I
thought we were on the main
motion sorry are we on the house
yes we are.
And I'm saying that I don't have
any objection to this motion all
okay thank you so as you're
comfortable enough to say that
the.
There's no objection to this
motion show all bridges all
members present voting in the
affirmative.
Representative Maestas you.
Thank you for your leadership Mr
chairman and even though we're
still going to school chairman
retired he better not retire as
a result of this bill thank you
Mr.
What we have here.
Thank you very much.
Thank you everybody.
Sorry Mr chair that's what
happens when you go back and
forth I'm hearing.
Thank you that's okay I
understand that I have in the
house memorial to relieve the.
Representative Garcia are you
I'm presenting the house
memorial for.
No Sir we have Representative
Dow.
Okay.
Representative Dow it is with us
so Representative Dow will
present the memorial
Williams near here.
I see this year's.
Thank you Mr chairman I'm at I
like the in the hot seat in this
committee and I seem to do do
all right in here and this this
bill is it's a mobile I'm sorry
this is a memorial many of you
have been following and and even
signing on to the bill that
asked that asked we raise costs
for providers who provide
services for most on will
populations that their rate is
increased by the state to cover
those new costs.
And in this bill did make it to
appropriations thank you for
your two passed from this
committee and in that
appropriations committee there
is a lot of discussion about you
know you for bringing this we
know that it's a problem we need
to address this problem and
maybe it's something that we
should study in the interim so
here is the memorial that asked
that it be studied in the
interim so that we can come up
with the actual costs and where
we're at on reimbursement rates
in connection to the new costs
that providers are to pay I do
have an expert witness as well.
Meghan with the home health and
hospice is here if we can move
fishing writer Hannah remove
ran.
And.
She's now okay Meggin Lorino
okay and should be able to
answer any questions but the
biggest issue is that these are
providers that contract with the
state or providing services for
our most vulnerable populations
and they are they are paid a
fixed rate by the state and
cannot charge the difference to
cover costs that exceed the
reimbursement rate so we really
need to study and get it right
and this one just addresses
minimum wage but will have the
same you know discussion with if
the sick pay bill passes as
well.
So with that let's Meghan at
anything she'd like before you
go to questions.
Thank you thank you Mr chair
members the committee thank you
all the for all that you do to
represent the interests of New
Mexicans and for taking the time
today to hear this memorial and
arses ciation truly appreciate
everything Representative Dow
has done to recognize this need
I'm really quickly I just to
want to talk a little bit about
personal care services those are
non of medical
Services that include that
support activities of daily
living and and instrumental
activities of daily living such
as bathing eating dressing
toileting laundry light
housework meal preparation and
those are covered through the
community benefit for those
folks that are twenty one and
older and have full Medicaid and
meet a nursing facility level of
care but it is also a service
for individuals twenty one and
under either through the apps
that program through Medicaid or
those with at intellectual
developmental disability for the
Representative at the child with
individuals with intellectual
and developmental disability for
respite services for their
families I'm for today's
purposes I'm only going to be
speaking about that community
benefit for twenty one and older
because they have seen some but
not enough for eight those other
services have not received any
recognition of the increasing
minimum wage personal care
services are important because
we know study showed ninety
percent of people sixty five and
older would prefer to receive
care in their home for as long
as possible if we learned
anything from this pandemic we
know that home is the safest and
most preferred care setting and
probably most important to the
New Mexico budget is that it
saves taxpayer dollars at Kaiser
family foundation found that the
average cost for nursing
facilities level of care nursing
facility care was about seventy
one thousand dollars a year and
PCS Services it's about eleven
thousand dollars a year so while
you want to increase that cost a
little bit it there are still
significant savings I also want
to applaud the state and and and
your work and and the work of
the department of health and
Human Services because in New
Mexico we have what's called pre
balance we've gotten increase
the number of people receiving
these community benefits and
decrease the number of people
and nursing facilities over the
last decade and are.
Are really our leader there.
But in the last twenty years so
when this program started in
nineteen ninety nine there was a
reimbursement rate of eighteen
dollars an hour and that
reimbursement rate has only gone
down which is surprising to
everybody including our
providers I'm as I've indicated
we have seen a little bit of
recognition of that minimum wage
increases both and twenty twenty
at the end of this year but it
might surprise you to know that
the lowest reimbursement rate in
New Mexico is an Los crucis
right now they're they're
getting about thirteen dollars
and eighty cents an hour for
that for that personal care
service and in Santa Fe they are
just getting fourteen dollars
and thirty two cents an hour our
own informal right survey shows
us that to provide care in Santa
Fe cost about eighteen dollars
and seventy nine cents an hour
so every time they're providing
care in Santa Fe they're losing
money any time they're providing
care in Los crucis they're
losing money and anytime they're
providing care Albuquerque based
on our right survey at least
they're losing money so most of
the providers in these more
metro areas they only they exist
they are but there's providing
services across the state also
in non metro areas and with the
way the state has sort of
recognized minimum wage
increases while they're still a
little bit of a margin there
that margin it's very much add
contracted constricted and makes
it even harder for for us to
have those.
Agencies and providers
everywhere that we need them and
so we're really worried that in
the years to come that this
service will not be available
because there will not be
providers there.
I'm just a little bit more
background our neighboring
states of Arizona they give a
reimbursement rate least as of
two thousand nineteen there
reimbursement rate for PCS
services was twenty four seventy
two the reimbursement rate in
Colorado was eighteen dollars
and forty four cents we're far
away from that
nationwide the average
reimbursement rate for personal
care services is eighteen
dollars and sixty nine cents and
at the meeting and reimbursement
rate nationwide is seventeen
eighty again are are far away
from that.
Home is the safest and most
preferred care setting but we
cannot insure access to care
while increasing the minimum
wage unless the state Medicaid
program concurrently and most
importantly proportionately
increases payment rates
proportionate increases need to
include wages and that the
indirect costs that are agencies
take on
providing a living wage we know
and we believe it is essential
to maintaining quality staff for
this challenging work but the
Medicaid reimbursement rate
limits what an agency can offer
compensation so I hope that my
comments help you understand why
we believe a rate study is
critical and I thank you for
your time and stand for
questions.
Thank you Mr chairman will stand
for questions.
Your muted Sir.
Still needed.
Thank you.
As I
understand.
Consensus.
I was seldom finds if you want.
Say a few words thank you Mr
chairman our funds on the
registered lobbyists for the New
Mexico caregivers coalition
coalition represents the
personal care attendants who are
the workers who provide the
services that mystery know it's
just describing under the
Medicaid personal care services
benefit.
We support efforts to insure
that the amount the state pays
for important services like
personal care are adequate and
therefore we stand in support of
this memorial however we do have
concerns about the lack of
worker representation on the
task force as laid out in the
memorial we believe that when
issues relating to workers
compensation are on the table
workers should be at the table
when those things are discussed
and therefore we respectfully
request that the executive
director of the caregivers
coalition be added to the list
of names participants in the
memorial participants in the
task force that can be very
easily done by simply adding a
one line new subsection a new
after subsection on line believe
it's page four of the memorial
and re lettering the subsequent
sections so the very simple
amendment Representative Dow and
I did have an extensive exchange
of phone calls and text and
email yesterday about this and I
hope she will be amenable to
making this change to ensure
that workers are represented in
these discussions thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you Stacy Johnson Davis.
Hi good morning good morning Mr
chair members of the committee
my name is Stacy Johnson Davis
and I'm the vice president of
business development and
government affairs with HB
specialists we'd like to thank
the sponsor for introducing
house memorial twenty seven I'm
speaking and stop excuse me
strong support of house memorial
twenty seven HB is currently
contracted as a durable medical
equipment company with the state
of New Mexico three New Mexico
Medicaid and centennial Care we
surface New Mexico state
hospitals with liquid oxygen and
patience throughout the entire
state of New Mexico with a
multitude of items such as beds
oxygen wound care supplies and
other equipment that helps keep
patients in their homes safely
HM is reimbursed based on set
contracts and fee schedules with
Medicare Medicaid centennial
Care in commercial health plans
we're not able we are not simply
able to increase our
reimbursement rates to offset an
increase in cost of doing
business while many industries
such as retail stores are
grocery stores are able to pass
the increased cost of doing
business as would occur with an
increase in the minimum wage by
passing those costs onto the
consumer HB is not able to do
that this task force will serve
as a vital role in making
recommendations to the
legislator as legislation is
considered that affect all state
contractors serving our most
vulnerable populations we stand
in support of house memorial
twenty seven and I thank you for
your time.
Your muted Sir.
It
Jason Espinoza
On chairman members of the
committee Jason Espinoza
registered lobbyists at the New
Mexico child first network.
And we stand in support of the
the memorial and we stood in
support of the legislation
passed years as well we
recognized especially I'll speak
on the the childcare side the
importance of really increasing
this child care child care
assistance payments in order to
increase access to those
critical services and one thing
that I'll just note to I mean I
think in terms of support of the
workers the workers really did
get the benefit and you know
there are statutory increases in
the minimum wage and really what
this task force my understanding
is looking at is how can the
states and how can the providers
come together to make sure there
are adequate reimbursement rates
both on the childcare and as
well as the personal care
provider side
to ensure that those costs are
covered thank you stand in
support.
Sir you're muted.
Okay.
Cells.
I see that I have a couple has
reached an all star
Representative Garcia.
Thank you Mr chair we're gonna
have the nickname you and will.
It means that that that that
that who cannot speak.
Thank you Mr chairman
you know Mr chairman and members
of the committee
This issue first came to my
attention when we were running
house bill thirty one which was
a bill that I sponsored
to increase the state minimum
wage the cap that twelve dollars
an hour and what we were
debating this piece of
legislation on the house floor
in twenty nineteen
Representative Dow got up
address this issue.
Very eloquently.
And
and suggested an amendment.
And without hesitation I accept
that the amendment.
Because there is merit theme
chairman to this issue in that
We don't have a mechanism in
place.
To automatically compensate
these child care providers these
personal care service providers
when we make increases in the
minimum wage so there's a
disparity there.
And this happens to all state
contractors in this case these
two for state contractors in
providing much needed services
to our children and to our adult
population and and I really like
this memorial because it.
Mr chairman it kind of
establishes a criteria in which
this parity rate task force will
focus on.
And
and establishes also the
qualifying members up to the
task force and so yes this has
been an issue I bought co
sponsored the legislation that
Representative Dow has brought
the the last two years including
the one that she brought forth
this year and I'll continue to
be supportive of this measure
until we kind of finding the.
Come to a really compromising
understanding in terms of how we
move this issue forward in in
the most equitable way so thank
you Mr chair thank you
Representative Dow.
Representative tell us.
Mr chair representative I think
our.
Representative Garcia stole the
thunder As right so I just want
to move to do yes.
Well promotions improper second
one question most of these
people Representative that we're
talking about are not paid on an
hourly wage and they don't have
a.
The taxes withheld from their
paychecks they're pretty much
based on a ten ninety nines of
the speaker Mike correct.
Mr Chairman that is not the case
for most of these I guess maybe
Meghan knows of someone she
could speak to that but I'm not
familiar with that case most are
paid an hourly wage and we send
the state reimburses them an
hourly reimbursement rate as
well.
That that that's correct that's
correct Representative Dow at Mr
Chairman many of most of these
employees are are hired through
an agency and that just about
agency assumes of course the
cost of minimum wage and and
I've been told now our most of
our agencies pay above minimum
wage I'd also include spike as
social security unemployment
workers comp gross receipts tax
there's required background
check required TV tasks required
hepatitis B. vaccinations there
is required to provision there's
minimum training requirements
and some agencies of course try
to offer benefits and they have
operating expenses unfunded
mandates travel pay there's a
lot of money there's a lot of
different expenses above and
beyond just that hourly rate
wage that goes into that
reimbursement rate.
Mr chairman I would just add I'm
looking at these the contractors
that are included in this and
because their their hours are
set by the employer I do believe
that they have to be an hourly
employee there may be an
exception maybe at some of the
the waiver maybe family
caregivers or perhaps maybe with
parents who are caring for med
medically fragile children but
for if that would be an
exception the rule would be that
these would be an hourly
employees.
Thank you.
Thank you at this time I have a
proper motion proper second and
do I have any opposition to that
motion.
Madam secretary show all members
present voting in the
affirmative you and we can go on
with life.
Thank you thank thank you again
for those lower hounded to
Judiciary so I'm not finished
for today if not for a long
time.
Everybody else on.
Thank you.
But Sir.
What we think to myself all the
time and this is the only reason
I thought to myself is yes
sometimes I think the on the
only one who can understand what
I'm saying well we are Mr
Chairman representative Garcia
can get away with calling you
will I'm still to news to stuff
like that.
Coming soon though and
everything else to.
Well than the LCS on the floor
take care.
Well I'm HB twenty and
Judiciary.
Paid sick leave thank you wishes
well readers.
I'm it was on the floor in the
Senate banking Judiciary
consideration right now Senate
judiciary and it's getting
clobbered Phil.
Well thank you.
