like to ask when you
And uh try not to repeat
yourselves and um.
We begin with HRR3.
Representative
present.
Here, here.
OK
Hong Kong.
here.
Here, here,
Madam
President.
Madam.
Here,
here.
We have um.
Ferrari.
of committee members,
um.
The substantial right to clean,
safe and healthy environment.
The greenendment also includes
an explicit obligation
to protect natural resources and
the right is protected by an
explicit mention and
by reality.
Environment and therefore
protected environmental rights.
here.
Land,
and ecosystem is so
important that we do.
I'd like to introduce other um
sponsors may make it quick.
Madam Adam,
the amendment is a
transformative opportunity for
New Mexico
is not prior
priority.
Thanks.
Oh.
and
they're calling
off
and
they're calling them
lot of
lot of seconds.
This it's not working.
Yeah,
I'm gonna start I'm sure the
green transform opportunity for
environment right.
Yeah,
I'm gonna start I'm sure the
green transform opportunity for
environment.
right.
As awin development.
the environmental costs.
and
our landscapes, water, and
the population benefits. The
Greenendment seeks to change
this by clean air in.
This is not merely symbolic.
It's a practical economic
development in
in hand with environmental
stewardship.
The
amendments
New Mexicans.
and our environment.
Clean energy project supported
by the Amendment
innovation and reduce dependence
on industries that our natural
resources. More importantly, we
will demonstrate the economic
environmental integrity
are not exclusive mutually
reinforcing.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, um, my name is State
Representative Joseph Franklin
Hernandez.
And my support for uh the, the
Green Amendment did not start
today.
As a child growing up.
Uh, my late father, Joseph
Eugene Hernandez took me, my
brother to sweat lodge ceremony
in the mountains of the Wahatoya
in southern Colorado, near the
Sacred melo of just not immy.
We, we learned a lot about how
important it is to have respect
for Mother Earth and continue to
do everything we can to ensure
that we're
Protecting her and, and doing
what we can to
Help our community and, and, and
it's things like that, that uh
as I continued as a community
organizer, I, I first got notice
of this when a local farmer came
to a community meeting and spoke
about how joint resolution 3,
and it really uh uh meant a lot
to me and that's why I'm
standing here in support of it.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you Madam Chair. Good
morning. Members of the
committee. I am Patricia Royal
Caballero, State Representative,
House District 13.
The Green Amendment's purpose
adds protections, particularly
for low-income communities and
neighborhoods which have
traditionally been the sites.
Or as some refer to the dumping
ground for pollutive industries.
So long as we lack the necessary
guard rails like the Green
amendment.
inhabitants of our state remain
at risk.
And we will continue seeing
healthy declines in of our
children.
Wildfires rage.
Flash flood floods inundate
rural areas and see the overall
decline of otherwise healthy
communities. I urged the members
of this committee to vote yes
today. Thank you.
Madam Chair, we have um two
experts on online.
Which it doesn't seem you have
the web.
Um, Cliff Villa and Senator um
Mu.
Katy mute
And also while you're getting
them on, I'll go ahead and ask,
did you want to? Yes, I'd like
to ask our other expert Maya Van
Rossen.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name's Maya Van Rossum. I'm an
environmental attorney and
advocate, and I'm leader of the
organization called Green
Amendments for the Generations.
That's been working nationwide
to help communities understand
and secure constitutional
recognition of their
environmental rights.
I published published numerous
books and articles and presented
as an expert nationwide on the
value and importance of
constitutional recognition of
environmental rights.
Madam Chair and Representatives,
HR 3 will enhance environmental
protection here in New Mexico by
ensuring that every arm of
government at the state, the
municipal, and the county level
are embracing environmental
rights protection as part of
their day to day work, creating
the greatest opportunity to
identify environmental concerns
earlier in the process when the
opportunities to remedy and
avoid harmful environmental
impacts are more accessible and
tend to be more cost effective.
If the courts become involved,
it will not be to displace the
legislative or executive
branches of government. The the
role of the courts will be to
determine if the government
action at issue meets
constitutional muster and leave
it to the other branches of
government to remedy any
constitutional deficiencies that
have been identified.
HJR3 will strengthen the
development interpretation and
application of existing
environmental laws that already
exist in the state. It will
allow government to address new
and emerging contaminants and
and technologies while essential
legal protections are being
developed, and it will provide a
meaningful opportunity for
impacted communities to engage
in the decisions that affect
their environmental rights and
to secure a remedy in situations
where the laws as written or
applied failed to provide
essential environmental and.
protections.
By creating a substantive right
of the people to a healthy
environment and a safe climate,
creating a duty on government to
protect natural resources of the
state generationally and because
addressing climate change is a
compelling state interest. HJR-3
will strengthen the obligation
and the ability of government to
address climate change,
including by advancing clean
energy in the state and to
defend these actions and
decisions in court if needed,
regardless of the legal theory
that's being used to challenge
them.
We have to acknowledge that
clean energy projects are
already being challenged under a
wide variety of legal theories,
but with the passage of HJR3 as
long as government fulfills
their duty to fully assess and
minimize environmental impacts,
government and proponents of
clean energy projects will be
better prepared to avoid and
defend against community
concerns.
And just in conclusion, I'd just
like to let you know that if New
Mexico passes HJR3, it will be
the 4th state in the nation to
recognize and protect the
inalienable human rights of all
people to a clean, safe, and
healthy environment, including a
safe climate and to protect
these rights on par with our
other cherished freedoms like
speech and property rights.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representatives.
Um,
Thank you, Madam Chair. I
apologize for being late.
There's a lot of traffic out of
Albuquerque. Um, I just, I don't
know what's been said, but I'm
sure a lot has been said. I just
want to make the point that now
um with our federal government
dismantling so many
environmental protections. This
is crucial so that we can
protect, protect our beautiful.
But environmentally fragile
state. So I urge you to, to vote
yes on this really important way
for our state to preserve its
sovereignty with regard to our
clean air, land, and water.
Thank you.
You. Now we will go to the
audience, madam.
OK.
Yeah
Do that.
New Year's clip.
Uh, good morning. Can you hear
me OK? Yeah, we hear you.
All right, thank you. Good
morning and thank you, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Clifford
Villa. I'm a tenured professor
at the University of New Mexico
School of Law, where I teach and
write in the areas of
environmental law and
constitutional rights. Outside
of academia, I have served in
government for more than 30
years. Most recently as an
appointee of the Biden
administration in Washington DC.
I wish I could join you all in
person this morning, but I'm
still in the DC area today,
preparing to move back to New
Mexico at the end of this month.
I was born and raised
in New Mexico, where I fell in
love with the mountains and mess
and learned to swim and fish in
places like Navajo Lake in the
northwest corner of the state.
When I take my kids back to
Navajo Lake today, I see the
evidence of climate change, with
the big sandstone rocks where we
used to jump in the lake as
kids. Now high and dry every
year, nowhere near the water. I
see climate change in the
cataclysmic fires we've had
recently, including the Hermit's
Peak Caf Canyon fire in 2022,
and the fires that struck
southern New Mexico just last
year.
I've also seen firsthand the
impacts of environmental
contamination in my beautiful
home state. I have seen and
dedicated personal efforts to
addressing the impacts of
uranium contamination. On the
Navajo Nation and across the
Grants mining district.
I have seen the polluting
industries in Albuquerque's
South Valley, where my mother
was raised, and I have seen the
impacts of POS contamination in
places like Clovis, New Mexico,
where my father was born.
At the age of 44, my father died
of brain cancer.
And I can't help but think it
may have been linked to the POS
contamination. We know it's in
the groundwater today.
Phos per polyfluoro alpha
substances are known to be
extremely toxic, but they
weren't regulated under any
federal statute until EPA action
last year.
And sadly, those new regulations
could be in danger under the new
administration.
These are among the reasons why
the New Mexico Green Amendment,
HJR3 is so important. The New
Mexico Green Amendment does not
depend on the federal government
to protect our health and
environment. The New Mexico
Green Amendment allows New
Mexicans to protect New
Mexicans.
Through the exercise of existing
authorities across our state
government.
As a professor of constitutional
law at the UNM School of Law. I
want the future lawyers and
leaders of our state to
understand the power of the US
Constitution and also its
limitations.
As interpreted by the US Supreme
Court, for example, US citizens
have no right under the US
Constitution to a quality
education.
And unlike the Constitutions of
more than 150 other countries
our constitution says not one
word about environmental
protection.
This is why states are needed to
fill the gap.
Many states, including New
Mexico, already have some
mention of environmental values
in their state constitution.
And a handful of states,
including Montana and
Pennsylvania have established
positive rights to environmental
protections in their
constitution.
In 2021, for example, New York
amended its state constitution
to provide expressly that each
person shall have a right to
clean air and water and a
healthful environment.
The New Mexico Green amendment
will build upon existing
provisions in our state
constitution.
Article 20, section 21, added in
1971.
declares that protection of the
state's beautiful and healthful
environment is a fundamental
importance.
However, this provision focuses
only on control of pollution.
Commits implementation of this
provision to the state
legislature only and only
requires regulation so far as it
is consistent with the use and
development of natural resources
for the maximum benefit of the
people.
The Green amendment, HAR 3.
will expand upon these
protections in many significant
ways.
It recognizes, for example, a
right to healthy ecosystems to
the preservation of culture to a
safe climate and to protection
for all people, including
present and future generations.
That means protection for my own
children and yours.
And for the children and
grandchildren yet to be born.
The protections afforded by the
Green amendment are also
self-executing. That means these
protections are not dependent
upon future action by the state
legislature.
The state legislature will
continue to have an important
role in defining and ensuring
full protection of these rights.
But with passage of HJR3, so too
will the New Mexico Environment
Department and every other
agency of state government.
In some cases where
environmental rights cannot be
protected through other means,
access to judicial remedies may
also be needed.
But as a constitutional scholar
and practicing attorney for more
than 30 years. I have confidence
that our courts and judges will
ensure that their role in
advancing the rights and
responsibilities enumerated in
HDR3 are constrained and
appropriately respectful of the
roles of other branches of
government and the interests of
all concerned parties.
I thank the chair and committee
members for their time and
consideration. I would be happy
to answer any questions. Thank
you.
Next, uh.
Witness
Senator Muth is not on.
Oh
She is Senator Katie Muth from
Pennsylvania and she's trying to
get on. Do we come back to her
and
It will do that. We'll, we'll
let her make a statement when
she gets back. That's all right.
Thank you. Let's go ahead and
move along to
The audience for supporting
comments, please take one minute
and we will allow a total of 15
minutes for the pod supporting
comments, we may have people
outside and on Zoom. So please
begin, we'll begin with you.
So, um,
My name is Michael Dolcher and I
thank you for allowing me to
speak here today.
As an educator for 23+ years.
It's been my job to prepare
students for a bright future.
And as the years have gone by,
I've looked into their eyes and
I have felt more and more like a
liar to them because I'm not
sure they have one, and I don't
think they're sure they have one
either.
And it's a shame and a crime
that we're breaking a promise to
them.
I was here last Friday and this
meeting didn't happen because it
was filibustered by a member of
the minority party. I happened
to look up the donors to this
individual.
Conico Chevron, Permian energy
and other petroleum companies.
These companies operate like
psychopaths in the world. The
only thing that.
Of course.
And they manipulate our
government against the will of
the people.
There only issue is the bottom
line of greed. We have to do
better because what good is
money if we poison our children
and what good is having jobs
when people live in a toxic
environment, please support the
Green Amendment.
Good day, Madam Chair and
Representatives. I'm Linda
Starr, a resident of Albuquerque
for over 52 years and a member
of Indivisible Albuquerque. I am
speaking indefinite support of
HJR 3, the Environmental Rights
Act. We cannot burn a bridge to
environmental security and must
respect the health, welfare, and
sanity of future and present
generations. We need to defend
our water, protect stream.
from Harville chemicals and
severe danger of pollution
projects.
Animal populations are declining
from lost habitat and pollution.
We should hold polluting
industries 100% accountable for
cleaning up their messes.
Respect for plants and animals
is vital. These are part of our
humanity since we eat and absorb
their products, PayPals should
be eliminated.
Thank you. Power to the people.
Power to the people right now.
Ladies and gentlemen, please
keep your comments positive and
respectful, or we will not
continue supporting comments.
Thank you.
Thank you. Good morning. My name
is Mariel Lanai. I am the
executive director of New Energy
Economy.
Why does the Green amendment
matter today more than ever?
Legislative environmentalism has
failed communities in New Mexico
from, this is according to the
oil conservation divisions
incident and spill database from
January 1st, 2010 to October 15,
2024.
There were 16,000 oil and gas
fluid related spill incidents,
10,000 oil and gas produced
water spill incidents, 19,000
spills of separate oil and gas
fluids. 4,789,000 barrels of
spilled fluids, losing over 1.7
million barrels, losing means it
goes
to our water and it goes into
the ground.
187 spills.
Thank you. Please press the,
this memorial.
Madam Chair, committee members,
my name is Carlos Mautes. I'm
with Green Latinos. We are a
national organization that
represents over 1400 grassroots
organizations and private
citizens. We urge you to pass.
HJR 3.
This green amendment is about
the people of New Mexico. That's
something that folks who are
opposing this legislation seem
to forget.
That we are the people.
Of New Mexico.
We need protection.
From the environmental
degradation that is happening
currently and that will
accelerate. We need to protect
our people, our families, our
children, our elders.
are at risk. That is what this
Green amendment is for. Thank
you very much. We do urge you to
support this HDR 3.
My name is Jim Eagle. I'm from
Santa Fe, and I'm a member of
350 Santa Fe with 300 members,
and I'm here to speak in favor
of HJ 3.
There's no good reason for
opposing the Green amendment
based on false claims that it
would slow down clean energy
development. Rather, the green
amendment supports and
encourages good quality,
renewable energy projects.
In the three green amendment
states, there have been no
instances of Green Amendment
language being used to stop.
Clean projects.
And there have been no Green
Amendment cases which have been
thrown out as frivolous.
Finally, and very important to
me, the Green Amendment language
does not replace existing
environmental laws and rules.
Rather, it provides an important
backstop for our existing
environmental protection system.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Tyham. Um, good
morning, everybody. My name is
Nancy O'Connor. I'm a mother,
grandmother, and retired
educator, um, and I'm deeply
concerned about the legacy, the
environmental legacy, we're
leaving our children.
Uh
Unwraps during the last week
have shown the urgency of
establishing guard rails against
the abuse of power. The Green
Amendment would provide the
people of New Mexico, another
avenue for protecting our
beautiful environment.
Thank you very much.
My name is Margaret Eagle.
We've shot past 1.5 °C and
there's no return.
We we today to reject the Green
amendment, we'd be placing our
hopes in a fictional technology
to bring this temperature back
down. We're heading to 3.
The non-linear nature of the
climate crisis means 3 times
warming is not just double.
We'd be willing to inflict
deliberate harm and gamble with
lives, for we won't live to see
the victims. They belonged to a
later generation.
Such hesitation fails to see
that climate catastrophe will
bite into the growth rate. Only
those cocooned in a virtual
reality of money sign can
imagine that living standards
will be unaffected by lost
harvest, inundated lands,
blasting storms, summers too hot
to permit work outdoors. The
material conditions of any kind
of economy will be stripped away
one after the other. Today's
hearing is a matter of
intergenerational justice. If we
postpone it.
Again, more COT CO2 will be
emitted than if the cuts have
been sharp, the temperatures
will rise higher and faster, and
it's an intergenerational buck
passing that has now become
explicit re relying on removal
technologies that exist in our
minds only with zero proven
efficiency. If you fail to pass
the green amendment.
Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair, and
the other representatives. My
name is Consuelo Ochoa de
Walker. I am a bilingual teacher
retired and also retired from
working with USAID that works
overseas.
Uh
My husband and I worked on the
environmental programs for
Africa, especially.
We know very well what it takes
to protect.
A state, its land, air.
And water.
Unfortunately, these 3 items
have been very polluted in our
state.
I urge you to protect and pass
our land, our air and water and
our beautiful state.
I er you also to learn more
about what it takes. I support
very much what that wonderful
teacher of law of UNM spoke this
morning.
And I urge you to pass it. I
represent the Presbyterian
Church at the national level
state and local and the.
Sierralo, thank you.
Morning, Madam Chair and members
of the committee. Uh, my name is
Jacqueline Walsh. I'm also
representing the Sierra Club Rio
Grande chapter in our 35,000
members and supporters. Um,
It is the duty of the
legislative body to establish
this framework for addressing
pollution in order to protect
our air, land, water, and our
people. Citizens should have the
right to these fundamental
supporters of life.
And they should have the right
to take action when the federal
or state governments
systemically fails to apply the
rules in the form of citizen
suits. Such suits are a tool
that the Sierra Club has used to
protect human health and
environment successfully, um,
and we implore you to vote yes
and protect the rights of New
Mexicans to a safe, healthy, and
thriving environment as a young
person myself, I don't just
implore you to vote yes. I beg
you. Thank you.
Madam Chair, member of the
committee, my name is Shelley
Manlev. I'm the executive
director of Healthy Climate New
Mexico, 250 healthcare and
public health professionals, we
stand in support. Thank you.
have anyone outside.
In the hallway.
Madam Chair
While he's checking on that?
Um, Senator Muth is now online,
if you'd like to hear her.
OK, we're gonna hear a few
comments and support on Zoom.
And then we'll go back to your
um
Expert witness.
So let's take about 3 Zoom
comments. Can you hear us?
Hello
Hi.
Madam Sharon Representatives. My
name is David Steele. I
represent the 180 members of the
Unitarian Universalist Church of
Las Cruces.
who have voted in support of the
New Mexico Environmental Rights
Initiative, a pillar of our
faith is a belief in the
inherent worth and dignity of
all persons. Another pillar is a
belief in the interdependent web
of all existence. The climate
crisis and assaults to our air,
water, and soil created by
pollution affects all of us, but
disproportionately affects
economically marginal
communities. The rights afforded
a green amendment provides all
people and those who do the
people's work, a mandate and the
tools to protect the people and
promote the health of our
planet. I urge you to support
this initiative. Thank you.
But
OK.
OK, Judy, can you hear us?
Yes
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
Judy Messels speaking on behalf
of Lutheran advocacy ministry in
New Mexico and the New Mexico
conference of Churches. We
strongly support HJR 3 for many
of the reasons already expressed
this morning. Thank you.
OK, Glenn, can you hear us?
Yes, I can. I'm Glenn Griffin
from Silver City, and I
represent the Grant County
Democratic Party with 7000
registered members. We support
the Green amendment and ask that
this committee support and pass
forward the Green amendment
today. The Green amendment has
never slowed down any clean
energy renewable projects. No
solar companies have had a
project denied to the Green
amendment.
It is shameful and preventable
loss that the New Mexico
Environment departments endless
discharge permits have have
allowed pollution, such as in
our Holloman Air Forces bases
world record setting PFAS
contamination.
It is because of these facts
that the Grant County Democratic
Party supports the Green
amendment and asks you to allow
the people of New Mexico to vote
on this constitutional amendment
to finally protect our water and
air into the future. Thank you.
Thank you. Now we will go back
to our expert witness online.
Senator Mu, can you hear us?
Yes, I can. Can you hear me OK?
Yes, we can.
OK.
Um, should I start?
Please. OK. Thank you very much,
um, members of the committee,
Madam Chair, um, and the public
whoever's listening, um, I was
asked to speak today about
Pennsylvania, um, and the Green
amendment that we've had in our
Constitution for several decades
now, and its impact and I want
to be clear that this um
amendment is incredibly helpful.
It allows for, um, allows for
residents to have a leg to stand
on and a legal standing
perspective in terms of being
able to protect their right
under our Constitution.
To clean air, clean water, and
clean soil, not just now but for
generations to come, and I think
there's some similarities um
between our two states, um,
relative to lay pollution issues
and how this um protection in
our state constitution has
helped protect people's drinking
water has helped ensure justice
for those who've already had
their drinking water
contaminated and also um making
sure that air permits and things
are actually protective versus
just helpful for corporations.
Um, I
know that there's some concerns
of that was mentioned to me
about um limiting permitting or
industry or business, um, and
economic growth, and I think
that's a complete fallacy in
Pennsylvania is a great place to
point to because despite this
green amendment being very
helpful, um, it does require,
uh, a lot of dollars to hire
counsel and legal
representation, um, to fight
some of these permits, uh,
specifically in Pennsylvania for
oil and gas and other fossil
fuel projects, so
Um, there's often legal battles
between companies and residents,
but they're always uh worked out
and there's still, we are still
the #2 gas producing state in
the nation. So, um, it's
certainly just one more leg for
residents of the consumer
protection thing, really, if you
think about it, um, and I, I
hope that more seats adopt it,
and I think that there's a way
to keep uh residents safe, to
preserve our natural resources
and let's be frank, not one of
us can live without clean
drinking water and
including uh CEOs of fossil fuel
companies. So we all need that.
We need clean air to breathe as
well and clean soil to grow our
food. So, um, it certainly has
helped, uh, ensure that some of
the regulations that do pass
around, um, extraction and
energy development are are
keeping residents safe and
minimizing harm, and so I want
to say thank you for the
committee for bringing this up.
Um, I can't think of a more
critical time for you to pass
this this resolution, um,
especially as the bulk
Of the moral and regulatory
responsibilities are now being
passed down from the federal
government to our states. So you
have an amazing opportunity to
protect your residents, and I
hope you do so by voting yes for
this resolution. Thank you.
Thank you. Let's go back to 2
more comments on Zoom.
And support and then we'll move
on to opposition.
Whoever's next.
Hi, Wildlife for All, can you
hear us?
Yes, hello. Thank you, Madam
Chair and committee members. I
am Dr. Michelle Lute, executive
director of Wildlife for All. On
behalf of our nearly 9000
supporters across New Mexico. I
thank you for your time and
allowing me to express our
strong support for the New
Mexico Green Amendment. Wildlife
for All's mission aligns closely
with the vision of the New
Mexico Green Amendment, which
will ensure proactive
environmental protection and
justice across our state. The
twin crises of mass extinction
and climate change demand urgent
systemic action, and the Green
Amendment.
offers a critical framework for
addressing these challenges. As
an organization rooted in
protecting wildlife and wild
places in our state. We also
recognize how closely human and
environmental health are
interconnected. Healthy
ecosystems are essential for
maintaining biodiversity, clean
water, and air quality. The
Green Amendment strengthens
these protections by filling
critical legal gaps in ensuring
the preservation of our natural
heritage by pacing this
amendment on the ballot, we
empower New Mexicans to decide
whether their constitutional
rights should include the
fundamental.
right to a clean and healthy
environment. Please vote yes on
HJR3. Thank you so much.
You next.
Bob Scott, 3rd act and M. Can
you hear us? Yes, can you hear
me? Yep. Thank you, um, Madam
Chair, um, members of the
committee. My name is Bob Scott.
I'm a member and co-facilitator
of Third A New Mexico, a
committed group of New Mexican
elders 60 years and older, um,
committed to protect our
democracy and fight climate
change. We stand in support of
HGR 3 for all the reasons, um,
stated previously and probably
all the reasons that you're
going to hear going forward, and
we
ask that um
You vote yes and pass it out of
committee. There is no time to
waste on this issue. Thank you
very much.
Thank you. Now, let's go back to
the audience for comments and
opposition to HJR3, please raise
your hands.
And then, uh, we'll need to
probably let them know outside.
So let's go ahead and begin one
minute, please.
Madam Chair, committee members,
my name is Tom Patterson. I'm
the president-elect of the New
Mexico Cattle Growers
Association.
For 40, close to 40 years, I was
a commercial trial lawyer
handling complex commercial.
Plaintiff in defense cases
across the country.
Cattle growers opposes HDR 3.
Based on that experience, the
resolution is a welcome mat for
lawsuits. In essence, anyone who
opposes a development and loses
before the legislature or a
county commission or a city
council would be able to go to
the courts for a second bite
with the cause of action based
on our Constitution, and that is
a corruption of our political
system regardless of whether
their successful in the courts,
the state, the counties, and our
municipalities.
We pay to defend themselves,
their budgets should be used for
more productive things than
paying lawyers. If our children
are going to stay in New Mexico,
they need jobs. This resolution
threatens that prospect. We urge
you to vote no.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, John Lipschitz
with uh New Mexico Federation of
Labor AFL-CIO. We very much
think the sponsors for bringing
this issue forward and the
intent that they are looking to
accomplish with this issue.
Unfortunately, we have uh
relayed some concerns about the
current language in the bill
that was just brought up by the
previous speaker and for those
reasons, we are unable to
support it.
this time. Thank you.
Hi, uh, Madam Chair, members of
the committee. My name is Varner
Simon. I'm the director of
government affairs for Pattern
Energy, uh, working across the
Western United States. Um,
regretfully, like the Federation
of Labor, we're standing in
opposition to the bill today. We
agree with the goals and
targets, um, are entire work is
decarbonization. We're currently
constructing the largest
renewable energy project in the
Western Hemisphere here in New
Mexico, as someone who works in
carbon policy across the Western
United States.
80% of the West has a
decarbonization, a zero carbon
electric grid goal by 2040 to
2050. We simply cannot hit that
target without New Mexico
resources. Um, we are very
concerned based on our
experience, our lived experience
as a developer here in the West,
documented recently in this book
about our experience of having a
wind farm killed by litigation
in Montana. Um, it's referenced
in our written testimony as well
as the high country news.
review of the book, uh, we're
very concerned about the
litigation. Thank you.
Uh, thank you, chair, members of
the committee. My name is Alison
Riley. I'm the director of
public policy for the Mexico
Chamber of Commerce.
The Chamber of Commerce stands
in opposition to this
legislation, and what we all do
share the goal of protecting New
Mexico's natural resources and
the environment, the language
and the current bill is
open-ended and undefined, with
terms like safe climate and
healthful qualities of the
environment when standards like
this are undefined, businesses,
developers, and even local
government can face costly
lawsuits, creating uncertainty
for sectors all over the state,
tourism, agriculture, and
construction.
Without clear regulatory
guidelines, essential projects
that everyone here wants to see
broadband expansion, renewable
energy construction and housing
construction could be delayed or
blocked entirely due to legal
challenges. New Mexico already
has strong
Environmental laws that we
should keep.
That we should keep in place and
should keep enforcing. So rather
than enshrining vague and
sweeping language into the
Constitution.
It
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, my name is Brent
Moore, I'm a registered lobbyist
for the New Mexico Association
of Realtors and the realtors are
opposed to House Joint
Resolution 3, and the opposition
comes from, uh, it's based on
our concern that this
resolution, if passed, will have
a negative impact on building,
construction for housing and
also have a negative impact on
economic development. I think
one of the things that is lost
In this debate is the fact that
the state has existing
environmental laws. We have the
water quality act. We have the
Air Quality Control Act, the
hazardous Waste Act, the Solid
Waste Act, those are robust
regulatory programs that are
implemented by the Environment
Department, HDR3 allows folks to
take a, take a turn, go to the
courts, file lawsuits, and will
negatively impede the
development of
housing and other economic
development activities.
Time.
You.
Uh, good morning, Madam Chair
and members of the committee. My
name is Deborah Condit and I'm a
registered lobbyist for inner
wrist Energy Alliance. Interest
is a renewable trade association
representing 40 of the world's
largest wind, solar, storage,
geothermal, and transmission
companies, and we're here to
stand in strong opposition to
this bill. Inner West in the
renewable energy industry are
strong believers in the goals of
clean and healthy environments
and stable climates. We're
excited to be
a part of that future in New
Mexico, and we're investing tens
of billions of dollars here and
putting hos the New Mexicans
into work. The language in the
proposal is so broad neither
government decision makers nor
private developers can
accurately guess at what it
requires, leading to incredible
inefficiencies, uncertainty, and
the legal risk in the context of
the renewable energy
development. Businesses need
predictable, stable regulatory
environments in order to receive
finance.
and invest. We oppose this
spell. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
Committee. Kelly Fajardo, I'm
here on behalf of the Associated
General Contractors of New
Mexico and Farm Bureau.
Unfortunately, we oppose a um
this uh age, this joint
resolution.
like this will also slow down
and increase construction costs.
Construction projects might need
additional environmental assets,
permits, and mitigation measures
to avoid unnecessary violations.
These additional requirements
can increase the overall cost of
construction projects around the
state, especially in rural area.
areas. Projects could face
delays while waiting
environmental impact assets,
public consultations, and the
necessary permits, extended
timelines can lead to increased
labor and management costs, as
well as possible penalties for
delayed construction due to this
bill. The law also introduces a
more rigorous regulatory
approval, which
Undermined construction projects
and could slow down
constructions or close them down
entirely. Thank you, Madam Chair
and members of the committee.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, and
share a grownor with the Public
Service Company of New Mexico,
P&M is making great strides to
carbon-free energy as part of
our goals and requirements of
the energy transition Act, the
ATA. Today we are 72% carbon
free and will be 75% by the end
of 2026. This particular
amendment can compromise
much-needed clean energy and
renewable development projects
in New Mexico.
There are already numerous
federal, state, and local laws
and regulations already in place
that provide for the health and
safety of residents and
protection of the environment,
for these reasons PNM
respectfully opposes HGR3. Thank
you.
Morning, Madam Chair, members of
the committee, Jason Weeks,
registered lobbyist for the
Albuquerque Hispano Chamber of
Commerce.
We very much appreciate what the
sponsors are trying to
accomplish relative to this
bill. We understand that climate
change is definitely a real
thing here in New Mexico we're
perpetually trying to diversify
our economy and attract
businesses to the state. When
businesses are looking at New
Mexico, they want predictability
in terms of our regulatory
structure. This creates a legal
mechanism that would allow
basically any individual to sue
to stop development.
Businesses are going to look at
that and they're going to say,
you know what, maybe we
shouldn't locate in New Mexico.
Maybe we'll go somewhere else,
and there's a lot of the
comments have indicated that
includes green development or
renewable development. Uh, the
Hispanic Chamber speaks
principally for small
businesses, um, and small
business owners that rely on
larger businesses in the states.
We have to have those larger
anchor businesses to create
economic activity for the
smaller businesses. For those
reasons, we stand in opposition
of this bill. Thank you.
Thank you. Any further comments?
Can we check outside, please?
OK, let's go to Zoom.
Barbara Mills, can you hear us?
Yes, I can. Can you hear me?
You got one minute.
Good morning, everyone. Uh my
name is Barbara Mills. I'm just
a citizen here. I wanted to say
that I believe the Green
amendment is foundational. It is
an expression of the value of
our environment.
I don't think we need an
amendment to protect the right
to do development and to make
money. That is something that we
all understand needs to happen.
But we seem to have lost sight
that we can't live in a world
that is polluted and that
doesn't have wildlife. Uh, we
are part of wildlife.
With this amendment, we have a
chance of preserving the health
of our state and our citizens.
We need to do that. Um, I'm old.
I, I grew up in Ohio during the
60s and 70s. I remember the
Cuyahoga River catching fire in
the toxic chemical drums popping
up in the Love Canal
neighborhood. We don't want a
dust bowl here. We don't want a
love canal here. Please support
this amendment. Thank you.
Thank you, Barbara.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Jason Espinoza,
executive director with New
Mexico ADA, which is the state's
economic development
professional association. Uh, we
do stand in opposition to the
constitutional amendment. Um, we
represent economic developers
both in rural and urban
communities who are working hard
to attract investment to
diversify our economy here in
New Mexico, and we do believe
the constitutional amendment
does create.
Unpredictable, unstable
environment for that investment
and job creation, so we do stand
in opposition. Thank you.
OK back to Zoom. How many?
Do, can you hear us?
Yes, can you hear me? Yep, you
got one minute.
OK, thank you. I am patient no
doubt. I'm a chemical engineer.
I have worked for the New York
State Environment Department.
I've had a environmental group
for the last 20 years, we passed
laws to protect wildlife in New
Mexico.
This, uh, resolution has a good
part. It's section 1A where
It gives a right rather than
what currently we have, uh, says
the protection of the state's
beautiful and healthful
environment is hereby declared
to be a fundamental importance
to the public interest, health
safety, and general welfare. We
do talk about the environment
that is our semire amendment
that was passed in '71 with one
in PA pass in '71. Um, the
dangerous part about this
resolution is B and C.
Where we give jurisdiction to
counties and um municipalities.
We have 16 municipalities and 33
counties. So therefore we could
have 139 lawsuits every year,
and quite logically, none of the
other uh green amendments in
different states allow for
competing interests of, of
municipalities and counties.
OK.
Cheryl, can you hear us?
Carla, can you hear us?
Yes, thank you, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, I'm
Carlos Sontag, president and CEO
of the New Mexico Business
Coalition. We represent hundreds
of businesses and thousands of
individuals, and we are opposed
to this legislation. We
appreciate the concern, but
Mexico has many laws and
regulations currently in place
to address these issues.
I think that most of our
businesses
Voluntarily act responsibly, but
they do follow regs and laws
because they live here, they
breathe this air and they care
about the beauty and safety of
our state. The language is vague
and is gonna cause a lot of
problems for the state agencies
who've noted
That the ambiguity will cost
them a lot of money to manage.
We have received over 40,000
emails in opposition to this
legislation because these people
understand it's gonna cost jobs
and their opport opportunity to
provide for their families. We
urge you to vote no on this
legislation. Thank you.
Thank you, Carly.
Howard Ms
Yes, I can. Thank you.
My name is Howard Hutchinson. I
am the executive director for
the coalition of Arizona and New
Mexico counties.
In New Mexico, these are
primarily rural counties, uh,
natural resource dependent and
we're very cognizant of the
protection of environment.
However
We cannot afford uh the
potential for litigation that
this.
Resolution proposes. So,
For the previous
Reasons, uh, mentioned, uh, we
respectfully oppose the
resolution. Thank you.
Thank you.
Cheryl, can you hear us? Yes, oh
my goodness, I couldn't find the
unmute button a minute ago. No
worries. You got one minute.
Thank you so much. I'm my name
is Cheryl and I'm uh calling in
opposition to HJR3. We already
have a Green amendment, Article
20, section 21 of the New Mexico
Constitution, our environmental
laws are based on that, um, um,
a section of the Constitution
and what we need to do, in my
opinion, is enforce the laws
that are already on the books.
If we insert decision making by
counties and municipalities, we
are adding a
a lot of confusion. The other
states who have a Green
amendment, the state legislature
is in charge of the laws and the
lawmaking and the decision
making regarding the environment
and the natural resources. So I
oppose HJR3 and thank you so
much for this opportunity.
Thank you. OK, committee
members, representative block.
Would you like to begin first?
Madam Chair, members.
Um, I believe that this bill.
It's the same as Bill HR.
HER 4.
Back in 2023.
Yes, they did not pass. It has
changed a little bit. What did
it change?
What had changed.
Oh, Madam Chair, I'm sorry.
I'm at the end of the table, I
forgot.
Um
We changed, um.
The state shall be entitled to
say have a right.
And we also changed healthy, we
added healthy native flora,
fauna, and ecosystem, and we
removed and changed uh stable to
safe.
And self-sustaining ecosystem
for benefit of public health,
safety, and general welfare. We
changed to, and to the
preservation of the natural
cultural scenic and healthful
qualities of the environment.
And instead of saying tribal
membership status, we changed
that with advice, um, to
affiliation, tribal affiliation,
gender, socioeconomics, or
geography.
Thank you for that answer,
manager.
Represented a block.
and thank you,
uh, Senator Representative and
experts for being here today and
everybody who testified, I also
want to thank every single one
of those people. So, Madam Chair
Representative, a few questions
here. I think some of them were
brought up and I would just love
some clarity on this. So, number
one, Madam Chair.
The, the introduction of
counties and municipalities into
the trustee role, Madam Chair
Representative, I'm wondering,
is this
Newer to this legislation or is
this always been in there, Madam
Chair, representative.
Mm
Yeah, it, go ahead, um, so.
Madam Chair, Representative, um,
originally the the original
version of the Green Amendment,
um, referenced the state and
like other state green
amendments, the other three
states that have a Green
amendment that includes all
levels of government,
municipality, and county. It
actually is not correct to say
that Pennsylvania, Montana, and
New York only applies to the
state legislature. It actually
does apply to all levels of
government, but the addition of
that specific language was made
to offer clarity.
that the Asseia Associations
were not, um, were not included
in this obligation that it
applies to municipalities,
counties in the states.
Like only.
OK, thank you, Madam chair.
Thank you for that, uh,
clarification.
Madam Chair Representative, OK,
so my next question, so what
about land grants or land grants
included in this at all, I'm
sure.
No, Madam Chair, no, they're
not.
OK.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. So, OK, I did
see that and I, I looked at the
constitutions of Pennsylvania,
New York, and
Montana and so it, in my
opinion, Madam Chair
Representative, the way I read
it, it says as the trustee of
the resource, the Commonwealth.
That's what Pennsylvania says
Montana also says the same
language and then New York says
the state. So Madam Chair
Representative, I'm just
wondering how do we, how do we
rectify that with
Them also including counties, so
have counties also been sued and
has it been successful in
counties in Montana,
Pennsylvania, and New York,
Madam Chair, representative
experts.
Madam Chair and Representative.
Come a little closer, um.
So in, in, um, in each of those
green amendment states, the
language is very, very clear
that by by referencing the
Commonwealth or the state, we
are actually referencing all
levels of government whose
authority emanates from the
state, so that explicitly does
include municipalities and
counties, and that has also been
confirmed through um court
precedent and interpretation by
the governments themselves
within the those communities and
in fact, um, the municipalities
and the state legislation.
are often the ones in and out of
court to reference the
constitutional language in
support of their authority to
legislate, regulate, permit, and
advance critical environmental
protections for their
communities.
Thank you so much, Madam Char
representative for that
clarification. I, I still
have concerns regarding the
locals because I, I have a very
small county, Madam Chair, we
don't have huge population like
some counties and like our city
budget, for example, I think
it's in about 30 million, I
think the county has about 60
million in reserves. That's not
just operating, so.
If we did have a lawsuit, I'm
wondering, Madam Chair, what
So could anybody file a lawsuit
if they have standing, and what
would that require? Would it
just mean that they file the
legal, the court fee and then
file the suit through the state
with a complaint, or how does
that go about, at least with the
localities, Madam Chair, and
representatives expert Senator.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
Local uh very local
municipalities have not really
been sued in the, in, in the
past, um, mainly because they
use the Green Amendment his
justification for for their
regulations and so it's helped
them uphold any kind of zoning
regulations or any kind of
regulations that they, they
might choose to protect their
local communities, um, and so
the Green amendment can use to
protect the counties as well,
but
The way this would work is, um,
if you notice the Green
amendment specifically says no,
um, damages. No, um, no
monetary.
Damages.
And that means and like all
constitutional amendments, our
constitutional rights with uh uh
somebody suing your, the county
would get is
Uh, injunctive relief.
And not monetary damages, um,
and of course, you've mentioned
standing. They'd have to have
standing, and that means they
have to have had some kind of
harm by the regulation.
OK, thank you so much, Madam
Chair and Representative that.
OK, so I guess, kind of in your
answer, it kind of gives
credence to the fact that maybe
locals in other states.
felt that they were not
Included in this because if they
haven't been sued before, I
just, I kind of want to get back
to the, the local governments
and counties. I want to make
sure that those folks are
protected because I know their
budgets are very volatile when
it comes to some counties, for
example, a lot of them have most
of their funding through the
state. Some of them don't have a
huge populations, they don't get
a lot of.
Income taxes or rather property
taxes. So how, is there some
kind of buffer to fund those
local counties if they are sued
to ensure that they don't go
bankrupt. There's some kind of
parachute, for example. Is that
in here at all? Well,
most counties have insurance um
for or either, either their uh
madam chair, most counties, um,
Have insurance or have some kind
of some kind of way for of of
dealing with lawsuits, um, and
what I want to clarify is I said
they haven't been sued because
they've used it as justification
for regulations that they have
passed to protect their local
counties, um, and of course they
could be sued. One of my
favorite, although this was in a
local county, but one of my
favorite was a lawsuit in
Montana to stop um a permit that
was granted for
exploration of, of a potential
gold mine that was going to
destroy a creek and the agency,
which I believe was a state
agency had failed to take into
account the impact on a creek
that was a stream that was going
to go into the Yellowstone. And
so what happened, which is
normal, is they sent it back.
They didn't, they didn't ask,
they didn't get damages or
anything. They just sent it back
to the agency for consideration
of the impact of this
exploration on the creek. And
that's how that, this is how it
works. It is not a, a way for
people to get monetary damages.
It's a way for people to ensure
that the state protects.
Our air, land, and water.
OK. Thank you so much, Madam
Chair, Representative. OK, so I
see like creek, you know, that's
a very black and white kind of.
Situation, I think.
So I'm wondering, Madam Chair,
Representative, I see some of
these definitions in here, or
maybe they're not really defined
cause it's a constitutional
amendment. I get it. So, Madam
Chair Representative, I'm
wondering regarding
Clean, for example, clean air,
clean water.
How are we, how are we defining
that to ensure that people in
this space.
can prove damages for clean air
or clean water.
I, and I would love to just
figure out from maybe a legal
perspective, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair Representative,
thank you for that question. Um,
the way the terms in the Green
amendment will be defined is the
same way terms in other
constitutional entitlements will
be defined. The all branches of
government are involved. It
begins with the legislative
branch passing legislation,
seeking to define in various
contexts, what these terms mean.
You then have regulatory
agencies passing regulations,
and you have the implementation
through permits and through
decision making. Um, that's how
the definition.
happens for all other
constitutional entitlements.
That's how the definition will
happen here. And when the courts
are, are needed to get involved
if a community is being
irreparably harmed and believes
that that their constitutional
environmental rights are being
violated and the courts are
brought into the equation. The
question for the courts is
whether or not the the action,
the interpretation, the
application by the governmental
entity meets constitutional
muster. If it does, that action
stands, and we have good
precedent and
information about the um about
the amendment and how it's
applied. If the courts determine
through standard judicial
principles that the um
That the action or activity is
resulting in an unconstitutional
violation, then that government
action becomes unenforceable,
and then it is incumbent on the
original governing body, whether
it's the legislators, the
regulators to then go back and
bring the interpretation of the
application into compliance with
the Constitution. The justices
do not seek to displace those
other branches of government,
they just do their job in
confirming or denying whether or
not the action actually complies
with
the Constitution.
OK, that makes sense. Thank you,
Madam Chair, and uh thank you
Representatives, experts,
Senator, so.
OK, it was my understanding that
this resolution was
self-executing upon voting. So
Madam Chair Representative, now
I, I guess we're saying we need
to pass additional legislation.
Could you just clear that up for
me? I, I thought this was just
self-executing boom once it's in
there, it's in there.
Madam Chair,
Madam a couple more questions.
Yeah, I just have maybe 4 should
be quick, madam chair.
Madam Chair, it is
self-executing in that it does
allow an individual to use it
without any additional
legislation, what um our expert
was saying is that when you were
asking about definitions. So
when you look for a definition
of clean water, you look to what
the legislature has said about
clean water, and we have.
Plenty of, of definitions of
clean water. That's what they
look to. Thank you.
Thank you, thank you so much,
ma'am. If you'd like to add,
please go ahead.
Madam Chair Representative, just
for additional clarification,
what the self-executing also
allows for if there are contexts
where the legislature has not
had the opportunity because of
emerging contaminants or
technologies to take necessary
action, like in the context of
PAS, where there was no
legislation or regulation to
protect communities and
businesses from the devastating
consequences of PAS. People had
there been a New Mexico Green
amendment in place at the time,
people could have turned to the
Constitution to advocate for.
see can secure um legislative
action and regulatory action to
protect the communities, help
inspire that additional
legislation and get um
intervention to ensure
governmental action to protect
them.
OK. Thank you, Representative,
and I, I won't belabor that
point. I think that's just
important to note. Next here,
uh, Madam Chair, quickly. So I
guess I'm wondering, are the New
Mexico Environment Department
land office and regulators not
doing their jobs currently since
We need this new amendment,
Madam Chair.
The exciting thing about this
amendment is they have been
doing their jobs in this
administration, um, it took the
Martinez administration 10
months to undo all of the
painstaking regulations that the
Richardson administration had
done on climate change. And so
with this amendment would do,
would, um,
The question would be asked.
Is this undoing of the
regulation going to harm or
violate this constitutional
amendment, so it would at least
slow it down.
If not, you know, have a really
robust consideration of what it
means.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you,
Representative. OK, so it kind
of, I guess it could, could
technically codify some of these
portions but not technically in
law, it would just be in rule
making, kind of slowing down the
revocation of
Potential regulation. Is that
kind of the way I understand it,
I'm sorry, it, it's grating on
me how you said it because I'm a
law professor in it and that's
not how the law works. It's not
a codification, um, what it is
is something else to be
considered with regard to the
process. OK, thank you, ma'am.
That was a subquestion. I just
have two quick questions left.
I promise, maybe, Madam Chair,
I, I see the, the fiscal impact
report.
And I just want to note here.
According to the LFC analysis,
it says estimated legal costs
range from 150 to 2 million
annually, but it also says
corrective environmental actions
resulting can go up to $1.6
billion. So Madam Chair
Representative, I'm, I'm
wondering, have we looked at
those numbers and is that what
we envision if this goes into
effect, Madam Chair.
Madame
like our experts.
Mm-hmm.
Um, Madam Chair and
Representative, when, when we're
referring to legal action and
litigation and we look at the
other green amendment states
when we look at the number of
cases that actually make it into
the courts. It's actually less
than 10 a year, so we do not see
an onslaught of litigation, we
would not expect those kinds of
numbers and to be perfectly
frank with you, I'm not sure
what the grounding for those
numbers is the Green amendment
actually will strengthen the
ability of government officials
to enhance and defend good
government actions, right?
whether they're being challenged
through advocacy or ultimately
legal action, but I think what
is critically important is by
securing more informed,
effective and protective, um,
environmental protections when
necessary were actually avoiding
significant and devastating
economic harms, for example, the
New Mexico State Land Office in
a report in recent years said
that um the cost of remediating
pipeline and other oil and gas
equipment on state and private
land in New Mexico, the
that they've inflicted would
cost $8.4 billion. We know that
New Mexico got $18.9 million
from the federal government to
to respond to PFAS contamination
if New Mexico had not received
those funds from the federal
government, New Mexico would
have been responsible for those
funds, and I can go on and on
about um serious environmental
consequence serious
environmental harms that have
resulted in tremendous
environmental consequences for
local governments, county
governments and state
governments.
Better protective and informed
decision making helps us avoid
those devastating harms.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representatives expert.
Yeah, I don't think anyone is
defending the federal
government. I sure as heck
wouldn't, but I do think that
You know, a lot of that was
federal. Now do you wanna
Reissue that a lot of those
federal PFAS regulations were
indeed needed um.
Federally to be remedied. So
last question and this actually
pertains to my district. So on
your bill, on resolution rather,
page 1 line 14 talks about
healthy water, soil,
environments, and then it says
healthy native flora, fauna and
ecosystems Maam chair
representative in my district,
we have a lot of grafted plants
such as pistachio trees we have,
we have a winemaking. We have
palm trees, which are not native
to southern New Mexico. We have
a pomegranates, Madam Chair
Representative, how
that protect those plants.
Flora fauna, etc. Madam chair.
They are not native.
where you want.
Madam Chair and Representative,
the way those plants will be
benefited and protected in the
businesses that depend upon them
is that we will be protecting
the water, the soils and the
contaminants in the air, as well
as helping to better address
climate change, um, and as a
result, we'll be ensuring that
those, those plants, right, have
the fundamental healthy
essentials of the environment
that they need to grow and
thrive.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representatives.
Yeah, I, I do have some concerns
on this still. I think that
local governments, I really am
scared to, to put burden and
liability on, on those folks
because I know that, especially
I know it's 15 some years since
the crisis that we had
economically, but I just don't
want them to have to go back
into that hole, and I think
that's, that's a huge concern.
Also, I don't see anywhere here
that it, it talks about
specifically to
Private companies, I think it,
it really puts the
burden on the actual
municipality where the company
is. So I think that it might be
a better approach to go
specifically toward those
companies, and then also I'm
just looking at certain, certain
definitions that I, I, I find
overly broad and so those are
just my concerns on this. I'll
continue to listen to the, the
debate, but I think those are
all my questions I had jotted
down, Madam Chair. Thank you so
much. Appreciate you guys.
Representative Lujan.
And then representative Zamora.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um.
Thank you to our presenters and
my fellow members who support
the, the Green amendment. Um,
I think that
That we've heard from both
sides, madam chair, um, and this
has been ongoing and sometimes
we're told that we need to to
get good legislation, um, past
that we have to
Wait a number of years.
And I'd just like to say um.
We don't have a number of years
to wait on.
The climate crisis we're in.
And I think that this piece of
legislation
So more comment, and I'll have
some questions. Isn't in the
right place in the direction
that we're moving to mitigate
what we need to do for the
climate.
And I think there's a lot of
legal terminology and a lot of
um education that is really
necessary to understand a
constitutional amendment.
As, as we are going to be
hearing quite a few this year
session.
Um, and understanding, um,
Some of the, the relative ways
of the constitutional amendment
is put forward in the language
around it is really important,
as I've met with the members and
worked with the members and, and
educating myself on what a
constitutional amendment is and
why the language is.
Sometimes vague or intentionally
vague in some ways. I'd ask, can
you, as our law professor in
front of us and our senator, can
you explain why the language is
raised the way it is, madam
chair.
Senator, um,
Thank you, Madam Chair. All
constitutional provisions are
statements of our values and the
important thing about this
amendment is we would let the
ultimate sovereigns of our
state, which is the people vote
on our values, um, and that's
why it is, it was, it is broad
because it's a statement of what
we value our air, our land, our
water, equitable treatment of
people in our state, um,
including tribal, tribal a
People who are affiliated with
tribes, um, this
This is, I think, a beautifully
written example. Um, it has gone
modified over the time we first
introduced it and I think that
the language is
Is really effective in giving
guidance to courts and guidance
especially to the legislature
and to the counties about what
they should do and what the
people value in our state.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, I just wanna add
that
The, the value of a
constitutional amendment.
is also giving the rights.
To our populations to make these
decisions to self-protect.
That's probably one of the most
critical elements of this
particular um constitutional
amendment. Thank you for the
question, Representative Madam.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, in
part of the language that um
that's in this uh constitutional
amendment refers to and includes
the counties, um,
As straight as a trustees, Madam
Chair.
And I think it's been deciphered
or if I may add or have more
clarification on that that even
though it's included in the
language that every county,
every elected official, local
government or not.
has
And does take the oath of office
to protect the Constitution. So
if this is enacted and
For whatever reasons that
language is taken out of this
um.
This proposal for an amendment,
then they would still have to
protect the Constitution. May I
have further
Clarification, Madam Chair.
Yes, you're absolutely right.
They would be included, but
there was a concern that if we
didn't um specifically mention
the counties and municipalities
that it might be held to to um
To apply to a sekis and land
grants, and that was not our
intent.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
thank you for the clarification.
Um
I believe also that there's a
concern about the language in
the amendment of
And the section that is uh
reflects self as the executing.
Um, again, I had to educate
myself and understanding that. I
think there could be further um
Exemplification if you have or
examples if you have or if you
have a little bit more education
there and why this is why we
prefer to have this as
self-executing and have that in
the amend madam chair. Did
self-executing was important.
Oh, Madam Chair, self, thank
you. Self-executing was
important, Madam Chair, because,
um, if it didn't say that, then
the courts would have to decide
whether it was self-executing.
And we didn't really want the
courts to debate that issue. We
wanted to clarify our intent,
which is that it is
self-executing, that it is
something that can be used from
the day it's passed.
And it would not rely on
additional legislation.
Thank you, Madam Chair. And
In the, the questioning that
I've had or what I've seen, um,
regarding
The lawsuits um in plaintiffs
pursuing actions under these
provisions.
Um,
If they were that there wouldn't
be any monetary um recovery. Is
that correct, Madam Chair?
Yes.
Thank you. I think that that is,
that is a a critical piece.
And in the process, if any
plaintiff would come to to have
a case against the state or.
Her government
And they used uh this, this
amendment if it's enacted, then
The
The court would then have
jurisdiction to have to allow
for or recommend legislation, is
that correct? I need
clarification on that.
Madam Chair, know, the courts
never really recommend
legislation. They invalidate
unconstitutional legislation and
send it back, um, for the
legislature or the municipality
or whatever to, to make it
constitutional.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
That's
There there are pieces of this
and understanding how this
Um
This constitutional amendment
would affect us and I think that
You have done a really good do
uh due diligence. I do hear on
the other side, the concerns
with this and I'd like to know,
have you, what has been your
engagement with everybody to
address some of their concerns,
Madam Chair.
Um, Madam Chair and
Representative Lujan, we have um
met over the years, um, with,
uh,
The different um distribution uh
companies and also with labor
and trying to understand or to
explain how the um bill would
work, um, we
Um
have not been able to convince
them that the Green amendment
actually will help clean energy
and more jobs to our state, even
for, you know, um, better in
support for environmental new
technology and things like that
that would uh support uh what's
already going on in our uh state
for extraction, but um it is
found in other states, um, that
it actually
helps with the clean industry to
support their projects and to
make it so that they don't have
the opposition that they seem to
have already and are con you
know, able, the courts are able
to hold, but I also want to
mention that I have um some uh
references from solar companies
in doing business in
Pennsylvania, and this gentleman
says as a company focused on
leasing land for solar
development, we
Pennsylvania's environmental
rights amendment is consistent
with our vision and desire to
promote clean energy. We have
multiple solar projects underway
in Pennsylvania and we continue
to pursue more and I won't go on
and read it, um, but people get
Um, concerned when their
environmental rights and
amendment, it's, it's going to
lead to litigation and this they
have not seen that and industry
is not running away like it has
been implied, um, they are
dealing with it and they are
working with the players at the
local government level, and
what's really important, Madam
Chair and Representative, is
that when a project is being
developed or being approved at
the local, the county, the
municipal, or the state.
level that the considerations
for environmental aspects and
the protection of the people in
that area will be addressed
early on and so that mitigation
of any harm such as like they
saw in Pennsylvania with the
storm water um of a project that
was going to cause a lot of
flooding in an area. The um
Inclusion in their design of
making sure that there was um
stormwater uh protections that
they took that in consideration
right away. And because of the
Green amendment being there,
people were protected.
Madam Chair, if I may add, just
very quickly, we are already in
the world of renewable energy
development, uh.
So already we have solar
development, geothermal
development, all other renewable
energy development underway.
So this is already being proven
that this is a great economic
development driver, jobs will be
protected, jobs will be created
and so just to dispel the
constitutional amendment
protects the rights.
Of the citizenry around the
state to ensure that as we're
going into all these realms of
new renewable energy development
that they continue to protect
clean air, clean water, clean
lands. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, I'm, I'm not going
to go on much longer, but I'd
like to just say that I hear
those concerns and I would
I don't know that the committee
would have the authority, but to
bring these, um.
These groups together to have a
deeper conversation and
relationship to what this, this
uh constitutional amendment
intends intentions are in the
rights that it, it will protect
along with and how working
relationship will be with our
economic development in those
industries, I myself have taken
that upon my, you know, um.
Something that I've done and
bringing both of bringing these
groups together to have these
conversations and I've been
working towards figuring out how
we, we compromise how we, we
relate what we're doing, um, in
our roles as legislators and to
um developing and growing our,
our economy through our
renewable industry, which I
greatly, and I think everybody
right here in these sponsors
greatly support, as I've seen
you and worked with you on other
legislation to
Um, to develop and grow those
industries. So I think that that
would be worth everyone's time.
I think that this would be
something that you should
dedicate some serious attention
and time to, to work together to
have better understanding and
more education on how we get
through or get to a a better
resolution here, Madam Chair,
because this is very divided as
we've all heard today, and there
are great concerns. I, I do
believe that this is
This is a, this is an added
benefit and a tool that could be
used.
Um, but I also hear both sides,
and I'd like us to really work
together, um, to see how we can
how everyone can come to support
this type of uh of a
constitutional amendment, much
like we've done the work with
other civil rights bills that I
know most of us have voted for
in the past.
So, um, with Madam Chair, I
thank you for the time. I thank
the sponsors, and I thank all
those that have come here and
voiced their their concerns or
their support, and mostly I'd
say the concerns in both
directions are on the table as
we're making these decisions as
we are trying to diversify our
economy. Um, I think there is,
there is, uh, there's fear and
confusion in our world right
now, Madam Chair, and I think
New Mexico has the resources to
come together to squash those
fears.
that we have um
Better, uh.
Bitter constitutional
amendments, better legislation,
better bills to protect us all.
Thank you.
Representative Zamora and then
Representative Berego.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, members of the committee
and thank you sponsors for
bringing this bill forward.
Uh, I think you've done a great
job presenting the bill.
Uh, although I do have a lot of
reservations.
About what's going on in this
committee room today.
Madam Chair, if you'll allow, I
have some questions for somebody
in the audience.
Madam Chair
It's uh partner.
Seamen with pattern energy.
And
thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair, for allowing that. Mr.
Seaman, uh,
So in hearing the testimony
today.
And
Seeing what's going on and, and
everybody's everybody's uh
concerns.
And I'll, I'll give you a little
time to get up to the speaker.
So
You're, you're not, you're not
allowed to sit at the table.
Sorry, ma'am,
the microphone, you're, you're
good.
So, so my concerns, uh, Mr.
Seaman.
Are
When a lot of times we see a
bill like this presented in
committee.
And the intent of the bill.
And what actually happens on the
ground, boots on the ground, and
people that are working.
Uh
Different projects which thank
you for, for working on clean
energy in the state of New
Mexico and what you do.
Uh
What, what have you seen, uh,
uh, and, and you, you even wrote
a book about it, so I imagine
you're, you're very well in
tuned as to, as to what goes on
with boots on the ground. If we
pass this constitutional
amendment.
Have you seen uh monetary
lawsuits, uh, go on in the
courts and, and projects held
up. What have you seen? Why are
you so skeptical about this
amendment passing, uh, Mr.
Seaman, Madam Chair, Madam Chair
Representative, um, just quick
point of clarification, I read a
book, didn't write a book. Uh
yeah, um, I, I don't write much
more than about 6 sentences at a
time. This is Amy Gamerman uh
from pronouncing that correctly,
she's a former Wall Street
Journal.
reporter who wrote about about
pattern energies development
experience in Montana.
Um, and in that case, there was
a rancher that we were trying to
build a project on the ranch
land so that they could keep
their ranch. I mean, it's kind
of classic ranching story where
you can't make a lot of money,
all your wealth is in the land.
So we were trying to partner and
there was a billionaire who
didn't like the view. Um, he had
a, he had a bunch of ranches
around the west, um, and he
didn't want to have to look at
our wind turbines. And so he
sued on the road permit multiple
times, um, and our team was
involved with litigation. We got
basically project killed on a
road permit. What we're
concerned about is for the
Sunzia project that took 17
years to get the transmission
line permitted, um, that what
we're concerned about.
is that, uh, I think Jeremy,
we're totaling up earlier,
there's something like 17.
Uh, major discretionary permits
we needed for that, for both the
wind and the transmission.
And if the
Uh, some of the provisions in
the measure around view, um, and
viewshed. Uh, it's one of the
things referenced in, in HAR 3,
that if somebody is concerned
about the view, if they're
concerned about scenic
qualities. I mean, we agree on
air, clean air, clean water,
understand the challenge in
defining that. But we're really
concerned about is any one of
these permits, we could be sued
on it and it would, um, all the
permits have to be in place to
be able to start construction
and close financing.
And so what we're concerned
about is, I mean, Suns was $11
billion financing project. The
complexity of getting that put
forward and having all of those
permits come at the same time.
So what we see is a concern that
even after we start
construction, people could
litigate and um it ends up being
in a position where we just
can't move forward and where
we've lost the development spin
that we put forward.
S.
Thank you. Thank you for that.
Thank you for your, for your
response.
And since this is an unusual.
Um
Uh, permission to have someone
in the audience, um.
The Green amendment does not
allow someone to be sued. It's
and not especially not for
monetary or it is only to the
government that's permitting it
to have an objection, but our
Green Amendment would not do
that, and I'd like to have Maya
also.
do that.
Madam Chair and Representative,
just for additional
clarification, when you look at
Pennsylvania, Montana, and New
York, there's not been a single
legal challenge brought forth
using the Green amendment to
stop a solar or wind project,
the only lawsuit that exists in
the state of New York, where
there have only been a total of
8 cases brought since the Green
amendment was passed, but the
one case that involves a solar
array, um, where the Green
amendment was one of several
arguments. The, the, the
plaintiffs were very, very
clear. We do not want to stop
this.
project, we support this
project, but we are concerned
that the stormwater runoff
coming off of this project is
going to devastate our entire
town's drinking water supply.
Therefore, pursuant to the Green
Amendment, we are asking for a
better stormwater management
practices and monitoring to
protect our drinking water
supply. I would also just like
to highlight that in the state
of Montana, again, not a single
um claim against a solar or wind
project using a Green amendment,
the pattern case that's being
discussed was a lawsuit based on
nuisance, the Green
it was in existence. It was not
utilized in that case.
And I would like to note that
the recent held v. Montana case,
um, where youth use the Green
Amendment uh to challenge a
piece of state legislation that
was to challenge legislation
that would have prevented the
government in the state from
considering the climate changing
implications of their actions
and decisions by virtue of the
fact that the Green amendment
that prohibition was declared
unconstitutional, and now all
government officials can and
must consider the climate
changing impacts of their
action.
and decisions at every level of
government, which is going to
result in the the support and
advancement and progress of more
clean energy in the state, not
less. Thank you, Madam Chair.
And Zamora.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So,
representative uh Uuss who, and
you just, you just made a
statement says this will not
Allow any lawsuits or cause any
lawsuits, there won't be any
lawsuits. So, so, Madam Chair.
I'd like to representative to,
to go back on, on what your
comment.
And
But if this goes to if, if, if
somebody plays, places a lawsuit
in the courts. It's not for
monetary, but somebody's suing
who.
And you said it's not the
private.
Citizen can't sue, Madam Chair.
No, I'm sorry. Um, I would I,
madam chair, um, representative
Zamora. I was saying that um a
company.
Like pattern could not be sued.
It would just be a, you know,
private citizens or who are um
harmed, have um uh
What's the term cause of action.
Yes, thank you. Against the
government.
So, so, madam chair and
representatives, so
So a private citizen.
And so then the county or the
city or.
Yeah.
I, I don't understand that. And
then, and then how does
qualified immunity come into
place here?
Madam Chair,
I'm going to ask
Um representatives.
Thank you for the question. I
think earlier Senator Cedillo
Lopez indicated that there would
have to be standing and then the
most that we could ask they
anyone could ask would be for
injunctive relief, not monetary,
when the state has a
constitutional amendment.
We, the state is responsible for
protecting the rights under the
constitutional amendment, so no
private parties, no businesses,
no, uh, localities, none.
The state is responsible. So for
protecting the rights under the
Constitution, so that's why it's
important to note if there's
further clarity, Senator, or did
we cover it all right?
Uh, I believe you did. It, it's
a constitutional right is a
limitation on the government's
behavior.
It, it doesn't, um,
It doesn't create a, a private
right of action against an
individual or a business, so
unfortunately, their lawsuit
that they talk about in, in uh
I, I don't even know. I ever
read the book, but I believe
it's about a nuisance case. It
had nothing to do with the Green
amendment and nuisance is a
cause of action that we still
have against um.
Against private companies that
create a nuisance and they
create a toxic environment.
That is nuisance is a completely
different theory of law. It's
not a constitutional amendment.
So I think there's confusion
there.
Um, and a company, whether it's
the, whoever it is, um,
Has to operate cleanly and not
create a nuisance in a community
right now. That is the law. But
what this adds is the government
having a responsibility to
protect the rights in
constitutional violations.
So, and uh senator that
So what this, what this
amendment would do.
I
To make sure we follow the
Constitution.
Madam Chair, if I may.
It, it creates a constitutional
right, Madam Chair, to clean
air, land, and water, which if
you ask people, they actually
believe they have a right, and I
say they have a moral right.
It's time they have a
constitutional right.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, presenters. I have no more
questions.
Thank you, Representative
Barrego.
Thank you, ma'am Chair.
I think I'm gonna be like my
colleague Mr. Block. I have 44
questions. This is the first
time I've heard this. Um,
actually, thank you for your
presentation, all of you, and to
the, the people in opposition
and then and then support.
Um
So
I want to qualify, Madam Chair,
that I helped develop the
Superfund site in um South
Broadway.
And helped implement that.
To the cleanup.
Um, that was caused by General
Electric. I also helped clean up
the railroad site.
I have a little bit of
experience with regard to
environmental issues on both
sides of the fence.
Um
And I'm gonna start by
Talking about, I guess because
this is well.
Let me start from the beginning.
So you all are saying that a
sekis and land grants are
excluded.
In Albuquerque.
Especially on the west side.
There are, um,
Land grants within the
municipality, um.
Madam Chair, representative, the
Asacas, their protections aren't
excluded, just the government
body the political subdivision.
So
And, and, and my brother sits on
the aseki board up in northern
New Mexico, but I'm, I'm
concerned that um
You know, they are political
subdivisions and I'm wondering
why they were excluded.
I just, I'm, I'm curious.
Because it's unlikely that they
are granting madam chair or Mad,
Madam Vice Chair.
I'm sorry. I'm looking around uh
um.
It's unlikely, very unlikely
that an Asea or a land grant is
going to make a decision on any
kind of government action that
would raise any kind of issues
with air, land and water.
And so we didn't want to impose
any kind of liability on them,
uh, or even the fear of it,
which might cause their
insurance rates to go up or
something, we did not want them
to be concerned about it. We
talked to them and and did it
this way. So I'm, I'm a little
concerned about vice chair, um,
because we have um.
Land grants.
In the city of Albuquerque on
the west side that is vacant
land.
And they are, in fact, or they
would in fact or could.
I don't know which is the right
term there, like, I'm not a
lawyer, but they could be
affected.
If they were developed.
Madam Vice Chair and
Representative, I share your
concerns. The Aseass and the
land grants are very critical to
protecting our cultural
traditions and our cultural
traditions include protecting
our land.
Making sure we have clean air,
clean land, clean water, that is
the primary tradition of these
two entities. So they by nature.
Of what they believe in and what
they have been preserving for
the entirety of their histories
already include these
protections. Thereby,
The conscious decision that
Ensuring that they are already
upholding constitutional rights
in this area. So thus the
exclusion, Madam Vice Chair and
uh representative.
Thank you, um, for that answer.
Um, I, I respectfully disagree.
I think that if we were going to
include everybody in New Mexico,
they should
Also be included in this
legislation. That's just.
My feeling, especially having
been in the development business
for a long time, um, Madam
Chair, may I, may I just add a
little bit of clarification if,
if the representative uh would
care to hear it. Um.
In the example you make of, of,
and I'm very familiar with land
grants in on the west side. If
they wanted to develop it, the
developer would have to get a
permit, but not from the land
grant but from the county or, or
from the city depending on where
it's located. So in that
instance,
They're, they're more like a, a
private company, and not like a
government official granting a
permit. It's, it's the county
and the city that would have
that power and that's why it
wouldn't make sense to limit
the, the land grant.
Well, thank you for that and um
I just, I raised that question
because it concerns me that it's
like, for example, um, the North
Valley where um the huge uh
secular runs adjacent to a lot
of land and some of that land
has been developed.
Um, and, you know, it's kind of
hard to exclude in my mind.
And I, as a land.
Us planner, I guess, that it, it
concerns me, and I'm just gonna
leave it at that, and you might
want to take a look at that a
little bit more. Um,
The second question that I have,
um, Madam Chair is with regard
to the regulatory, and I heard
your discussion with
representative Zamora, um,
regarding, um,
You know,
The legal implications.
And I'm trying to understand
this whole.
This whole thing.
Um
This whole bill, sorry, um.
So I always say the devil is in
the detail, so the state passes
this, um, let's just say the
state passes it hypothetically,
OK? Um, then each municipality
in each county would have to go
back and amend the regulatory,
um,
Codes
In order to comply with that,
Madam Chair and Representative,
thank you for that question. Um,
in the first instance, if the if
the legislature decides to pass
HR uh HJR3 and the Senate
companion resolution, then this
amendment would actually go
before the people to decide
whether or not they would like
to amend the Constitution and
have it added. So just to add
that additional clarification,
but for purposes of state,
county, and municipal
government, what it would mean
is from that point forward, when
they were
interpreting and applying their
existing um protections and
regulations, um, with regards to
the environment, they would be
interpreting them, applying them
through the lens of protecting
the right of the people to clean
water, clean air, healthy soil,
safe climate, and healthy
environment. So it will inform
the interpretation, the
application, and the enforcement
of existing protections. Um, it
will also create an opportunity
if new, new, um new operations
or emerging contaminants.
It
It will help bolster the uh the,
the, the obligation and the
mandate and the impetus on
government officials to use
their appropriate authority to
put in place new protections to
address those new threats or
harms and to the extent extent
that the interpretation,
application, or enforcement of
existing regulations, for
example, at the state level are
resulting in inequitable
protections for the environment
and serious and significant
harm, the people would have the
opportunity to come.
forth and and make that point,
um, and seek an interpretation
and an application that enforces
the law as written, but
additionally as a way that also
protects the constitutional
rights of the people as created
in the, in the New Mexico Green
Amendment and I understand that
overarching, this is sort of
overarching, but the
municipalities and the counties
would have the responsibility to
go back and and probably amend
their regulatory.
Um
Codes in order to comply. The
New Mexico Green amendment is
not representative,
the Green amendment is not
retroactive, so that would not
be an obligation.
But moving forward.
It would.
Moving forward, it would be
about the interpretation of the
regulation and legislation as
written and how it's applied, it
would not be a mandate to
rewrite.
OK.
Um, and, and, Madam Chair,
remember that that's, that was
what I did for many, many years
is regulatory and so if a
developer came in, let's just
say a developer came in and this
did the the voters.
Approved it
And there were, there were
regulatory um
Um
References that did not comply,
then the city council or the
county commission would have a
responsibility to go back and
look at their regulatory.
Um
codes.
They would have to.
If that's not already in there
regulatory if, if it's
noncompliant.
chair.
Only if they were directed to by
the court.
OK.
They were sued or there was a
lawsuit.
Only if the lawsuit directed
them that their regulations were
unconstitutional under the, and
that would be.
Noncom
because I see. All right. Thank
you.
OK, thank you for that and um my
next question is with regard,
Madam Chair, to the
I haven't really heard a lot of
discussion about this, and I'm a
little concerned about it.
Um, I'm going back to the fiscal
impact report.
Um
And I marked it up.
You know, and reading it.
And just in general, there were
comments by the AG and comments
by M nerd.
In the report that um.
They felt that this.
Legislation still.
You know, it could, there could
be legal challenges, which was
already raised, um, there's
conflicting um political
subdivisions which I raised, um,
Private, well, let's see, the
question about jobs versus state
regulations and where that sits,
and then the question of
renewable energy, and I didn't
hear a lot of discussion about
responding to these comments in
here.
So I just wondered about that.
I'm sure.
Madame Chan represented, if I
may, I think we've said, uh we
did address the constitutional
amendment goes back into, if
passed, goes all the way back to
the citizenry.
To vote on this, um.
Constitutional amendment.
As with all constitutional
amendments, most of these agency
comments precaution.
Us concerning what the next
steps are, with any
constitutional protection, any
constitutional amendment.
There will could be.
Challenges. So these comments
are pretty.
Common in terms of how they
address the rights of citizens
to protect their constitutional
rights because there could be
constitutional challenges, but
again, um, it, it, we still have
to get to the step of passing in
order for the voters to
Vote on whether they would like
to have this constitutional
amendment in place.
And I would agree that they did
stipulate Madam Chair, various
comments I also highlighted most
of the comments, and they've
been um
The same types of comments that
are made on most of our
constitutional amendment
propositions. I would just say
that. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and the
the reason I mean I, I would, I
would have liked to have seen a
little bit cleaner FIR like,
yes, we can support this. Yes,
there are issues here, but, you
know, and, and that would be my
question, Madam Chair, and you
don't have to respond to that,
but I
It makes me uncomfortable having
seen it for the first time, that
there are a lot of comments.
And that concerns me.
And remember, the devil is
always in the detail, and one of
the things that really concerned
me when I was reading all this
is Ener further raises concerns
that the proposal creates
misaligned authority. They say
that in the FIR and they also
say that in the House committee
analysis report, it's repeated
on the 2nd page of that, so.
I just want to point that out,
Madam Chair, because I am very
detail oriented. Um, so I'm just
gonna leave that at that sen,
and then my last one, I just
needed to comment on this, Madam
Chair, is with regard to what is
your um
What, what, and I don't know who
wants to respond to this, but
The comment regarding
That this would prevent jobs
from happening in New Mexico.
Moving forward.
We please.
Madam Chair and Representative,
what, what we've seen in the
other green amendment states is
that there has been no impact on
economic development plus or
minus, um, everything has stayed
the same and there's been a
great economic, you know, growth
and job growth as appropriate in
those states, not impacted by
the Green Amendment. OK, thank
you.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
You represented a block
representative Zamora and uh we
have to be on the house floor
and I still would like to do a
House Bill 98. Thank you,
Representative Locke.
And I'm sure I was going to make
a motion, but if Representative
Zamora has continued questions
I'll defer to him, Madam Chair.
I'm not quick, Madam Chair, you
know I'm the slowest question
asker in the group.
Sorry, Madam Chair, sorry.
So, so if this bill
Excludes a se yes. What about?
Soil and water conservation
districts and
Why aren't they excluded?
Madam Chair and presenters.
Thank you for that question,
Madam Chair. Soil and water
conservation districts and their
more planning, um, oriented, so
I, I don't see them making the
kinds of decisions that would um
would be affected by this at
all, um, my one of my good
friends is on the Valencia
County, um, soil, and that's one
of the most active, uh, soil and
water conservation districts,
and they've all been uh getting
grants, planning, education, um,
they don't have authority over.
Permits, um, so I don't think
that they would be affected.
So Madam Chan and presenter uh
senator, then why are the
asseus.
Uh,
Um, the way that, the way the
amendment excludes them is by
not including them, so we only
include the state,
municipalities and counties. So
the soil conservation district
would not be included. It would
be excluded just like the um
Asey and the, and the land
grants. So it is excluded.
Madam Chair and Senator, I feel
like I got
The two answers that I wanted to
hear, but they're both
different. You said that that
the theseass didn't need to be
excluded, but then they are
excluded and so I, I didn't.
I think, I think there was some
contradiction in both your
answers, Me and Senator. Madam
Chair, I apologize if it is
unclear.
We excluded any other entity
except the state, the county,
and municipalities, so other
entities like the soil and water
conservation districts would not
be subject to any kind of
lawsuit under the Green
amendment, um, and the reason
for that is they do not.
They like the land grants like
the Eseki Associations would
have been very robust in
building up our soil and
building up um an educating
people, they do not make
decisions that would, they don't
have the power to make decisions
that would harm our environment.
Madam Chair, I think we could
sit and debate for another hour
as to
As as to these answers that I'm
getting on this, uh, I'll
respect your time and.
Thank you for letting me ask
another question.
Thank you, Represented with more
uh representative block.
Madam Chair, I move a do not
pass.
We have a motion for
not pass by representative
block, second by Representative
Zamora, please call Roll.
Representativevani Nonu.
Know to do not pass.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Borego.
No.
Representative Lujan.
Representative Mejia.
Yes.
Represented uh Madam floor
leader.
Oh
Representative Zamora.
Madam Moisture.
No
Madam Chair, no.
motion for a do not pass fails.
Madam chair.
Representative Madam floor
leader.
Madam Chair, I would move a due
pass without recommendation.
I have a motion for a to pass.
Uh, with no wreck and a second,
please call roll.
Representative Waa Nordin.
Yes.
Representative Block.
No.
Representative Borego.
Yes, with the explanation.
Representative Lujan.
Representative Mia.
No.
Representative, uh, Madam floor
leader.
Representative Zamora.
No.
Madam Vice Chair,
Madam Chair. 60.
Uh, representative and
presenters, uh, committee
members, uh, you have a you pass
on a wreck.
Um, thank you for your
presentation and good luck in
the next committee. I have 2
representatives to explain their
votes. Representative Lujan and
Representative Berego.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um, and
to the presenters, um,
Many of our, our codes, our
local codes already, um, talk
about water.
here
We, I mean
Protection for all of the things
that are mentioned in here, um,
but I think that there are
significant questions in my mind
still, um, regarding, you know,
Our local agencies or state
agencies, and the questions that
they've raised, and I think that
those questions need to be
answered and hopefully they will
be answered before the next
committee. Um, I think that
Madam Chair, people on both
sides of the aisle, um, totally
want
You know, a, a great environment
for New Mexico and want to
protect it, but at the same
time, I think that.
You know, the devil is always in
the detail.
Thank you.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair. Uh again, thank you to
our presenters and, and what we
getting this bill through, I
would have liked to seen a due
pass just, just to be on the
record for saying that, but I
will go with the, the Du pass
with a wreck, um, to see that
this, this gets it's um
It moves forward so we can have
further and deeper conversations
and to really understand and be
fully educated, and again,
well,
we'll say again, we really need
to come together and all these
parties and have some really
thoughtful conversations. What
this means, if it does pass for
our state or what does the
concerns are. I really want to
move that conversation forward
as well and uh I'm willing to
host the meetings myself so that
we can have fuller conversations
about this. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair and committee members.
Thank you.
Committee members.
Committee members, you are
grounded. I'm just kidding.
We are, we don't have time to
hear how Bill 98. We will roll a
House Bill 98108 and 113. Uh,
remember, we do have a full
schedule on Wednesday. We have a
full schedule on Friday. Um, we
will have to come in on Saturday
if we need to. Don't forget
committee dinner this evening, 6
p.m.
Palace Prime or prime.
6 o'clock, 6 o'clock.
Tonight, yes. Palace Prime,
Prime Palace.
We had to, we, we, we couldn't
get into our original
recommendations
too short of a notice.
