Thank you all for being here on
time I I hope this doesn't take
the full hours the full four
hours before we go on the floor
but I wanted to be sure we got
there are agenda so so I asked
the speaker if we could move it
up an hour and he was kind
enough to allow us to so if we
get there early we may actually
have time to our.
Do whatever we need to do so
with that Representative
Trujillo go ahead with just be
ninety two as amended.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee I bring
to you House Bill I'm sorry
Senate bill ninety two as
amended and what this bill does
it the from the original bill
Which us spoke about the bodies
of missing women that were found
in the west Medicine Albuquerque
in the early two thousands the
legislation created the clearing
house and the department of
safety as a central repository
of information on missing
persons and unidentified remains
all law enforcement agencies
including tribal a required to
report persons.
When a missing person is found
the information is reported to
the person that notified law
enforcement that a person is or
was missing but this bill this
amended bill provides an
exemption and the exemption to
the requirement that the re
person.
Be notified that the missing
person is found missing person
can notify law enforcement and
or the clearing house that they
request come geology and that
the reporting person not be
informed that they were found or
the.
Or their current location if a
missing person has a guardian or
custodian law enforced all
inform the court of jurisdiction
that they have been found but
this exemption does not apply to
minors and the reason for all of
this madam chair and members of
the committee is because some of
those missing women have chosen
to be missing because of a of
the problems that they've had in
the meeting with abusive
relationships or Stockert or P.
really made an effort to hurt
them and so they don't want to
be found just to stay away from
those folks and I do have
Linda Siegel if she wishes to
add at your convenience madam
chair.
Go ahead Linda.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I
really don't have anything to
add we've been wanting to do
this amendment for a number of
years and in two thousand and
three
when this Original Bill passed
we we couldn't get this specific
language and so we've taken the
opportunity now and I think this
will make people who are the
victims of domestic violence and
sexual assault
feel more protected if they want
to disappear.
Thank you.
Okay we will now go to the
audience with a full.
So Paul will be popping up and
now your convo to whether you're
in support or opposition to this
bill.
Madam chair I can get the full
the last two minutes okay okay
yeah that's fine you know what
let's go ahead let's go ahead
with public comment then and
while we're waiting for the full
and now so if you are in
opposition to this bill please
go to where it says participants
click on that and raise your
hand if you want to speak in
opposition.
Is there anyone here in support.
If you are please raise your and
want to speak please raise your
hand.
Okay I'm not seeing any for
So I think we will go ahead with
committee questions we only have
twenty people in in the audience
and no one wanted to see here's
a call great so if you are in
the audience and you want to
vote in support or opposition
and please do so.
Representative Trujillo I think
you didn't get the the bill
that's going to get you the
headline in the journal today.
Madam chair you know I can live
with that.
Okay so essentially a we're not
getting anything from the
audience that here for the much
sexier later bills like gas so
I'm I will go to the committee
for questions.
Okay we will start with
Representative Garratt asked.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Trujillo for
for bringing this over to us
this is this bill why is it is
significant to me I I live right
down the street from from where
they found all those bodies on
the west mesa but one of my
friends are from from high
school was was missing for a
while and this was a few years
ago but they put it all over
Facebook and everybody was was
was was trying to find her and
then when they did find her it
turns out that she did not want
to be found and there was the
the this exact reason she was
she was trying to escape from a
very abusive situation but
nobody really knew about so I'm
in I'm in a huge huge support of
this bill and and that's all I
don't have any questions thank
you Representative for your.
Thank you we'll go to vice chair
Romero.
Thank you madam chair thank you
members of the committee I just
had a quick question for
Representative Trujillo
regarding the work being done by
the missing and murdered
indigenous women task force and
that how this might relate to
that
being that there are a lot of
findings that are indigenous
communities have found with
public safety I'm just wondering
on the on the immediate family
member with what we had heard
were often times those who may
have been disappeared or at work
could have been with the family
member unknown person on in the
community and so I'm just
wondering too if this works and
tribal communities as well.
Madam chair I will defer that to
mixed with Nestle to see.
I'm sorry
what was the question.
Madam chair.
Madam chair representative of
Linda I'm of so we've been
working with the indigenous
women the tax task force with
the Indian Affairs Department
with the missing and murdered
indigenous women and relatives
looking at how to reinforce
how to seek out missing people
sometimes we've heard stories
about relatives being attached
to that I'm I'm just wondering
if this also make takes place as
far as how this law will change
if this is going to help with
native country.
madam chair R. Representative
Romero I I don't think it
changes anything other than the
fact that if someone does not
want to be found this is the
protection we're trying to find
and I know we did have testimony
in one of the Senate mayor
Committee about indigenous
people.
Being missing and no one is
looking for them feeling like
that the law enforcement is not
actively seeking
what has happened to them and so
I I know that's an issue but
we're on sort of the other side
of the issue saying well if
they're found
and they don't want to be found
for whatever reason that's
personal they they don't want
that information revealed to the
person who's who's looking form
so I I I don't see it really.
in any way.
Impacting in an adverse way what
you are doing.
Okay Madam chair representative
thank you Linda
one more question regarding like
Federal witness protection or
something like that would this
be one of those cases if
somebody was sort of trying to
reinvent themselves for safety
reasons is this helping with
that as well Madam chair
representative.
Madam chair representative
Romero I don't.
I think that would be of
referral to a federal agency
that it really wouldn't
automatically do anything.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative I don't have any
other questions.
We'll go to Representative
Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair I
apologize I'm gonna have
we were having technical
difficulties here and those more
capitals so I miss the
interaction.
I need to madam chair and
Senator
This bill.
Work with respect to minors.
I know.
Mr chair I'll defer that to the.
Madam chair representative
Pettigrew my and others are
specifically exempted in this
bill so from minor disappears.
You know they have and and the
and law enforcement finds them
they have to tell the parents
minors are not not included.
Thank you very much that was one
question I appreciate it.
Madam chair I yield back.
We'll go to Representative Lord
and hope that her Mike is
working now okay good okay and
I'm just gonna try my my dear
friend Representative Trujillo
I'm not Mr chair.
Adam chair my apologies.
I'm just messing with our go
ahead Representative Lord.
Thanks Amanda hold on he can't
be in the camera hold on a mask
on hold one second.
We can hear you okay I'm putting
my mask on to because he just
came in here so hold on one
second I'm gonna do a bunch of
things.
In the area.
Okay can you hear me.
Yes all my gosh okay.
Don't touch anything.
That's what no I'm teasing you I
do it that's the way I feel when
I get something to work it's
like whoa don't touch anything I
don't know what I did I can't do
it again what's hysterical now I
can all I can keep going to the
computer okay so now he's not
here to take my mask okay hold
on.
Okay so if you can hear me Madam
and I apologize I'll get this
bill.
In my hair.
Where one of those days.
Okay thank you madam chair and
and I apologize to everybody for
this profusely I'll have tech
support come up your briefly
some listing through here and
you can hear me through here so
I I actually went through my we
have I have we have some the
best analysts this year it is
amazing and I I love our
analysts they give us so much
stuff it's unbelievable the
manager I think my question is
already answered it was at a C.
that I'm looking at some of the
senators questions from before I
I had quest but the miners that
was answered.
Add question unaffordability
that's already answered in here
is a look through here
And the only thing okay I think
what I do have a question of
somebody with mental illness it
looks like a Representative
Senator Smitty said asset
question one of the missing
person has a mental health from
my paranoia it said the expert
said if law enforcement reform
by a person that they want to
remain confidential and law
enforcement in terms of their
behavior that something is wrong
so I it was a real clear so
somebody has a mental illness
are we.
Going to let the people know
that they found impact trying to
think about a family member who
scared to death doesn't know
whether family as and they say
they don't want them to know so
how will that be handled with
mental illness Senator I'll
defer to my witness.
Madam Madam chair representative
We did discuss that online and
really it's going to be up to
law enforcement if someone says
to them we don't want to be
found and they think there's
some kind of problem you know
they have the ability of someone
is really acting out to refer
them to I'm mental health
facility so we we didn't feel
like we could resolve that in in
this the statute.
Thank you madam chair and so.
Thank you so just ask this
question because I'm going
through and I see a bunch of an
answer but.
I'm trying to think about the
heartbreak of a parent or a
loved one not knowing where the
person is so they're they're
gonna have no way they're not
they're not going to say we
found but we're not going to
tell you where they are they
don't want to be found there
just I think never going to know
what the answer is where their
loved one is.
Madam chair.
Go ahead do and it I just.
The person that has been
notified or I'm sorry that's
been found.
That is coherent obviously but
afraid.
Is taking a risk of of of not
interacting with the family
member and and it's a big risk
but it's something that they
want because of their personal
safety reasons and I think that
But you know it's it's.
Hard for the parents to deal
with but if that's the case that
person is and that person is
considered qualified to deal
with their own with their own
behaviors there's nothing that
that anyone can do about that.
Thank you madam chair per sheet
you answer my questions again I
apologize for having to put
these things back on and off so
I I love the concept I do love
the concept because if you were
in a dangerous situation and
you're trying to get out and you
don't want to be found or for
whatever reason you your family
is abusive and mean and you want
to get away from them under
eighteen and you're out of there
and get that the same time I
just wish there was something in
here.
I don't now I don't know I don't
know what how to solve this
problem is something we're at
least they know they're found in
the the parents are crying every
night thinking that their loved
one is dead and they don't know
where they're at that concerns
me are at.
I have been my own parents with
their own problems and then
disappearing on me when I was a
child was not easy so had not
knowing whether they're dead or
alive or something then I can
absolutely I know what that
feels like so.
That's all the question I have
for now again I apologize thank
you madam chair for my technical
difficulties.
Okay thank you I'm and and I I
have the same.
Worries I guess is the best way
to put it about family members
are we there's that there's a
family who who the son and
brother has been missing for
some time and we get it worked
with that I believe it was
former Representative Sanchez on
on some of these issues and and
I wish there was an answer in
terms of yeah the family you
know I'd be great and I talked
it over with my husband last
night like can we think of a
solution where you can notify
people but not.
Let the secret out and I I'm I
don't know that there is one you
know I mean I I too would feel
horrible if if my son just
decided to up and leave and but
I I don't know that there's an
answer and you know that an
adult is that is an adult and
they should be allowed to one.
Do not see their family or not
here from their family so it's
it's a hard one and I really it
it hurts my heart to think about
people being so worried but I I
don't know if there's an answer
so with that I will entertain a
motion.
Would you pass in the chair okay
so we have Representative
Barreras with the motion and
Representative Romero
with the second and Alison what
you call the roll please.
Representative Barreras.
Yes.
Representative aboard.
I think she said one second.
It was not your head I was no
with an expert.
Okay.
Representative Pettigrew.
No thank you.
I share Mero yes.
Madam Thompson yes.
Okay by a three to two you have
a do pass thank you
Representative Trujillo for for
sitting in for Senator Lopez and
I'll come back to Representative
Lord for an explanation thank
you so much I actually thank you
madam chair having been in a
domestic violence situation I
totally love this bill I really
really do but I can't I I just I
struggle with the heartache of
the family not knowing and I
don't know if there's a website
where they could just say
founder something and the person
those are not dead just that
sense of relief it that's my
only heartburn with this other
than that I think this is great
that if you want to remain
anonymous you should but I'm
trying to think both sides thank
you for bringing this forward
and it was and no against this
was just that one part thank
you.
Madam chair.
Just before we move on if
anybody is interested in a very
fascinating story has to do with
this look up hiker named they
they called and mostly harmless
hello this is Nick names there
was a whole we went on for years
on reddit where they were trying
to figure out who this guy is in
tractors timely and it turns out
he did not want to be found here
horrible relationship with his
family but I was I was
fascinated by it but if you guys
wanna check that out.
Thank you.
Next we will go to SB ninety and
ninety four as amended and not
Representative my yes this is in
the waiting room and he it to
present this.
Good afternoon Representative
Maestas do you have an expert.
No I don't madam chair up I'm
sitting in for representative
mark more arms I Senator Mark
Moores and senator bill o'neill
who I believe are on the floor
all text them and hopefully they
can join in but but I'm prepared
to present the bill and and I'm
sure.
Mr chair that you are an expert
this is the sports bills this is
this is where you are where you
live I would say so whenever
you're ready go ahead okay.
Moores welcome.
What.
Okay so go ahead and present
your bill.
Thank you madam chair and
ironically I just read the the
article that I was just referred
to about that missing hiker and
I would encourage everyone to
read that I was so fascinated so
thank you Representative
Barreras thank you so much
managers to see you miss missing
or work space so special House
are one of our present this bill
Senate bill ninety four hours of
my assistant I've been working
on now for two years this is a
bill that actually started in
California there are about three
years ago in response to the
NCAA long standing for our
policy that student athletes can
not earn a living outside of our
there are scholarships or even
if they're not on scholarship in
this with this would you would
prevent the NCAA conferences
from the nine student athletes
the privilege in our arm sorry
right structure on a living when
they're actually in school a lot
of the attention usually goes
and student athletics which is
that a billion dollar industry a
basketball men women's team or
college football with the vast
majority of student athletes
almost all of our our no
scholarships available players
soccer players from tracks we
teams are not allowed to
actually monetize their name
likeness or image so great some
great examples of all of this
are I think about Olympians
there was a great great
yes one of the California
legislature when it passes state
Olympian from all state and
virtues of all of all player won
a gold medal.
And she made the decision and
can she go make money right away
our agency or go back to
Stanford Representative school
should have the option
opportunity to buckle so she had
to give up to that one
opportunity take advantage when
the gold medal getting name
likeness image opportunities she
has given up the rest of our
college career to go market size
that you think about the gym
just wanted the metals it's an
audit on on what this would do
is allow them to actually
monetize now we would not be the
eight state passed the very
first person was able to
monetize their white was a high
school volleyball.
She got a scholarship to go to
college and during the pandemic
she had actually started doing
it yourself our website on tick
tock which brought out thousands
and thousands of followers so
you know what athletics related
she was able to actually
monetize it gets cut off money
from our product placements on
this to talk about apple for
needs price forms most most
issues actually make you money
she had a maybe would have had
to make a decision I want to go
to college and play volleyball
or do I continue this do it
yourself
Channel that she's developed and
now she was able to actually go
to college in Michigan.
So that's really a example of
what we're talking about it's
really about freedom for student
athletes most of you all who
went to college we're able have
jobs on the side one your
college student athletes you
prefer not on scholarship are
prevented from doing so this is
something we're really excited
about some of our Senator new
myself madam chair
Representative Maestas working
on this really excited about and
for competitive advantage madam
chair if you think about going
to your local farm just like I
am madam chair I of our
conference opponents in our
conference call are either in
Colorado California those things
where it passes legislation so
when we're recruiting to UNM
from other states we're not at a
disadvantage if we don't pass
this New Mexico state athletic
director Mario is actually
testified in the Senate will
committees and favor of this
legislation because the
conference New Mexico state
isn't and of their conference
opponents are in California if
we don't pass the spirit
significance recruiting are
recruiting disadvantage from all
schools in California so it's
very important bill for our
state major schools but also for
our smaller schools like eastern
and what should we do a lot of
record from States in those
student athletes I'll be able to
make a living while they're in
school Representative Maestas
wants to add to that Senator
deals on the floor as we speak.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator Morris just a quick
comment the.
The issue of a college
scholarship and athletic college
scholarship is actually going to
the supreme court and the
Supreme Court said the
scholarship belongs to the
school.
Not the student so even though
the university makes a for your
commitment they don't have to
they can take your scholarship
and give it to someone else.
So it's a very strange power
dynamic amateur sports
particularly in college football
ended about fifty years ago if
not further really in the mid
nineties.
Major college sports took off
and makes you know when from the
millions to the billions of
dollars if I called a local
local golfer to you know teach
my get out of PED or teach me
frankly how to play golf and
given three in a box for a
couple hours that's student
would lose their scholarship
because they would be deemed
professional by the NC double a
this is this is a of.
The time has come to allow
student athletes to make a
living you know and not be a and
not lose their scholarship thank
you madam chair.
Thank you we will go to the
audience with a poll.
So you are able to vote in favor
opposition.
Madam chair this is really cool
none of our committees are doing
this.
Are all the committees in the
house doing this.
Most of there may be a few that
aren't but most of them are I
it's it's very helpful yes.
The house is the head of the
state.
We are old and stodgy sure.
Okay I I I I I suited up
Representative Maestas.
Four sessions so we have by two
in favor and zero in opposition
so now we will go to the
audience if if anyone in the
audience would like to speak in
support of this bill I'm okay
Senator o'neill we will let you
in and you can.
You can be a panelists you don't
have to speak from the audience
what we will promote you.
But I think you are poll results
group girl that this Senator
Moores has got all these high
powered experts from California
and so forth so this is an
improvement I'll stop right
there okay if if if I may madam
chairs etcetera of for your old
timers know this Senator o'neill
is a a long line of C. pack I
believe he served on C. back for
for if six four years or six
years back in the day thank you
madam chair.
What what what did you do to get
in the dog house to get but on
feedback Senator.
I'm.
I
just wanted to be on C. packed
the speaker actually sat are you
sure you want to be on scene for
the past where the action is
then okay is where the action is
that's for sure.
He was also the leading rig in
return or for the Ivy League for
two years running no actually
one year and I was sentiment but
that's okay it was just.
Better your honor you can
complete that are you one.
So miss that Senator you were
what what what school did you
play for our core now.
Ivy League secondhand Ivies and
kickoff returns my senior year
and you know we were a terrible
team unfortunately so I had lots
of kickoff returns was also
poverty but we did we really
stop people but we did so I
didn't get many part returns but
we did beat Columbia.
You okay I'm sure that was the
big rivalry cartel in Colombia
I millions tuned in okay.
Okay.
Getting can you hear me yes we
can hear you okay what I I do
believe that thank okay okay and
we do actually have a someone
who wants to speak in support of
this bill and that is Julianna
Koob.
So I will I'm Julie on it
whenever you're ready madam
chair members of the committee
I'm speaking for myself when I
say go back guys thank you
madam.
I should not more in I knew.
You.
Maybe five guys for her wedding
I
have that stricken from the
record please.
It's it's good to laugh I'm okay
so we will go to the committee.
And I have first Representative
Lord.
Thank you for that madam chair I
apologize again Frederick I
think we have it all fixed I. T.
people came and I I think I'm
all good help we'll see okay so
I do have some questions on this
I was looking at one of the
analysis on here madam chair and
it said that this act is going
to allow student athletes
receive food shelter medical
expenses or insurance from a
third party is that correct.
Correct madam chair
Representative rewards good to
see you there is actually cases
and was student athletes that
are don't have the financial
support for the family support
to actually attend school is a
legal that is against the rules
right now someone showed up this
is happy with a bag of groceries
seriously the student leaders
actually doesn't have any food
if you give that **** right back
your groceries they will lose
their college eligibility of the
current rules so that's what
that amendment is about because
that has happened schools are
actually stripped the
eligibility of student athletes
who have actually need food and
taking some food from anyone
besides their parents.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Senator I don't want to say
Representative now because you
know I can't I can't get used to
that we get the Senate over here
who.
House.
After late last lap late night
last night from at note that
thank you madam chair that was
interesting I didn't know that I
had no idea I went to college
but I didn't play sports
unbelievable is as tall as I am
everybody asks me at six with
something place port Act and do
that
so another interesting thing I
did also they can wear footwear
they're choosing during official
mandatory so as long as for work
they they have to are mandated
but where.
Hello Representative Maestas
answer yes.
Thank you madam chair
representative lord Center
Moores yes the coach I'm a big
will coach I signed a contract
with Nike I I make my kids wear
Nike I guess they don't and if
they want to work converse I
kick them off the team.
Thank you totally understand
that totally get that thank you
for into the question I think
that's all the questions I had
there's just a few things that
have popped up that I was
unfamiliar with and I do one
more question and chair so with
the compensation I was homes are
going to work out like are they
going to be a free agent to get
in
that's what I'm looking for a to
get an agent who will help them
and to go she eighteen using
their name and how much are
gonna makers are gonna be any
cap on that can they make as
much as they want as much as
they can is there any kind of
cap a limitation on how much it
can make Madam chair
representative it's a fantastic
question one of the the model
legislation that we work with
our with the national
association of college athletes
was to actually allow all.
Athletes to be able to hire
agents are as you can imagine
especially some of the more high
profile students the so you
think about of the want to make
sure that they're able to hire
agents to be able to negotiate
this so we just want to be a
level playing field of state
thank you your or do this was
working with.
World famous college athlete
right now but you know someone
which we are national
chairmanship basketball player
or team or something like that
so this would actually allow
them to get agents to work on
those deals for.
Thank you senator thank you
madam chair that's all the
questions I have for now thank
you I yield my time okay we'll
go to representative press.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator Morris and nail and
representative of Maestas for
bringing this I'm I'm I'm a huge
supporter of this bill I think
that it makes a ton of sense
some of these kids are bringing
in a ton of money to the schools
and it only makes sense for them
to be able to to make money off
of this the question that I have
include it is about is about an
athlete here in New Mexico that
his mother is mother was
suffering from from breast
cancer and so he started the
peacock.
This was to to bring in money
for breast cancer research he
had to to get it cleared through
the NC double a and he had to
prove that none of the funds
were going to him and he was
barely able to promote it at all
with this bill affect anything
like this.
You know what Madam chair
representative I have not heard
of this example I will have to
defer to my legal experts if
that would actually for to not
but if it was if you was able to
monetize
you would be able to under this
legislation to be able to keep
that money I don't think about
an attorney that that would
prevent him from that set up a
nonprofit like this I would have
to defer this summer with what
were requests for to support
self.
Madam chair representative about
us and our our I
No the Senators correct I think
I think with that student did
was perfectly legal under
today's rules but if this bill
were to pass there would be no
question about it there would be
no scrutiny nobody would I would
think twice and and
And so it would liberate folks
for that purpose.
Thank you thank you so much of
Madam chair representative and
senators and that was the only
question that act I think that
this is a really great bill for
our our student athletes and it
would it's more of an incentive
for them to come to New Mexico
or stay in New Mexico so I
appreciate this thank you.
Representative Representative
Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you.
Kelman for bringing this bill.
My first question madam chair is
very specific.
With respect to the donors and
also with.
Right to the the athlete that
receives these benefits I want
to make sure that we're madam
chair and and gentleman that
the.
We.
Will will be accountable and
help to the.
Reporting this information and
they stop of the actual value of
we see what he receives not cost
value.
Is is considered taxable and and
we'll have to see what will have
to account for that one is in
basis with respect to taxes.
Hello.
Madam chair R. Representative
absolutely would be a source of
income they would be liable to
pay taxes on.
Okay and.
We also madam chair and
gentleman the.
To me this this is very similar.
Just some other things so the.
Is there a reporting structure
that will be put in place that
indicates who is providing the
guests and and is there a way
that we are tracking what guests
are given and based on every
criteria that we are using it
here
So I I just wanna make sure that
it Nike's giving gets to a
handful of people that there's a
way that this this becomes
public information because they
are attending public school and
so I just want to make sure that
madam chair gentleman that that
it this is happening on both
sides number one Nike is is
reporting that yep I gave you
twenty thousand dollars in the
student is reporting the athlete
is reporting that I receive
twenty thousand dollars and it's
it's transparent.
Madam chair chairman are some
sort my apology Madam chairwoman
Representative this is a private
transaction just have you
received I think your internet
we have about you.
You are correct I'm sure.
No Sir I'm an engineer.
My my apologies for defaming.
Surescripts thank you.
With this to be a business
transaction which we the the
student athletes or B. R. the
the the endorser of the product
to be endorsed C. just slow like
your car trucks it would so
there's no reporting mechanism
yes this is actually eighty
a a business transaction.
Money for someone.
And also sure to remember these
are always public institutions
of this so welcome.
This could be your issue river
city or.
That are not actually our public
institutions.
Thank you madam chair thank you
gentlemen I'm sure I don't know
he needs to mute the phone but
The.
So.
This is relating to New Mexico
we don't have a private college
in the state of New Mexico.
We are playing sports yeah that
that has.
Yes I.
Thank you for your for what
you're talking about but what
happens at Rice University
doesn't affect the lawsuit The
or the laws that we sent packed
here don't don't affect price
so.
With respect to this madam chair
and gentleman.
We have the potential of the
student could be a walk on could
not be could be semi is picked
out a high school that receives
a scholarship from from from the
university and on top of that
has the ability to.
Receive.
State funds through scholarship.
Then issued manage of being able
to utilize their skills and and
and and and make money off of
the from from that standpoint as
well my understanding that
correct.
I'm sure.
Senate vote absolutely that's
the whole point.
Okay.
All right.
With respect to the fact that
but madam chairman Joe in the
repair receiving.
In fact state funds from a
scholarship standpoint yeah
we're not able to understand
what other benefits they're
receiving
Well I like the concept to this
gentleman I cannot support thank
you.
Thank you madam chair
representative of I think it's
important to refer to note that
most student athletes are not on
scholarship.
Lot of the attention is
basketball football next we're
just media attention we look at
the golf team the example used
before many of those student
athletes or non scholarship if
they are it is for just books or
tuition we don't get the full
saw scholarship work football
and basketball also the example
representative of my ancestors
before about the call for you
could do some lessons on the
side it might be just receiving
the minutes about scholarship
money for books or other
tuitions covered with feces
covered not a full scholarship
would allow them to stay in
school do some questions on the
side and ultimately the goal is
for them to stay in school get
it right so they can contribute
to our society.
Okay we will go to vice chair
Romero.
Thank you madam chair thank you
the senators and representative
for your this excellent bill
it's very exciting to move New
Mexico forward especially in the
in the way of athletics
you know this is been a hot
button issue across the United
States I'm just interested to in
and how it might work I mean I
agree with basically all of the
points have been made and I
think one of the other key
points that for those athletes
that do get endorsements which
this is like a high class
problem if you were able to
achieve that is that if you were
to get injured at a young age
like that's over and so to not
even be able to have any earning
capacity from all of that hard
work at that level of getting
sick I mean even being able to
compete in NC double a is a
massive massive athletic feats
so this is a you know I think
just a fairness issue
overall and and having gone to
you know at D. one school where
athletes were choosing their
degrees over there indoor Spence
was just insane been
impossibility of calculus that
you're going of course you
should never have to choose one
or the other that's a high class
problem but again if there's
injuries involved in other
things in your earning potential
does decrease so I I super
appreciate the thoughtfulness in
this and the the movie that's
behind getting athletes paid
that said I do have a couple
questions just with thinking
about New Mexico in the mix of
all of this and and our
universities being that we do
house you know we have a couple
that you know do one schools but
as far as some of the other you
know do to schools that we have
athletes for so are we saying
just across the board whether
it's NC double a or otherwise
sanctioned even perhaps a club
team or something like that now
if you receive a scholarship and
I don't know necessarily how the
rules work
Without your bill because I do
not know student athletes who
had received scholarships that
did work
how does how does is this an NC
double a thing or is this just
across the the board if your
student athlete receiving a
scholarship now you can work can
you describe that for me Madam
chair representative just
fantastic question because there
are different levels are.
College athletics that you
brought up and also club sports
let me start with close point no
does not scholarships about
section they're not there was
not a governing body for the
club sports so this would not
apply to an A. I. A. which is
are your smaller schools around
school the country has actually
adopted this all this
requirement in the example I
used earlier of the young high
school volleyball player from
Michigan who are created on to
your cell phone to talk
accounted says don't quite well
financially choose able now to
play and and and I and I.
The school she was the first
person hi is it just that you
would have to make the decision
or play volleyball to school for
continue to make money what I'm
ninety years old.
Most of us were probably at that
age wanted to make money and so
this is actually more targeted
to the NCAA and again California
Colorado four houses we
instigate is taken steps because
they are in making the decision
to miss out on the California
Florida New Jersey Brasco
Colorado New Mexico markets if
they don't actually for.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Senator so it that said you I
mean I've looked at some of the
data regarding likes the
opportunity of bringing in
business even into the state
because of these athletes is
this also going to help us
attract talent to our state from
other states like when we think
about a more you know
competitive team I know that
this is always controversial
especially in the space of you
and
you know whether how athletics
run and I just wonder if this
helps reinforce some of those
questions about stability and
athletics does that help at all
I'm I'm really curious if this
there's any data on that you
madam chair Representative
absolutely and that's what would
be the first person to talk to
me about this was the basketball
coach at U. one L. the football
coach you and and then had a
great conversation directors at
state are you on about this and
particularly New Mexico state
is.
Various positions out football
team this independent but their
basketball team and their other
sports compete against that we
have over conference opponents
are California California's
spouses so then our significant
recruiting disadvantage trying
to recruit kids out of Arizona
or California if we pass this.
And and and I used the example
earlier if you want to help out
west conferences I the
conference opponents return
California Colorado so we passes
now we have that it would manage
will still be on par with
California Colorado but now
we're.
Vanished over Texas to recruit
some of those kids in Arizona
especially Mexico state.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Senator that's very helpful and
I'm glad that you're having
these conversations in real time
with the folks who will be
affected by this I'd love to
hear from them at some point I
think just maybe I don't know
that just in testimony if we can
to just to know that they're
they're on board that would be
great but that side I I support
this the only other question
that I had and thinking about
some of the different
possible controversies to avoid.
What I'm thinking about like a
student that might be endorsed
by a lake of microbrew company
and while they're student
policies about keeping alcohol
of campus they're able to
advertise you know things like
that
that made you sort of create
possible rest I just wonder if
there's ever been any issues in
other states or if there is
any situation where we
Have to make sure that we're not
you know conflicting with any
existing university policy about
you know where students can
worker who they can be
represented by or who they're
representing and is if there's
any controversy there just
thinking about how we want to
continue to you know we monitor
that.
Madam chair representative
that's factually a fantastic
question because one of my
favorite first questions because
I immediately thought about the
second search about endorsement
to to see those or alcohol
coverage for what you just said
it was a really pointed out to
me the UNM house of the door
with the student university of
Colorado Gesta has site issues
contract with the casino up
there and those Agpiece on the
screen there's a pistol Pete
Pete you're at a whiskey out
there that this is the worst by
the university of New Mexico
State University I don't think
the locals here apple it would
work on that but once that was
that was highlighted to me I I
that makes sense why why would
we limit the freedom of student
athletes from doing that if the
universities are actually
marquis to what correct and
gambling stations right now.
I just learned something.
I know I'm scratching my head
about all of those decisions
already but even so
never misses publicly but I
tried it the I think it's
personal Mexico state you're in
such a particular.
Well you know if it helps our
economy know us as legislators
we need that bottom line no
that I think I just you know
want to be cognizant of any
unintended consequences of this
and again I support the bill I
think this is about yeah student
rates and and ensuring that they
have the equal access everybody
else and and so it's for a bill
thank you madam chair thank you
senator
Representative thank you madam
vice chair so I I do have some
questions and let me say that I
am in support of this bill but
I've been following sports for
what back when I was in high
school and college I read Sports
Illustrated cover to cover every
week and I mean I I not so much
anymore I have other things that
need my attention but so I've
been around for all of that
scandals you know that the
people that that that college
athletes that were paid to you
know pay that fifty thousand
dollar salary to turn on the
sprinklers in that the I'm on
the field what that's astro turf
and those kind of things so so
you know those kind of the way
that boosters can.
Help behind the scenes perhaps a
lot have you thought about those
kinds of those kinds of issues
where loose.
Go ahead I'm sorry what I'm
sorry I lost you for a second I
think that just was corruption
athletics asked the bill does
include at two Smith's clause
that the universities cannot use
potential endorsements for
inducements are for example
famous cases like you talked
about were student athletes
watch a Jack go up and down a
couple hundred dollars an hour
things like that so does include
and all the other national
line which from States include
inducement offices universities
are not able state to do what
you just described in that would
be a still up for grabs for you
see here okay so Senator it was
you know I mean we we here we we
see on the news about we have a
great prospect coming to you
know watch the Lobos and if a
booster with a lot of money gets
a hold of that what how how can
we make sure that they are not
you're saying that the school
can't offer that as an incentive
to provide how is there anything
that you can prevent a booster
from doing something along those
lines.
madam chair that's actually what
happens now the boosters are
considered by the NCA extension
of the university and that's
what prevents.
That from happy about some very
famous cases and see a history
of paying violations think of
you'll just a few days
some of the other cases that's
exactly what happened it was the
boosters who were doing that and
that when they found out the
university was punished because
grocers are considered extension
university.
So I guess I wasn't clear my
questions what if it's a a
booster but I'm maybe a fan a
fan with money as opposed to the
organized stir organization is
there anything in the bill that
well you know let's say and not
to throw in the state but Garcia
Honda they have a ton of money
and I'm not enough they're big
sports fans is there anything
that would prevent them from
saying okay you're gonna get a
new car and that you know forty
thousand dollars a year from us
if you come to New Mexico is
that is there anything that that
would look at madam chair that
is the inducements Clause that's
in the bill that you could not
do that once we get to
Albuquerque and they you know.
One thousand yards or score
thousand points in basketball
this season an update a Garcia
Harper wanted to be able to.
The use of this document and it
would be allowed to do that okay
so so I guess just to make clear
to my own mind if if anything
happens before their sign to the
university it's not kosher but
once they're signed then then
it's okay.
Madam chair that's a great way
to say yes okay okay and and
this is more my curiosity then
then has to do with the bills
but how big of a fight did the
NC double a put up with the
first state and how much of a
fight are they putting.
Madam chair that was a huge fire
because the first day was
California no California cares a
lot of weight that we want to
support national economy we are
all of our our phones plus you
get the pac twelve there and
that is really what have
Representative discussions of
reform in Washington and washer
there is a couple of these
legislation washer right now of
the one probably the gentleman
part is sponsored by Cory Booker
in the NCAA is definitely.
Trying to change your influence
our process for well as a stand
to talk about floor New Jersey
Rep Roscoe California Colorado.
Create a huge market so that the
NCAA school after response to I
can't imagine in CA decided that
they're not going to be
competitive in Florida
California our future.
Yeah okay thank you for that and
then this is just just a concern
of mine but it is always a
concern of mine my poor Lobo's
and.
And that was we met was at what
looking for number correctly
could be I I've been a huge fan
since since I moved to New
Mexico when I was between my
second and third grade years so
and we we got to stay up late to
watch the rebroadcast of the
local again after the news on
ten thirty we had to take a nap
but we got to stay up late
remember my parents my parents
instilled in us at all love for
low blows and but my and my only
concern is that the rich are
going to get richer and I don't
mean the student athletes I mean
the Alabama as the UCLA's both
kind of people who really have
that I'm and and it probably has
nothing to do with this bill but
I can see it if this goes you
know I'm if it becomes
nationwide that not the programs
that are already strong are
going to get stronger and that
programs that struggle are going
to but that's I guess that's
that doggy dog world of both
sports and I just have to say hi
to Leo hi Leo that's my buddy
there.
So I will entertain a motion.
Madam chairman of the past do I
have a second.
The second okay we have
Representative Romero with that
motion and Representative but it
just with the second Alison will
you take the role.
More Representative Barreras yes
go back I just.
There are.
Representative Lord.
Yes.
Representative Pettigrew.
Yes and go Agpiece.
Mr Merrill.
Yes go chart go Lobos and the
compelling at you know public
comment really.
And madam chair Thompson.
Yes everyone's a low oil what
What what.
Thank you madam chair thank you
for bringing this bill and
giving us a little levity we
have that kind of a heavy night
on the floor last night so by
four to one you'd have it I mean
five to one I'm sorry you have a
do pass and good luck in your
next committee and not thank you
for doing this.
It was zero but but.
Madam chair.
Madam chair I just want to thank
thank you all and I I believe
I'm up next but before I go on
to that
Mow my **** this with us I.
A guy for six years and I was on
for four and we had some
wonderful moments together did
we back in the day so.
The question at the end that's a
very good question the thing is
timing wise that's why this bill
is important we get this in now
Hey you know then then we can
compete with Alabama sort of.
Cornell maybe Cornell.
For the
second coming of bill o'neill
and.
Before you before we leave this
did you were you a form letter
Senator o'neill unfortunately
I'm looking at a picture my
office it was Dartmouth and you
know the rule of thumb is you
don't catch of bear our
appointment within the ten yard
line and for some reason I
wasn't thinking and it went
right through my hands it did
start with recovered and they
were the best team in the league
and we are planning really close
and I'll never forget I just
wanted to banish I remember
going over to the side I because
I was a special teams guy wasn't
the star and then Amanda I
wanted to go somewhere else in
my world in that building
Hanover New Hampshire.
I fumbled once okay.
That's not bad my was my husband
returned punts and kicks for
highland high school and north
he said he are the coach always
had someone behind him just in
case.
He ran but he didn't always
catch it.
Cancers well.
So with that we will go on to
Senate bill one fourteen thank
you senator and representative
of my just that thank you thank
you madam chair and if I can I
want to introduce Senate bill
one fourteen Senate bill one
fourteen would update the
procedures for requesting and
evaluating request for early
parole based on an inmate's
advanced age or medical
infirmity madam chair members
basically the corrections
department and parole board
doing this already but they want
to put it in statute and what's
really stands out about this
bill concerning geriatric parole
and again this is for severely
ill inmates not somebody with
like a tummy ache or a back pain
okay somebody this severely ill
fifty five and over but what's
great is that.
They are the sentencing
commission and I have Douglas
carver from the Senate
commission on this to answer any
questions they met they had a
special meeting of the reform
criminal justice reform
committee upon which sat victims
groups D. A. is all kinds of
folks in this was a unanimous
can they were looking for low
hanging fruit and they they all
agreed on this one just because
over the you know the public
safety center at not at risk in
these cases and they're doing it
anyway but they just wanted to
you know wanted agreement on
something
you know that that job you know
what's happened in the past with
this particular bill is that
it's gotten lost in this omnibus
bills that we know so well you
know and and like an omnibus
bill can be great like three of
the four bills but one of them
aren't so hot and you know the
other three are like a counselor
so that's a long winded way of
saying
This is Senate bill one fourteen
and if Douglas you want to just
stand for questions or chime in
a little bit and then questions
I think we need to promote him
to a panelists are Douglas
Harper.
Not Harper.
Carver.
Yeah.
I guess I think carver in.
I love this that the closed
captioning wow.
It's really impressive but I it
makes me understand where I
don't pronounce things very
clearly when it puts things I'm.
It point that out to Mr Douglas
do you do you want to say a few
words are you just here for
questions I just because
basically brief madam chair I
was also an expert waiting on
the house to finish last night I
think my our bill went on right
after yours I'm so appreciate
how tired everyone is Senator
o'neill said a procession to use
myself on instead of us.
The director of the New Mexico
sentencing commission.
And senator dole said this bill
came out of our reform
committee.
Session thank you madam that
committee and the reform
committee is made up of
representatives from the dust
public defenders corrections of
victims groups department of
public safety.
Administrative office of the
courts the commission as a whole
also at CYFD members on it
members appointed by the
governor including our chair
justice Chavez former justice
and Chavez and also members
appointed by both parties from
both chambers so it's a very
broad cross section of the state
in the criminal justice system
and so this bill was actually
the language in the bill was
developed by corrections the
parole board myself and another
member of the commission who are
work together on a subgroup
brought it to the reform
committee work this week then it
went on and was endorsed by the
full Commission.
I just want to know there's a
lot of new that one looks like
new language in this bill but
actually most of that language
is just combining the existing
medical geriatric parole program
which for some reason because of
amendments the split over two
statutes a lot of language is
imported that's why there is
that one repeal statute and then
A new policies were added into
it thank you madam chair and
members thank you for that
explanation and we will go to
the poll.
So if you are in support or
opposition to this bill you can.
Wait.
Okay all right it looks like I
in support and zero one
opposition so we will go to the
audience is is there anyone in
opposition we're going to do
opposition first so I'm if you
are in opposition to this bill I
want to speak please raise your
hand.
I'm not seeing anyone if you're
here in support and would like
to speak please raise your hand.
Okay I think we're gonna have to
start giving some of these
particularly because women
frequent flyer miles here I am a
cash and Rikki Lee Chavez are
are our number one fans so I'm
so we'll go ahead with Diane.
Thank you I'm Diane cashed
representing myself asking you
to vote yes on this bill that
formalizes that not only humane
and common sense avenues for
parole for some inmates who do
not pose a threat to our
communities Representative
provides a way to save tax payer
dollars on the incarceration of
individuals who pose no threat
to our communities you automatic
and be much better served and I
think you dance.
Thank you Diane Rikki Lee
Chavez.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Rikki Lee Chavez
on behalf of the New Mexico
Conal defense lawyers
association madam chair it's
always a pleasure to be before
you when you're committee I
appreciate all the work that
this committee does we stand in
support of this bill we
appreciate Senator o'neill he
has been working on this issue
for several years and it's a
really important issue and I we
ask this committee to support
thank you so much madam chair
members.
Next we will go to Alisha Tafoya
of expectant Secretary Tafoya
Lucero my correct.
Yes madam chair.
Or.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members I am Alicia to foil the
Cerro the corrections department
cabinet secretary and I just
want to stand in strong support
of Senate bill one one for today
and the the state thank you very
much to Senator o'neill for
caring this sentencing
commission bill I was part of
the group that developed this in
the offseason as part of the
criminal justice reform
subcommittee and it was just
an incredible experience to sit
with people from all
perspectives of the criminal
justice world and really come to
a place where we had consensus
on this very important issue
it's smart for public safety
it's smart for people to be able
to spend time with their
families when they are in
terminal terminally ill
situations and I would urge the
committee to stand in support
thank you very much madam chair.
Thank you madam secretary
Lucille dot compost.
Good afternoon chair and members
of the committee my name is Liz
elect them plus I'm up policy
associate with gold futures
formally known as young women
United we stand in support of SB
one fourteen criminalization and
mass incarceration particularly
in communities of color.
Has meant that many of our loved
ones are serving incredibly long
sentences many women find
themselves incarcerated for drug
related convictions that could
have been avoided with access to
health care this bill states
people can only be released if
they don't pose a risk to
themselves or society this
common sense legislation will
mean that those who have served
their sentences.
May get to spend the last years
or even months up with their
loved ones dying people won't
have to spend their last days
behind bars we ask you that you
support just be one fourteen
thank you.
Thank you Barron Jones.
Good afternoon I'm madam chair
members of the committee my
name's parents also with the
ACLU of New Mexico we stand and
support of this legislation
because we recognize that as a
common sense step to did it to
show humanity for those on who
are ill and incarcerated in no
longer a danger to the public so
I thank you so much and I think
responses sponsored for bringing
this legislation and I encourage
you all to long supported thank
you.
Finally we have Kim Chavez Cook.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Kim Chavez Cook
with the law offices of the
public defender I don't have any
different or new reasons to
support the bill than those who
have already spoken but for
those reasons that have already
been presented to the committee
the law offices of the public
defender stands in strong
support of this legislation and
would ask you to vote yes.
Thank you and we will go to the
committee I have Representative
Lord.
Thank you madam chair.
Okay so I do have some questions
on this you're gonna have to
walk me through this bill
my understanding as I'm reading
through this as well as
on page two geriatric inmate
means a person who and that goes
to this first part second part
is fifty five years are of age
or older.
Or suffers from a debilitating
chronic disease or does not
consist Services danger to the
person self or to society at the
time to review.
Explain.
Section four to me I'm section
for.
Is that man anybody that is a
child molester
so let's say received twenty
five years of prison
would they be eligible for this
for this release if they were
had cancer and we're dying
Representative thanks for the
question and this came up during
our Senate debate then yes
basically we're it doesn't go
into it doesn't.
Make any exemptions for any
certain kind of crimes you know
what I was in the position of
explaining on the Senate floor
as the parole board is charged
with public safety and as a
former I was the executive
director of the juvenile parole
board in the state for us for
several years and so you know I
have to remind myself folks
don't really understand the
parole process I would emphasize
that all victims are invited to
any kind of parole hearings so
in that case if there was a a
sex offender the victims would
be front and center talking to
the parole board but basically
the reason why victims groups
and others can agree on this
bill is that public safety once
the release of such a personal
matter you know whatever the
crime is does not pose a risk to
the community so that's that's
kind of of the consensus that
came out of at of this group
that the secretary was
mentioning and Douglas did you
want to chime in on that
thank you Senator madam chair
representative board members of
the committee two things of note
one
Madam chair representative know
that that list of
In the Senate debate on that
because they're looking at a
different provision of the bill
so you would have to check all
four of those boxes.
And as senator o'neill.
Just make noted just making the
baseline qualification
a big I doesn't trigger your
relates that dangerous in this
component is very important it's
going to be analysis and this
three stages of review in the
process the classification
officer corrections would have
to approve second goes to the
secretary for review who would
have to approve the package then
get sent the parole board who
would also have to review
and note also that the person
isn't just released in free and
clear they still have to they're
still under corrections
jurisdiction for the length of
their sentence also.
You get to go home and spent the
month the two months with the
family but never happened
checking or anything that so
they would be released if
they're still pose a danger to
society as a whole Madam chair
representative of a second there
The under present supervision so
they'll have to go through that
I have to have a procurement
role and established.
And with corrections are thank
you an awful thing someone would
normally have upon release
another new wants that got lost
it would have been the Senate
debate
People are just walking out of
or you will check that out of
the facility additional in
person supervision
Are not and a corrections
facility I hope that answers
your question and if I made to
the parole board can always deny
this is an automatic get out of
jail card free and that's when
you again as a parole board
person like I'll never forget
these hearings it when the
victims would speak up you know
if there's a real problem with
somebody the I just have faith
and and the probe or no matter
what area it serving you know
your job is a parole board
members to guard public safety
and to listen to the victims so
I I am reassured by all that I
understand your question
Representative we had a very
good discussion on that on the
Senate floor
and so what I was encouraged by
the the vote was very
I think it was like thirty four
to four at the end but but but
anyway that that you're asking a
question that that you know on
people's minds and certainly I
understand
that question for sure and I'm
sympathetic to that question
thank you Representative.
You so much friends and that
thank you madam chair so I I'll
keep it brief you guys remember
Charles Manson very top of mind
for me because I lived in Los
Angeles at that time.
Area and I'm dating myself but
yeah it.
There's more and there's more
weight more to that story but I
remember was Susan Atkins
she was sixty years old
diagnosed with cancer and she
was denied parole and rightfully
so for the reason they said you
showed no mercy to your victims.
R. and while I want to have
trust in the program they do
because they do make a lot of
good decisions.
I worry about and you're gonna
hear this is just my own
personal thing might write
reoccurring theme I've not
giving.
Breaks to people that are serial
rapists and child molesters
because they showed no mercy to
their victims I also have a hard
time with someone who may have
committed a horrendous murder
they showed no victim to they
show no mercy to the victims
whatsoever I can understand if
somebody was in there for drugs
and staffed and you know they
they did some really bad things
in their younger get that I
always have a hard time with.
Any eligibility going to people
who show no mercy to their
victims I don't I don't I don't
believe that they should have
that bestowed on to them and
they tortured people and
children and ruin their lives so
I won't support this bill I
understand we're trying to get
at and if there are some
exclusions but you're getting
here we haven't heard yes I I I
always am I am very harsh on sex
offenders have a degree in
psychology and I know there's no
cure and and it's frustrating
that there is no cure for
Seraikis and child molesters and
something like Susan mac and
should should not be given a
right to parole so I think you I
understand but I I will be
supporting thank you I realize I
thank you Representative.
Representative vice chair
Romero.
Thank you madam chair I thank
you senator I obviously support
still I think we need so much
reform in our
Raul situation and this is what
like you said low hanging fruit
secretion at the intro and I
just had a question just
thinking about the pandemic that
we're in and kind of the
continuing.
We've had a situation
Where you know we've been
looking at different aspects of
Medicaid and access and those
who might be coming out of these
situations are they do they
qualify for Medicaid after a for
the for the care that I'm seeing
Representative Thomson nodding
okay.
So I how does that sort of care
coordination because they're
obviously in very dire straits
in their conditions should they
be allowed to.
actually leave their sentences
you think are serrated situation
how does the continuum of care
workers work in that
circumstance you but the family
how does how does that play out
Douglas and perhaps the
secretary can answer those to
that is there you're both better
situated answer that question
so.
Madam chair
Representative Romero.
The secretary if you so on could
be promoted to give you details
but I can give you a thirty
thousand foot view where they
will have to have a parole
planned so I'm presuming part of
that parole plan would be being
able to access care I know
corrections has made great
strides since I was involved
with the Legislature up and
Council services on working with
the CCJ made great strides in
ensuring that the all sorts of
benefits stringer upon release
so you're not having a big gap.
Anyone who's released would
qualify for Medicaid can get the
proper services one
Better that we discussed as the
committee was discussing bill
was that you just on a lot of
places to based on.
But you might have special needs
because
or be.
Placements because of their age
and the nature of their crimes
there's just not a lot as we
hear what does not a lot of.
What do you take those but that
all goes into the programming
process and no one's release
without a parole plan the all
this really does is it it's
forty one causes the everything
is the same except for for
people in these terminal
conditions are incredibly
serious medical problems
might get a slightly earlier
Raul leaks the other still under
parole still under correction
supervision etcetera and also
just want to win noted the
reference to something that a
representative our state and I
think I misspoke earlier on the
bill there is still an exclusion
from these are the medical
geriatric parole program for
anyone who committed first
degree murder so that's that's
in the current law that's been
carried over into this statute
is a big debate there obviously
people on the reform committee
who would have been anxious to
allow those people to take
develop themselves but first
degree homicide cases
are still banned from accessing
this program so I want to make
sure the committee was clear on
that point as we move forward
and I'm gonna jump in here we
Representative Romero we have
been working for some time in
this in the legislature on
trying to take care of health
care issues for people who are
being released in terms of
whether they're Medicaid is cut
off and and and so we have I
believe I don't know who carried
it and I don't know what you're
but I believe we passed a bill
that basically says that part of
releasing someone is helping
them to get I'm in health
insurance were you know however
that is because it what you know
we we realize that it would be a
terrible thing if somebody was
incarcerated and had had gone
through at a drug rehab program
or or their their behavioral
health issues have become stable
with medications that that that
release and then they're out
there without their budget and
without the support that they
need medically so I believe that
we have taking care of that if
the secretary has.
More to add that's fine but but
it's something we have been
cognizant of for years in this
body and we have been working
on.
Yes thank you madam chair thank
you Representative I'm sorry
Senator and and experts I and I
guess that going back to that
the scenario of a public health
emergency in these situations
where you know I don't even know
her whole point functioning if
they are or how that's going and
if hearings are being held and I
can imagine that you know just
knowing what's happened in our
corrections facilities that that
COVID has probably been an issue
with exactly the crux of these
patients that you're talking
about as well and I'm just
wondering like in this scenario
I'm sure there's a an increase
in in folks seeking that
supports it does that does is
there ever a situation that with
the layer of a public health
emergency that changes any of
this or or how is it being dealt
with now just my curiosity.
Senator your meal.
The secretary like to weigh in
on that question or Douglas.
Yes thank you very much madam
chair and senator so the first
item as far as a Medicare or
what that transition process
looks like yeah absolutely
anytime that a person is
released from incarceration we
work with them and as long as
they consent we fill out the
Medicaid application go through
the whole process with them and
in the case of somebody who's
releasing early for this under
this bill are under this process
that is in place now we set them
up with their doctors and then
our doctors from in facility
the indicate that doctors and
medical personnel in the
committee make sure they other
medication I'm sometimes we
release people to their home and
then we briefly make sure that
hospice comes in to the home
works with the family to get
everything set up so that
hospice can white and white here
and it is true and correct that
people will be covered by
Medicaid if they are at least
under this provision and of
course they need higher miss
educate and then the the second
item was it house the parole
board working or how are things
going now the pandemic
affecting.
So forty actually has really
provided us with some just.
Is to.
The way things work.
And so now we are having it so
that parole board will give more
access for more people to see
the scene by the parole board
the way it works previously is
like maybe once or twice a month
they would spend a day at one
location and then move on to the
next location and so on but now
they will do hearings for all
the locations if we have people
that need to be heard on the
same day or cluster them in the
same week so we're actually
finding that there's a lot more
direct interact or it access
rather to parole board hearings
and parole board members and the
way we're working with the board
through the pandemic because of
course the board is a their
ministry of the attached to the
agency but they're separate and
their their own individual
entity not not part of the
umbrella of the corrections
department but what they do is
they they will come into our
physical offices are our local
region and district offices and
we set them up with an office
the computer and we signed
Amanda do everything that needs
to be done to make sure that
they can be present for their
hearings and it actually has
gone really well in fact in the
year of twenty twenty I mean I I
I know this doesn't sound like a
lot but we released nine people
under this is a medical I'm
sorry might be eight I'm gonna
have to get a positive number on
that it was more than had been
released under medical or
geriatric parole in the combined
number of years prior it was
really significant and it was
because these people were in
terminal situations some comment
related some not but at the
ultimately they were all in need
of end of life care and we
assure that they receive that
and be able to spend time with
their families with the
assistance of the board thank
you madam chair thank you
senator.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator and and and thank you
Secretary for for helping me
understand how it's working and
I'm I'm so grateful to hear that
technology has been our friends
for for making sure that this is
a much more improved process so
I hope that continues look
forward to hearing more about it
in interim but I I support this
bill thank you madam chair.
Thank you I just have a question
for the secretary so do you I
mean I I and I I admittedly I've
never been to a parole board
hearing I've only seen them on
TV on the the law shows so and
but but I'm finding that with
the particularly with our
committees we are getting a lot
more participation where people
don't have to drive and that
maybe don't have to be in the
same room with it and when I
talk about the parole be in the
same row with that with that
person to attack them is there
any thinking from when the
pandemic ends to continue with
some sort of remote
participation.
Thank you madam chair yeah
absolutely what what I liked
best what has been really
amazing for for us is we
actually see people who have
delays in their release times
that was solely based on when
they could or couldn't be
schedule for the probe work
because the person who was that
say the Santa Fe facility they
only had two opportunities to
see the board in a month so if
their case worker missed the
deadline and they just missed
out into the hall next month and
now that's not the case now
we're able to just get people
and so that in and of itself for
me is a big deal I have heard
some members of the board though
have they they talk about how
they really prefer the personal
interaction and I understand
that so I think that when it's
possible to do that but does not
cause a delay in a person's
release then we can probably
figure out some sort of a hybrid
process I appreciate the
question though and I mean this
is one of those situations where
where I say technology has
really helped us to streamline
the release process.
Yeah I agree madam secretary and
now I think and I hope and and
the speaker has spoken about
that we will continue in this in
the house that we have remote
participation in our communities
that we all know how tiny are
committee rooms are in the
shuffling people in and out so
that may be a waste of thank you
for the answer so I will
entertain a motion.
Thank you madam chairwoman I see
right Representative peppers.
Sure I had my hand I'm sorry I
missed that go ahead
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you senator for bringing
additional I.
What was that like that some
clarifying points your.
In in your introduction Senator
madam chair.
And this part of this but I
heard the words low hanging
fruit.
Please expand upon what low
hanging fruit means the
corrections industry yes thank
you madam chair thank you
senator and thank you
Representative you know that's a
good question I guess I've been
real involved over the past
several years with criminal
justice reform among the
criminal justice reform
subcommittee emphatically
bipartisan subcommittee.
And so we talk about that a lot
thank you can imagine the range
of of some subjects that you
know the range of issues that we
take on like how do you how do
we deal with parole is parole
even necessary
we have we've had a vigorous
debates on contentious thanks
for example there is a bill
right now in the Senate that
will potentially come the houses
is it okay to have no life is it
okay to sentence a juvenile to
life without parole you know
those are those are issues that
are the opposite of low hanging
for me you know there are
contentious issues in and ones
that where you can get a
consensus and when I say low
hanging fruit what I'm referring
to is on our subcommittee that
criminal justice reform
subcommittee of again bipartisan
foreign for
I and I actually
so the key is what we try to do
is call us around something that
we all can agree on.
And so that's what I mean by a
low hanging fruit so we deal
with a lot of different a
criminal justice issues and
Douglas is been a real big part
of that and and others to
secretary so that's where that
expression comes from.
I can say I don't like cliches
but they're irresistible
sometimes.
When you present.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator for that response and.
From a business standpoint from.
People the the.
Actually used in paying payroll
and running a business and I am
running a P. and L. statement in
accountable for the low hanging
fruit has a totally different
concept for me.
And so I was.
Low hanging fruit to me is what
back to watch a process to the
site oh wait a minute here's
efficiency users affected here's
a way to make something more
efficient and in that was
concerning to me if that's the
way we were looking at
corrections and criminal justice
for Iraq is thank you
at the times madam chair and and
and.
Gentleman
you know what process because
it's a proficient and effective
to to to let somebody out of
corrections doesn't necessarily
mean it's a good thing for the
general population for sure.
So I do appreciate that I do
appreciate that clarification I
am hello closable.
One of the other things madam
chair and and I think maybe this
is for the.
Comments.
That I just want
want to correct for the record.
One of the public comments from
and I don't remember who it was
but said people this this this
helps people serve their
sentences and just to be crystal
clear this has nothing to do
with whether or not somebody has
completed their sentence.
As for we wouldn't be having
this conversation at all we're
would that be correct madam
chair yes Sen.
Yes Representative that is
correct.
Okay so I just wanted to clarify
that for the record because but
I wouldn't I can't even imagine
the need for the bill that was
the case.
And I do appreciate that
Representative Romero's
questions covered some of my
concerns with respect to the
insurance and so what I do
understand now Madam chairman
and senator is that.
We
The New Mexico taxpayers still
responsible for covering the
insurance costs.
An inmate that would qualify for
this is that correct.
Madam chair and representative
group.
I don't believe there would be
any more or less
because I don't know how
Medicaid works anyone is
released who needs the care
qualifies for Medicaid we get
that there I think any net
effect would be a savings to the
taxpayer because these people
would be housed in generator
housed in a long term care
facility down in most of this
and so that burden would be the
department I don't know if
secretary of corrections is
still on and secretary
Department Cerro might want to
comment more on that you would
know the details.
Madam chair.
Secretary.
Madam chair Senator
Representative Pettigrew I'm I
think that Mister carver kind of
hit the nail on the head there
one person is incarcerated the
the cost of their care medical
provision on the extra
supervision that they required
to correctional institution
etcetera all of that is
essentially covered by taxpayer
dollars if you will because of
course the state budget it is a
general fund agencies hi at type
of funding
I also am not terribly familiar
with how Medicaid works but I do
know that any who is eligible
and in a community setting be
able able to benefit.
I will just jump in here and say
that Medicaid is we get the
state gets about four to one
match from federal dollars so it
if they go from prison health
care to Medicaid it would be a
significant savings to the state
information.
Your.
Thank you.
Thank you for.
For future Representative still
muted.
Thank you I.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Secretary discover and.
Senator for those responses I I
do see a savings with respect to
moving them out because of the
Medicare peas but.
What what what I learned today
was that when when we have
somebody go on parole we're
still carrying the state still
carrying that that burden and
and that's just was an
interesting key learning for me
today
The.
Just to clarify I don't think I
think I heard you state the the
an inmate madam chair Senator
the an inmate convicted of first
degree murder.
is.
It's not considered for oh
double for this and and so I
just wanna make sure with the
way that we're defining.
Convictions and first and second
third and fourth degree.
Facilities throughout the
session that none of that's
going to have an impact on this
bill whatsoever and the state's
true to form.
Yes I would say a representative
I mean we're talking about a lot
both chambers but first degree
murder is first degree murder
and that's what that we're
they're not eligible for this.
I'm so again going back to low
hanging fruit keep in mind this
bill comes out of a consensus
process with victims groups you
know public defenders etcetera
so that's what everybody could
agree on as the one exemption.
And you know philosophically we
could go into what as
Representative Lord.
Very accurately stated what what
about these other crimes but
it's basically that's what April
people were able to agree upon
and then again for me just
because I'm just so close
professionally to the parole
process I just have tremendous
respect for those men and women
that are on that parole board
and they're listening to the
victims are they're looking at
public safety they're looking at
that inmates behavior while
they're when they're in that
could you know historically in
the correctional institution are
they rehabilitate themselves and
set arts are so no it's just
it's a very interesting process
the state laced you know the
notion of parole but the bottom
line is public safety.
Thank you very much and so
With with that.
Going back to the low hanging
fruit and the consensus building
madam chair and senator.
For all the deliberations
through this process.
We we we we can't get a
consensus between.
Both parties the the
child molesters and serial
rapists and
The sexual offenders should
Shouldn't be allowed to.
Take care this.
Can you explain that process on
on how we can't get agreement to
those people that the have a
tendency for continuing every
time they get out.
We can't get agreement on that
your Douglas because you're part
of that process did you want to
fill us in on some of the
dialogue that back and forth
between the different
stakeholders I will indeed thank
you
Madam chair Senator and thank
you for that question
Representative Pettigrew that
was of course a key point of
discussion at every stage of the
process an example that was
raised frequently was.
I noticed from my understanding
is from something that's
happened in the last year you
have a seven year old child
molester come into the system
would he qualify automatically
for this provision I would say
no because the only thing the
only out box that he takes right
away is that he's over fifty
five hundred the geriatric
revision.
Just been admitted to but
facility there's no way to prove
his dangerous this to society
and the categories that you just
mentioned the sex offenders and
right zero rapists child
molesters all are known and
there's service science
particularly on some of those
categories to show that
That they do have a tendency to
recession right.
And so that would be taken into
consideration for the analysis
of their dangerous nis and if
someone is not believed to be
repaired rehabilitated to the
point of
where he or she though these
requests are missing mostly he's
would be dangerous then they
wouldn't qualify under this
program because they still be
considered a danger to society
there is obviously some given
take in some of these issues and
as I mentioned before there are
a great number of people who
hope
to open up this to everybody
who's incarcerated even first
degree murders if they're
seventy years old have cancer
only a few months so I'm let
some people wanted them to
qualify if they make everything
else stayed grossness et cetera
et cetera
but the compromise was to agree
to exclude them
that was part of a give and take
but the categories you mentioned
in particular that came up often
and all the parties concerned
agreed that.
If they don't pass a dangerous
in this analysis they're not
going to be released and I'll
just again reinforcing
corrections department of public
safety victims advocate
the courts and the dust all
agreed with that argument and
they were all okay with that
provision.
Out that answers the question
Representative.
Follow up on that it's not an
automatic this is just
establishing out of eligibility
I mean the parole board white
when I was on the general
proboards we would deny parole
often and you know that's their
job is to to either grant parole
or deny it so we're just talking
about eligibility and I would
also emphasize that you know
everybody these cases are all
their different I mean they are
each person presents a different
whether my P. commonality of the
horrible horrible crimes but how
they rehabilitated themselves
are not rehabilitating
themselves inside the
institution is huge so it is
really a case by case and that's
what the parole board does
whether it's juvenile or adult
they they evaluate individual a
you know what these factors so
we're just talking about
eligibility not like automatic
release.
That answers your question.
And I appreciate you taking.
Madam chair Senator and
I I appreciate you taking the
time to.
Thank you to my education and.
This along with everything else
madam chair I yield back thank
you thank you Representative.
Okay with that I will entertain
a motion.
I'm sure everybody pass.
Want to have a second.
A second okay so Representative
Romero with the motion and
Representative rests with the
second I'll listen we go ahead
and check the rule.
Representative Barreras.
Yes what what.
No.
Representative Pettigrew.
Is that right now.
Mr Chairman.
Yes.
Madam Thompson yes.
Three to to you have a do pass
on your bill as amended and I
just have to what today we're
being we're having levity so I
when when I said something about
risk recidivism or wrist it it
the closed captioning put
refrigerate which I thought was
that interesting.
Right I'm watching the closed.
Hello how things are are are and
that was a ten point for the
closed caption okay and on that
note madam chair I took note my
name was capitalize syndrome
mail instead of bill o'neill it
was okay it's not Senator but it
was syndrome mail as in nail so
anyway.
That we may need to get you some
genetic testing to see what.
But but but seriously thank you
committee very good discussion
and really appreciate it and
thank you thank you.
Thanks dad within think you
especially secretary our look to
to for you'll lose Cerro.
Okay we are going on to house
but the Senate bill one forty
five as amended and it Senator
Burt and he is here senator do
you have any expert witnesses
that we need to promote.
Yes thank you madam chair
Allison Nichols from LFC is.
On board I believe to be a
expert witness should we need
her okay there's go ahead
senator.
Thank you madam chair and and
just to set the stage I'm not as
tall as Mark Moores I don't have
the athletic act that the state
Representative my S. this or
maybe bill o'neal does but I did
I was a starting guard for the
Deming Wildcats and I was one of
the top five on the day
block at golf G. so I just kind
of give you a little perspective
before we get down this road
here so but thank you madam
chair it's a pleasure to up
visit with the you and the
committee today I think this is
a pretty simple
of Bill.
Each year the legislative
finance council convenes a
committee to review committees
and commissions and boards in
the state that are coming up for
sunset everyone of them has a
sunset date on this year we had
twelve boards and commissions
that we reviewed LFC presented
their evaluation of the
commissions boards and we.
Put together this bill which
originally had ten of the twelve
and due to the COVID and and you
know timing of board missions
and New people being put on to
the point of that had not been
on the board as yet
there were two boards and
commissions that were not in the
original bill and that bill was
then amended and
the amended bill allowed for
those two additional boards to
come on board so all twelve of
the regional
boards were in now in the bill
as amended and basically what
this bill is asking is that you
can from the work of the
committee that these all these
boards and commissions will have
an extended sunset I believe
into the year at twenty twenty
seven.
And and that is the the the crux
of the bill.
Madam chair some I'm I would be
open for discussion of questions
okay and we will now go to the
audience for a full I have a
feeling there's not hundreds out
here who are dying.
The cap on this that this is one
of our key things that we have
to do that and aren't so sexy
yes.
Okay.
All right it looks like we have
to win support and then in
opposition.
And so we will go to the
audience just in case you didn't
get in on the pole if there's
anyone who was in opposition to
this bill.
And support.
Okay we will start with Julie on
a coup.
Madam chair members of the
committee Giuliana coop
representing the American
physical therapy association of
New Mexico and we stand and
support this allows the physical
therapist and that PTA's in your
communities to continue to
provide health care services to
your communities so thank you
senator Byrd for bringing this
forward.
Okay that that that was music to
my ears the PTA I'm I'm Jason
Thompson.
Thank you madam chair can you
hear me.
Go ahead check that we've got to
thank you.
Madam chair members okay my name
is chase Thompson I wanted to a
company and also give a Senator
Burt some support system I'm
also not as tall as senator
Morris either so just no one is
I can feel better yes
but that thank you and the
register lobbies for the New
Mexico athletic trainers
association I'm also here today
speaking on behalf of the New
Mexico chapter of the American
massage therapy association
register lobbyist for them as
well which are both included in
this bill we just appreciate the
Sanchez work and working with us
and including us in this bill
and also the work from the LFC
and the we appreciate the
committee support here the both
athletic trainers and massage
therapists that provide very
vital important health care to
our communities here
so we urge the committee support
thank you for your time.
Thank you Jason we will go to
the committee and I have
Representative Lord.
Yeah I just want to say I am I
think madam chair I'm almost as
tall as Mark Moores with my
heels that counts I think that
all and also Senator are Rachel
Representative rich black is my
roommate so also some she said
some great things about your to
see how good she keeps getting
the checks that's a good thing
right.
I was I was going to move
forward to pass but I see that
Representative Pettigrew has a
question so when he's of this
question I'm gonna still stick
with my moving to a do pass on
this thank you madam thank you
Representative okay go ahead
Representative Pettigrew.
Which is keeping with levity is
as the senator madam chair was
was mechanism or direction I'm
making my notes from the last
four one fourteen and I'm
writing low hanging golf.
Talking about golf.
You see me play.
No it's just I started right
writing exactly what you said
and so I thought I'd keep of the
levity and give everybody a lot
so thank you madam chair.
Before.
And I just have a question so
you're Burt there's there's a
committee that works with
Legislative Council to look at
sunset dates are can you tell me
a little bit I I don't know
anything about that sure it
madam chair there were three
hundred boards commissions in
the state of New Mexico they
also port industry within the
state rate really do good work
and we're glad to have them
every year they all have some
sets on their their their
association with the state and
each year the legislative
finance council identifies those
boards and commissions that are
coming up for sunset if you will
in the next year year and a half
we they put all the data
together for each one have they
been meeting on a regular basis
or all of their committee
members up to you know current
members they're not dated
members are they doing the work
that is required of them by
their individual industries and
they collect all the data and
then they form the committee
they go to the legislature
legislature put together and by
the way I will tell you that
Gail Armstrong representative
Armstrong is my co chair and
also my a co sponsor of the bill
and she did a wonderful job we
had a meeting in October here in
Santa Fe all of the boards and
commissions were represented and
accept the two that we amended
once they got their data in and
so that's where the bill came
together and and it's it's a
it's an annual thing but each
year the committee is different
because of the make up of were
they put on the committee and of
course the list of boards and
chairs or excuse me point
commission changes each year.
Okay thank you for that and and
as I said I'm a PT so I'm
familiar with with several
boards actually just out of
curiosity have you have you been
on that committee for some time
no ma'am I was it was in one
year if I have to okay just this
year last year okay okay so that
then you probably you might not
know but do are you looking at
just boards and commissions that
have to do with with professions
or what I'm thinking of is the
development disabilities
planning council do you look at
things like that or is it mostly
employment kind of boring it is
my understand all boards and
commissions.
Again the three hundred have a
sunset on them and as they come
up for sunset they will all get
reviewed okay thank you for that
and I will go back to
Representative Lord for motion I
move for a do pass and do I have
a second.
Second madam chair okay so we
have Representative Lord with
that to pass and Representative
Barreras with the second and not
go ahead and call the roll out
listen.
Representative Barreras.
Yes and I feel obligated to add
that I'm very short.
It.
Representative Lord.
Sorry.
Just.
Representative Pettigrew.
Yes.
Mr Mero.
Yes and I was a collegiate
athlete as well Representative a
representative or senator Byrd.
It for you.
And madam chair Thompson yes and
I was a high school athlete and
I'm I'm told but not compared to
Senator Moores and he's kind of
like that House expert you
just he's a big guy
so with that you have a
unanimous do pass thank you and
very much madam chair members of
the committee played work thank
you for your work on that
committee that's an important
thing to do I know I I I I
served on the New Mexico chapter
of the American physical therapy
association years ago and we
frequently worried about our
sunset so this seems like a good
way to what to deal with that so
thank you so much my pleasure
thank you madam chair in the
committee okay and committee
members we did good today it is
not you get two hours to our.
Maybe get some get some dinner
are yeah we might need a nap
after last night and probably
tonight so with that we will be
in recess until I'm we will look
at what bills we have for
Thursday but my guess is that we
will probably try to start at
twelve thirty get of course will
make an announcement and watch
the watch that website for for
what will start but I'm assuming
we will start at twelve thirty
on Thursday have a good couple
hours off we've earned them and
we'll see you next time bye bye.
