Committee members and audience,
I just wanted to let you know
that.
trying to get connected and
also announce that we are gonna
we're gonna do a hard stop at
10:30.
So,
um that we can get this going.
Thank you for your patience.
I
We're ready.
Madame Chair we're ready, thank
you. OK, thank you. All right,
we are ready to roll.
Representative Garrett.
You have the floor.
Oh, roll call, roll call.
Representative A Norner.
Here.
Representative Black, present.
Representative Borego.
Representative Lujan.
Representative Mia.
Here.
Madam floor leader.
Uh, Representative Zamora.
Vice Madam Vice Chair.
Here
Madam Chair.
Thank you. We have a quorum and
uh Representative Garrett, back
to you. You have the floor.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chairman, and, and thank you
committee members. I'm here
today to talk about House Bill
69, the loan forgiveness
multiplier Act and just to
predicate my remarks. This is
nearly identical to 2023's House
Bill 403, which passed house
labor, house education
unanimously. The full house with
bipartisan support, Senate
unanimously and at 11:30 a.m. on
the final day of the session on
the Senate floor. It was the
next bell to be heard, but it
closed. So this is basically the
same bill.
Um, the public service loan
forgiveness program. It's a
federal program started in 2007,
uh, enacted by Congress, and
when the first group finished
their 10 years of paying loans
for 100 and paying their loans
back for 120 payments, and I
will say I was actually one of
those people by chance, um, 98%
of those who applied were
denied. The program was
complicated. It was confusing,
um.
6 years later in 2024, I
actually, my loan was forgiven,
um, and I had a regular teaching
thing. I wasn't an adjunct or
anything. So a yearlong
investigation by the American
Federation of Teachers and the
Student borrower Protection
Center, and I will say my expert
witnesses on Zoom. She's Amy
Chuzada. She's the outreach and
advocacy manager for student
borrowers Protection Center,
which worked with AFT to analyze
what was happening.
They found that borrowers were
routinely uh misled by their
loan servicers. Loan servicers
are private companies and people
who go through loan forgiveness,
uh, I had many of you may have
had the same situation. I had 4
different loan services during
the course of my federal loan.
They found that they were misled
and what to do. People were
told, oh, you didn't do the
right thing. You didn't
consolidate, right? You didn't
do this, uh, and many public
service workers still didn't
know that they were eligible for
the public service loan, they
were never notified by their
employer, uh, some employers
refused to certify them. So
different changes were made. Um,
it was acceptable that adjunct
or contingent faculty of which
the major
of our instructors and
professors in New Mexico, high
institutions of education, fall
into that category.
Um, they can now calculate the
hours they work and multiply
them to get credit because to
get the student loan, uh,
forgiveness, you have to have
full time hours.
And so previously adjunct and
contingent faculty were weren't
able to qualify, uh, because the
schools wouldn't certify their
classroom time, uh, they didn't
account for all the time beyond,
you might teach a class for 60
minutes, but you have office
hours preparation time. So this
bill quantifies that into a
multiple. So the bill tackles
two of those common issues, um,
a lack of awareness about the
program, so it requires the
Higher Education department, and
institutions of higher education
to notify their um employees on
an annual basis that this is
available with a fact sheets,
forms, things like that.
Um, and it mandates that they
use a multiplier of 4.35 hours
to calculate the hours worked
currently or formerly, um, it
encourages institutions to
maximize the amount of time
they're able to certify. It
mandates uh institutions to
certify employment in a timely
fashion and, and there are
national forums for all these
things that are consistent
across
Um, the country. It allows
institutions to certify the
employment of applicants
directly with the US Department
of Education.
And it mandates that public
service employers, which in this
case is institutions of higher
education, uh, to share this
information, uh, with the letter
and forms and frequently asked
questions. Uh, this legislation
already exists in many local
states, um,
Let's see.
And um that's actually all I
have to say. Um, my expert
witness who has worked on this,
um,
Amyhuada, the outreach and
advocacy manager, uh, Amy, would
you like to add any remarks
briefly.
Madam er um Amy.
I would like to speak.
Hello, can you hear me?
You're being translated, but we
can't hear you.
Yes, can you hear me?
you want to go ahead without
her.
I, are you able to hear me? We
can go ahead.
With that, I stand for
questions.
Thank you, Representative. OK,
we're gonna have to wait for
Zoom opposition and supporting
comments. We're working on that.
So we'll go to the audience. If
you have a comment in
opposition, please raise your
hand, seeing none, if you have a
comment in support of the bill,
raise your hand.
OK. Um, we will hear one minute
comments, we'll start with you,
sir.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of committee, John Lipshutz with
the New Mexico Federation of
Labor AFL-CIO representing over
40,000 union members around the
state. We stand in solidarity,
all of us stand in solidarity
with our teachers in support of
this measure, we supported it
two years ago, very vigorously
and thank the sponsor for
bringing it up again. Thank you.
Thank you, John. We have one
more.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Whitney Holland,
president of the American
Federation of Teachers New
Mexico. Public service loan
forgiveness is a lifeline for
educators, nurses, and other
public service workers burdened
by student debt. This bill
strengthens PSLF by ensuring
adjunct and contingent faculty
get fair credit for all the
hours they dedicate to teaching
their students. By passing this
bill, we honor their commitment
to those who dedicate their
lives to serving our
communities. Thank you.
Thank you. Any further, uh,
Comments from the audience.
Are we back on with Zoom?
Madam Chair, we are not.
OK, committee members, we have
representative Luhan and then
Representative block.
Thank you, Ma'am. Thank you, uh,
representative for bringing
this. The only, the only thing
I'm about is um.
Uh, possible, uh, possible
issues um from the independent
community colleges.
And that would be on page 3 line
17.
Representative, can you move
your microphone?
And my voice is low too, sorry,
um, so my question, uh, I think
as I read through that section,
I think they're they're looking
for some clarification in
regards to uh credit or
classroom contact time in
contact time is in general time,
the faculty member is scheduled
to teach.
And, and it can include office
hours and other interactions
with students at credit hour is
typically equivalent to 50 to 60
minutes of instructural time per
week for 15 weeks, uh, and for
lab classes a credit hour can be
equivalent.
Equivalent to 2.5 to 3 hours of
lab time per week for 15 weeks,
so I think they're just looking
for us to clarifications there.
Is there a way of working on
that, Madam Chair?
Yeah, they would simply work um
on their campus to figure out
the multiplier in relationship
to the hours. So they would
have, they would have the Madam
Chair, uh, thank you, they would
have the ability to um
distinguish this.
Um, for institute, Madam Chair,
yeah, OK, absolutely. Thank you.
presented a block.
Thank you Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. I didn't
know it was my turn already, so
thank you.
OK. Thank you so much for being
in front of the committee. uh,
good to see you. I think 2 days
in a row in different committees
that were making a habit of
this. So, Madam Chair,
Representative, your bill, I
guess I did have some questions
throughout the bill, and I just
wanted some clarifications here.
So Madam Chair Representative,
I'm gonna start on page 2.
And I think maybe this question
was touched on regarding
community colleges, but I'm just
wondering that definition of
post-secondary education
institution on page 2 line 20 to
21. Is that all encompassing of
any kind of uh
Vocational schools, the two-year
institutions, etc. Madam Chair
Representative.
Yes, Madam Chair and
Representative, it would count
any higher education institute.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. And
would this include private
schools or would this just be
public manager?
It's institutions of higher
education.
Got it. Thank you, Madam Chair.
So I, I just assume they have to
be accredited and everything, so
got it. OK.
So thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative.
had a scribbly note and I'm
sorry, my handwriting is not the
best this morning.
Um
So, OK, Madam Chair
Representative, I guess my
question that I wrote, I believe
it's what I, what I asked myself
this morning while I was reading
this bill with my coffee was uh
how do we let people know that
this, that this is available.
And I believe we said it was
tied to a federal program is the
federal government doing that or
does the state need to start
that, Madam Chair,
representative.
Madam Chair and Representative,
the federal government has
websites and lots of information
and this bill requires higher
educations to make sure they
disseminate the
Um
Information to both new hires
and ongoing hires on an annual
basis.
All right. Sounds good, Madam
Chair Representative, and
Forgive me, I, I don't know
which institution on the federal
government does that. Can you
tell me which, which uh
department manager, Madam Chair
and representative of the US
Department of Education.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative, and I
know it gets a little in the
weeds when it comes to the
federal government. There's so
many different
Things happening there and then
we have our own PED and all, all
of the cool things we have. So
that's helpful. On the next page
here, Madam Chair
Representative, I know we talked
about
On lines
5 to 7 on page 3.
The program pursuant to 34 CFR
section 685.219 as amended. And
so my question on this one was
the definitions in your bill, I
believe, for the employee.
And I believe that is on page.
Page 2.
I believe one of the things that
was flagged when I was looking
at this bill from my assistant
was the word employee, the term
in the bill is not.
Mirroring the federal statute.
Madam Chair, that was referenced
in page 3. I'm just wondering,
Madam Chair, why we didn't just
verbatim, uh, utilize their
definition, Madam chair
representative.
And I, I can provide you with
their definition says if you, if
you like.
Uh, Madam Chair and
Representative.
Um, they are aligned, the
employee on section B, page 2,
line 8. Employee means someone
who works for a public service
employer.
Um, that is aligned across both
the bill and the federal
government.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
Representatives. So,
I appreciate that. So we're
talking about part-time
contingent and contracted
facility.
And that is included in the PSFL
and the federal statute. Is that
what I'm understanding, Madam
Chair Representative Madam Chair
Representative, yes, it is. OK,
got it. Thank you so much, Madam
Chair Representative. And do we
know what part-time is defined
as in the federal statute.
How many hours, etc. I'm trying
to find that right now. Madam
Chair Representative, part-time
would vary according to
contracts, many of our adjunct
and contingent faculty work at
multiple campuses, so they might
have, you know, 3 credit hours
at Valencia, they might have 3
hours at another one, and that's
why this is significant because
they're working full time, but
this way they can add up their
part.
time.
That's fun too
sideline in just a little,
they not allowed to their hours
to institutions
in their hours. Just, just
allows them to get the, for the
actual work that you're putting
in.
attack people.
Um,
the, the don't have
that thing on 1 you099s instead
of W-2s, Madam Chair
Representative.
In
non employees has no impact.
OK.
And there's no.
Madam Representative, no.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you. And then the definition I
see here.
30s.
understanding.
One week
40 hours the next week and then
30 hours the next week and it's
technically kind of averaged 30,
does it have to be specifically
30 or if it's 29.5. Is there any
kind of leeway in the statute as
it's written in the bill to
allow that individual to
technically be part time if
they're just on the edge, Madam
Chair.
Madam Chair and representative
generally contracts um spell out
for per semester.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. So I guess we're
this person could technically be
working.
40 hours, 10 hours, etc. and
then as long as it's averaged at
the 30 mark, they would indeed
be eligible for this uh
forgiveness, Madam Chair. Yes,
uh, Madam Chair Representative,
that's the qualification for the
public service loan forgiveness
program.
OK, thank you so much, Madam
Chair, Representative that, that
helps me a lot regarding that.
Um,
And then Madam Chair
Representative, does this
The 30 hours does that just
mirrors federal statute as it's
written currently or is this?
Yes, um, Madam Chair
Representative, everything has
to reflect the federal statute.
OK. Thank you so much, Madam
Chair Representative, and I, I'm
sorry, I'm kind of looking at
the federal statute right now on
like uh Cornell Law School or
something, they, they have all
the statutes there and I'm
trying to match it up to your
bill. So thank you for that
clarification. OK, another thing
that I saw, Madam Char
representative was on page.
Well, actually it was one of the
comments I heard in the in the
open about a timely fashion for
certification.
Madam Chair Representative.
Uh
I must have missed what we were
talking about regarding the
timely fashion for
certification, is that just for
um
eligibility for the program or
Madam Chair and representative,
it means that the institution um
doesn't wait 2 years to certify
the employee, timely fashion
means that according to the
time, you know, within 30 days
or whatever it is, they do it.
OK, thank you so much, Madam
Chair Representative, and do we
have a definition of a time
stop. So for example, we're not
going to say.
OK, let's just wait it out for 2
years and then finally certify
them. Is there some kind of
mechanism in there to protect
the employee to ensure that they
do get certified if they have
the requirements, Madam Chair,
Representative.
Madam Chair and Representative,
it's just some says timely
fashion. UNM might do it in.
12 daysina might take, you know,
30 days, whatever, but that
it's, it's done in a reasonably
acceptable fashion.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
Representative. So do we have
any
Do we see any issues currently
with how it's been forward
regarding the certification
process. Have we had any
complaints about length of time?
Madam Chair Representative, that
would be within a given
institution. Uh, we haven't had
any reports of any.
OK, perfect. That's good to
know, Madam Chair
representative. Yeah, I just
don't want people to have to
wait, like we said, so, that's
good. Uh, continuing here, I'm
on page 3 and I'm going to go
down to lines 19 to 21. I'm
looking at
This, the portion that says
provisions of the subsection
shall not supersede any greater
adjustment factor established by
collective bargaining agreements
or employer policy recognition.
So Madam Chair Representative,
I'm wondering,
I, I know that
We can't ask you, oh, if you've
been talking to the
To the AFL CIO or or whatever,
but I'm wondering, Madam Chair
Representative.
Are we um
Are there provisions in the
statute to ensure that we are
not encroaching on any
collective bargaining, and is
that specifically
spoke in, in, in this new
potential statue, Madam Chair,
Representative.
Madam Chair Representative,
that's why this is in there.
That, that if uh
Let's say UNM.
Decides they're gonna er because
of the amount of work they
require of an adjunct, they have
a different multiplier.
Uh, that institution would go
with that. So this just allows
for the independent, you know,
local control, so to speak, of
any given educational
institution.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
Representative, and I like
That term local control.
Me, I'm sure I thought you yeah
man representative. I love when
they my ears perk up and LESC
whenever I hear the words.
Local control, so I love that.
So I'm gonna continue to the
next page, Madam Char
representative.
Um
So we, we touched on
certification.
I'm gonna be on line 7 to 8. It
says for the purpose of
certification of employment.
Only a public service employer
shall, and then it gives
specific
Guidelines. I'm, I'm just
wondering why we, why we said
only, and is there some kind of
uh information that we're trying
to keep.
Secure so that we're not using
it for some other purpose, Madam
Chair, Representative in that
section.
Right, this, uh, Madam Cha
representative, this just
pertains to the certification.
Um
In relationship to the public
service employer. Got it. OK,
thank you so much, Madam Chair
Representative Garrett.
that
It's good to know. Yeah, I just
don't, I just didn't know if it
had any kind of uh
And with employment, you have
Social Security numbers and all
that personal stuff. It, it's
not really in tailing entailing
that, pardon me, that that word
is challenging this morning,
Madam Chair. So that's good to
hear.
Uh, another question I had
regarding that certification
process, Madam Chair.
I
The multiplayer.
Uh, we use a 3, are we using a
4.35 hour multiplier.
in this, and could you just
direct me to the page where it
says what what the multiplayer
may be if it's in there, and I'm
sure.
Um, me
and representative.
Um,
Yeah, the multiplier is 4.35.
And
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
the foreign, uh, point.
35 is in section A, page 3.
Uh
Section A, which is lines 12 to
25, it's written out in words on
line 16.
A public service employer shall
credit at least 4.35 and 3500
hours worked for each hour of
credit or classroom contact
time. Thank you so much, Madam
Chair and Representative
Garrett. Thank you. I
Sometimes in statute when they
don't actually put the word or
the the letter for in there. I'm
kind of lost, but thank you for
finding that. And so I, I heard
somewhere in my analysis, and I,
I need to find it. But I believe
Madam Chair Representative, the
4.35 hour is.
More than the federal.
Uh, the federal multiplier,
which I believe is 3.35.
Madam Chair Representative,
could you just clarify what
that, what that's for Madam,
that's a minimum from the
federal.
Um, surrounding states, uh, we
looked at Colorado.
Um, they use the 4.35.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. Do any
neighboring states that you know
of, and I don't want to put you
on the spot. Just use whatever
the federal minimum is, or is
that on the high end, low end,
where, where's our multiplayer
versus
Arson is consistent. The 5
states that I know already do it
as Colorado, Oregon, Washington,
and New York. This is consistent
with that, and it, it has been
accepted by the federal
government as an acceptable
multiplier.
OK, great. Thank you, Madam
Chair, Representative. Yeah, and
I'm sure they have parameters on
the federal statute somewhere
and I.
I hesitate to read the whole
thing because it's super dense,
but Madam Chair Representative,
uh, I appreciate that.
Uh, continuing on here with this
question I did have regarding
the actual contract or the
certification process. I'm
wondering, does, does the bill
anticipate challenges.
With the Department of Education
or the PED.
For uh state-mandated multiplier
conflicts.
Are there any kinds of conflicts
that we foresee with this, Madam
Chair, Representative Madam
Chair Representative, no. Thank
you so much, Madam Chair
Representative. I know that's
always a question that I try to
find, especially when it comes
to conflicts and
In statute, we don't want any of
that because
Lawsuit.
Central, right? So, that does
help me, Madam Chair
Representative, continuing here.
Is there flexibility in
determining uh an institution's
own multiplier, if collective
bargaining so chooses, Madam
Chair Representative.
Madam Chan representative, it
has not come up ever.
All right. Thank you, Madam
Chair Representative. So does
that 4 point
35, is that
Hard ceiling.
Or could they potentially
increase that to 5. If the
institution's collective
bargaining agreement, so choose,
Madam Chair Representative.
Madam Chair and Representative,
um, I don't want to speculate on
it, uh, 4.35 is very reasonable.
On a national level and
Um, state level.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, but just
I, I know that
We tie some things to CPIs and
things and maybe we need to,
maybe if there needs to be a
change in the future, is that a
is that a high? Is that just
like a a ceiling where it cannot
be more than 3 or 4.35.
Madam Madam Chair
Representative, no.
So it's not, not a ceiling. OK,
Madam Chair Representative, so
they could technically be larger
than that if so desired, and I'm
sure.
um, Madam Chi Representative.
If it was worked out at an
individual institution of higher
education, it is conceivable.
All right.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
Representative. That's just one
question I had from a, from a
school that reached out to me
because they, they were unclear
and I, I'm glad that we have
some clarity and legislative
intent for that. So that's
helpful a lot.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative.
Um
All right, so I guess I now will
go to the FIR that we, we spoke
about a little earlier before
the
Actual
Committee and so Madam Chair
Representative.
I see that there may be
potential for
Um
Historical data.
Reporting that may be an issue
with technical challenges, I
believe on the it talks about
New Mexico Tech.
On page 2 at the bottom.
is that the bill proposes an
institution certified
employment, including hours
worked on or after October 1st,
2007, and so Madam Chair
Representative says it could
require the institution to
access historical data that
could lead to potential
technical issues, Madam Chair
Representative. Have we
accounted for such issues in the
legislation and how has it been
accounted for, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair and Representative,
that would be an institution
specific issue which simply
might make it take longer to
certify if they didn't have the
records.
And in that case, if somebody
was going to tech and worked as
an adjunct, let's say, in 2014,
um, it might take longer.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. So that, that is
helpful. I know that 2007 is a
pretty long time from now. So I
just wanna make sure if they do
need that time that it's
It's a working with them. I know
in the actual bill, Madam Chair
Representative, it says, uh,
The effective dates July 1st,
2025. Do we know if that
I don't know if I don't want to
ask about your personal
discussions with institutions,
but have, have we heard of this
in your own recollection being a
reasonable uh.
Time frame, Madam Madam Chair
Representative, it's reasonable.
Perfect. OK. Thank you, Madam
Chair and Representative. That
helps me on that one.
Another one I had on the FIR. I
didn't see any specific numbers
when it comes to fiscal impact.
And I, I said you, I heard you
said that you'd love to, to help
yourself with this, Madam Chair
Representative, uh.
Is there going to be a new
office or something that's
dedicated to this in one of
these departments such as the
Higher Education department to
oversee.
Such a thing, or does it already
exist? And if it does, who's
who's running that department,
Madam Chair, Representative or
office representative,
uh, there's minimal, uh, impact
and it would lie within an
existing higher education
department office.
All right. Thank you, Madam
Chair and Representative. So I
guess we wouldn't need
additional staffers pursuant to
the
The FIR I guess. I, I'd have to
look at the HED one real quick,
Madam Chair, I have it here.
So it does say actually, I see I
here at the bottom of the first.
Agency analysis from HED. It
says on page 2 of that analysis,
it's not numbered, but it does
say public service employers may
incur administrative costs
associated, so that could
potentially flow through with
the funding formulas and
everything that we have to that
higher education department.
And I'm sure representative. I
love the background music. It's
really, I got the vibe here,
Madam Chair.
It's mariachis in here. I think
I lost, I lost track of my
question. So
Yeah
Madam Chan representative, um,
again, it's a minimal impact.
And I, and I will remind you of
chair representatives that
All these forms already exist.
And uh
I'm happy to help any
institution that needs
assistance for free.
Perfect. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I don't know how you find the
time, but that's great. Thank
you, Madam Chair, and
Representative. So, OK.
Next, I'm going to just go back
into the bill with definitions,
Madam Chair Representative,
we're looking at the definition
for consecutive academic terms.
I know some.
Institutions are based on
quarters, and are based on
semesters. Uh, do we, how did we
factor that into how we define
that in the new legislation,
Madam Chairman. Madam Chairman
Representative, it simply means,
um,
That you can be working full
time and be working like a a
fall and spring and not this
summer. And so institutions vary
on their contracts.
All right. Thank you, Madam
Chair and Representative. So,
but it doesn't.
Bar, any individual from
utilizing this time and in the
summer time or in a short
semester between the Christmas
break, etc. and I'm sure is that
what I'm understanding, Madam
Chair Representative, yes, you
understand it correctly.
Perfect. OK. Thank you, Madam
Chair and Representative. That
helps me with all those
questions regarding the
semesters. So I had about 5, but
we answered it in 1, so that's
good.
OK, Madam Chair, Representative,
and then I'm wondering what,
what is the federal statute with
this new legislation and the
state statute if we pass the
legislation.
Uh, talk about legal recourse
for an employee if the public
service employer refuses to
certify.
Who would they file that with
and how did, how did they go
about that? Is it strictly
federal or would the state DOJ
assist with that, Madam Chair,
Madam Chair Representative.
Um, we have no record of any
state institution refusing to
certify.
OK, Madam Chair Representative.
So in the instance that it did
happen though.
I, I'm glad it hasn't happened,
but if it did,
Is there
Federal, is there a federal
resources? Are there federal
resources for that, or would
they have to go through a legal
channel for a civil kind of
Madam Chair, Representative.
Madam Chair and Representative,
I would estimate that they would
talk to somebody at the higher
education department and solve
it.
On a state basis.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. So through the
department, they, I'm sure they
would have.
The answer to that. OK, madam
chair, representative, next year
I'm talking about the higher ed
and ensuring consistency
regarding the
The implementation of the
program. And so Madam Chair
Representative, I'm wondering.
How do we, how do we go about
that? Is there annual reports
that they look at from each
institution, how do they ensure
consistency across the board,
and are there any kind of
auditing factors that have been
implemented to ensure that,
Madam Chair.
And representative, the higher
education department would
ensure that.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, and if they, for
some reason, let's just say it's
a
Financial reason and institution
does not disseminate or
distribute the materials as
mandated, at least on time.
Is there an enforcement
mechanism for that, or would it
just be
I know it's a federal program,
and I know federal programs have
a lot of intricate verbiage.
They have a lot of very specific
guidelines that they require.
And so Madam Chair
Representative, I'm just
wondering,
If this isn't implemented
correctly, at least on the state
level, and let's just say HEG
doesn't catch something.
Could we be liable to be to have
some kind of recourse from the
federal government, if such
materials are not disseminated,
etc.,
my representative. Madam Chair
and Representative.
I don't anticipate a problem
with this already, there's like
full time traditional.
Higher education employees that
have access to this program.
It's just ensures that the part
time and contingent faculty
members also have access to it.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative, and so on the
federal level with the
contingent.
And the part-time individuals
have, has it always been?
For everyone, including those
contingent in part-time, or has
it just been full time?
Individuals or has that been
changed at all, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair Representative, the
federal government, the
Department of Education
recognizes that contingent and
part-time faculty are eligible.
All right. Thank you, Madam
Chair Representative. So, I
guess, so our current statue, I
just want to make sure for
current statute only allowed for
full-time.
Or maybe we didn't even have a
current statute to implement
such a program. It was just
federally mandated, etc. I'm
wondering, Madam Chair
Representative.
Is this um
Are those individuals who are
part time and are contingent,
they are indeed.
Kind of
Protected on the federal level.
It's not like a rulemaking kind
of thing. It's, it's a federal
law. And if it is, how do we
ensure that those folks are
indeed going to be able to have
access to the program in the
state, Madam Chair,
Representative. Madam Chair
Representative, this bill simply
provides the mechanism for
contingent.
and part-time faculty.
To have their employment hours
uh certified.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
and Representative. Uh, OK,
that, I think that, that clears
it up.
For me, I'm glad that they're
just at least.
There's some kind of cushion,
right? We want a cushion for him
and I, I think that's something
important.
You consider
And so, Madam Chair
Representative, one of the
questions that I, I popped out
in my analysis was.
Incentives for institutions to
reduce
Adjunct hiring if they
recalculated hours may make more
instructors eligible? Have we
considered that employment
question, Madam Chair,
Representative.
Uh
Madam Chair Representative, no.
OK, Madam Chair Representative,
do we?
Do we see in neighboring states
any kind of
Change to that where you have
fewer adjunct faculty because
you have
Increase the multiplier.
Madam Chair, Representative, no,
because this doesn't affect
college finances. It's a federal
program.
Pertaining to these loans.
All right. Thank you so much,
Madam Chair Representative. So,
OK, it doesn't really
disincentivize or or anything
like that on this, on the school
level, just to clarify, Madam
Madam Chair Representative, no.
All right.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
Representative.
So, and then if, if an
institution does provide
information to
The state
Which would then provided to the
federal government that was
incorrect.
How would they go about?
Changing that incorrect
information if it was seen to be
done in error, Madam Chair,
Representative.
Man representative that would,
that would be worked out by the
institution and the HED.
Perfect. OK, Madam Chair
Representative, so, but there
wouldn't be any kind of, if it
was a mistake, it wasn't
intentional to make incorrect
data, there wouldn't be any kind
of penalty.
Monetarily wise to the
institution of higher learning,
it would just be a correction
through HCD Madam Chair,
Representative, Madam Chair and
Representative, it would just be
a
Uh
Correction on materials.
The institutions don't have any
fiscal responsibility. They're
not giving them money.
It's loan forgiveness.
Perfect. OK, Madam Chair,
Representative that, that does
help. And then uh one other
question that I had that popped
out at me is what if two adjunct
faculty members, they're sharing
a course.
And I know this happened, at
least when I went to college, it
did happen. And so how are their
hours calculated under the bill
regarding that.
Madam Chan representative, it
would pertain to their contract
with that institution.
All right. Thank you, Madam
Chair, representative. So I, I'm
just clarifying, it wouldn't,
let's just say both folks.
teaching the course, it wouldn't
chop those hours in half for
them. Is there, is there some
kind of provision that protects
that?
Like if it was a 3 hour class,
and they each get 1.5.
It wouldn't
Do anything to split it for each
individual is that
representative, it's totally
reliant on the certification and
contract.
that those employees have.
All right. Thank you so much,
Madam Chair, Representative.
So it's, it's pretty much based
on mostly collective bargaining
and
That's what I'm understanding
with this.
Madam Chan representative, it
depends on their contract.
Uh, with the college.
And the colleges certification
of the hours that they work.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
Representative that, OK, that
does help regarding those
institutions, cause I have a I
have a community college in my
district and I really care about
making sure that it stays open.
It's a New Mexico State branch.
So we do want to make sure that
they have all the resources
possible. And then next I, I
guess, I know New Mexico, we're
on this new.
Well, I guess it's been for a
very long time trying to
increase our education outcomes,
especially when it comes to
8 through 12, but also higher
ed. And so Madam Chair
Representative, uh, do we think
that this bill with this
increase would
For this increase in the
The instructional or not the
instructional hours, the uh.
Formula that we put forward. Do
we see this is helping in our
rankings nationally, and is this
something that we're looking for
in the purpose of the
legislation, Madam Chair
Representative, this bill
doesn't have any reference to
that.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. And yeah, I, I
know it wouldn't say, yeah, we
definitely want to be better and
highered because we do a very
good institutions in the state.
I just want to make sure that we
are providing as many resources
as possible to these folks,
because I love our colleges. I
went to all.
On Mexico, well, one college
that was public, but it was out
of state, but all public schools
and definitely have buy in on
this, you know, go went to Santa
Fe Community College. I went to
EMU, and so I love our
institutions. I want to make
sure that they have the
resources to provide really good
education, which I did get in
the state and I wanted to
continue in our state. So, Madam
Chairs representative, I believe
That's kind of all I had, um,
I'm leaning toward supporting
this bill, and I like the idea,
but I will definitely listen to
continued discussion because I
think it's important at least to
be able to be in compliance with
federal statutes as much as we
possibly can. So, thank you so
much, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative.
I have represented a Brego and
Representative Zamora.
Madame Che I passed, I think,
uh, Representative Block asked
quite a few questions and
Sentative Zamora.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you members of the committee and
thank you, Representative, for
bringing this bill forward.
How did this bill come?
To be, is it, and, and I want to
know how much
Money this is talking about. Has
there been any calculations as
to how much, how many people
will help and how much money
we're talking about this bill
helping move. I know, I know
that the bill doesn't.
Have an allocation or anything
like that. We're not gonna put
the money out.
But
Is there any, any numbers that
you have, uh,
Uh, Madam Chair and and
Representative Zamora, I don't
have any of those numbers. I
know that um.
My original loan was $65,000 and
when you pay
Mostly your paying interest, so
it's, it varies borrow borrower
by borrower.
Um, and that's why after you
consistently pay the 120
payments, which in my case was
$500 a month.
Um, having that loan forgiven
meant that I wasn't gonna die.
still owing my student loan.
and Madam Chair and
representative, so.
The, the issue that we have that
this is gonna help.
Not really solved but, but help
in the manner of, of uh getting
these loans forgiven.
Is that people don't understand
or they don't have the time or
is this, it's just not
happening?
Madam Chair Representative, the,
the bill's purpose is to make
sure that people know about it.
They know how to calculate it in
a fair way, um, and that they
can achieve the 10 years.
Right. And, and it's not that
the institutions that they're
working for or anything like
that, aren't doing.
Something because they, they,
they don't have.
Either the means or the funds to
do it, that's not the issue, uh,
Madam Chair and Representative
Madam Chair and Representative,
um, the institutions have no
responsibility and paying for
these loans.
It's just to give the
information, assist with the
certification. That's their only
responsibility and Madam Chair
and Representative, I might
have, might have.
As that in the wrong way or, or
mis misquoted what I, what I
wanted to say that
Is it that the institutions
Aren't now doing it if, if an
individual asks.
Or
I guess that's, that's what I
want to ask.
Madam Chis representative, it's
to give the um the institution,
the mechanism to figure out
accurately and fairly.
How to look at a contingent or
part-time faculties teaching
hours because you're not, you
may have a one hour uh writing
course, but then you have the
office hours.
You know, and the preparation
time associated with that. And
so the multiplier recognizes
that one hour of teaching time,
you multiply that by 4.35 to get
what it means, uh, to work that.
So this is a mechanism that's
been agreed on and as I said,
it's used in many other states.
OK.
Thank you. Thank you for that.
And thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you Representative for
bringing the bill forward.
That's all my questions,
manager.
Thank you, Representative
Zamora, uh, representative Vice
Chair Little.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Madam
Chair, I'd like to move a due
pass on this bill.
I that.
Thank you.
I have a motion for to pass by
Vice Chair Little and a second
by representative Zamora, please
call Ro.
Representative Ona Nonu. Yes.
Representative Block.
Yes.
Representative Borego.
Yes.
Representative Lujan.
Representative Mejia.
Yes.
Madame Floor leader.
Yes.
Representatives.
Representative Zamora.
Madam Vice Chair.
Yes.
Madam Chair,
Yes.
Congratulations representative,
you have a you pass. Thank you,
Madam Chair and thank you team
house government.
Thank you.
OK, let's move on to
House Bill 75 and Representative
Thompson is not available this
morning. She's double booked, so
I will present this bill along
with um.
Our expert witnesses and uh
Madam Vice Chair will preside.
Good morning.
Good morning. Good morning,
ma'am Chair. Today we
begin,
um, has been 75.
Um, which is just making this,
uh, an appropriation to the
Department of Health for county
and tribal health councils
statewide.
And the appropriation is in the
amount of $43 million to fund
and support county and tribal
health councils statewide to
carry out the functions as
provided by the county and
tribal health councils Act.
To um
With that, it's a very, it's a
very simple bill, as you can
read before you simple
appropriation which supports our
um our health councils, which
are in statute to be funded.
However, we've known through to
past history that the, the
councils have not been fully
funded. Last year we were able
to secure funding for them in
the amount of $3 million and
that was an effort by um
representative Anthony Ellison
and many others, myself
included, and what the
have been able to do with that
funding is really been very
effective. They're their
statewide planned in the
regionalization has been, has
been, they've been able to
benefit and improve the health
across our state and with that I
I'd let my two expert witnesses
here introduce themselves and
give um further response.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of committee. My name is
Valeria Alarcon, executive
director at the New Mexico
Alliance of Health Councils on
behalf of 33 counties and
currently 10 tribal health
councils. We thank you for this
opportunity today. Um, Madam
Chair, would it be great to go
over?
Um
The function role of health
councils and their impact to
give context here.
Yes. OK, if we turn to the
second slide. I just want to
emphasize that health councils
are a critical function of
public health, um, in service of
community statewide, and they
have persevered over these last
14 years, as they've been deeply
underfunded. It's clear that we
have the dedication, expertise,
lived experience, um, to meet
the needs of our communities,
all that we are asking here is
to leverage their functions,
operations, and services so that
they can be
been more effective and
together, Madam Chair, members
of committee turned this ship
around and be one of the first
states in the nation to be the
healthiest nation instead of
coming in 47th and 50th every
year.
If we turn to page 4, you'll see
an overview of the 33 counties
in the current 10 tribal health
councils, but of Acoma, Pueblo
of Cochiti, Pueblo of Nambe,
Pueblo of Pierre, Pueblo of Sani
Delfonso, Pueblo of Santa Ana,
Pueblo of Santa Clara, Pueblo of
Santo Domingo, Pueblo of Tezuki,
and Canyoncito Band of Navajo
Nation, um, in the following
slide, I can give you a quick
sound bite.
the, the role, the critical
function of health councils. And
that is really, uh, to promote
public health, uh, lead
prevention, intervention
efforts, coordination of
services, and emergency response
efforts much like during COVID
and in the last years with
extreme weather, uh, heat waves,
cold fronts, um, extreme fires,
extreme floods, and so forth.
Um, as Representative Lujan
noted, their instrumental in
communication, uh, in
Community-based health planning
and working in concert with DOH
to implement strategies to meet
the needs of uh both county and
tribal health councils. In the
following slide, you'll see a, a
very simple, I think, but, but
effective infographic that shows
you how deeply aligned the work
of health councils is with, uh,
obviously, NMDOH, um, Governor
Grisham's priorities and
behavioral health, aging and
long term services, firearm
safety, housing vaccination.
In the list goes on, also health
counsel's work is deeply, deeply
aligned with the New Mexico
Healthcare Authority with
behavioral health, with the
environmental department with
Indian Affairs and the list goes
on. In the following slide,
you'll see sort of an aggregate
visual aid of all the ways and
all the various partners, the
health councils collaborate with
in order to coordinate access to
critical service as the at the
local level. So if you think of
these,
Web of collaborations, health
councils are the connective
tissue, right? In service of our
community members. If we think
of the unprecedented times that
we're navigating right now,
health councils are even more of
a critical partner as a trusted
community health hub that can
help us connect community to
those essential services.
Following gives you an aggregate
of um tribal and county health
council's collaborations, both
with early childhood.
Education Coalition, local
behavioral health collaborative,
in total is over 434
collaborations going on
statewide to connect community
to essential services.
The next slide gives you a very
um quick overview of when the
funding of health councils, uh,
stopped in 2010. And as you can
see in this graph, it's been an
ongoing uphill process to get uh
recurring optimal funding to
leverage health councils for
success in service of
communities, um, and really the
proposition here today is to
really resource the capacity
operations programming,
coordination, intervention, all
The various ways in which health
council serve community at an
optimal level so that they can
be even more effective. Um, in,
in improving population health
and safety.
The following slide gives you a
quick overview of a study that
we did with health councils
assessing um their optimal
funding budget. So what would an
optimal budget look like for
them to leverage them for
success in the median was
$184,000. Now, let me just say
that on the county side, we need
to add 10 to 15% in direct fee
on the tribal side, we would
need to add 30.
5% indirect fee. On the right
side, you'll see all of the
elements and functions, uh,
operations that this would, this
level of funding would make
feasible. Now, we think of HB 75
of $43 million. Let me just give
you an overview of that
financial justification and
breakdown. Currently, let's say
just utilizing that 184K median,
uh, budget for health councils,
um, we come in with the 9 remain
Pueblos in the 50 chapter houses
in Navajo Nation, along with
Apache nations and that one we
haven't had the opportunity to
do an assessment, but we will.
We're looking at $10.8 million.
That's to make sure all of our
tribal communities, both Pueblo
and Pueblos and nations have the
optimal funding to set up their
tribal health councils. This
year alone, we had SUNY, Zia
Pueblo, Zuni Pueblo, Pueblo and
Paulaque Pueblo.
very much interested in, in
establishing the tribal Health
council, but at 80K, that was
not substantial to, to set it up
successfully. Same thing with
Navajo Nation. Lots of interest
there for setting up their
health council. Now, 10.8
million to take care of all
county and all tribal health
councils. Now, including the 35%
indirect on the tribal, the 10%
indirect on the county, those
two
com b in ed comes out to $45.7
million.
So I do get that, you know, we
look at a level of finding a 43,
right?
Um, but we definitely have the
justification. I'm happy to
provide even additional context,
based on counties and, and
tribes if, if that helps. Um,
for all of you to, to be very
well informed. Um,
I'm going to skip through the
following slides, um, because it
highlights the processes, uh, in
concert with DOH and bring your
attention to slide 12, uh, which
gives you a, a very clear
overview of governance
structure. This tends to come
up, um, as to understanding the
governance structure of health
councils, of course, tribe,
health, tribal health councils
are tribal government. And then
the 33 counties Health councils
are broken down into a third
fiscally sponsored.
Uh, a third nonprofit and a 3rd
county. And on the left side,
you have some data points around
how many full-time health
council coordinators we have,
um, how many health councils,
uh, interns we have and
volunteers, which is really has
been the lifeline for health
councils, uh, dedication of
community members and student
body who contribute their time
and energy, uh, to support their
county and tribal health
councils. Slide 13 gives you an
overview of that.
Community assessment and
prioritization as Representative
Luhan noted. Let me just
highlight the health councils
are the representation of our
local diverse community members.
These are not outside entities
that are coming into our pueblos
or nations or counties saying
this is what you all need. This
is what you all need to address.
No, these are our local
community voices saying these
are the most pressing needs in
our communities. And as you'll
see on slide 14, uh, the
alignment with healthcare
authority priorities.
with behavioral health
collaborative, the alignment
with early childhood education,
so on and so forth. On slide 15,
we highlight our work with
Center for Health Innovation
under the CIA grant, 5 health
councils working on uh
addressing uh concerns with
public water systems, we can
provide a whole presentation on
that one, slides 16 and 17 gives
you the most recent impact data
from the first quarter of fiscal
fiscal year.
25, combined with the 2nd
quarter working closely with our
uh partner at DOH and collecting
this information from and with
health councils. If we were to
do an incremental overview for
the last 3 years. Thanks, thanks
to CDC funding and impact data
combined with these 2 1st and
2nd quarter impact data, it will
be incredibly substantial. And
this is on minimal funding,
right? Imagine what we can
achieve together with optimal.
funding really leveraging our
communities to address their
most pressing needs. Last slide
gives you an overview of the
justification for a 33 million,
um, and obviously a very quick
overview of FY 2024, and I want
to turn over very quickly to our
Anthony Yepa who is from Santo
Domingo, our board member as
well, Anthony if you'd like to
introduce yourself and.
I like
So you should know it or the
good morning, Madam Chair and
Representatives. My name is
Anthony Ypa, and I'm
representing the Hopa Health
Coalition is from San Domigo
Pueblo.
I want to emphasize that you and
your work of this legislature is
very important. We all know that
there are going to be laws,
there are going to be fundings,
they're going to be impacts and
the county and health, uh,
tribal health.
Uh, councils are members of the
respective communities that they
come from. They are community
members that are sometimes not
even versed in a lot of the
health issues of their
respective communities, so what
the health councils do is they
are able to interpret, they are
able to represent, they are able
to talk about the main issues
that a lot of the commissioners
may not have time for, for some
of the tribal leaders that we
have that may not have time for
and maybe even for the state
legisla.
and including the federal
government.
I think that we need, as you can
see on TV yesterday and the past
week we have been inundated with
a lot of the federal uh
administration that is now in
place, doing some things that
are quite interesting in terms
of our healthcare throughout the
United States and that would
deck directly impact the state
funding coffers because CMS was
included in there and CMS is the
major regulator of healthcare in
terms of
Health and Human Services
Department that brings in the
Medicaid dollars, the Medicare
dollars, the big pharma, the big
insurance companies that we are
talking about are impacting the
health care of our tribal and
local county members. So I think
that in terms of proving this,
we do have a lot of information,
a lot of discussions, and a lot
of uh.
Awareness because the community
members sometimes are not aware
of the intended laws and the
regulations that are passed from
this legislature and including
the federal government.
We are partners.
Not only with the legislature
but with the various health
departments in the state, the
DOH and the new healthcare
Authority, which is still trying
to get on its feet.
Because that deals with Medicaid
40% of our population is under
Medicaid. Uh, some of us are now
under Medicare.
And that enclosed low energy
assistance programs and a lot of
the other programs that are in
place. So we need to keep in
mind that the impact is
tremendous, but how does it
affect Joe Blow, Mister and
Missus New Mexico resident. Do
they understand the implications
of it. Do you, as
representatives, go out there
and talk to these people. No,
you don't. You don't have the
time.
But that's what the Health
councils do. We have to
translate, we have to interpret,
we have to say this is how the
CMS regulations, the new state
funding is going to impact you.
Keep in mind they can go to
hospitals.
But remember we live in a um
what is the word, a shareholder
economy.
Everything is based upon profits
and shares.
That we are all part of your
pension plans are part of that.
So we need to be mindful that
how things are being impacted,
it's gonna really be uh
affecting the healthcare of the
state of New Mexico. Keep in
mind we are always down on the
totem pole in terms of our
status based upon the metrics
that the uh uh representative
Block was talking about earlier,
how do we rate compared to the
rest of the United States and
the States. Yeah, we're always
down there, but we can't move
unless
As we improve the local
community members in terms of
their education and
understandings of all the
legislation that you are
presenting and bringing out to
us. We have helped the
Department of Health with the
state Health Improvement plan.
We are key members in teaching
and translating the information
of the North Star that we are
trying to be. The north side is
the metric that we as a state
are trying to achieve, and we
need to make sure that even the
community and the
people that are being impacted
understand that.
So, Medicare, Medicaid,
everything that is financing.
The community health of our
people is really tied into a lot
of our work. And I just want to
remind everybody in the world
that we are all DEI D E I
employees. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I'd
just like to say that I had um
Santa Fe County, um, here they
had to leave, but they are in
full support of that, but and
with that will stand for
questions.
Thank you. Let's go to Zoom. Do
we have um comments and support
of the bill.
Uh, Pam Roy, we have you, uh, as
wanting to speak, if you would
go ahead.
Pam, I'm sorry to interrupt. Um,
we're barely hearing you here.
If you can speak up and get as
close to your mic as possible
and let's see if we can hear
you.
Just a little bit.
Um, we cannot hear you.
And
Yeah
OK.
Chair and committee members, the
New Mexico Food and Agriculture
Policy Council and farm to table
are in full support of this
appropriation request for the
New Mexico, um health councils.
Thank you so much for the
support.
Thank you please, uh, folks on
Zoom provide your comments
within one minute.
Who is next, please?
We have Cindy Sacomman, if you
would, uh please uh make your
comments.
morning, Madam Chair and
committee members. My name is
Cindy Sockerman and I am a local
level evaluator and the founder
and director of the New Mexico
Tribal Behavioral Health
Providers Association, I
strongly support HB 75. There
are 43 county and tribal health
councils, all community-driven.
This funding will be vital in
building local capacity and
increasing community engagement,
strengthening connections with
community stakeholders, tribal
leaders, and tribal members from
various public nations and
tribes.
It is essential that we focus on
improving the health of all New
Mexicans and that we prioritize
data-driven initiatives. The
alliance provides a voice for
community members, those who
have a pulse on the specific
community public health needs
that ensuring community-based
issues are prioritized. Alliance
addresses naloxone distribution
promotion of 988 crisis line
information, suicide prevention,
all behavioral health
initiatives that are important
to the New Mexico tribal
behavioral Health Providers
Association. Throughout this
session, we
heard that there's a need for
collaboration at both the local
and the state level, and that is
a key role that the alliance
plays. Thank you so much.
OK, thank you very much for
that. And the next speaker.
Uh, please, is uh Monica Ray
Otero.
Hello, can you hear me?
OK, OK, OK.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Monica
Otero and I represent New Mexico
Voices for Children. The 10 role
in public health infrastructure
in communities they live and
serve. The 43 health councils
across New Mexico are a
representation of the unique and
beautiful communities that each
health council serves. Their
impact is especially important
for children because they have
been able to offer vaccination
events for children 0 to 5,
provide suicide.
prevention trainings and offer
public gun safety trainings in
their own communities. The
health councils have created
trusted relationships in their
communities over the years, and
for the reasons stated above, it
is essential that their
reoccurring funding is
reestablished as an advocate for
children and families, New
Mexico Voices for Children
stands in support of House Bill
75.
OK, thank you. And the next
speaker we have is
Tommy Hernandez, if you would
like to give your comment now.
Thank you.
Yes, uh, good morning, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
Tommy Hernandez, public policy
director for the New Mexico
chapter of the Alzheimer's
Association here. Just wanted to
chime in and register our strong
support for this particular
piece of legislation, I believe
that adequate funding for these
tribal councils as well as all
the other councils is critical,
given the critical work they
perform. I'll go ahead and stop
there and just urge the
committee to please go and move
this legislation forward and
also want to say thank you to
the sponsors for bringing this
legisl.
for it as well. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
OK, thank you. And our next
speaker, uh, is going to be, uh,
I apologize if I mispronounced
the name.
Sepora.
Nepesh
OK, let's go on to uh Sharon, I
I I apologize for the
pronunciation. Argenbright or
Argenbright, if you're ready to
give your comment, go ahead.
Madam Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
members of the committee. This
is Sharon Argenbright, Masters
prepared registered nurse with
over 45 years of experience. I'm
retired Air Force nurse.
The best insurance we can
purchase is taking care of our
own, our health, like HB 75
would continue to promote, while
at the same time conserving,
using money wisely, our New
Mexico revenue, a healthy New
Mexico tribal and pueblo.
Populists will contribute to the
overall health and well-being of
our state. Please vote to fully
fund the 10.8 million for all
county and health councils.
Thank you for your support on HB
75.
Thank you for that. And our next
commenter.
It's going to be Vanessa Murray.
My apologies, uh, Madam Chair.
My name is Jordan Murray. This,
uh, automatically log my wife's
name in, but uh
Madam Chair and committee
members, my name is Jordan
Murray and I represent Unite Us,
which is a technology company
that bridges the gap between
community government and
healthcare partners across the
state of New Mexico, uh, for
individuals to get connected to
health-related social needs. Our
partnerships include
Presbyterian Health Plan,
Presbyterian Delivery System,
Santa Fe County and the city of
Santa Fe, Donanna County, uh,
north central New Mexico
economic Development District,
Los Alamos County, the city of
Albuquerque, Berlio County, and
the New Mexico Department of.
Workforce solutions.
And additionally, the share New
Mexico Resource directory. Uh,
we see the work of the tribal
Health councils as being
critical to the work across all
community and government and
healthcare stakeholders, which
is why we are in full support of
House Bill 75. Thank you.
Thank you for that, Mr. Murray.
Are there any other public
comments, please raise your hand
in the zoom. Thank you.
OK, we're gonna go back to
Sepora
OK, let's stay on the Zoom. Do
we have any comments and
opposition to the bill?
Be no, let's go to the audience.
Uh, please raise your hands if
you are gonna make a comment in
support of this bill.
OK. Uh, please, uh, comments
within one minute.
Let's start with you.
Uh, good morning, Madam Chair
and committee members. Uh my
name is Anna Hansen. I am uh the
registered lobby for the Pueblo
of Poaque the pueblo, um, would
really like to have a health
counsel. They do not, but they
do have a behavioral health
center which serves over
Which has positions of over 20
positions including therapist,
program coordinators, and case
managers. Um, they also serve
tribal and non-tribal members,
so it would be really important
for them to have a health
counsel. So we stand in full
support of House Bill 75. Thank
you.
And as a former county
commissioner, I know how
valuable this is at Santa Fe
County.
out of a chair, members of the
committee, my name is Shelly
Manlev. I'm currently the
executive director of Healthy
Climate New Mexico, a longtime
public health leader here in
Santa Fe and the state of New
Mexico. I have worked with
health councils when they had
more funding when they lost
their funding and have seen the
incredibly important impacts
that health councils have with
our local communities. We are a
centralized public health system
here in New Mexico and
we have got to have people in
the community who are
knowledgeable and trusted
members who can work on
planning, integration,
coordination, and of course,
service delivery as part of
healthy climate in New Mexico,
we are seeing this. It's not a
new public health threat, but
climate change, extreme weather
is deeply, deeply threatening
our communities and the
involvement of health councils
again in close.
with what the community members
know about their threats.
is critical to issues of extreme
heat, flooding, cold. Thank you
so much for your support of HB
75.
Good morning.
Madam Chair
Members of the committee. My
name is Mark Mitchell, former
governor from the Pueblo of
Tosuke.
And former chairman of the All
Public council of Governors.
We had um started this
initiative and supporting this.
Since I was chairman.
But since um then uh and to now
the public Susuki is uh
supporting this efforts and we
look forward to a favorable
outcome.
Hello
Hello, Madam Chair and members
of the committee. My name is
Pamela Angel, and I'm the CEO of
Amadar Health Center in Las
Cruces, New Mexico. We're also a
part of the Donana County Health
and Human Services Committee and
the Wellness Institute, and I'm
here to support HB 75, um, I
think coordinating counsels can
really help.
Get help communities meet the
vast needs, um, Donana County,
as many of you know, has very
low, um,
You know, very difficult health
situations with people with
diabetes, hypertension, our
Health Center is a federally
qualified health center and FQHC
and were on the campus of Missy
Valley Community of Hope. We
serve homeless, indigent,
undocumented, and any commercial
people, people with commercial
insurance or no insurance.
That need care.
Um
that time.
Thank you so much.
Further comments and support of
the bill. Do we have any
comments in opposition to the
bill, seeing non-committee
members. I have.
Representative Zamora.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you presenters for this bill.
Uh
So,
Madam chair, uh, members of the
committee and and and
presenters. So, can you
Explain to me.
We're, we're talking about $43
million.
And can you explain to me how
this money's
Of these monies will be divvied
up.
Throughout the state of New
Mexico, or is it just?
Or
Or uh certain
Health councils in the state.
For the question I'm gonna, I'm
gonna let my expert answer.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative. Um, so,
The proposition here is to
leverage health councils, the
current 33 + 10 current pueblos
remaining 9 pueblos and then
chapter house is Navajo Nation
and Apache. So how the state
funding.
When allocated goes from here,
from the state goes through DOH
in that scope of work, um, that
calculation as to how much
funding each health council
would get is done through that
process, along with the scope of
work. We've done, we, as in the
New Mexico Alliance of Health
councils have done an
assessment, a study as to
Each health council's individual
financial needs for their
individual capacity needs,
operations, administration,
programmatic services. It would
be ideal that health councils
will have at the very, very bare
minimum, at least 2 full-time
staff people, right? And so we
have uh identified a median of
1840, 184,000, which would get
health councils into the right
direction to start sing.
up, building their capacity,
having the ability to have an
actual office space, having the
ability to rent spaces to host
public health, uh, education
events and trainings and so
forth. So for every county and
every tribal health council, it
does look different. But I think
starting with a median helps us
understand what is that budget
justification and what will that
allow health councils to
actually have, uh, in their
capacity.
operations to deliver and be
effective, even more effective
at meeting the needs. Um, I'd
love to have Anthony Yepa also
chime in as he works with our
Pueblo Health.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative.
With the money
As has been the practice in the
this past year.
Representative is that we are
assisting the Department of
Health and in a lot of cases,
the new healthcare authority in
meeting some of their objectives
that have been mandated by the
state legislature.
So what ends up happening is
that in these contracts and
grants that we are given, we
help them not only and I just
remembered, not only with the uh
Children's services that we were
to to work with, to collaborate
with, we also had to work with
the uh climate change and the uh
state.
Health improvement plan, which
means the North Star and those
are the metrics that the state
is being used in measuring from
a lot of the federal government
in terms of meeting some of the
objectives so that we at least
move out of being one of the
lowest states in terms of the
status of healthcare. So, yeah,
there are some contingencies
that come with the funding, but
all in all, I think that it's
really impactful in terms of
meeting the legislative needs
that are being uh approved by
this legislature.
Madam Chair, thank you for that
and thank you for the answers.
And so, if I understood right,
there's gonna be $180,000 per
council to just kick off their,
their programs and, and their
activities that they're gonna
do. And that's gonna be divvied
up.
Equally throughout the state in
every county.
Is, is that what I'm hearing?
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative, um, based on the
assessment, we've identified a
median of 184,000, which would
be very leveraging to health
councils.
And Madam Chair and presenter,
I, I guess more directly is, is
that gonna be divvied up to
every county in the state. 180.
84,000
To every each of
33 counties in the state.
As needed, yes.
Madam Chair.
Oh, OK. Thank you for that. And
When, when a private person
Madam Chair and and and
presenters, when a private
person
I needing some kind of help with
their health or something.
They don't automatically think.
Health council.
So how is, how is the private
individual
How are we gonna get?
Some of this information to the
private individual as to how
How the uh these health
councils, I, I'm gonna go back
home and they're gonna say,
well, how does that help me?
And, and, and I'm gonna have to
explain to somebody.
How
And why we voted for this bill
or how we supported it or didn't
support it or why. So,
How does a private individual
How does this, uh, uh, a health
council relate to a private
individual. Where, where's my
health counsel in Curry County.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Those,
those are really good questions
and I'm gonna let the experts,
um, respond, but it's, it's a,
it's a funding mechanism issue
too, and so
That
Madam Chair Representative.
When you as a person become
Medicaid eligible, you will go
to the Federal Medicaid office
where your relatives are going
to meet Social Security
requirements and you're planning
on retiring, you go to a Social
Security office, where you need
Medicaid. You go to the state
ISD office where you're gonna go
to your private insurance, of
course, you're gonna call the
private insurance.
Where you're gonna meet some of
the eligibility requirements of
the new legislation that is
going to be coming down from the
new president's administration,
then you are going to be asking
questions, including the VA.
Because a lot of these programs
are going to be impacted. So
when any of your constituent
constituency and members come
and they end up.
And most of us do this. We only
go when we need it. We go to the
hospital when we need it. Well,
when you go to the hospital,
they are going to steer you to
the programs that they have or
whatever insurance you have.
Keep in mind that a lot of
people with, especially with
Medicaid, is contingent upon
income.
So what that means is a lot of
times the definition is
household.
We live in communities where
there are various
intergenerational levels of
income.
And various uh grandma, grandpa,
grandkids, even great grandkids
are living in the same
household. A lot of people are
disenfranchised by applying for
funds or services only because
they don't understand it. That's
where some of the community
health councils, especially
Senator Mingo, the people will
come to us and we navigate, try
to steer them to this different
places, trying to find the
addresses and the phone numbers
of Social Security or ISD or
even Medicare.
and Medicaid and even including
the MCOs and private insurance.
That's where the information
comes before you end up needing
that services.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you Madam Chair. And so
the outreach that the health
council does goes out in various
different ways through public
public means to to meetings that
they host and in Curry County
health council holds its regular
monthly meetings in person on
the 2nd Thursday of each month
from 3:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m.
And for information, you can
call Kimberly Reiker.
And we can give you the, well, I
don't want to give the number
down, but we can get you that.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
OK, thank you for that. I, I've
never, and, and, and you think
about health.
And your well-being and
everything, but you don't think
of uh going to the health
council to, to try to get
better, right? But this is to
resolve issues within
Within our communities.
Instead of, they're not gonna
treat you for, for a particular
illness you have, right?
Madam Chair, and presenters. So
then,
Explain to me.
We heard, we heard climate
change, uh, Madam Chair and
presenters.
Time and time again during this
presentation.
Uh, how does, how does climate
change fit into this bill? I, I,
I don't
know has an effect in many ways
of a lot of things, but
Is there some scientific
Study that you all have looked
at or something that that ties
climate change to.
The Health councils, I just
Seems like we're reaching way
out.
And in a lot of the
presentation.
And even in the bill, we see, we
see some broad language, uh,
Madam Chair and presenters, uh,
Like when, uh, I believe.
I believe on page 2, line 17. It
starts with
With uh pay for cost of running
county tribal health councils.
Including overhead expenses.
Offices, health hub locations,
travel reimbursements.
And supplies.
I mean, this is so broad to me
that
I'd, I would like to see more
specifics when we're spending
the state's money and taxpayer
dollars.
As to
How these monies are gonna be
spent it, it, it sounds like
we're putting $43 million out
there.
And
We don't have any
Specifics. We just have a
general definition.
Of how these monies are gonna be
spent. And if you, if you could
tag on that a little bit and.
So that we can have a better
understanding, you know, of
these monies, how they're gonna
be spent and thank you, madam.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I think
there's a few questions in
there, so I'll try to, to
maneuver um the response, but
pretty directly, I think which
would overview of answering the
question is the emergency
response and trauma training and
the uh additional trainings for
suicide prevention and and other
things like that encompass all
the uh around the questions in
general what you're asking.
We've had to scale the amount,
the fires and the flooding that
we just experienced this last
year and then over the last few
years, then we have to have a
response team out there that's
identifying the trauma and
needing to identify where the
resources are, where they need
to go to um to help them and
help these communities in a
direct way. So that is what our
what our councils have been
doing and will continue to do
and continue to plan with our,
our counties and our local
governments and with our states.
Our DOH and how to create a
cumulative um plan to do those,
those types of responses and
trainings. So we're in a crisis
now if you want to talk in
behavioral health, we're in
crisis now in climate, and
that's why we're going to
continue to see these type of um
fires and flooding and those
sorts of things. It's not an if,
it's a when.
So thank you, Madam Chair.
And thank you for that answer
and Madam Chair and presenters
on
When, when we talk about
overhead expenses, do, do any of
those expenses go
To hospitals directly.
Uh
We, we know that a lot of our
hospitals in the state of New
Mexico in the, in the past.
And then present uh near past
have
Had a lot of issues with their
financial.
Uh, being able to cash flow
because of all the situations
with the insurance and, and
doctors and
Everything else that's going on
with hospitals that are, that's
affecting the hospitals.
Is any of this money gonna be
going directly to hospitals.
Uh, so they, they can, uh,
Help pay their bills or anything
like that?
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative. So HB 75 does
allocate the monies for the
capacity operations, so health
counselors can do all the
education, prevention
intervention coordination of
services and as Representative
Lu Han noted, emergency response
coordination as we saw in Rioso
and other parts in the in the
state this year, um, health
councils in utilizing the funds
for their own capacity can
coordinate with their local or
regional hospitals to coordinate
maybe mobile clinic.
to come to the local
communities, much like they do
with DOH. DOH now has mobile
clinics. If we think of our
rural communities, um, in, in a,
in an average folks are driving
if they have transportation, 1
to 2 hours to get to the nearest
special specialist appointment,
primary care, urgent care, even
an emergency situation. Health
councils in like in Guadalupe,
uh, coordinated with their EMS
board to issue a license so a
nurse can practice at a higher
level out of their ambulance.
is, therefore creating a local
mobile clinics. And so health
councils coordinate that access
by bringing the service care
providers to the communities and
for and absolutely they can
coordinate with their local
hospitals to enhance that
capacity to get people to
medical service. Mm,
how did the $43 million figure
come up uh Thank you, Madam
Chair. um, representative. So,
as, as I noted earlier,
We did a survey with health
councils. The median, right, for
operating, uh, funding, it came
out at 184,000. So that doesn't
include indirect costs, indirect
percentages. So, 184,000 times
um 33 counties times the current
10 tribal health councils times
the 9 remaining pueblos who do
want to establish their tribal.
And 50 chapters in Navajo
Nation.
We calculated $10.8 million.
This doesn't reflect Apache
nations, we, we need to work
with them to assess what their
specific needs are. So, at $10.8
million right? Plus the indirect
on the tribal side is 35%, uh,
plus the indirect on the county
Health council site at 10%. We,
we calculated 45.7. So this was
a guesstimation around the 43
million. Now,
If we can come to the table, you
know,
In a middle ground, you know, at
10 million, at 6 million, at 7
million will be the best step
forward in the right direction
to leverage all county and
tribal health councils for
success in service of
communities across the state.
Madam Chair, and, and presenter,
I, I don't think you want me to
amend the bill and cut it, cut
the money off, do you?
I'm just, I'm just kidding with
you. Don't, don't get too
nervous yet. So, Madam Chair and
presenters, uh,
And and representative this
might be directed more to you. I
is this money in the budget
already or is?
Madam Chair, we have, um.
Multiple, um, lines for um
special appropriations and one
of the lines incorporates a
community.
Um,
then
I, I, I can't come to the war
with it, but it's in alignment
with what the health council
does.
And so we're looking to see how,
how more specific that language
can be.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, and, and
Representative, maybe a little
more clarity for me, uh,
That money is available in a
silo that we, we have some money
in. Is that, is that what you're
saying, uh, Madam Chair and
Representative?
I'm sure I'm working with um um
LFC, um, and with our chair and
vice chair to see where exactly
that language could be utilized
as, as it is um already written
now and as we're working on the
budget.
And Madame Chair and
Representative, but you're not
saying that that money is in
House Bill 2 or anything like
that already
we have a special appropriation
line items and within the
language that currently exists,
the, um, our health councils,
um, are able to utilize that,
and I think that my expert could
speak to that a bit. We've,
we've been discussing that and
um we're looking to see how that
fits in there. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you for that, Madam
Sharon. Thank you, presenters,
uh.
I believe that concludes all my
questions.
Thank you, Representative. I
just have a little housekeeping
announcement.
Um, looking at the time, we will
not be able to hear how's Jake.
Our 3 today.
Um
So I have on the list to speak.
Um, so we will not hear, um, HJR
3 today. So just want to let the
sponsors know, um, we'll be in
contact with you for uh the next
scheduling. Thank you for coming
today.
I have on the list represented a
block, represented a Brego,
representative Little, uh,
please be a little cognizant of
your time, um, we can probably
start um getting ready to
To call the question.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and uh
Fortunate for me because
representatives I want to ask
some of my questions. So I have
a few more for you guys. Thank
you so much.
Madam Chair, I'm just gonna
Right, it looks like the doors
may be closing, Madam Chair.
So
I'm sorry, I'm like super ADHD
or something and I can't really
focus on two things at once. So
Madam Chair Representative, uh,
experts, your bill here, I did
have some questions on the
presentation of where these
dollars will be going. So, page
14.
I'm looking at
The last two items on that, or
I'm sorry, the 3rd to last, and
the 4th to last. We're talking
about chronic disease
prevention, chronic disease
prevention, and uh elder and
aging care.
So Madam Chap representative, I
think we may have spoken about
this in the interim, when we,
when we talked about this, but I
know that our state, we have
A larger aging population in the
state of New Mexico. And I'm
wondering why, why is that
number or that percentage of
what we're focusing on so low,
when these issues such as
chronic diseases that happen
later in life and just elder
care in general, why is it that
it's such a, so low on the totem
pole as opposed to behavioral
health, for example, Madam
Chair, Representative. Madam
Chair, Representative, thank
you. That's a great question.
This is a reflection of capacity
on health councils in the sense
that the need
is there in the capacity to meet
the need needs to be leveraged
by investing in health councils.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
and Representative that, that
does help me a little bit. I
just want to make sure that if
that is the case, we are
ensuring that those health
councils do get that.
Um, that focus, Madam Cha
Representative, next question.
I'm gonna try to be brief here.
Uh, talking about indirect.
costs. So Madam Chair
Representative, that's like a
majority of the pie of the 44
million, I believe it's 44
million that it's asked for in
the bill. I'm wondering, Madam
Chair Representative, can you
specify any specifics in the
legislation as to what those
additional indirect costs maybe,
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair Representative,
thank you. That's a great
question. And those, the
indirect on the tribal side is
an administration fee from
tribal government and I'll turn
to Anthony Yapa.
The, the indirect costs in most
of the tribal communities.
Is the overhead cost that is
required to run most programs,
those are directly negotiated
with the federal government,
being that a lot of these grants
and contracts that the tribes.
Receive are through the federal
government. So those are
overhead costs and that will pay
for a lot of the issues, the
infrastructure, the supervision,
the supplies of somebody to
supervise maybe the tribal
governor, the uh health and
human uh HR, the finance
department, all of that are
included in there in terms of
the space, the housing, the
infrastructure, buildings, and
um that's where most of the
costs are coming from. I just
wanted to remind the
Madame Chair and committee that
most universities, their
indirect costs that they get for
some of the uh grants that they
receive is over 40%.
And you are funding them
already.
OK, thank you, thank you so
much, Madam Chair Representative
and, and experts for those
answers. So, OK, I'm just, I'm
just wondering because I feel
like
At least the way it's set up,
the way that we appropriate
money, if it goes to a nation
tribe in Pueblo.
Once it leaves the city of
Mexico's hands. We can't really
we can't ensure that those
dollars get to the individual
chapter houses. That's, you
know, since it's sovereign, we
don't how that's applied on the
boots, you know, on the ground.
So Madam Chair Representative, I
guess I'm wondering, how do we
ensure that those dollars do
indeed get distributed equitably
to those specific chapters, and
how do we make sure that there
is consistency, Madam Chair
Representative.
Those dollars have to be
calculated directly and
proportionately based upon the
administration of whatever tribe
in the case of the Navajo
Nation, I don't know how they do
that, but in most of the smaller
tribes, you have to make sure
that those dollars are spent
directly for those services
because all federal contracts,
all state contracts, any grants
are subject to the audits, and
the audits will indicate whether
the uh
The uh organization of the tribe
is spending them appropriately
and every year, once the audit
is done, the audit requirements
are sent to all the federal
agencies as well as the state
agencies, uh, of the audits that
were done regarding the indirect
costs. Now, if there are some
overages or under recoveries
than those will be impacted the
following year, so there are
some internal checks.
More so in indirect costs than
there are with some of the
grants that the state and the
federal government sent out.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, and I, I'm sorry
about this point. I'm really
just trying to, I don't
understand because we're talking
about federal dollars and these
these dollars that we're going
to be appropriating our state
dollars. They're coming from our
general fund. So I don't believe
the federal government has
authority to look over what
we're appropriating.
to the tribes. I mean, unless we
give the money in a blank chunk
to like BIA and then they
distribute it, Madam Chair, I'm
just trying to figure out.
Madam Chair, representative. So
once the state funding is
allocated to health councils.
Um, the appropriation goes
through the Department of
Health. The Department of Health
works with both county and
tribal health councils, curating
a scope of work that's
deliverable based as well.
These scopes of work then are
issued to each of the
leaderships of in tribal would
be tribal administration
government of their tribal
health council and then on the
county side, it will go to that
respective entity, and they then
go through review approval
processes, signature, execution
of contract.
Um, once the first, I think
quarter is completed or um the
contract is executed. There is
one deliverable completed in the
first set of percentage of that
allocation is released directly
to the health council for that
projected deliverable. So it's
very contractual deliverables
based in great to track that
way.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. So each council
has a contract with the state
and that contract says exactly
what dollar goes where and what
it's used for, etc. in in the
contract. That is correct. Thank
you so much, Madam Chair
Representative. A couple more
questions and I will, I will be
hopefully brief. Representative
Zamora did talk about my, one of
my questions, which was
regarding your page 15.
On the CCHICA priorities.
Madam Chair Representative, I
see that climate change
education via social media
podcast networks and education
materials, ma'am to
Representative, I mean, I, I
just kind of want to understand
what podcasts, what materials
are we looking at? How do we
ensure that they are looking
At the
Issue if it is even an issue at
a very objective approach, Madam
Chair, and I just want to make
sure that those dollars that are
state dollars are indeed
encompassing all all
perspectives of that.
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative. So we
highlighted this Chica project
on public water systems, um,
because of the intersection of
uh healthy climate. Um, this is
actually funded through a
federal grant through a partner
uh Center for Health Innovation.
So we highlight this as yet
another way in which health
councils are addressing um
public health water system
safety, uh, but this project
specifically funded through that
federal grant called CIA. It's a
climate change, health impacts,
and community actions. This is
just purely to highlight other
type of work that they're
leading.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. So can you tell
me now today, will these
And you would ensure for me that
these funds that we're
appropriating this 44 million
will not go toward climate
change.
Initiatives if the federal
government is indeed providing
that, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair
That is, that is a broad topic.
What we are, what we are
illustrating here is the
intersection between
Healthcare, behavioral health,
and the climate and the
emergency response that these
dollars go towards when, when
that is.
um part of the equation.
All right. Thank you, Madam
Chair and Representative, and I,
I bring that up because I just,
I find it duplicative of what a
lot of agencies are already
doing when it comes to these
issues, and I mean, I love our
my my health council in Otero
County, but Madam Chair
Representative.
I, I cannot in good faith
support legislation that
explicitly or maybe implicitly
allows these funds to go
specifically to that climate
change initiative, and I would,
I just want to make sure that
that is not something that we're
using in this appropriation of
$44 million. And so I guess we
don't, we cannot.
Ensure that today. Is that what
I'm understanding? Madam Chair,
Representative, so this is a
grant that ends um this fall.
Now,
On the intersection of climate
and health, health councils have
been very active in coordination
of services. We think about the
fires in Ridoso, for example.
They were the go to people that
knew where their elders live,
you know, get them to the
shelters or to the cooling
centers during heat waves, or
make sure that they had, you
know, their, their first aid
packs and um food delivery
during COVID and the list goes
on. So this is a conversation
also about emergency response
with
Which health councils are very
critical to
In the context of say climate
change.
Madam Chair Representative, and
I, I, I think it's important to
help when, when fires and floods
happen. But in the instance of
the redoso virus, it was in, in
my understanding, it was
mismanagement of the federal uh
land that they didn't clean the
forest and there there was
higher fire risk and, you know,
since the, the climate.
I, I don't know what I'm not
gonna even get into that part,
but I'm going to say at least
regarding that, that was 11
thing that did indeed contribute
to those fires, so I, I don't
wanna
Label the fires based on climate
change because there were so
many other factors including
aging infrastructure and lack of
lack of funding when it comes to
that. And so, I do want to be
very cautious with that, Madam
Chair Representative, yeah, I, I
still have.
Large concerns on this, but I, I
guess I'll just continue.
Um, listening to the discussion,
I thank you for the information.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative.
Representative Barrego thank you
Madam Chair, um.
This is the first time that I've
heard this, so I was trying to
find information and
representatives asked some of
the questions that I
And I was interested in, but.
Um, so,
Just really briefly, I want to
support this, but.
I have a lot of questions.
And I don't, and you gave a
clear explanation.
But that should have been a
writing of, you know, how the
money was going to be
distributed because I didn't see
that of the distribution.
And so I came to understand, I
think.
That, um,
We have a reoccurring expense in
the general fund of $1 million.
You guys
received a one-time allocation
of $3 million.
And that was last year.
And now you're asking for.
$43 million.
And
What my, what my question is,
and and it was partially
answered, but not in detail is,
what is the cost of doing
business for each of these.
captors or um groups and I
didn't see that.
And that makes me a little
uncomfortable. I have to be
honest with you. I mean,
especially when we're allocating
state money is, you know, like,
I would like to see a breakdown
of each of those chapters and
how the money is used.
Administratively, for what
purposes? And I don't, and I,
I'm very detail oriented person,
so it makes me uncomfortable to
say, yes, here's $43 million.
And
It,
but I know it's going to be used
for a good cause.
I just
Need that information somewhere
and it's not in the FIR. It's
not in the.
So
Voting yes and I would love to
support this.
But
Voting yes makes me
uncomfortable.
Without having that information,
that kind of information in
front of me.
May I respond, Madam Chair.
Thank you. um, thank you, uh,
Representative Bodego, uh, we
can get that information to you
in that breakdown, but just
primarily this uh.
The the house councils fall
under a state statute and how
they operate and, and how all of
that is facilitated in a lot of
those questions. Um, if it's not
in the FIR.
You know, we can get you more
detailed information as, as we
move.
That concludes my comments,
Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative, Representative
Little.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for the presentation. All 3
of you. Um, I have two
questions, and I think they're
um.
Um, I understand. I just wanted
some clarity. This is not for
direct.
This is for the um.
planning, it's my word. I can't
think of a better word. Oh yes,
providing systems advocacy
Who are the individuals
providing the direct care.
that, that is correct and they
they're the, they're the, the
conduit, if you will, to getting
services and training as you're,
you're indicating and plan.
Thank you.
I think OK, so
you incorporate in here. I'm
just curious. They haven't
already and I heard the interest
expressed of some of some of the
others, are these 10?
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative, we have a strong
partnership with the all council
Pueblo of governors, and we
currently have SUNY Puebloa
Pueblo, Pavaque Pueblo, very
much interested in setting up
their tribal health council at
80K. it is an it's not
sufficient, um, and with other
pueblos Northern and southern
also showing interest. Yes.
Intended
One more time, just, just a
quick question, but no floor
leader Spazanski's first so I.
I'll wait.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, just
really quickly, um, I, um, Madam
Chair, and, and,
um uniquely effective body.
In part because the.
The Board of County
commissioners had
Specific language the role of
The uh health commissioned by
the board.
Um, and so,
Um
One thing is, uh, in looking at
the authorizing statute.
There's not really any reverence
into its activities. And I think
that would give health councils
are really specific and unique
role in the health planning and
the use of
Um, so I, I would just, uh,
going forward, just suggest you
make this more than an advisory
body. Is it um recommendations,
commissions, so that they
understand, wow, our population,
what services do we need to put
in place to take care of our
seniors, um, before we get in
and um Madam and Representative
Luhan for this, this budget
think that
You all really need to do some
work on defining, um, you know,
there are 43 existing sort of
looks like a million new
councils, which is great, but,
you know, this is a
Roughly, I think you're gonna
have some really hard that I,
you really need to prepare for,
um, and I, having managed.
Any organizations, but I'm sure.
Like there is a role for a
phased in growth, um.
Uh, increasing the budget to
this size so quickly is gonna
serve you. That being said, I, I
very, but um I um
And I think if you go down to
brass tacks and tailored that
before the appropriations
committee that you will a better
based bill if you'd like to
respond quickly, um,
we have not been able to secure
recurring funding, and that's
the issue. We also have other
processes that we put in place
with HAFC with the grow um which
really, it's more of a pilot
program, but it does take the
the sum summation of, of, of the
amount and breaking protein for
the program.
to phase in and do those sorts
of things. Now, those, those
conversations will continue um
with HAFC, but I really do
appreciate the focus from both
sides, quite honestly, and on,
on this appropriation, but we
did also hear that.
You know, there is, there is
compromise and and.
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Floor leader
and representative,
Representative quickly, please.
Thank you to make it quick, uh.
One of the concerns I have about
All the debate we had today was
That we kept talking, I think it
was probably talked about 3
different times that.
Somebody wanted to set up a
health council.
I believe that the bill is
addressing money and, and, and
Supplying money to health
councils.
So I don't think it's healthy
for us to
Supply money to health councils
and then create a health
counsel.
It to me it seems like we're,
we're contradicting what we're
doing. We're gonna send money
out there and anybody that
creates a health council will,
will get the money. So it, it to
me, it's kind of like some
controversy there, some that.
It's not
correct for the bill.
Thank you
Madam Chan, and you don't have
to make a response to that. I, I
thank you, Madam Chair.
May I thank you. I, I understand
that what you're saying, um,
representative, um, Madam Chair,
um, but in statute, health
council exists, and so the
funding would go to DOH and then
from DOH is the distribution and
the addition of uh the growth of
this is um.
Yeah. Not remaining pueblos in
two nations that have not had an
opportunity to have um.
The functionality or the the
growth of of what health
councils do statutorily, and I
think we, we have one. Thank
you, Madam Chair and
Representative, I do have a
couple of responses, um, first,
uh, representative Barrego.
You are looking at a big picture
in terms of the 43 million that
is in place, but the facts are
in the history is health
councils since I've been aware
of, we're only receiving 12,000
a year.
Then we went to another 12,000 a
year, then we moved up to 15 and
then last year we moved up to,
and it's not recurrent, it's
under some special funding from
uh wherever the uh
That search was able to find it.
We got the 80,000.
OK. So,
That is where we're at.
It is not, maybe we are asking
for the, for the 1,500% or
whatever increase, 1,500%
increase, but that's where we
are at in terms of us receiving
the money at the local level.
OK. So I think that the request
is even to be part of and remain
with the 80 grand if that is
possible.
The compact that is in place for
the other representative, Madam
Chair, representative, is that
House Bill 137 requires that the
health council exists.
And we are not.
Mm
quote unquote fixing uh
anybody's arm as a provider,
what we are doing is we're
helping the state.
Provide the state.
Health improvement plan, and
that's where the information
that we gather from the local
communities is given to the
state DOH and we are solid
contributors to the new
healthcare in 3rd authority in
terms of how they're doing their
business.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative.
Thank you, everyone.
Representative Little and then
Representative Waa Nonu.
Thank you Madam Chair.
vice chair and a second, please
call Roll.
Representative Ona Nonu.
Represent
No, and I'd like to explain my
vote.
Representative Borego.
I'm gonna pass for now.
Representative Lujan.
Representative Mia.
Representatives, uh, Madam Ford
Leader.
Yes.
Uh, Representative Zamora.
Yes.
Representative Borego
and I'd also like to explain my
vote.
Madam Vice Chairman.
Madam Chair.
Yeah, to explain your vote.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
I'll be really quick. I just had
many concerns with this
legislation. I support my local
health council, absolutely, but
I do think that there needs to
be parameters such as climate
change, it's a very political
issue. I don't want to conflate
politics with healthcare in any
way, Madam Chair, I also think
that this is duplicative of many
other, other entities, and I
don't want to add more
bureaucracy and especially since
it's not necessarily having
actual power, it's more advisory
that this these dollars could be
spent in a much
more better fashion and then
thirdly, Madam Chair
Representative, there is no real
framework for how, how these
dollars are going to be spent,
so I'm really concerned with the
huge appropriation of $44
million with no real, real
guidelines for that. And so
Madam Chairs representative,
that's pretty much all I had and
uh I, I thank you all for your
time, madam chair.rego to
explain your vote.
Madam Chair, I do support um the
concept.
And, you know, because it is,
um, however, Madam Chair, I
think that getting to the next
committee, um, you all are going
to need to have a lot more
detailed information about the
cost of doing business for each
of these councils, um, exactly,
um, adminis.
And how they operate.
Um, I think that, you know.
A 90 according to the FIR
actually there was a discussion
of over 100 representative.
Our leaders
um.
And the FIR says a 90% increase,
so there's a discrepancy in our
understanding, and I think that
those things really need to be
tightened or
Kind of loose.
At this committee, and I think
that in in the next committee,
if you're gonna get it through.
