Uh, senator, welcome to our
committee. Good morning, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
Thank you for hearing us today.
We're excited to be in front of
a land grant committee 2 years
ago, a bipartisan bill was
signed into law, which had zero
opposition. That bill looked at
clarifying which land grant
Merceds are political
subdivisions of the state
governed by the land grant
general provisions. Now that
bill specifically named 26
active land grants, which are
covered by that general
provision.
Which is found on chapter 49,
Article 1 of the New Mexico
statutes. This bill, Madam
Chair, if passed, would include
a twenty-seventh land grant,
which is Santa Cruz de la
Cannava, that land grant we're
hoping will be placed into
statute, which then would
recognize them as the political
subdivision by local units of
government and at the federal
and state agencies as well as
other local governments. As you
know, land grant merceds, Madam
Chair, are part of our history
and part of who we are as repo
Mexicanos.
And joining me today are 3
expert witnesses. You'll hear
from one to my left is Arturo
Archuleta of the New Mexico Land
Grant Council to my right is
President Don Bustos of the land
grant and Secretary Brian
Martinez, and I'm gonna yield to
the president who'd like to make
a few remarks before we take any
questions from the committee.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Don
Bustos, and we're honored to be
in front of you. We've met as a
land grant committee for over 2
years on a monthly basis, we
developed our land grants, we've
opened it up to annual meetings.
We believe we've made all the
stature requirements that are
mandated by the state to become
a political subdivision of the
state, and we're here in front
of you asking me for you to
recognize that. Thank you.
Thank you so much. Uh thank you
presenters. Uh, we're gonna go
online. Is there anyone opposed
to this bill online, please
raise your hand.
And in the room, is there anyone
opposed to Senate Bill 47.
Is there anyone online in favor
of Senate Bill 47, please raise
your hand, and is there anyone
in, in the room in favor of
Senate Bill 47.
Seeing no hands raised will
bring it over to the committee.
uh, Representative Mason. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you,
representatives.
Uh, not much on this. It seems
pretty simple. Just make sure
this bill.
Only adds another.
Land grant to the list that we
already have they.
Madam Chair, Representative, you
are correct. Now, this land
grant was established in the
late 1690s, and this will add
them into statute officially
recognizing them as a political
subdivision. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you.
Uh
There's uh Madam Chair
representatives, you're not,
there's no appropriation for
this bill at all today, is
there, Madam Chair
Representative, you are correct.
With that, uh, that's all I
have.
Like a.
I'm Ducas.
I
We have a motion for a due pass
by vice chair Joseph Sanchez,
seconded by Representative
Mason. Um, is there any
opposition to this motion,
seeing none, please mark
everyone in the room voting in
the affirmative. Uh, you have a
due pass on Senate Bill 47.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee on
behalf of the landed. Thank you.
Thank you.
Moving, oh, I promised.
So we'll, we'll give um a House
Bill 571 building housing
communities, a moment, I did
promise, uh, Representative Dala
text her, but we moved so fast.
So give me a moment.
For the question, uh,
representative Mason. I should
have said at the beginning.
House Bill 568 asked to get
rolled and 219 has to get rolled
as well.
Um.
Oh yeah, yeah, they did ask to
roll this morning. Thank you. I
said earlier.
Great. Uh, Representative, we're
on you for uh HB 571 building
housing communities.
Good morning, Madam Chair. Good
morning, members, um.
The bill before you on building
housing communities, interesting
title, we may change that. Um,
is, uh, essentially looking at
how we can help provide a
wherewithal for, um,
Oh, Representative Andrea
Romero, OK, sorry, for the
record, um.
So this, this bill essentially
will help um provide a tax
credit for those looking at some
of our old and aging,
dilapidating, uh, commercial
spaces to help convert into
residential, um, as we've looked
around, uh, the span of New
Mexico, we know that some of our
aging buildings are in some of
the best located areas, um, this
would help provide the impetus
to do that.
Um, we, for the last 5 weeks
have been putting on a series
representative Doo and I.
Um, about some of the better
policies that New Mexico might
be able to apply um for
transforming our housing crisis
into some solutions and this is
one that came out of that. Um,
so we are working bipartisanly
to, to bring this before you
today. She's stuck in another
committee right now, so, um,
yeah, I look forward to the
discussion. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Is there anyone online opposed
to this bill, House Bill 571?
Is there anyone in the room
opposed to House Bill 57. Is
there anyone in favor of House
Bill 571 online?
Please raise your hand, and if
there's there anyone in the room
in support of 571, please raise
your hand.
Um, so the attendant will hold
the microphone for you. Please
keep your comments to about a
minute. Thank you.
in the room just so folks online
know. Go ahead and keep your
hand up online.
If you would like to speak.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Roger Valdez, Center
for Housing Economics. This is
a, a, a good step in the
direction of incentivizing
local.
governments to make more
progressive land land use
decisions and so we support it.
Daniel Wealth, um, housing, uh,
in the office of governor. This
is a step towards doing better
statewide best practices around
Landy student zoning and I think
is an incremental step towards
creating more systematic
approaches to land use in our
state that could help out.
men in chair members Committee,
I'm Ken Hughes, a coalition of
sustainable Communities
comprised of 7 local governments
around the state who would love
to use this tax credit to
incentivize uh
Converting buildings into.
Better quality places to live.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you, uh, Kent
Cravens, uh, registered lobbyist
for the New Mexico Association
of Realtors on behalf of our
almost 8000 members statewide
and a lot of other folks I'm
sure, uh, we stand in a strong
enthusiastic support. Thank you.
I chair members of the committee
on Mark Duran, I represented New
Mexico manufactured Housing
Association and Madam Chair
members of the committee, I
think something like this is a
really good uh first step, but
only a first step if we're ever
going to get to the point of
trying to solve 35,000 unit
deficit of homes in New Mexico,
we're going to have to figure
out how we work with the
localities to ease their burden.
in restrictions and
registrations. It's great we're
gonna have a a housing office uh
that the governor is proposing,
the hundreds of millions of
dollars that you're sending to
Housing New Mexico and the New
Mexico mortgage Finance
Authority, if where the rubber
hits the road is with the local
entities, the local entities
have too many regulations and
too many burdensome requirements
in planning and zoning. I hope
this is a first step to help
resolve that. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, thank you for the
opportunity to speak in support
of House Bill 571. I'm Frank
Smith with the New Mexico
Veterans and Military Family
Caucus, we stand in strong
support of this bill because
affordable housing,
accessibility, or critical
issues for veterans, military
families, and all New Mexicans.
The New Mexico veterans and
military Families Caucus urges
your support on this
legislation. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Carlos Camorra, I'm a
community land use and
affordable housing planner. Um,
I also want to urge support for
this. Um, I agree with all of
the testimony from the earlier
witnesses. I'd also say that uh
I really encourage the state to
take leadership and to provide
guidance to local communities. I
think local communities really
need that guidance. They really
need that assistance. And I
think that's this, um, along
with the Office of Housing
Planning Production would be a
really a positive step in that
direction. Thank you.
It will, will turn online. um,
we have me unmute Peter's.
Hi Pat, Peter, you're muted.
Thank you very much. Uh, my name
is Peter Ives. I'm a former city
councilor, uh, here in Santa Fe
and Mayor Pro Tem. and uh have
been working on housing issues
in our community for the past
several years, as well as when I
was a counselor.
And of course, we are in the
process of uh uh redoing our
land use code up here, uh, the
type of guidance that's provided
and House Bill 571 would be, I
believe, very helpful in that
process, and also allows some
uniformity across the state in
favor of housing, which may be
the only way we're going to
solve our uh housing issues
across the state that the other
speakers have addressed. Thank
you very much.
Thank you, seeing no other hands
raised, we'll turn to the
committee, uh, Representative
Mason.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative, uh.
Madam Chair representative, I
see.
This, there's no appropriation
this in.
Gonna cost anything?
Um, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Mason, uh, we
don't think so. So, again,
within the current housing code,
when we're looking at some of
the no cost initiatives where
folks are already, um, in place
to essentially make these
adjustments. We don't see that
that's a cost.
Thank you. It, uh, Madam Chair
Representative, I see in my
analysis that
Probably
The DFA will need in another
project manager for about
109,000.
Will they take care of that cost
internally, um, Madam Chair
Representative, um, so, yes, and
currently within the um House
Bill to the Office of Housing
has money, uh, appropriated for
this purpose as well. Thank you.
Thank you, uh.
You know, just as a statement,
uh,
We've uh
We've tried everything we keep
growing.
money at this problem we know
it's a big problem and uh.
I really hope that this helps in
some small way. Thank you,
Representative Madam Chair.
Mm
Thank you,
uh, Representative Cullen.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So can
you walk me through, because you
know, I've always believed in
kind of low, everything goes
kind of local, so kind of walk
me through the program.
How we're going to be looking
at.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. I'm
just pulling up Danielle Weworth
with the Office of Housing to
ask some of the and answer some
of the technical questions about
how the operation will work.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative. So the idea here
is um about establishing some
best practices for the state
around land use and zoning. One
of the big challenges we have is
that we have really diverse
zoning and regulatory
environments around the state.
Cres big challenge if you're a
developer to go from community
to community. Um, good example,
Santa Fe County, A project takes
3 to 4 years, large scale
project to get approved. The
cost of that compared to getting
a project approved and say,
Roswell in a year or 18 months
is $80,000 a unit. So the idea
behind what we're trying to do
is make it easier, faster, and
more consistent to build
housing. Um, this is an optional
thing. It's a certification,
it's not any.
preemption of local rights. I
would also point out that in the
framework of
Local land use, when states
intervene, it's often to give
landowners more rights. It's
actually to limit local
government's right to limit
landowners with what they can do
with their properties, right?
And so from our point of view,
um, uh, we've seen numerous
articles in recent years, uh,
uh, right before the session
started, we had an article from
Pew identifying regulatory
barriers, there's probably one
of the biggest cost drivers in
New Mexico, one of the biggest
things limiting our housing
production. So this is a
proactive approach where we
propose
in the Office of Housing that we
want to work with local
governments to help solve these
issues. A lot of local
governments want to update
landing use and zoning. They
want to make it easier to build
new housing. They want to
address their housing problems.
They don't know where to start.
A lot of times their land uses
director may also be a dog
catcher, you know, so for us
this is about creating a
framework to be able to support
local governments to to do
better at their regulatory
frameworks around housing and
and modernize them. OK.
Cause I know we are developed
because of what happened
land assembly issues, yeah,
in regulation, you know, we tend
to overrate and so we want to be
able to make it kind of
throughout the state. So I
appreciate it. Thank you.
I think you're a representative.
Vice Chair Sanchez
Santa Fe County, there's been
some opposition to like uh
manufactured houses.
And things like that, uh, which
are affordable housing, I know
like in Rio Riba, uh, northern
Santa Fe County. A lot of people
live in mobile homes cause
that's what they can afford.
Uh, and uh, what concerns me is
uh the concern from uh
commissioners that uh maybe
these types of houses are gonna
lower their land values or lower
house values.
Does any of that factor into
this program?
Uh, well
Are you guys gonna
I guess
Prevent this type of housing or
support this type of housing
from going into place which
people can actually afford.
Madam Chair, representative, um,
I think, um, modular
manufactured housing is a part
of the regulatory frameworks we
want to look at. When we look at
the need for 3500 to 40,000
housing units right now. Um,
we're building, we built 7500
homes last year, um, and that's
about keeping up with our, our
needs for growth, not our, our
gap. So we need to look to
modular manufactured housing as
part of that, and regulatory
frameworks are an important
piece of that. So it's certainly
something that's a priority, um,
from
Um, a lot of different places in
state government, um, but I, I
think it's one of the things
that we could potentially look
at with this. Thank you, Madam
Chair. I just want to make sure
we're not discriminating against
that type of housing because
that's what people can actually
afford and I know, uh.
Some people, it's important that
they, their values of their
homes don't go down, but again,
uh,
Like what they can't have it
both ways and I know they're all
we want affordable housing, but,
and we don't want those types of
house houses in our backyard you
know what I mean, it's like
crazyly shows that um affordable
housing does not negatively
impact values of homes around
it, right? When an appraisal is
done to compare a house to
another house. Um, there would
be adjustment factors applied to
modular manufactured housing
compared to a stick bill or a
traditional adobe house, they
all have adjustment factors. So,
Um, those issues are typically
unfounded in terms of, um, you
know, at least the data we have
around them.
Um, I appreciate the vice
chair's comments, you know, I
feel that housing prices have
been skyrocketing so quickly,
these, these investments go up
so rapidly. People are used to
this insane return and I, I, if
we want to catch up to where we
need to be with this. Obviously,
we need to um maybe that's that
increased slows, that return
slows, but again, it's still a
good investment, um, and to your
point, ensuring that our
communities have places to live
is better for everyone's housing
and, and long-term investments.
I did have a quick question, why
is this in DFA and not perhaps
with MFA or
So, uh, sorry. Oh, why is this
in DFA not MFA?
So, uh, Madam Chair, uh, the,
this particular program, so the
Office of Housing, uh, are under
the governor, which has been
created with executive
authority. We have two bills
seeking statutory authority, the
contemplation is that would be
administratively attached to DFA
and DFA would be able to
delegate that to our office to
implement.
And and similar or not really
similar, but just a question,
um, and it just might be a
technical thing. In the title,
it says on line 13, to provide
technical support to
municipalities, um, I, I'm not
necessarily seeing that inside
the bill itself. How do you
envision that? What, what do you
see that as meaning for this
bill?
Madam Chair, uh, that's part of
a larger scope of work related
to the Office of Housing, and
that's one of the big verticals
of work that we have in that
bill is providing support to
local governments. This is a
sort of companion that would
allow us to develop the best
practices and other sort of
definitions, uh, even model
codes and ordinances that we
could then work with local
governments to implement. So
it's sort of covered in other
areas, but I think um also DFA
has a natural relationship with
local governments through the
local governments division, um,
and that's one of the conduits
that we'd be working through.
So the in terms of this
particular bill, I, you know,
absent and everything else, this
would be really possibly best
practices in the other work
that's already happening. That
makes sense. Um, great, I'll,
I'll take a motion from the
committee if there's no further
questions.
Make a motion to do
There's a motion by
Representative Gonzalez for due
pass, seconded by Vice Chair
Sanchez on House Bill 46. Um,
let's do a roll call though.
River son of Cullen, yes.
Represented Gonzalez, yes.
Ranking member Lord.
Representative Mason,
Vice Sanchez.
Madame Cerrado? Uh yes,
unanimous have unanimous
support. You you have a due pass
on hospital 571. Thank you.
All right. Next up we have
ranking member Lord's Bill. I
believe that's
What I
It's 56, um, we'll drop a note
to uh Representative Lord and
see if she'll.
So it doesn't look like we have
the representative in the room
right now. If it's all right, we
have Representative Cullen, uh,
present the bill. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Collin. You have the Madam
Chair, committee members, I'm
here to present House Bill 576
relating to adopted children
providing adopted children with
free admission to state-owned
museums and state parks, camping
passes, and fishing licenses.
This will allow um,
The children to be so there's
Then I'll stand for.
Oh, is there anyone online in
favor of this bill, House Bill
576.
And is there anyone in the room
in favor of House Bill 576.
So I think no one in the room.
Let's go ahead and turn to that,
uh, saying no one in the room.
Barbara Yi will go ahead and
unmute you.
Hi.
Hi, good morning. Um, I am
Barbara Yale, and um I am a
foster and adoptive parent in
Chavez County. I also I'm a
social worker, and I serve on
the governor's CYFD policy
advisory Council, and um I
support this bill, and I
represent, um the foster and
adoptive parents in Chavez
County too. We, um, all support
this bill. We have foster
families who have already um
been taking advantage.
Of, um, this opportunity to go
to the museums in the state
parks, and we have many adoptive
parents, including myself, who
would love this opportunity to
take our adoptive children, um,
to have these
Awesome opportunities also, and
I think that, um, the financial,
um,
burden that it would cause is
very small, given the huge
encouragement and opportunity it
would be to New Mexico adoptive
families. Thank you.
Thank you. Is there anyone
online opposed to this bill,
please raise your hand and
there's, there's no one in the
room now.
They will bring it over to the
committee, Representative Mason.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. Now
we get to griller.
Uh, basically, Madam Chair.
Representative, this.
We
this is already in effect for
foster children is, is that
right?
Correct.
So basically we're just adding
the adopted.
Built into that existing
regulation.
Adam Chair Representative, yes.
Thank you, thank you, and, and,
uh, that's pretty much all I had
to state other than, you know,
anything we can do to help.
Incentivize people to adopt
these children.
You know, I think it's a good
thing.
With that, uh, uh.
I'm through, Madam Chair,
representing grilled you really
hard today, um, I have a quick
questionless than anyone else
does. So, and I, I know you may
not be able to answer some of
these, um, I think we've in in
the bill itself, it seems we're
leaving a a decent amount up to
rulemaking, um, for example, the
ID that they'll show um that
they are adopted, um, even if
there's like a, like an age
limit to when that would happen
otherwise. Um, so for example,
visit it through their 18,
through that they're 26, um, I,
I don't know.
that, but I'm assuming we're
gonna make that clear in rule
rulemaking, um, uh, is there, I
think those are my, my comments.
I don't know if you have any,
any responses to any of that
representative.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
committee members. Uh, that's a
great question, and I appreciate
it, but uh unfortunately I do
not have, I think that'll go
through the rulemaking process.
I, I want to clarify that
because I do think that this,
either we could flesh out this
bill and, and roll it in that
aspect, but I actually think
that stuff can get solved in the
rulemaking, um, as noted, it's
not an immense expense, and I
believe it's the FIR that states
that um already did uh at 5 of
DSA's 8 museums, it's already
free if kids are under 16, um,
and state parks are already free
for all residents between
October 1st to April 30th. Um,
so, uh, again, it, it seems like
the adding this population would
make a big uh
a big impact on that, that piece
of it, and that those, those
elements could be resolved in
rulemaking, um, and if we needed
to correct that, I believe we
could come back and do that. But
it seems like a step in the
right direction. Um, with that,
I'll take a motion from the
committee.
I make a motion to do pass. We
have a motion for a do passed by
Representative Gonzalez,
seconded by Representative Mason
on House Bill 576, um, is there
any opposition to that, uh,
motion?
Seeing none, please mark
everyone in the room as uh in
support in voting in the
affirmative on House Bill 576 to
pass. Thank you.
All right, that is it for today.
Um, we'll be back on Tuesday. It
looks like we'll have a few
bills up then as well, um,
members, please remember we have
our dinner tonight. So, uh,
please refer to your, your
invite that has the correct
address. And uh and we'll see
you tonight. Thank you,
everybody.
We're at.
No
Yeah, I thought so, but I was
like.
Yeah. And I thought it did, but
I was like I'm
Yeah. And I thought it did, but
I was like
if we would have got it to.
Amended if we needed to,
I thought I saw it, but I'm like
I would put all of it.
I mean,
Such a small little thing.
A nice little X-ray.
I don't know how to.
That getting out here and that's
why I missed this last one.
I had a meeting
meeting I was like I
went through it so fast I was
like, man, this is nice.
