Representative Montoya.
And vice chair Stansbury percent
thank you in German the queen
here.
Thank you we have a quorum.
thank you shall be in the thank
you to everyone for coming out
on a Sunday.
I appreciate it I think.
The U. we hold our to do the
there were there were a lot of
committees meeting yesterday on
Saturday I think this makes it a
little easier to distribute the
work I know
We give up a lot the
legislature's sometimes our
weekends
I hope Representative Strickler
and others were able to.
attend church service or
whatever the interest you on
that we can.
I'd like to especially thank our
staff I know it poses on them as
well we are more than halfway
through the session and I think
it's important to keep a steady
flow of work.
so before we go to our first
bill are there any questions or
comments or announcements from
the committee.
Hey I got a solid struck from
Representative Strickler.
I want to match last not body
upright for all of centers so
we're.
It should be it is specially you
Mr Representative Chandler
it's a beautiful day in
Farmington gorgeous day.
Yeah it's a beautiful day in New
Mexico right now so that's a yes
are they least have a window
Us so our first bill today is
house bill two sixty two energy
storage system tax credit.
Representative Sarinana are you
saying that bill.
yes Mr chairman I am India the
experts that we need to add to
the panel I do you a pass yield.
Welcome the former
representative a keel and a
former member of this committee
thank you Mr chair thank you so
much for welcoming me it's a
great pleasure and an honor so
we we can hear you we cannot see
you that that might be by choice
I don't I'm I'm since electing a
proper background so.
Okay.
Yes no no no islands with palm
trees please absolutely and I'd
also have seized using my
legislative background so that's
important.
Representative Sarinana whenever
you're ready.
All right thank you Mr chairman
and good morning Mr chairman
members of the committee I'm
here to present the House Energy
Environment natural resources
committee sub for House Bill to
sixty two energy storage system
income tax credit.
Do we need to of the seven.
Yeah.
To move the the.
The committee so for
consideration.
I'm the committee says for
consideration.
Their second.
The.
Okay yes Representative Sarinana
can you read the two into number
on the committee so please yes
Mr chairman two one nine nine
eight four point thirty.
Great go ahead then all right
thank you Mr chairman this bill
aims to put energy storage
behind the meter on a test on
the customer side always start
with the definition of energy
storage system it means of
battery used to store electrical
energy for use or displace
energy at a later time in this
bill that's how to use the bill
itself allows forty percent of
the total cost to purchase and
install an energy storage system
with up to a maximum credit of
five thousand dollars whichever
is lower the bill asked for a
million in energy storage income
tax credit for fiscal year over
two year period.
By the end of two years
hopefully there will be two
hundred homes that have energy
storage along with an energy
storage system.
I'm.
Specifics on the bills the
energy storage income tax credit
would be installed for use with
a new or existing Peavey system
or installed as a free standing
system.
It has a minimum of the to our
storage capacity the system
system must be certified by
energy minerals and natural
resource department or EMNRD the
total amount of credit available
each year is capped at one
million the number of year
specified would be two years
prior to January first of twenty
twenty four.
The issue tax credit may be
carried forward for up to five
consecutive years.
The taxpayer may claim the tax
credit in here that the system
is installed or the following
year.
I'm EMNRD must adopt rules for
the certification requirements
and application process and
EMNRD will create a publicly
available website that the
taxpayers can use report
specific data with five
different feels for they will
ask from the data.
the taxpayer will pay a hundred
dollar fee to EMNRD and EMNRD
will give the taxpayer and
identification number to be used
on the taxation and revenue
department TRD application and
the tracking of the tax credit
reports will be by TRD and this
this particular bill is talking
about the value of energy
storage
it's important is an important
peak times or peak usage during
rolling blackouts or brownouts
or during an arctic freeze what
is the value of the Energy
system and with that Mr chairman
I'd like to defer to my expert
witness Abbas Akhil for
additional comments on energy
storage where did you start is
needed in New Mexico why it's
important thank you Mr Mr
chairman.
Thank you Mr chair the queen and
members of the committee thank
you so much
Representative Cadena has quite
adequately covered the details
of the bill but I want to take
Kerr and Senator Mimi Stewart
for sponsoring this bill and
also want to thank the sponsors
for allowing me to explain what
is this about and why it is
important for New Mexico so I'll
briefly cover the mechanics of
what this back the storage is.
So to do with lithium batteries
it has become quite feasible to
design a compact battery pack
that can powerful play Keister
Google of ours and this can be
done it's just one of three base
at least first if the home as
the representative explained has
support or take system on the
rules the battery can be added
on the PC side update what
all the new TV advert tomatoes
have a port that allows the
battery to be included at the
time of the system is installed
or as a retrofit if it already
exists because of this
particular configuration a DC
coupled system and that's
important and I'll explain why
how that works.
Alternatively the battery can
also be installed and brought it
to the PED system but the output
of the Peavey system the
supplemented by the battery
systems are part of the power
going into the great is the
aggregate of the two and because
of this configuration and AC
coupled system.
is that is that technical
limitations for this
configuration which I can I
would just explain later the two
options as pointed out is
installing only the battery
system even if that is no
rooftop system of the system and
there is a provision of the bill
if and one of the issues to do
this and that so you know once
is here that we can go into
later.
The Backstreet today with
lithium batteries it's the
system except us quite compact
to give you an idea that this
low battery for this application
would be about four feet tall
three feet wide it just about
six inches deep so it's of in
almost like a book very slim
will case and it should be about
two hundred fifty pounds of
weight used in this manner we
call this storage behind the
meter which means it sits on the
whole side of the electric meter
on your side of the electric
meter and this bill addresses
only this type of storage of
this distinction behind the
beaters in part because the
electric system electric me
during the whole funds and
important dividing line between
your whole and they like to
company our cooperative that
serves you whole so it could be
behind the B. to belongs to you
and is much smaller in size the
other side of the beater on the
utility of the cooperative side
is a much much larger size and
works according to a different
set of rules at appropriations
for example the battery size
behind the meter which we are
talking about here is only a few
kilowatts but as the battery
system on the utility side of
media would be seven megawatts
and a good example of the Act is
a battery system that we've been
consent one that'll be about a
hundred eighty megawatts and
that thanks I so badly could
power seven hundred homes so we
are talking about much smaller
side on the your this side of
the meter and much larger size
on the internet side of the
meter now the question comes up
is why would a full Wilshire one
energy storage so let's consider
that for a few minutes in case
of a whole one of it the rooftop
system the energy that the
rooftop system gender.
Range is available or even the
sun shines and the sunsets the
system shuts down.
Of the battery storage system
when you add it in that
scenario.
Can keep the hold power play
please to fuel will hours after
the sun sets because a battery
save some of the energy that the
PED system is producing stores
it and it is available for use
later on.
and you can do this at least for
a couple of more hours after the
sun sets.
This bill also allows a whole
but the rooftop of it on a
rooftop system to use a battery
storage in that case it would
capture the difference between a
lower night time electricity
date when it is available at
keep it for use during the times
of the electricity rate is much
higher.
It's a different type of
application which the battery
standing alone it's freestanding
does not have a B. B. R. O.
Phelps is to work with.
When you do this when you
install battery storage of the
whole there are some operations
budget at as well at present for
example PNM allows only so many
homes to be start have a rooftop
system.
Once that certain number is
reached other homes in that
vicinity on neighborhood I'm not
allowed to add a rooftop system
because the energy generated by
all these rooftop systems would
exceed what defeated in absorb
and inmates stable.
If you add battery storage that
that provision somewhat goes
away thank each call get store
the extra PPE energy without
putting it on the PNM great and
it does not have to cross the
beach and flowing to the PNM
gray as a code number the work
and you open up by doing this
you'll open up a larger we'd go
to install more Peavey on other
homes and thus maximize the use
of renewable energy so the
battery in the presence of
battery storage Bustamante you
renewable energy that we can use
of this matter that's what you
want to do that other benefits
that become possible board to
the whole border and the
internet are cooperative if
there is a control and
communications system available
which at present we do not have
that kind of a system available
at PNM at best electric or excel
the bill foresees this future
this is the future that
community relat likely be moving
into and the first of the
shedding of the battery storage
and such infrastructure exist
and that is specifically
mentioned this and this bill.
A good example of that is what
did Carson is doing in Dallas
right now but they are offering
cold with is a choice of using
bacteria did you storage to
absorb the extra BV when it
affects too much for the system
to pay and then use it later on
afterwards and the sun set it's
goes back the previous example
let us talking about what it's
being used right now and it
could be very useful this bill
would be very useful for
homeowners to capture that
benefit and still get a credit
on their taxes.
A couple of utilities and other
states in the country are
already doing this I want to
point out.
That we're going to execute
committee has two thousand three
hundred falls and they're great
with rooftop TV and battery
storage now what this does is it
makes up almost thirty percent
of the peak capacity so those
two thousand three hundred falls
this storage is actually
controlled by were wanted
electric utility and they can be
dispatched when it is needed by
the great so that's a very good
example of what this future
could be.
then there's the whole aspect of
resiliency and survivability and
this we saw first hand in Texas
this week.
All of that had backed the
storage had the lights on even
with the rest of the
neighborhood went dark and this
bill this provision now for
Bactris even from an electric
vehicle.
Our some religion you hold.
And there are codes now on the
internet with access families
have slept in the electric cars
because a car battery kept it
warm and he date of for over ten
hours the the families that have
slept in Tesla cars for hours
comfortable in wall even with
that family back with the dog
inside the car so.
This is something Mr chairman
and committee members I really
want to pause for a minute and
consider what this could do for
our children and tribal
communities.
Let's assume there's a disaster
our and our regional electric
grid.
As reliable as a great is it can
happen any day in Texas we know
this so let's not be complacent
via heading in the future we
have to plan for such
eventualities this could happen
right here in New Mexico now if
the envision a scenario but that
is a battery storage in homes
specially those homes that are
in rural and tribal communities
then the vastly increase their
survivability and resiliency of
our group and tribal communities
just as we saw in Texas.
Because those homes that are
fortunate enough to have a
battery storage and electric car
actually rolled through this out
to you exes what we somewhat
comfortably.
if we do this then I communities
would be somewhat more protected
from the disastrous consequence
of such anyway so that is
another really important reason
why we want to push back to
storage down to the lowest level
of the great which is on your
side of the reader.
Now the great modernization bill
H. B. two thirty three that was
sponsored by Representative
Stansbury last year contemplates
exactly that type of
configuration and it becomes an
important piece for our energy
transition activation for a
carbon free future so this is
one of the pieces that would go
ahead and work to support that
garbage chief for the future
that you're looking at.
Up in the bill as Representative
pointed out we are asking for up
to five thousand dollars forty
percent of the cost to purchase
and install a battery and a
whole so right now Bactris
systems that could be used for
this a running about seven
thousand eight thousand dollars
let's see and installation cost
of a couple thousand more what's
your right around ten thousand
dollars or so so the five
thousand dollar limit and forty
percent kind of look and intact
and provide enough of an
incentive for us to incentivize
district on need at this time
now EMNRD.
The Energy mentor is natural
resources department would make
the farm available although that
as stated and perhaps even a
smartphone app which very simply
the installer awful water with
access and up on being a hundred
dollar fee visibility about five
questions a nine digit zip code
but the battery wasn't start the
size of the battery hello what's
gonna work hours making model of
the battery go to legislation
costs and the date of
installation and that's all that
is needed the farm that
generates a unique ID that we
think should and back unique ID
submitted to the TRD along with
the cost information and of
basically it's ready to go
that's all that is needed
if that is a question about
certification in more detail as
I said that later that comes up.
The FIR and I just want to point
that out.
Of the
under significant issues the
third paragraph and the FIR
refers to how the aggregate size
of the battery and the and the
solar system read Google on the
AC side that that info to a year
would exceed the ten can walk
into connection covered by the
conduct yes the rules so hooking
up assisted with this
configuration good cause
significant delays because a it
exceeds that back in the water
they make sense I think the
connection rules at this time
and us it could be late
connecting the system and could
be that delay could exceed the
to your vet bills that this bill
is a long engagement that we
will be I mean it is very
possible and reading important
to note.
that the PCS this is the
electronic portion of the
battery storage system that
controls how it works with the
great because that bar
conversion system which I call
the PCS.
It does allow the secretary
point W. secretary limited the
discharge of the battery and the
Peavey combine to take to the
walks and the owner has the
option of setting that limit if
they want to go through that
expedited connection process
review process rather than going
for the extended review but if
the two state seed that can
thank the lord let me they can
do so at their charts
No it's noteworthy to point out
that they're least fifty three
fifty three battery PCS is
commercially available today and
certified by California in
California according to their
rules that exist that allow
exactly such an operation would
be possible so the fifty three
of these commercially available
systems that group of the state
so this is not something that is
experimental or new technology.
So I don't think that to be a
significant issue that's really
a choice to be made by the whole
border.
the budget analysts also point
out that the system bill.
SB three zero one that is
sponsored by this by Senator
Sedillo Lopez focuses on
electricity storage and that is
correct of S. H. B. two sixty
two the bill we have considering
now.
Is presenting specifically
targeting Bakshi energy storage
and the intent is intentional I
mean this is intentional we're
doing this because here we at
incentivizing the use of battery
storage rather than saving
electricity in some cases for
the two and two years on the.
It is hoped that it is our hope
that after the two year PTA
battery prices and utility
conditions might change rapidly
and allow this to stand on its
own.
So the distinction between the
Senate and house wishes of the
pin is also important.
Okay I think I'm going too long
Mr chair I want to in closing I
want to make of any part of
salvation and I was just going
to cover a little bit of the
historical fact but via.
Running up I'm using up too much
time so in that I want to take
you into the committee for
allowing me to present this
information and I stand for
questions.
Thank you resent the kids it's a
the I appreciate having you here
The New Yorker still be here
when we ask questions so we have
we have four bills on the agenda
today and I think we're gonna do
the whole for each bill and then
when we do public comment we're
gonna do that the two minute
timer
so first up for this before we
go to the public comment on
house bill two sixty two we're
going to the polls Shelby are
you ready with the all.
So if you are in support of the
ball keep this up for about
thirty seconds of please press
four if you're in opposition
this is for the full support of
the bill of please indicate your
support if you're in opposition
please so indicate.
About ten more seconds.
Thank you for that.
And we have the.
Twenty.
Three years of the public in our
polling software indicate they
were all in support and that's a
hundred five percent support.
Which seems mathematically
problematic.
so I don't know why that is but
twenty three support.
At least a hundred percent
because.
okay so I'm yes the public it's
possible that I'm gonna go to
the public if you want to speak
in opposition please raise your
hand now I see one hand up if
you if you want to speak in
support please put your hand
down for a second just so we can
see if there's any opposition.
So I see it Mr Romero Mr Merrill
if you're in opposition we will
recognize you otherwise.
Please put your hand down for
just a moment.
And it's down okay so I don't
see any opposition so now if you
want to speak in support please
raise your hand.
Okay so we have a quite a bit of
support
it the speaker will be limited
to two minutes and Shelly well
we limit overall public comment
to fifteen minutes on this.
In our first speaker is
increased
Where did Anderson go yes this.
S. chairman and committee
members I am Andrew stone pace
Fund New Mexico and board member
of both the New Mexico solar
energy association and the
renewable energy industry
association solar is great but
solar plus storage helps the
grid be more reliable and
actually differs expensive
transmission upgrades the most
cost effective future grid will
combine distributed energy
resources like rooftop solar and
dispatchable batteries along
with utility scale wind solar.
My family has run sold here for
sixteen years and battery
storage for the last five and we
meet our electrical needs twenty
four seven with power to spare.
The price of battery storage is
dropping fast but it's still too
expensive for most homeowners.
Our utilities will learn the
effectiveness of what's called
grid edge storage to help them
plan the least expensive and
most resilient and reliable
grid.
With the lessons learned from
Texas this week batteries have
become an even more this
solution I stand in favor of
this bill thank you.
Thank you for that next up we
have Tom Solomon.
Thank you Mr chairman and the
committee members my name is Tom
Solomon co coordinator of the
New Mexico chapter of three
fifty dot org the group devoted
to fighting for safe Clemente
I'm also retired electrical
engineer.
So on behalf of our eight
thousand members three fifty New
Mexico supports the energy
storage system tax credit this
bill is a next logical step in
support of the Energy
translation Act in our state's
transition towards a one hundred
percent renewable electricity
grid by twenty forty five every
expert acknowledges that the
final income into that grid will
require a significant amount of
energy storage to smooth out the
variable nature of renewable
energy generation this bill gets
a started on building in
integrating storage into the
grid and learning how to
optimize this is both smart and
necessary the ongoing power
outage in Texas shows how vital
it is to build resilience into
our power systems and backup
energy storage is resilience.
The sad fact is that we believed
for far too long it addressing
global climate change the
effects are with us now and will
get worse whether we'll get more
extreme and we must prepare for
that future this bill does that
so we stand in strong support
thank you very much.
Thank you for that we did Jim do
her dance.
Jim you're needed on your end.
Sorry okay can everyone hear me
now yes okay thank you very much
Mr chairman and members of the
committee my name is Jim day
Florida and I'm executive
director of the renewable energy
industry association of New
Mexico where a organization of
profoundly local solar companies
we also have a major credit
union we've been around since
two thousand and four and have a
long history of being active in
the state legislature.
There's lots of reasons that
this bill is really a great bill
but a sense I think it comes
down to one thing and that's the
ability to store energy and then
use that at a later date so like
we store data on a hard drive in
our computer to be able to use
it at a later date.
But I'm just going to focus on
one reason.
Right now there's thirty
thousand proximate thirty
thousand desktop I'm sorry
rooftop solar systems in New
Mexico almost all of them do not
have energy stores so what that
means is when they produce more
energy that's being used at that
location typically and in the
middle of a sunny day that
energy goes back to the grid.
Well what happens when the grid
goes down for safety reasons the
solar system is required to turn
off so in that scenario it is
not functioning it is not
providing power so what storage
behind the meter would do would
be to enable that energy to be
use and that critical type of
situation and of course we can
all we all know what's going on
in Texas right now and how
terrible situation that is so I
think it really underscores the
need for a bill like this this
bill will basically jumpstart
this emerging industry and
create more high paying jobs in
the progress process thank you
very much.
Thank you for that we have steep
wise bird.
Good morning Mr chairman and
committee members I work with
the three fifty New Mexico rural
outreach and we are in strong
support at this bill in order to
give rural residents more
independence in their
infrastructure and also to help
the eighteen thousand New
Mexicans who are not tied to the
grid thank you very much.
Thank you for that Mr to create
that next up we have Robert
Romero.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I'm Robert Romero
registered lobbyists for Kate
because let you call up as most
of you are aware Kate question
is a leader in solar energy by
November of this year.
K. Carson will serve its
customers with a hundred percent
local sort solar power during
daytime hours.
Without without because of the
success without storage behind
the meter you really cannot do
that anymore local solar.
This this bill adding batteries
is critical for for us to be
able to add more if more local
solar in fact we need both
behind the meter and then for
the meter storage and the we
have fully support this bill.
Thank you for that next week
here you can for.
You're you're muted on here and.
Sorry about that yep I I'm Gary
Gunthorpe the Brandt the
Albuquerque branch manager for
PPC solar which is based in that
house.
we have worked closely with
kicker Selectric over number of
years in the implement
implementation of renewable
resources and grid resiliency we
are fully in favor of the
proposed bill.
There two points that I'd like
to make as it relates to the
resiliency that we need on the
grid and how this proposed bill
will support that
I'm not going to belabor the
point of what's been happening
in Texas but The New York Times
this morning published their
lead article which says Texas
blackouts point to a coast to
coast Crisis awake waiting to
happen.
This bill and others that
support resiliency on our grit
are critical to keep New Mexico
out of the kind of scenario that
we've seen in Texas over the
last week or two.
The second thing that I'd like
to point out is with the
proliferation of electric
vehicles which is inevitable we
there will be additional needs
needs for the grid to support
the additional electric
consumption that will occur
through charging of electric
vehicles analysts predict that
if Americans switched entirely
to electric vehicles twenty five
percent more electricity will be
considered it is important that
we as new Mexicans prepare
ourselves for the inevitable
future additional loads on our
on our grit.
And for the proposed H. B. two
sixty two I think is an
important step in that direction
thank you for your time.
Thank you so much we'll take the
next remember the public.
Robert please.
Yes.
Good morning Mr chairman and
committee members my name is
Robert Hey I am the president of
the New Mexico society of
professional engineers and we
represent about thirty five
hundred.
Registered engineers in the
state of New Mexico and we just
want to go on the record.
As supporting this bill HB two
sixty two thank you.
Thank you so much next we'll
have Jefferson Taylor.
You're needed on here at.
Hello can you hear me now yes.
I'm sorry about that good
morning Mr chairman and
committee members I'm Jeff
Taylor I'm director of public
policy for some of so we're a
forward leaning solar company
based in Santa Fe it is my
pleasure to speak in favor of H.
B. two six two this is principal
public policy that provides a
financial incentive for New
Mexicans to install solar
systems and most importantly so
versus so we're storage to be
independent and off grid we have
seen and heard about the
heartbreaking Crisis in
neighboring Texas let me give
you some dollars and cents facts
to think about the Texas public
utility over this period has
raised the wholesale price of
power to nine dollars per
kilowatt hour that is three
hundred times higher than the
normal host cell price during
this crisis they have raised it
so during this crisis the price
of of a kilowatt hour has gone
from three cents to nine dollars
this bill will provide and we
certainly don't want this to
happen in New Mexico this bill
will provide a forty percent tax
credit up to five thousand
dollars as we all know solar and
solar storage efficiency is
climbing higher as the prices
are will ring but not fast
enough and this legislation will
stimulate the citizens of New
Mexico to go so we're and go off
grid we strongly support passage
of this bill thank you.
Thank you next up we have
Stewart what's in we we about
five more minutes left for
public comment.
yes my main store what's thank
you Mr chairman and committee
members thank you for the
opportunity
stop this
You know I recently installed a
solar system in my house and
it's thanks for the support of
the New Mexico taxpayers and the
subsidies that happen I would
like to do one find batter for a
battery backup and I think house
bill two six to help encourage
that and I would encourage you
to support the bill and I and I
support everybody statements in
the past thank you very much I
appreciate your support for
house bill two thank you.
Thank you for that next step we
have.
My in my name are you dean
carding.
Good morning Mr chairman and
committee members my name is my
neighborhood and I am
representing vote solar today an
organization dedicated to
increasing access to the clean
energy transition I am from
Santo Domingo pueblo and New
Mexican born and raised in just
twenty six I came in just twenty
six years I can receive
substantial changes in our
climate on going drought extreme
weather events and risks make me
worry for myself and our youth
about what is yet to come.
Climate change continues to
reveal the pressing need for
grid resiliency and behind the
meter energy storage will ensure
greater greater reliability and
survivability moreover New
Mexico needs to commit to the
energy transition on all fronts
not just thinking we are
checking the box with the ETA
you're often misled that we can
only rely and utility scale
transformation for the clean
energy transition but that is
not the case Texas is a clear
indication of the susceptibility
of the great to us and we need
solutions on both the
transmission and distribution
level it is better I believe to
be prescriptive than reactive
especially in interests are to
the detriment of New Mexicans
and could compound pre existing
circumstances for all these
reasons I stand in support of H.
P. to sixty two for customer
great benefit thank you for your
time today.
Thank you next up we have we we
scope Carrero.
Hi good morning chairman and
members of the committee my name
is risk item on the legislative
and political organizer of the
Rio club right Sir the real club
Sir Senator club Representative
chapter sorry early in the
morning as a Sierra Club chapter
we represent more than thirty
five thousand members across the
whole state of New Mexico and we
strongly support H. B. two C.
sixty two there were twenty five
thousand distributed energy
resource solar systems installed
in New Mexico and almost all of
these are install without energy
storage as a result of the solar
system generates more energy
than is being consumed.
The excess energy so back to the
credit it would be really
important to add additional
storage and it would be
beneficial for future.
It's you know I need to state
the obvious we're we're seeing
what our neighbors next door in
taxes are unfortunately
struggling with right now New
Mexico can continue to be a
leader in solar energy and
storage as well I urge you to
vote yes on the bill thank you
very much for your time.
Thank you for that except we
have Nancy Pierce.
Good morning Mr chair and
members of the committee my name
is Nancy bursts and I am.
Also elected official Bernalillo
county treasurer and
Both the sponsor and the witness
know me well and two years ago I
did put in solar on my roof top
but I think what's key in the US
our house bill two sixty two yes
the collaboration and circling
in of energy minerals and
natural resources department as
well as the tax revenue tax ID
Revenue Department I think often
we forget about putting that in
our public policy to make sure
that all of our state agencies
are working collaborative lady
and together to make sure that
this really does serve the
public so I'm very good to see
I'm very happy to see that the
sponsor included the US and
really as a public official that
that administers state statute
that's always helpful thank you
so much I stand in support of
house bill two sixty two.
Thank you for that in our last
public speaker will be Carlos
looser.
Good morning chairman McQueen
members of the committee
Carlos's are public service
company New Mexico and hope that
this bill we house bill two
sixty two we can't support we
believe that it will help help
the safety reliability for our
customers that already have a
rooftop solar system in place
and this would give him options
especially what we're seeing in
Texas from safety standpoint and
and yeah so this is something
that we we bill we can support
in on thank you for your time.
Okay so I have a a late entry
and since it's the last one
let's go ahead and take it
teacher here.
Mr chairman members of the
committee to do trio of
registered lobbyists for a
possible elector I won't take
much time and just say for the
reasons that are that were
previously discussed especially
comments made by the expert
witness apostle elector expenses
for the bill thank you.
Great thank you and that ends
are are public comment before we
go back to the committee
Representative Sarinana do you
have anything you'd like that.
Mr know Mister chairman I think
where we set everything we need
to do so far thank you.
Mr Lewis yes to see you up at
Carson maybe online if you allow
Mr chair bidding thank you bye
point to speak.
Well it it raises hand okay
that's fine in that case he was
attending church services and be
may not be on the line but I
think there's also a
representative from particularly
low might want to add a minute
less relevant okay so I I went
to everyone the reasoning okay
that's fine Mr and that's I
think you've got plenty of
support so okay.
Members of the committee.
Representative Strickler.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative Sariñana in a
representative Akhil
The
Just give me a little technical
understanding my neighbor put in
he's like Trish and.
Let electrical contractor
electricity put in some rooftop
solar I think about a three
kilowatt.
system
he he's got a.
Thirty three thousand five
hundred square foot house.
Any also put in some storage and
and I just I just haven't taken
the time to to visit with him on
how that works so
Representative Kayla if you can
kind of tell me how this how
this works you it's a two hour
capacity
you save it up and and you know
when it gets dark in the is it
automatic is is this new this a
quick method that you estimate
costs around ten ten to twelve
thousand dollars
how does it trigger
you know it's it's saves up
twenty percent whatever
Our two hours I should say two
hours of capacity has at work
has this equipment work.
Mr chair and Representative
Strickler thank you so much for
asking that question the way it
would work is he's got a three
kilowatt system as you said most
some of that energy would be
diverted to the Backstreet
during the day when his usage is
lower as of going out to the
great it goes into the battery
the battery gets charged up
fairly quickly and after the sun
sets the end worker can actually
die would that stored energy
back to his whole.
because sometimes the internet
may not allow that back feet to
the great know what that could
do is a typical back treatments
maybe about fifty kilowatt hours
so if his home only uses three
can arts as a peak and if he has
made sure that you know certain
segments of the whole R. he can
run his appliances and all of of
even more than two hours because
if you just use drawing about
three kilowatts and a store
about fifteen kilowatt hours
worth of energy that can go
almost five hours so yeah this
opens up tremendous opportunity
for him and the costs are coming
down to.
Does that explain Mr chair I
think it does he up again
because he put this system in
himself you know about the.
Of the panels in at a wholesale
and in a Phoenix the you know I
think they I think they had a
manufacturing facility there so
we was able to
by the panelists wholesale I
think he put this system then
for less than six thousand
dollars and it would cost
fifteen thousand dollars if you
had it if you could be used a
company many of those he's like
Christian so he knows what he's
done and
And I'll have to I'll have to
visit with him to see how the
storage works for him any put
this system in about five years
ago so I'm sure the storage is
much better now yes thank.
Yes.
Much more efficient and so again
this is kind of a rich man's
credit I mean you know it's you
know a lot of folks don't have
ten thousand dollars lying
around
to put the sand so you know
your your your your wealthier
homeowners
you know we have an opportunity
to take advantage of this
especially
Thank you have are said that
that just a small
Number of our population that
would be able to take advantage
of a of a big tax rate like this
because of their you know
their their tax liability is is
a pretty significant so and I
know this is a it has a has an
expenditure and it'll go to
taxed you know they'll they'll
hold it to see if we have funds
in the budget so I think that
that pretty much answers my
questions and thank you thank
you Representative and thank you
Representative kill thank you Mr
chair and representative and I
just address a little based off
your comments is that next Mr
chair so Representative keel
will come back to you for
closing but I'd like to get to
the committee thank you thank
you
Representative Dixon.
Good morning thank you Mr chair
thank you representative
Sarinana and representative keel
for introducing this I was
wondering if you could elaborate
on the implications in the
budget up for this particular
bill and yeah if we could start
there that would be great thank
you.
Mr chair representative first of
all welcome to the legislature
it's always a pleasure to see
you here.
The budget implications as
mentioned in the FIR.
All we are allowing a one
million dollar cap but just just
you know Representative
Strickler just pointed out it's
quite likely that in the very
first year you may not reach
that cap that's quite possible
so the budget implication would
be of the loss of backup
basically at credit that to be
handed out to the value of about
seven hundred fifty thousand
dollars and FIR which is that in
fact I think the FIR goes on to
say that that point or will
board the years that this bill
is in effect so we have an
expense or we have a deficit no
I think for the second year of
gas to be eight eight eight
hundred and seventy five
thousand.
The going down again to two
hundred fifty thousand for the
third year which actually is not
covered by the bill but those
are the rollover credits that
going to the following year so
yes that is the impact.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Representative Sariñana just to
follow up on that is there
funding within taxed revenue to
implement this program.
And then agency Mr chairman I'd
like to defer to my expert
witness on this hi.
Mr chair and representative I
have would be participating in
the tax and Rev hearings and I'd
don't know what is in that at
this time but I hope that you
can being this laws adjustment
because it's not not a whole lot
but the incentives and the
benefit is quite large.
Thank you Mr chairman and
representatives my last question
relates to the fact that this is
a two year experiment is that
correct and I'm wondering if
there are the sort of what
metrics we'll have to
Measure the success of that the
program to determine whether
it's extended beyond that thank
you very much.
Mr chair representative thank
you for that question.
Actually create using is at the
end of each year of the two
years every night with generated
report which reports how many
systems where and and start.
How much credit was claimed and
the killer walked into the water
tolerating of those systems that
that's really important because
that shows us.
The potential for this type of
technology can do and it is as I
said a year it is hoped that at
the end of two years if given
enough momentum for this to get
a forward on its own and you
know.
We have deliberately limiting
district two years and there's a
subset of any hard sunset after
the two years because we don't
want this program to go on for a
long time it is really an
expectation that the costs and
the benefits would speak for
themselves.
Thank you I thank you Mr chair
that was the last my questions
thank you.
If you're Dixon except we have
Representative Scott.
Thank you Mr chair trying to get
there was the.
Technology is there we go.
Mr chair representative and the.
Mr kids happy to see you back
again you were expertise was
appreciated in.
Previous legislative sessions
thank you so much Mr chairman.
Looking at the.
At this hi on battery systems.
It appears as though the life
expectancy of these runs from
the twenty five.
In fifteen years is that.
All part numbers.
Mr chair representative that is
true in fact most of the systems
not catty of important warranty
of ten years.
And if you all can go beyond
that okay Mr chairman and
representatives Mister keel so
let's use ten years.
And the more research indicates
that the.
All.
On the low side would be a ten
thousand dollar expenditure.
And on the high side maybe a
twenty thousand dollar
expenditure.
That would be amortized over ten
year period so let's use.
If you will serve the mid point
of that to.
Okay that pricing scenario and
say we're gonna have to
depreciate that system.
We get ten years a lot of that.
At fifteen hundred dollars per
year.
Now.
If I if I backed all the way up
to a dollar.
For K. W. our Shakir.
It comes out to shop around two
Bucks could go.
A little either side of that
dispatch.
That's a reasonable number what
Mr Chairman.
Mr Kiel.
Would you consider that to be
accurate.
Mr Chairman representative
actually I don't.
because.
The way I look at it or what
life of ten years this battery
system would generate about R.
forty thousand kilowatt hours.
And I'm looking at a slightly
different figure so if I use
that number and I say that the
state is spending five thousand
dollars credit our system.
Then my calculation is a much
much lower system of not much
much lower cost of maybe about
ten eleven cents per kilowatt
hour which is very comparable to
what you're paying for
electricity today.
So I think we differ on the levy
arriving at that number I'm
using the total energy use
generated by the system during
its useful life and actually use
less time I I was using seven
years twenty five extend that
could take years which is the
warranty you.
Then the cost would be even
lower.
And Mr Cahill.
What is the average price of.
Hello Christy also the grid in
New Mexico to the.
If you take the overall price Mr
chair and representative and you
add in all the other components
that going to affect my whole
for example the comes out right
on present spoken a lot of our
by the time you include the
taxes and other writers that go
into the building.
Mr chairman Mr Caleb leave the
EIA indicates.
The average exit Mexico was
twelve point five so yes you are
certainly in the ballpark so the
very this question what is your
system is generate.
How are J. two cent discount.
Perhaps three cent discount.
To.
Commercial.
What do you to subsidies for.
Mr chair representative
absolutely agree questions the
subsidy really is not to.
Captured this difference between
these you know price is a great
discussing I think the intent
here is to incentivize a
technology that increases the
resiliency the survivability of
of great at the homeowner level.
So it is really a future looking
intent of this bill we can argue
about the prices difference
being you know two cents three
cents plus minus but I think the
overriding consideration here is
how are we preparing for holding
this to have a greater choice to
have more freedom and to be able
to survive any unforeseen
disaster.
And this particular technology
plays a very key role in making
that happen.
And and that is a date.
Mr chairman Mr kill you would
agree with me that I
a system designed to provide.
State to kilowatt hours of
power.
Particularly given.
This last the.
This last episode of cold
weather that we went through
that's really a pretty trivial
amount of resiliency.
Would you not agree with me.
Some of these some of these
homes.
Needed up thirty six or forty
eight or seventy two our.
Electricity before.
The utility scale grid was back
up and running.
So Mr chair representative
that's the need to very valid
point the business is two hours
but remember most of these
batteries and now exceeding
fifteen kilowatt hours and
capacity and there is no reason
to believe that we might even
get larger batteries than that.
So as I mentioned there
Representative Strickler Robert
disappoint it is quite
reasonable to expect that if the
whole is only has a three can
walk lowered and you as an
engineer with understand the
spike with and my battery is now
sized at sea more than fifteen
kilowatt hours you're going to
survive for more than five hours
indeed we are not offering this
as a band they are as a solution
to long term store to long term
outages and I'm not going to
claim that because the
technology as it exists today
cannot do that.
But however you can all of these
limit your usage during an
outage and the vendor so that
you don't discharge thank god
capacity of the battery
continuously.
That I mean you're refrigerator
even if the freezing in a fridge
rater according to the EIA and
other government agencies.
Clearly show that during an
outage if you don't open the
freezer door you can still have
frozen food for the next forty
eight hours.
So let's intermittently open the
door and closed it to take out
food up with food and you still
can't survive for long outage
with frozen food without a going
back so the point here is the
size of the battery as we are
discussing it here there is a
notion that you're going to use
it continuously to discharge the
battery.
Well as forty sign Texas was
people conserve the battery
usage the use maybe a few hours
at a time and then went to
Christie came back fine our to
them able to pick up a little
bit of a charge then use it
again when the electricity went
out so you can you can chop up
your usage and small pieces so
that your total.
What time is much more extended.
The staff makes sense Mr chair
representative.
Mr chairman Mr kill.
Cero degrees after.
Hi sure is.
They have a right.
Storage system.
Is going to run on he.
And or air conditioning.
For.
Very much longer than a few
hours and if you are installing.
Loadshedding capability into
your home.
You are now discussing.
Pricing.
A substantial in excess of the
fifteen thousand dollars we we
have been discussing practically
speaking when you really need
to.
When it's cold outside.
And the seats and the system has
the utility system has failed
what you're gonna get as a
couple of hours of relates.
Mr chairman Mr kids.
I
continue to hear that the price.
These systems are coming down.
And this legislation provides
for me.
I think a maximum of two hundred
installations in the.
In the state.
Which thank you.
Is a trivial long well.
Resiliency to the grid.
The.
The rely on electricity.
So.
Mr Chairman representative Mr
kids are are really do consider
the technology as it currently
exists.
To be suitable for.
very well lost people.
That are very infants are
minimally conscious.
But we all.
Not particularly practical.
You Mr chairman thank you Mr
kill your answers were very
federal that's all I have for
now.
The message we have
Representative Ferrary.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Representative Syriana for
bringing this forward and it's
so nice to see you
former representative at a keel
and I am just I think this is a
great bill to help as prices
might be coming down on behind
the meter storage that this will
help incentivize a good start on
this market I've had I think we
have eighteen solar panels for
the past fifteen years and
to not be able to take advantage
of keeping the.
Stored of fuel are you know that
production for later use has
really bothered me and I think
this is going to be great as we
have been waiting for the
technology to catch at
my question when you were
mentioning
Mr Thiel that the storage units
were like about ten hours of
capacity
and as we all move to electric
vehicles
Sooner than later is there a
chance that we could double
stack those storage units that
you were on describing what is
that four by three by six inch a
bookcase size or would you just
buy something bigger.
Mr chair representative.
I I conceive that for the time
being.
One of my just install one
system but certainly the
capability to stack these exists
electrically you can do that and
as we move forward you know the
this is what the C. presently
but the future might bring
completely different types of
systems to.
So yes that is possible however
this and other possibility is.
S. electric way because become
more ubiquitous and more used
than the manufacturers
themselves up taking about why
there's battery which is much
larger than what you put in your
hold today would not power but a
few hold as well and this debate
has gone on this community for a
long time there are some issues
that relate to not just safety
but also the life of the battery
and how it is used and why it
was how it was designed in the
first place to be used as a with
Nico motivation a motive battery
so yeah there's some other
considerations certainly the
speeches of any possible so I
would take up more time but yes
all these configurations when
should happen in the future okay
great and Mr chair and
representative Sarinana I was
reading some of the at technical
difficulties that
TRD and
EMNRD have pointed out have you
been able to resolve that.
Time of when
this certifications are
Approved and yet when people go
to
I think they just had problems
with
who is going to be in at what
time of the credits were going
to be approved in and by the
time people go to collect on
those there was a difficulty of
them knowing how many were
already out might we get a
longer process for the
taxpayers.
I'd like to defer to my
experiments.
Chairman.
Mr chair and representative
thank you of.
That is because of the fact that
the follow fiscal year which
starts in the middle of the year
as opposed to a calendar year
receipts tax is a fine by the
taxpayer this this this
disconnected these bows and
acting to FIR refers to that so
what we have done is allowed to
thanks you can carry over the
tax liability to five succeeding
years and it also allows the
community to process that in the
remaining code here with these
requests coming.
The process of how the system is
reporting I'm via working behind
the scenes with and noted to
simplify that and to expedite it
so that the people who are
leaving the credit on Oct you
know delayed in claiming that
credit because of the
certification that needs to
happen by the end to forty.
I hope that answers your
question yes as long as
something is happening to clear
that up that that's what I want
to just make sure okay thank you
Mr chair and and Representative
hi support this bill.
Thank you Representative Ferrary
Representative Townsend.
Yes thank you Mr chairman good
to see it came out of
thank you well in your family
well yes we are thank you.
A couple of questions I see the
this bill go and may be
Representative I I was come upon
this off on the kids thinking of
him as a representative but this
bill currently does that go to
appropriations for tax.
Representative I don't know
where it goes next.
It is going to Representative up
Mr Chairman representative.
I believe is slated to go to
accent Representative next.
Not to appropriations accent
Representative.
But it does have an
appropriation.
Yes in the sense Mr chair
representative yes in the sense
that it does a lot the critics
need to be paid out.
Yeah I
Mr Chairman can you of.
Can you verify noted tax.
I can look in a minute yes it
does district.
Okay that's why I think it
should I think
I think it should be
I think it ought to be looked at
at least by tax and in law by.
Appropriations.
You said something Molly go
thank you all
That makes me that made me ask
questions are there safety
issues with this battery that
have to be considered in the
installation.
Mr chair and representative yes
yes safety issues but all the
systems that I'm talking
speaking about our all covered
by both US standards and I.
Tripoli standards national.
So if you look at the I'm sorry
money to you or is also not on
the side for that that's a good
stance thank you so yes each of
the systems that a national
certifications that designed to
be very safe now there's always
a possibility that the whole
border me to St Stalin has on
battery which he can make up I
mean that's always possible and
has happened people have done to
safely over the past years my
colleagues at Sandia labs have
pulled off The Great when they
took literally you know profit
doesn't car batteries and hold
them up so people who are
technically savvy can do this
and the mill have enough
knowledge to do it safely.
And if they don't have the
knowledge they can always have a
licensed electrician do it for
them the installation would be
safe and should pose no obvious
threat or danger I does that
answer your question Sir yes I
just I heard you I was listing
to you another question.
The.
And I think you've answered it
but.
I want to just read directed by
May do you please any homeowner.
Would.
Best.
In this system out.
Tax credit being four.
Mr chair representative in the
it could happen.
But they intent here is to jump
start this application and
brick.
Being more awareness wider
awareness by the report staff to
be published.
At the end of each plan EMNRD.
and sent to LFC to show under
people what the benefits are and
and that is really the intent
and as was pointed out earlier
indeed and there's no denying
the fact that people who have
this kind of tax appetite would
be able to take advantage of
this only at this time.
But that's not unusual.
Walls new technologies.
Go through the cycle where the
early adopters be a premium.
For using that technology and
then as the technology matures
the prices come down and it
becomes more widely used by
those who are not as well.
And that is we've seen this
happen over years and years with
many technologies and I could
going to detail but something
even as simple as of New Mexico.
But it was designed for use by
astronauts.
And maybe thirty thousand
dollars a square foot and today
you can buy velcro strips from
literally pennies on the market.
So yes technologies do go
through the cycle where the
early adopters would pay a
premium.
But only so that us or follow
can afford it.
Well I I I agree with that
except I don't believe balco
that tax credit.
Isn't so I I know it's difficult
when we cannot see each other
but if you could go through the
chair I would appreciate you're
more than welcome.
Chair you might and
representative of is that would
you say that's correct that.
Not every emerging technology
desires.
The tax credit the only benefits
very few people that they don't
need tax credits to.
Mr chair representative.
It's a philosophical question
you're asking and I think that's
probably a debate we can have a
look office if you don't.
As for the copy of.
Mr cal I.
I understand the mechanics of
your bill.
I don't believe that's a wise
investment.
For taxpayers in New Mexico.
Who are stressed Mr chairman and
and Representative Mr hill.
At this time it seems like.
It seems like there are much
will.
More significant ways that we
could put this money to benefit
to a wider.
A range of our population I read
this morning Mr Chairman.
Representative Mr kill.
Estimate tax bills in Texas.
All right.
Electrical bills over the last
month some of them are estimated
at seventeen thousand dollars
perhaps so.
And that is that is very very
troubling because issue and I
know Mr Chairman representative
restriction there are many
people.
Many people that can't afford
that.
And
right I I would I won't support
your bill today.
But I as always I look forward
to that coffee in the future and
how is that for the senior thank
you Sir for your time thank you
Sir thank you Mr.
Thank you Representative
Townsend there's no further
debate from the committee I have
a couple questions of my own.
Representative Montoya.
Could this bill apply to
electric vehicle could to the
taxpayers say my battery storage
is my electric vehicle.
Mr chair
Mr chair choose a presiding
interesting the onset of this
bill which I had not considered.
But at this time.
The provision.
For at least for the next two
years I don't see a great deal
of provision by the back the TV
manufacturers to allow that to
happen I think to my knowledge
or the one TV manufacturers
allowing that Bakshi could be
used as storage for the whole.
yes Lara certainly to my
knowledge is not allowed to act.
But yes that is a possibility
that we are before C. definitely
I think this is going to come up
because the car battery is
seventy five table walks through
it as you know I only have a
couple of collective the whole
back to the correct docking
about today.
So it makes it makes sense.
To use that read this battery
power to power the whole this
well.
So.
Representative thank you I guess
I'm.
I think you could apply to
electric vehicle but was
entirely sure in my reading it
would hinge on the definition of
install.
And the requirement that the
system be installed.
I don't think that would apply
to electric vehicle would you
agree with that.
Mr chairman state yes I do agree
that that I mean it just at the
provision of this bill is I
think would not allow that I
would be very surprised if it
isn't to predict that we and
applied that pre.
Representative on that the the
same sort of
Thought on page.
One one twenty four of the
committee substitute it says
purchases or installs working in
in.
Mr chair that's true it can be
and then but I think the VA Act
was envision was that you either
by an off the shelf system.
Or you don't do that and you
literally JD right one of the
old system and install it but
yes I mean if language allows it
can be and are.
So you have the option of either
buying it off the shelf system
you know and faced just sliding
one of these manufacturers are
as I mentioned briefly earlier
somebody could just by their own
batteries installed it
themselves and it it is not
commercially available system
that's what I was it was
envisioning but you know we are
certainly open to that amendment
if that's.
If you think that's beneficial
are clarifying.
I appreciate your answer had
considered the.
The the homemade system so I
understand now why you included
in or.
Let me ask on page two.
we're limiting the tax credit to
one system per property I I
always think in the I'm not sure
if this is happened maybe it's
wishful thinking on my part but
I would like to think that out
there there's some developer
building ten houses and he's
gonna quit each house with the
storage system with that
developer be able to claim ten
tax credits one for each of is
ten properties.
Mr chair interesting on city
brought up.
Thank you to the way the bill is
stricken I don't take that TRD
will allow that because if the
installer is going to claim it
on his personal income tax
return if he's claiming ten
properties that could be a huge
tax credit that you would not be
allowed to claim because get
capping it at five thousand
dollars a forty percent.
So I think that might become the
limited set of.
But however I think that's a
technical question which TRD
behalf to address.
Okay it might be something you
you discuss and the.
The.
The the tax committee as opposed
to the tax department
and it's
You could have a the eighty
corporate entity could claim
this tax credit correct or is it
just on the personal income tax
return.
Mr chair at this time when the
personal income tax.
Yeah okay well that clarifies
that yeah
and then my last question was
just I'm just very curious we
talked about the
The number of credit the number
of people that might claim this
credit and if if the credit was
maxed out at five thousand
dollars per credit than the
number would be two hundred do
we expect the credits to Max out
at five thousand or will there
be some systems that will come
in under that.
That Mr chairman that's really
important question goes back to
the pricing point that was
raised by.
Representative on sand and
restrictor and perhaps by Scott
I.
The systems are coming down in
price and really the the tax
credit that I believe that would
be more individual for positive
perhaps four thousand to three
hundred dollars with increased
to forty five thousand.
But there are some systems that
they installed the largest
system might go up to five plus
but it is thank you I expect
that the credit claim would be
lower than five thousand per
install.
In my last question is that the
FIR indicates a fiscal impact.
Less than
The full million here is that
because people can't most people
can't use the full tax credit
one year or
Not we won't hit the maximum
allowed in issuing the tax
credits.
Mr chair I think it's a
combination of both the FIR kind
of implies that the claims
number might be less than the
two hundred.
And also the the price point and
the credit claim then also be
lesser that's why I think the
Baghdad estimated seven hundred
fifty thousand for the first
year.
Okay thank you for that
Representative Sarinana before I
solicit the motion do you have
any do you are so he'll have
any.
Brief closing remarks should
like to make.
Thank you Mr chairman I would
like to say we just have to
think about this is value how
important is it for you to have
stored energy I know when the
power went out here in
Albuquerque I have an electric
garage door opener I could not
get out of my house and go to my
car because I could open my
garage so at that time a storage
system with just two hours would
have been plenty but so it's
about value so thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you.
Mr chair I think we've discussed
this long enough thank you for
asking the question but I mean
this discussion get go on for a
long time.
I think thank you.
Was the will of the committee.
I'm if for do pass.
Their second.
Also.
Okay
Sure we could you take the vote.
Representative Chandler.
Yes.
Representative Dixon yes.
Representative Ferrary yes.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Ortez yes.
Representative Syriana yes.
Representative Scott.
No.
Thank you Representative
Strickler no.
Representative Townsend.
Not ma'am.
Representative Montoya.
Vice chair Stansbury yes.
In Chairman the queen.
Yes.
That is a two passed with a vote
of seven to three.
thank you Representative
Sarinana and others of the kids
you have the best thank you Mr
chair thank you committee
members.
So our our next bill
Is house bill two sixty five
natural resources and lands
protection.
With Representative Ortez
Representative or yes are you
ready.
I am thank you Mister chair
members of the committee I have
two expert witnesses Andrea
Miller and Scott will work they
should be moved over possible.
It's
possible.
They're on their way.
There is a committee substitute.
Representative Ortez could you
read the committee since the
number.
The two to one yep two one nine
nine seven zero point two.
The committee substitute.
Or discussion so
I did so the last bill.
It's just pause for a second.
What was also committee
substitute.
We have moved the committee
substitute for discussion and we
voted on that bill.
This is there any objection to
recording that motion as the do
not pass on the bill and the
past on the committee
substitute.
Okay so we'll route will
recorded that way we were
discussing the committee
substitute at the time.
So I apologize for that
to going back to the house bill
two sixty five can we have a
motion to discuss the committee
substance.
So moved.
So a motion for Representative
Ferrary and seconded by
Representative Dixon
Representative Ortez if you
you're right presents bill
please do and committee it was
time to make a motion on this
bill if you get Representative
help remind me for other
committees substance all the
giants for.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee
Representative H. B. two sixty
five which amends the natural
lance protection act of the an
LPA and the natural heritage
conservation act the N. H. state
NACA both of these the LPA in
the NH CA given our state of the
tools to protect our natural
resources which is important to
our hunting and fishing
communities for other types of
outdoor recreation like rafting
and hiking those acts also
protect our working lands which
is important for food security
and cultural traditions so this
bill offers some technical fixes
to modernize these acts the bill
would bring the two programs
together the N. H. CA and the an
LPA to create the natural lands
and heritage conservation fund
which would be expanded to the
allow the state to do a couple
of these things one choir lands
unilaterally and without a
nonprofit organization as
partner this is not the case for
expanding the purpose for
acquisition to also include
recreational access is really
important to our local
communities for health but also
for economic development it will
also expand the scope of factors
that the state considers for
projects that seek funding
requisition to include habitat
connectivity cultural
significance recreation and
climate change among other
factors all of these changes
together vote of the state's
ability to cover it that
nonfederal match for the land
water conservation fund and tap
into other sources of federal
funding at the fund the bill
also includes some changes to
the natural ones protection many
which is expanded to include the
department of Indian affairs
department of cultural affairs
and the director of outdoor
recreation or their designees
this brings in a wide range of
experiences and perspectives
when managing the fund in the
programs.
Colorado Texas both have a debt
dedicated funding source for
conservation we do not we know
how important is to protect our
land water we know how important
it is to bring in the new
generation of land stewards and
hunters and fishermen these
amendment set the stage for
that.
We're not asking for an
appropriation with this bill but
we do know that if we were to
fund these programs we could
distribute these requests to to
local governments land grants a
sec yes to to match those
federal funds for acquisition
restoration conservation and
recreation projects so this bill
seeks to amend a modernized the
sister programs and put our
state on the path to economic
development rural economies
public expanding public access
in restoring our working lands
our land and water renewable so
with that I will stand for
questions.
The duty their here experts one
make it brief statement or or
the we just using that as a the
resources we have questions.
I think we're okay it to go
public comment okay I appreciate
that Sir we're gonna pull again
so members of the public a whole
if you're on zoom a full appear
on your screen and you can
indicate here either your
support for this bill or your
opposition show me whenever
you're ready with the full.
So keep this up for thirty
seconds.
Ten more seconds.
Okay thank you for that
we have a nineteen members of
the public participating
seventeen in support eighty nine
percent into an opposition so if
you would like to speak on this
bill in opposition.
Please raise your hand at this
time you don't know what's
required to speak up but if you
want to speak in opposition
please raise your hand and we
will call on you and you'll have
two minutes first up we have
Michelle frost Maynard.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee the
shop operator seeking on behalf
of New Mexico cattle growers in
New Mexico what course we stand
opposed to happen up to sixty
five the bill would change the
fundamental purpose of the Act
include recreational use the
land yet it does not clearly
define what is determined as
recreational appropriation are
given to acquire land in
different projects but are not
allocated for maintenance of the
land.
And appointed fund for payment
of committee members per diem
Miley is not clear neither is
the schedule a meeting time or
location.
Finally nonprofit role in land
upkeep is not stated therefore
the state would be responsible
for the upkeep and cost with the
act required when with the
reason we stand opposed to house
bill two fifty five and we thank
you for your time and
consideration.
Thank you for that we have fifty
Rivera.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee thank you for the
opportunity to comment this
morning I Tiffany Rivera
registered lobbyists for New
Mexico farm and livestock bureau
we stand in respectful
opposition this morning to house
bill two sixty five we're
opposed to the state acquiring
any new lands and removing those
lands from private ownership the
bill before you includes no
funding for EMNRD to manage the
land that is required and the
bill now lands now allows for
land to be purchase for
recreational purposes which we
fear could lead to segregation
of those lands the lack of
management funding and the new
recreational use seems to go
against the purpose of the
natural heritage conservation
act further we have concerns
about the amount discretion that
the legislation grants to the
secretary of EMNRD the secretary
has the authority to determine
what land is purchased.
Purchase the land and designate
the management of that land to
other state agencies again with
no funding provided for the
increased management
requirements.
Lastly we have concerns with
some of the original language
specifically the term
preservation of land mentioned
under section four that pertains
to management managing land for
preservation will work to
protect and limit the
environment from human
activities we believe that
management approaches instead
should implement conservation
management efforts which work to
protect the environment through
the responsible and multiple use
of our state's natural resources
thank you for the opportunity to
comment this morning.
Thank you for that
seeing no further he is no
opposition he would like to
speak in support of this bill
pre please raise your hand at
this time if you're on the phone
you can press star nine.
But he will call for two minutes
it doesn't look like we have too
many will we'll watch the time
and don't want to go over about
fifteen minutes first up we have
Oscar Simpson.
Oscar you needed on your end.
Thank you very much chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Oscar Simpson I represent New
Mexico sports from.
I'm an agent Mexican seventy two
years old but all over the
state.
And don't quite extensively with
the conservation and management
of our public lands still
various agencies federal and
state we support Senate bill two
sixty five because it modernizes
and allows a lot more
flexibility allows the state.
To preserve conserve some really
unique plants thank you very
much.
Thank you for that except with
looking glass that.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
members of the committee my name
is Logan glass up on staff
attorney with New Mexico
wilderness alliance we fully
support H. two to sixty five not
only for the reasons provided by
Representative Ortez but
additionally these bills will
help our state as we work
towards meeting the thirty by
thirty goals
not only to help stave off
massive species die off
extinction but also to stave off
the more severe effects of
climate change are coming down
the pike thank you very much.
Thank you for that next up we
have Luis Carrero.
Yes thank you so much good
morning Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is risk
and on the legislative and
political organizer for the
Sierra Club your bandage after
representing.
Or thirty five thousand numbers
all throughout New Mexico and we
strongly support HB two sixty
five I'm preserving our natural
lands and natural heritage of
this extremely important to all
New Mexicans our history is one
of our life outdoors our
ancestors understood the
importance of preserving the
beautiful natural resources and
wildlife that we had available I
live in Los crucis near the
beautiful organ mountains desert
peaks national monument it is an
area full of outdoor areas and
also boost our local tourism I
would be able to enjoy the money
then and the lands that have
that we have had so fortunate to
have here in New Mexico this
bill increases representation
within the nat natural lands
protection from any ally members
to appoint a designated as but
as specifies that the committee
oversees a fund to be used by
both programs it also
streamlines the work of the
committee by clarifying is your
project I cross the street
program is a great deal and I
want to thank the sponsors of
the bill for bringing it up for
to you today please vote yes for
each B. two sixty five thank you
for your time.
Thank you for that we have great
Peters.
Morning Mr chairman members of
the committee thank you for the
opportunity right COVID my name
is Rick Peters and the public
lands and wildlife advocate
conservation voters New Mexico
where to stand and support HB
two sixty five.
HB two sixty five a
straightforward build offers
technical fixes to existing fun
Committee and programs rather
than create new funding agency
makes these two ticket programs
more functional and ready for
funding.
Unlike our neighbours New Mexico
lacks a dedicated funding source
for conservation programs each
year New Mexico misses out of
millions in federal funds for
land and water conservation
projects including grants to
protect working farms and
ranches your project critical to
protecting New Mexico's natural
and cultural heritage and by
supporting fund dedicated
conservationists New Mexico is
capitalizing on a major
opportunity to drop resources to
the state.
Right critical leverage for
other resources conservation
funding such as money for
federal assistance and fishing
wildlife restoration farm bill
the land and water conservation
fund state assistance program
state wildlife grants as well as
local conservation funding for
New Mexico cities and towns is
there bill will prepare our
state the ability when funded in
the future to distribute grants
to various local government
entities nonprofit organizations
then rinse sectors to get
projects funded projects that
will restore and protect water
quality and quantity for some
watersheds wildlife habitat and
recreation opportunities
including hunting fishing
working farms ranches and other
agricultural lands and cultural
and historic sites modernizing
programs which are New Mexico
has the ability to expand public
access free parking open spaces
also rural outdoor counties in
restore lands water wildlife
working.
We're to do passcode eighty two
sixty five thank you for your
consideration of this
legislation.
Thank you for that next up we
have the Isaac.
Useful that could be multiple
names Senator you hear
additional self.
Your muted out here at.
Isaac do I have to hold the.
okay can you hear me now you can
hear you there okay very good my
name is Isaac he's full
currently I'm president of the
Cherwell one dessert Conservancy
we own about two hundred nine
acres of very financial well and
deserved mostly within the city
limits of truth or consequences
a little bit in elephant Butte.
And when we purchased the land
the realtor fail to
Appropriately warn us that we
needed fifteen acres for access.
And so now we're looking at
trying to come up with funds
for that and it looks like this.
This bill might provide an
opportunity to consider that.
I'm also not related to the
Conservancy but on the river
there is a little park called
rotary park which actually is
considered a city part but now
it's owned.
It has been owned by the bureau
of reclamation.
It's on the west bank of the Rio
Grande and across is some very
fine land privately owned by
about but six parcels.
Which needs to be acquired in
order to fully restore the
wetlands
I think we all remember in in
September the mass die off of
birds migrating birds due to
what the US yes Sir in the.
Well other agencies determined
to be basically starvation.
Of these wetlands and their
insect populations are essential
for these birds to put on the
little Legisla- fat they need to
take themselves and their
juveniles back to Mexico or to
come up from Mexico in the
spring.
And so we're looking at trying
to get funding to acquire those
and we presented to our city
commissions twice and with no
response.
it's hard to get a response to
environmental initiatives here
in truth or consequences but
we're working on it and we're
proposing it as a kind of a soft
pass for economic development
rather than the hard pass like
the spaceport in the copper for
less money and things like.
Thank you for your comments.
We have stirred what's.
Thank you can you hear me.
Yes okay all right yes thank you
Mr chairman and committee
members on through what's a long
time resident in New Mexico.
Mexico is obviously a very
special state and what makes it
special of the lands itself
besides the people so let's work
to keep it that way let's do all
we can to keep New Mexico
special
and the keep access to public
lands my family and so many New
Mexicans into our public lands
and I see that so different than
some other states which is so
difficult to access some lands
and the I think by keeping it
and supporting house bill two
sixty I would be able to keep it
that way I appreciate your time
and and the opportunity to make
these comments thank you very
much.
Thank you for that except with
can't cells are.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I'm Ken Salazar
I'm representing today actual
Hispanics and going camping
funding in the outdoors so
nonprofit that so.
Mission is to elevate the
importance of Hispanic culture
traditions and perspectives in
strengthening the advancement of
conservation on public lands we
stand strong support of House
Bill to sixty five because
because it does just that it
allows it modernizes the the
actor expanse public access
creates parks and open spaces
hopefully and will allow access
to the the land water
conservation funds we have many
communities that have had
projects northern part New
Mexico that have been unable to
move these forward because they
lacked the matching funds for
the federal program
this would also help
conservation or wildlife areas
provide access to to some areas
that you better you've heard
already that been landlocked and
hopefully this will provide
increased access to those areas
for for our communities for
their traditional use
you know we have a sec yes the
need easement of some time and
and to to access their their
press yes and and this would
provide those things and that's
we stand in strong support
urgent support for house bill
two sixty five thank you.
Thank you for that and that is
our public comment.
Representative Ortez before we
get to the committee do you have
any additional legislature.
And I think we're ready for
questions thank you Mr chair
okay members of the committee.
Representative Strickler.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you Representative Ortez
and
You know New Mexicos county kind
of one of those typical western
states where the federal
government announced a lot of my
hand and thank you New Mexico is
a forty three percent of our
land masses as on by the federal
government and then the state of
New Mexico also is blessed with
a lot of surface land of the
Jews that the land office
manages about nine million acres
in a course we have a lot any
alliance as well I think this
might be ten percent so
we're looking at maybe thirty
five percent private alliance
this
You mentioned in your your your
discussion that this help
streamline the current act state
of having to go through
private partners the the state
can buy these these lands
themselves is is is that the the
goal here.
Mr chair representative
Strickler I think it gives the
state the option you don't have
to the state doesn't have to
unilaterally on the land but it
gives us that gives us the
option and I'd like for my extra
reduces to weigh in here.
After again all of this group
introduce myself my name is
Andrea Miller how work on land
conservation policy with western
resource advocates the thank you
chairman and Representative
Ortez members the committee I
mean today.
as Representative noted that
this bill would just make that
point corporate partnership
requirement optional would not
be requirement but again it
would allow the committee to
the next one production
committee to consider
acquisitions where the state is
this all order of those plans.
Thank you Mr chairman I thank
you.
Thanks for.
Since this bill has been put in
place is this bill was inactive
what two thousand ten.
Is that right.
There is thank thank you
chairman Representative this
this two programs there's the
national land protection act and
that that was passed in nineteen
eighty eight over thirty years
ago and then the national
heritage conservation act was
passed and twenty ten okay I
think I have the twenty ten
statute and since since twenty
ten Vigil how many parcels to it
did the the state well along
with the private partner a choir
to.
Two three parcels of that eleven
year period.
If I may chairman I might FY Mr
over to address the question.
Yes good morning yeah my
understanding is that
approximately ten parcels
totaling about four thousand
eight hundred acres were
acquired by the nature
Conservancy between nineteen
eighty eight and
two thousand and nine
those were under their natural
as protection act and and then
of course in two thousand ten
there was just a one time
allocation of funding of for a
combination of conservation
easement and restoration
projects I believe nineteen
projects in total were funded
between two thousand ten and
eleven.
Okay thank thank you Mr chairman
and expert addition I know we
have an active a
conversation conservation.
I just secretary
Activities out there were
We're folks
Where these conservation
easement and I'm not sure what
organization is typical in that
area but they they say cap a
private owners the decent
addition title search I guess
that they do an assessment of a
particular area that they love
to have
two three private parcels to
kind of finish up their their
You know the watershed
management or whatever it might
be a give me a little bit idea
have the have the private sector
to these conservation easement
folks you know how successful
they are in acquiring private
lands in setting aside those
lands for you know for
beneficial use for for
historical purposes are you know
there's a lot of different
things said that are out there
can you give me a little little
history on how that works how
the private sector does is
Picking up some private lands to
to help out there.
Resource.
Mr chair Representative
Strickler I just want to be
clear that are are you asking
how private landowners are able
to protect their their private
land or how the state of choirs
private land I just want to be
clear well I you know I you
you're gonna have to coach me on
this Representative because you
know we don't have a whole lot
of private land no San Juan
County it's a large County and
only six percent of the lancer
privately held the federal
government most phones most of
it the state of New Mexico has
four sections in each township
in the west side is Navajo
country and the site is a
hickory Apache country so I
would I'm just kind of trying to
tune in.
We're we're private ownership of
scares but but most of the
private lands in our county for
example along the rivers and
streams that they're good
farmlands and you know that the
those lands were highly sought
out and those years were home
stated in and so forth and I'm
sure
the conservation folks would
would have to deal with private
you know with these private
landowners to do you know to
accomplish whatever project they
have in mind just give me will
get a little educate me a little
bit on on that.
Thank you Mr chair
representative Strickler up I'll
start because I do know a little
bit about this and there are a
couple of experts on who are not
master witnesses but losses sit
on the committee that that could
answer but probably can't
so private land conservation is
really important to to
protecting our working lands
especially but also our our open
spaces and and you know they
offer recreational opportunities
as well we we use the you know
the N. H. C. eight to to help us
do that where we get some tax
credits back to that private
landowners who protects their
landed in perpetuity you
chairman is the development
rights for from that land is
really it's it's really
important especially you know it
will all over the state but what
I have experiences up here in
the north so so that the
traditional land owners you know
can hold on to that land and
have a little bit of incentive
at the state and federal level
to to keep their working lands
really in working hands forever
so you know I did this these
kinds of programs are are really
important but what I'll do now
is let Mr Wilbur get give us a
little bit more information
about how you know how this
works around the state.
Thank you Representative Ortez
and thank you my name is Scott
will brand executive director of
the New Mexico land Conservancy
and we're actually the statewide
land trusts for New Mexico we've
been in existence since two
thousand two I've been here
since two thousand four and we
have done approximately a
hundred ten different
conservation easement
transactions around the state
ranging from wildlife habitat to
productive Act land to
protecting important cultural
historic sites
we put about three hundred
twenty five thousand acres of
land under easement now and
I would say about eighty percent
of that is been on working farms
and ranches so I think we
recognize very much the
importance of these private
working lands we know that we're
helping protect productive farm
and ranch land we're not only
protecting the viability of
agriculture the state but we
know that those types of
properties especially the
important you know irrigated Act
lands along recurring quarters
or large ranches you know
provide wildlife habitat often
also contain important cultural
historic resources you know
senior use as many of the
properties were working on help
buffer existing Public protected
areas.
And that's really important
because you obviously wouldn't
want to have a bunch of
inappropriate development on the
entrance to your favorite state
park or wildlife refuge
and I guess you know I would
just make the point that
we do a lot with limited
resources in the state we depend
heavily on the good will of
private landowners to do these
is months and it's very
important understand that these
land state and private ownership
to remain on the tax rolls we
are not trying to dictate
Management but we're here to
enforce the terms of the
easement which are primarily
focused on restricting
subdivision and development and
just trying to keep them intact
and continuing to serve their
their good purpose whether it's
for agriculture or wildlife or
other you know environmental
services and there hasn't been
much funding made available over
the sixteen years I've been
doing this Christina mentioned
the tax credit program that's
been a really critical incentive
for us we have a state tax
credit for landowners who donate
easements and land and the
important thing about that is it
can actually be sold so they can
actually convert these tax
credits to cash and use that
money to pay off debt or re
invest in the management of
their land or buy more land with
that incentive alone isn't
adequate you know we may need
some actual funding is not so
much that we're asking for
millions of dollars to you know
pay the full cost of these
easements we know that was small
grants small amounts of money we
could leverage large donations
of easements and leverage that
tax credit program and I'll give
you an example right in your
district representative
Strickland we're working with
the land owner right now that
has about seven miles of of the
San Juan river quarter it's a.
A large twelve thousand five
hundred acre property and
easement over that ranch would
probably appraise somewhere in
the range of eight to ten
million dollars this particular
landowner who is doing his
estate planning is willing to
donate the entire value of that
easement if we can come up with
the cost of the funds to cover
the cost of putting that
easement in place and their
number of transactional costs do
you know we have to do due
diligence environmental
assessments.
Appraisals are very costly
survey work.
All of that you know typically
cost anywhere from forty fifty.
Sixty thousand dollars but if we
can cover those costs we can
leverage JYJ donations of
easements so it's it's a really
yeah we're looking to maximize
existing programs but also as
Representative Ortez mention
Yes we will strike you dancer
short your okay thank you thank
you.
For.
It just it made Mr chair
Representative Strickler and
just to be clear that we they're
not asking for money in this
bill right now we're this bill
does not making appropriation
although we it we would love it
but it's not it's not part of
this bill.
Appreciate that Mr chairman and
and work Representative Artes
up you know I'm from Texas it's
a private ownership state
ninety five percent of the lance
and his taxes it is the third
largest bank in area.
and they just don't have a lot
of state federal lands in Texas
so I can see where maybe the the
legislature Texas would fund of
this type of program but in our
state we have so much not
private hands of the the feds
only the most the then the
statement that they've Americans
I mean what have you guys done
to.
Work with the
federal
land management team is program
I know up here
and I appreciate the gentleman's
of illustration of the twelve
thousand acre ranch I like know
who that is this is small county
and we we don't have a whole lot
of private land so that's a big
land are for sure but what we've
done with the bill Laimbeer land
management.
The city of Farmington or
Farmington schools have traded.
Have been given lance
for to build a school for
example
the bureau of land management
has all the surplus land they
gave eighty eight they dated
eighty eight eighty acres to
farm to schools to put in a
junior high I mean what do you
guys do and to work with the
bureau of land management along
with the county you know as a
fiscal agent to pick up some of
those lands for.
good management purposes we love
to have the the federal
government to turn over all
other federal land so we can
manage them I think we did a lot
better job especially the for
service but.
I digress Representative
Strickler that's I think pretty
far outside the scope of this
bill hi I I just said that one
time I I I know you're gonna pop
also that I got it.
What do you do what do you down
with it with try to land with
the.
I think that's outside the scope
of okay all right I'll I'll I'll
read right my question with the
I think I have the same concerns
that the
private landowners have out
there I think the
what the gentleman Mr Wilbur has
described picking up three
hundred thousand acres since two
thousand two is been a very
successful program and I think
funding is always a problem
especially in our state so I
will
allow Representative stops got
to.
Have have a Navistar thank you
Mr chairman and thank you
Representative.
Thank you Representative
Strickler I appreciate that next
up is actually Representative
Ferrary.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Representative for bringing this
bill forward I was just
wondering if help do we have
federal
funds that we can match to make
this program and and to
Make this you know so that we
can acquire more land.
Thank you Mr chair
representative Ferrary there is
there is of federal funding out
there right now the BCS land
water conservation fund did you
just got it and you know and
appropriation and there will be
money coming into the state
three to four million I believe
but I'd like for all Mr Miller
to to respond to that question
thank you.
Thank you chairman thank you
Representative Ferrary as
Representative Ortez noted the
federal land water conservation
fund wrist recently receive
significant more funding moving
forward through the passages
that great American outdoors Act
and the state New Mexico will
receive about a three to four
million dollar annual allocation
of that program that program
requires a one to one nonfederal
match but that could that
federal money could be used to a
choir new parks the state parks
new local open spaces and and
provide recreational access to
local communities.
Thank you to me that sounds like
a with a really great
opportunity and something that
we should be investing in our
state
Immediately but also I'm really
glad that you're going to be
expanding that membership of the
natural lands protection
committee and including the
Secretary of Indian affairs and
cultural affairs
and what was that can you tell
me what the third
Is director New Mexico outdoors
recreation division is that it
I think that it has a great
cross section of people who are
interested in all the different
things that our state should be
doing I really appreciate this
because if it does include where
we can expand and have more
state parks I was really
disappointed that we close that
community al
the facility that was beautiful
and I think I hope that that can
be reopened to with maybe some
of this funding so thank you
Representative for bring this
forward.
Thank you Representative Ferrary
next we have Representative
Scott.
Thank you Mr Chairman
representative.
Then H. is required.
Lands in conservation districts.
Thank you Mr chair
representative on Scott you The
New initially there in there and
Energy minerals and natural
resources but this act also
gives that agency the ability to
assign responsibility to other
on state agencies as needed and
there will be you know I imagine
a lot of you know conversation
about how that can happen and
and what that looks like Mr
Miller would you like to expand
on that.
Representative terms and
representative of Scott.
I know that this
the fifty two programs require a
grant process is overseen by
committee so the record
recommends plans to acquired
practitioners integration
projects to the Department sting
Department accordingly so any
agency that may end up with
management responsibilities
would likely be involved either
by through representation a
committee or through submitting
a grant application to the
committee but and document they
have the ability to
transformation to rock the
relevant state agency.
Mr chair Representative Scott
And also has the ability which
is currently existing in in
statute to to assign that
management to a nonprofit
corporation that still exists.
You know I I know that public
private partnerships are really
important and.
You know that that will continue
that can continue there's that's
not an issue the school.
Mr Chairman representative
there's no requirement to.
So for a public.
Partnerships.
Mr chair Representative Scott no
no there there isn't.
So it's possible for rules to.
Be responsible for.
HB.
Required property and.
Where would the fun.
Come from to accomplish that
mission.
Mr chair representative Scott
If the state is going to acquire
lands I I
I would man of the match and
that it would also ensure that
there is funding for the for the
management of those lands but I
will let Mr Miller.
Respond to this as well.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative I I know that
this fund that to the store I of
these programs would not funding
in at
as Mr Mr Overton but the there
was a one pack politician way
back in twenty ten but the
program has not been.
You madam tires and and and the
funding for the program would
have to
an appropriation or some other
source.
Mr chair representative touch.
Addressed were this legislation.
Currently what appeared to be a
problem.
Representative not having funds
to manage.
Mr chair representative on I had
a reserve the problem rather
referred as a a long term goal
is to is to try to get funding
for this program.
Thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Representative expert
for your answers that's all I
it.
Thank you Representative Scott
except we have a vice chair
stands for.
Hello and thank you Mr chairman
I'm I wanted to just kind of
dryer attention back to the
federal program at L. WCS which
we just talked about a few
minutes ago so Mister chairman
and Representative Ortez
you know it's my understanding
that this last year as part of
the America's great outdoors Act
president trump and Republican
leadership in the Senate in
particular and our own and
senator Heinrich really lead the
way and getting permanent
funding for L. W. C. F. which
folks have been trying to get
since the nineteen sixties and
so one of the things I want to
highlight is that this was
bipartisan across the board and
it was actually one of the
things that was very much held
up as a bipartisan initiative
because of the importance of
having federal programs that can
pair with both state and tribal
programs for conservation as
well as private landowners and
so Mr Chairman representative or
that as one of things I want to
ask about is kind of like why is
it so important that we stitch
together landscape level
conservation efforts like what
is you know I think some of the
previous questions relate where
do have a lot of public lands
why is it important that we do
this kind of like landscape
level work.
Mr chair representative
Stansbury thank you for that
question I'm gonna talk a little
bit and then I'm gonna open it
up to Mr Wilder and Mr Mr Miller
I I'm it conservation is a bi bi
partisan issue you know we we
everyone needs at to have our
land and water protected are on
a river corridors protected our
our mountains you know it's it's
it's it's essential for
you for recreation purposes
hunting and fishing of course
and we talked a lot about that
last week at landscape scale
conservation at you know really
thinking about big parcels all
of you stitch together yeah that
is how we protect our species
here and Madam species and
provide those find this
recreation opportunities at all
at the same time so you it's
it's really important for us as
a state to be able to tap into
the funds that exist right here
in our state but to match those
with with what's happening at
the federal level you know that
some of these amendments that
we're making now really you know
opens us up to it to be able to
take advantage of big federal
initiatives to the thirty by
thirty programming we we I think
for you know for climate
resiliency and for maintenance
of our own traditions all around
our state several different ones
we we need to to not protect
land and water in you know in
patchwork right you know a
little bit here a little bit
there but really think about you
know how how in elk you know I
really like elk on both the
species in as a delicacy how
they roam and how and what we
can do to protect their habitat
it's it's just it's so important
said Mr Mister Miller.
And Mr Wilder.
Thank you Representative Ortez
Mr chair and representative
Stansbury
I think it really comes down to
a lack of function programs The
New Mexico to match these
federal programs there dozens of
our programs administered by the
department of interior that the
state could do a better job of
leveraging for local
conservation projects and I I
think a compound that using all
the toolbox tool means.
Which is our plans restoration
of working lands and
acquisitions of new the parks
and wildlife areas and this bill
would allow recreation to be
considered and other
acquisitions and and that's
important because that's the
requirements of the all of the
C. F. program this is the
program.
Thank you and Mister chair
representative worth as yeah I
really want to emphasize is
somebody who works on water you
know one of the most vulnerable
parts of our ecosystem to the
changes happening to fire
regimes that you know we had a
few weeks ago we just passed
last week I'm chairman maclean's
fire mitigation bill is that our
northern forests actually up in
San Juan County and across
northern New Mexico are having
extremely high fire risk and we
need coordination across federal
state tribal and private lands
in order to manage them at a
landscape scale to ensure that
our watersheds are resilient and
we're protecting our water
supplies we're preventing
catastrophic forest fires in in
order to afford to do that
because it's hugely expensive to
do that kind of landscape level
management we need federal
resources to do that so the
reason why I'm supporting this
bill might think it's so
important is as a state we can't
leverage those federal dollars
if we don't have a good state
program to match them and you
know the federal government had
the wisdom this last year and
bipartisan leadership to
literally make hundreds of
millions of dollars available to
states to do this work to
protect our watersheds to
protect wildlife to protect our
lands so let's take advantage of
that and I very much support
your bill thank you.
Thank you for that except we
have Representative Dixon.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Representative Ortez a few of my
questions and actually been
asked and answered through the
course of the discussion but I
did want to follow up on what
representative Stansbury just
highlighted which is the
leveraging of federal funds and
Mr chairman and Representative
Ortez could you elaborate on.
Private philanthropic dollars
that may exist nationally.
That could also.
potentially be leveraged because
one of the things that I am
particularly interested in is
given it New Mexico's limited
revenue how we can effectively
bring outside dollars to
accomplish some of the things
that we'd like to and with this
legislation to help us do that
thank you very much.
Thank you Mr chair
representative Dicks and
I believe this eight this
legislation will help us do that
and I will also say here that
there are millions of dollars.
From national and state and
local organizations that that go
to private land conservation
public land conservation not
only for acquisition but also
for restoration which this also
covers that's it's so important
but but as you know but we we
you know we we have a lack of
capacity across the state the
state for you local
organizations local governments
other political subdivisions to
take advantage of to write
grants take advantage of that
grant money that that is
available that philanthropic
money that that's available on a
national regional level so we we
need to do more of that in the
state you know there's some
legislation right now it that
that would support you know that
the state helping to helping
nonprofits and local local
governments to to you to write
grants to to bring in some of
that money it is it is really
really important we need all of
we need the federal funds to
come and we need we need the
state to have the ability to use
those federal funds and matches
federal funds and to also tap
into the substantial the local
and regional and national
foundation money that comes in.
And Mr Miller would you like to
add anything else and Mr Wilbur
thank you Mr chair
Representative Dixon in the case
of one water conservation fund
the the as has been discussed
this can be a significant
increase in federal money that
the state can leverage over the
last decade or more the New
Mexico state parks is a master
that they've had program and has
frankly failed to offer grants
to local entities and some
private funds to match those
requests is retained that money
within state parks and hopefully
that
a program like the transaction
Act and orders conservation act
administered on successfully by
the state could have some of
that money that was previously
held by state parks be pushed
out in the local communities and
local philanthropic funds can
also be used to mention.
Thank you I have no other
questions thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you resent Dixon.
Is there any further debate from
the committee at I do one
question my own.
So seeing none
Representative Ortez I I know
this in the.
In the title of your bill it
says making an appropriation yes
I can find an appropriation bill
could you can you explain why
that's in the title.
At Mr chair at thank you for
that question
I wish there were an
appropriation of the we did not
ask for one so this is how I
understand it
because we are adjusting and non
reverting fund by adding a
program that used money subject
to appropriation that
constitutes an appropriation.
But I'm also new here so I but I
think that's how that's how it
was explained to me.
Representative Ortez just to be
clear the the bill itself
doesn't making appropriation nor
is there any money in the fund
that we're amending.
So it's just so there's no money
moving as a result of the bill
we're just.
Creating opportunity to fund it
in the future the statement Mr
chair you are right that is a
fair statement.
Thank you for that and thank you
for your presentation the
reserve Ortez before we take a
vote certain things like that.
No I think I think and I think
I'm done thank you Mr chair
thank you Representative Ortez
what's the will of the committee
and if they do pass please.
For
a second.
We have to pass Representative
Stansbury I think the second
came from representative
Sarinana I shall be could you
take a look please.
Representative Chandler.
Yes.
Representative Dixon yes.
Representative Ferrary.
Yes.
Representative Montoya and.
Representative Ortez.
Yes.
Representative Sarinana yes.
Representative Scott.
Representative Strickler no.
Representative Townsend.
No.
Representative Montoya.
Vice chair Stansbury.
By your Stansbury.
Yes thank you in Chairman the
queen yes.
And that is a do passed with a
vote of seven to three.
Right thank you very much thank
you Representative Ortez and
experts I appreciate that.
In order to as will come back to
you.
Next up we have house bill one
seventy three up Senator you
waving at me.
Yes Mr chairman up was that a
committees to drop.
yeah
again you know we move the
committee substitutes are
discussing the committee
substitute so when we vote we're
voting on the committee
substitute there any objection
to having the report reflect
that it's a motion do not pass
on the bill and you pass on the
committee substitute.
So you're no gestione that's how
the committee report will that
will be reflected in the
committee report Representative
Townsend.
I see you.
R. I needed did you wanna say
something.
Now okay.
Thank you Representative Dixon.
Of.
Well we're working on that I
apologize so thank you
Representative Ortez thank you
experts our next bill is house
bill one seventy three.
County solar assessments on
homes with Representative black
I did see Representative black
in the attendees list and now
she's going to join us.
Representative black are you
there.
Yes Sir good morning Mr chairman
and committee members I'm
presenting house bill one
seventy three which is strictly.
What.
Do you have any experts I
believe Nancy burst is out there
somewhere.
So if we get the NC.
Thank.
Okay.
Now Representative last thank
you.
Thank you Mr chairman I'm sorry
present house bill one seventy
three which is of strictly
cleanup language from house
bill.
Four forty in the two thousand
nineteen session that
representative keel actually
presented
we had a very interesting
debates on the floor on it and
it looks like through the
amendment process residential
was stricken from the bill I
believe on page three.
However it was left in page two
of of the original legislation
so I was asked by the treasures
affiliate to try to carry this
ticket to get it cleaned up so
that it's uniform across the
board so Mr chairman I believe
that's all I have I can stand
for questions.
Okay thank you for that so we're
gonna go to the public first up
we will do a poll.
So those those of you watching
we'll put up a poll and you can
indicate either your support for
this bill or your opposition
Shelby whenever you're ready
with all.
And we keep this up for thirty
seconds.
Ten seconds.
And that's it and we have to in
support in eight in opposition
so eighty percent opposition
twenty percent support
So we will now hear from the
public there still be a timer if
you would like to speak in
support of this bill please
raise your hand now.
And you'll be given two minutes
so if you would like to speak in
support no one has to speak but
if you would like to speak in
support of this bill.
You can raise your hand that.
Here in opposition please put
your hand down until we get the
opposition.
Okay so first up in support of
the bill is can use.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee action heroes
special this for the.
Coalition of sustainable
communities in New Mexico.
Which comprise of Santa Fe city
and county Albuquerque and Las
Cruces.
The original pace property
assessed clean energy
legislation is passed and Sir in
two thousand nine impact in in
there put out a guide for
counties used implement a pace
program Santa Fe County then
later Bernalillo Dona Ana County
stated temps to do this.
But the around twenty eleven the
federal home loan bank board
ruled it an actor repaint
so alone could not supersede
mortgage payments as was written
into the law.
says by way of background.
That
Taking residential out of the
pace Water would really.
Take an era where were of
options at home ownership should
rightfully have to pursue solar
in a very easy way compared to
other ways to finance that.
The county treasures are against
having residential pace on the
books because they might think
this man to the nation look at
all right SO stations set up
around the state where people
can get their roads paved ahead
of time paid off four times this
isn't no other way to do this.
That the pace would also
reimburse the county for all of
its administrative costs so that
we as respectfully opposes
legislation thank you okay so so
that was in opposition I'm
asking for statements in support
so if you're in opposition
please put your hand down sorry.
Thank you Mr use.
If you're so what we're doing
support for the bill support for
the bill would remove
residential from the existing
program.
And we'll go to the store
what's.
Mr what's do you support
removing residential from the
current program.
I support whatever so he'll want
to do.
So Mr what's about to kill not
presenting the bill know whether
he wants to know he's
recommending the bills are not.
Now.
Okay then I would bill would
remove residential from the
existing pace program.
We can go.
As a black black for
clarification.
Okay I'm sorry to lower my hand.
Okay.
So last call for those actually
supporting the bill.
Okay.
Seeing that now we'll go to
opposition.
The now Mr what's like tracer
hand we're right recognize you
so let's let's go to Mr what's.
Good morning Mr chairman and
committee members are thanking
the opportunity who's become a
long term resident New Mexico
and and
familiar with the the.
Abbas dealer fees recommending
the.
Any changes to this bill I would
support as changes thank you
very much.
Thank you for that
Next up we have.
In.
Thank you.
Under will chairman and
committee members I'm into stone
pace Fund New Mexico and I study
property assessed clean energy
pace for the last three years.
H. B. one seventy three isn't I
needed bill and here's why.
Residential pace is completely
optional the county has to one
it making ordinance forest and
then set up a program if they so
desire it.
It's just one tool in our energy
transition toolbox and I think
we should leave it in that
toolbox our pace is not in
competition with what our
community banks and credit
unions offer because our banks
have loans for three five or
seven years if you have the
collateral.
He success mints on the other
hand are like road or sewage
assessments on your tax bill
the for twenty years if you own
a building and if you sell the
building the pace assessment
goes to the next owner.
There's really no need for H. B.
one seventy three as it might be
a tool we need in the future I
recommend do not pass thank you.
Thank you Mr stern except with
Louise Guerrero.
Yes I guess you guys are hearing
from every bill this time good
morning good afternoon actually.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is going on
the legislative political
organizer with the Sierra Club
Yogananda chapter
and for this bill we are closing
because we believe that we may
we need as many arrows in the
quiver as possible to enable
homeowners to choose to get
solar well the residential
portion of the property
assessed.
Clean energy program is on hold
maybe viable in the future and
therefore urging you to vote no
on this bill thank you very
much.
Thank you for that next we have
been Chilton.
Thank you Mr chairman Ben
children conservation voters New
Mexico I think that Mr Hughes
made my points but I'm going to
I think we are of the opinion
that
property assessed clean energy
financing should be something
that is expanded especially for
residential
in the state of New Mexico
should be looking at tools to
make it more accessible and
easier use not limiting it and
so we oppose the bill today
thank you.
Thank you for that next week
Jefferson Taylor.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and members of the committee I
represent as a registered
lobbyist some of solar we view
this bill as a regressive bill
and I needed.
Of we think that the in New
Mexico we should be encouraging
not discouraging so we're and
especially where by homeowners
in New Mexico who are low and
moderate income or even a
marginal marginalized
neighborhood should have the
opportunity to financer sewer
improvements over a time period
on their property assessment so
we believe this is a bill that
we would stand in respectful
opposition to thank you very
much.
Thank you for that.
And seeing no further public
comment we'll get to the
committee of ice here stands
for.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative black it's
nice to see you I know you serve
and especial position also in
your county and I see that our
county treasurer and Nancy
Pierce is with us today I was
wondering Mr chairman
Representative black and
treasure yes if you could share
with us why are you guys
bringing this bill forward I
think many of us are confused as
to why.
And if we could also hear from
treasure appears as well I think
that would be great.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
Representative at actually I was
approached by the by the county
treasurer's affiliate and our
belief is that it was it was
basically a drafting error when
residential was amended out in
the original bill
that just got left in in this
one portion but I will that I
will yield to my expert witness
works.
Thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee and vice chair
Stansbury.
Thank you of four for listening
to us on this we do believe that
it was a drafting error.
It was actually Bernalillo
county that came to of the
legislature with representatives
Abbas Akhil to put in a program
for commercial takes.
Of that that was our desire and
in the US processes you've heard
from Representative black there
were some drafting issues that
we we thought we needed to
clarify there have been some
interesting historical trouble
with residential pace across the
country
and some of that involves
The the the market place up
primarily because when you've
better re sell your house or you
go to refinance your house
there's there's some problem
with those of residential pace
loans that are on the books and
and how it's been addressed of
course our biggest states that
have done us have been
California and Florida and
it got pretty sticky and it got
sticky enough that
the federal hide agency stopped
providing
mortgage financing for
properties that did have
residential pace
Our state only has this option
in two counties Santa Fe and
Bernalillo as well as I think
the villagers someone part of
has adopted it
but I I do not believe Dona Ana
County Hess it's just a village
so it's it's
not used in New Mexico quite
frankly of those counties there
are no properties at all of that
have use the residential pace
and that was primarily
Bernalillo county's motivation
to add.
Commercial pace
there's there's a lot more.
probably banned list to allow
for a commercial pace up again
commercial properties
you know usually they have a
resources that residents don't
and usually those professionals
are called attorneys as well as
CPA is that will depreciate this
property over time is it's a
business
and can help guide what kind of
purchasing of systems they want
for the pace that's not in place
right now for residential and
part of why there's problems
with it across the country
so that's why we wanted to be
cleaned up so we we don't go
down a bad pass for New Mexico
but we certainly want to see
commercial pace the ability to
grow.
Thank you.
In a nut shell for us.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
and treasure I'm I think what
I'm really struggling with in
this conversation is we can we
can establish what was
provided in tents and so I
wonder Mr chairman do any of our
committee analysts can anyone
answer the question
definitively here on the record
it was the state drafting here.
Because my recollection is that
this was debated on the house
floor and it was the legislative
intent to include residential
and that we did vote in favor of
including residential.
Chair on that point yes please
so so my understanding of the
bill the twenty nineteen.
Representative she'll have the
bill to essentially expands the
program.
By allowing for.
the third party administration.
And that there was some concern
about allowing for third party
administration on residential
programs and so the the
amendment was adopted to limit
that.
but the amendment was inserted
into the third party
administration language but
instead took residential out of
the prior paragraph there was an
existing law
I it's having read the F. I. R..
In in read the old bill I I
don't think it's clear that
there was a graphic here I think
if the.
If.
Tending to eliminate resin
senses from the pace program
altogether
that would have been a
significantly different debate
and I don't think that's the
debate we at.
So Mister chairman I guess on
that point
what what I'm finding confusing
here it is and and for
Representative black.
Is your intent here to address a
clerical error or drafting here
or is it to change the policy to
remove residential.
Because I think they're the
legislative record we can
determine whether or not there
was a drafting error and I don't
think that's the case.
So I guess the question is is
the intent of bringing this bill
forward to remove presidential.
Thank you Mr chairman and madam
vice chair I'm.
Yes.
This I know originally you know
when we did debate house bill
four forty Mr chairman and
representative that was of the
the administration
administrative part of the bill
was an issue however it was it
was made palatable to the
treasurers
We're in the residential portion
you have the option it has to
you have to one it I'm you have
to go about getting your own
solar set up or whatever and
then you have to approach the
county to actually and is an
assessment so that portion of it
maybe hello I'm so and I I still
agree with that I you know I I
and for people getting solar I I
really act I'm not really the
issue is a white guy treasurer
said
the attaching it to the resident
and that the fund funding.
And.
Past issues with mortgages in
the future that's really you
know and I am under the
impression I was under the
impression that reading the bill
in reading the in the amendment
context of the original house
bill four forty was that it was
taken out in one section left in
New so I'm sorry I don't know if
that answers your question.
I think the what's confusing for
me and and I'm I don't mean to
sound like I'm just beating a
dead horse here but I'm really
trying to understand the intent
of the bill that you guys are
bringing forward and I guess I'm
not quite getting a clear answer
which is thank and part of it is
like really just legislative
record if the body at the
legislature adopted this bill
with the legislative intent of
including residential then
really this bill is being
forwarded to policy which is to
remove presidential so I'm
trying to get kind clarity as to
you know are you trying to make
this more workable from the
treasury standpoint are you
trying to reverse the policy
that the legislature adopted.
I'm thank you Mr chairman madam
I share I'm I would like to
defer to a treasure versifi
cannot now.
Thank you Mr Mr chair and
Members of the the committee
The treasures of Soviet saw it
as a drafting error when we saw
Representative Abbas appeals
bill that we asked that he that
he Cherry to have the third
party
administration of that and
commercial.
Commercial pace
I did not hear the floor debate
on it but I understand it was it
was quite extensive and adding
residential us so we have the
residential removed out of the
one place but it's still stood
in another and that's why we saw
that let's let's have some
clarity and clean up this bill
So that's that's why we we
brought it to Representative
black.
Thank you Mr chairman and
treasurer I am I've received
some correspondence during our
back and forth here from some
folks who actually worked on the
drafting and and it's one of the
things it's really hard with our
state legislature is like in
Congress we could literally go
back to the red in at a record
of what happened in both
committee and floor debate but
it seems to be the recollection
of everyone who worked on the
bill that it was intended to
include residential and so this
would reverse the policy adopted
by the legislature that
residential building included in
peso
I think that you know that's
something for us to consider
here in New I really appreciate
and that you are bringing
forward your perspective on the
implementation and and the
challenges of that but I think
for me you know we're trying to
expand the adoption of
renewables in the affordability
and the ability to leverage
resources to do that so I plan
to vote against the bill because
of the policy implications so I
appreciate that you're bringing
it forward.
Thank you Mr Stansbury next up
is representative for our.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Representative
this
it it's been established by the
Attorney General that the
treasures are supposed to
administer the pace program for
residential is that correct.
Mr Chairman representative yes I
believe there is a.
I a letter from the Attorney
General have forgive me it's
been in the last few years.
Yes it should be administered by
the county treasurer.
And is that mostly the right Mr
chair Representative is that
mostly the reason why the
treasures are opposed to
including residential because of
some of the financial financing
difficulties.
I'm Mr Chairman representative
that is part of it the.
I guess basically I I'm gonna
tell you my thoughts on the
integrity of the tax bill you
know your tax bill should be
your tax
and any other financing our
state should be done on a
separate.
Instrument so if you know I
don't know if the seller has to
come up with because there are
there are any are ways to get
loans to provide solar panels
I'm your look thank you and some
I believe solar companies
actually offer some financing
so.
Mr Chairman representative that
that is from my perspective
for.
Okay Mr chair and representative
we're not asking the state
treasures to finance just to
work with the financing
companies so that they don't
exceed the appraised value of
the home that's all the
treasures have to do is that
correct.
Mr Chairman representative now
according to this the the county
treasurer would actually have to
attach the the the assessment on
to the tax bill and that would
be required to collect that and
then for those payments on to
the solar efforts.
Okay is
R. there are.
Mr Chairman representative we're
trying to make sure that
Low income people and
Can take advantage of lowering
their
Utility bills and being able to
do this is important and I think
that that
The different things that are
needed can be put in place
through cooperative efforts
between the financing companies
and accounts they just have to
work that out the same as they
do commercial.
Mr Chairman representative if I
yes I would like to defer to
Nancy burst on this and and
maybe she can collaborative a
little more understanding on how
I know she has solar panels so
as far as a residential customer
how that works.
Thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee
First I just do want to
recognize the statement that had
been made.
In this committee earlier in
that there's about what thirty
thousand solar panels in New
Mexico and I will tell you that
none of those were acquired
through a pace program
primarily because again are you
saying the treasurer as the
intermediary
Doesn't always make sense quite
frankly
because again you are attaching
it to the tax roll you're having
to pay for it over twenty years
assessments and in twenty years
lots of things to go on a with a
person's property.
and again it's it's based on the
value of that property I am the
I am not the assessor I'm only
the tax collector but I'm
collecting on a commercial I
would be collecting on a
commercial loan that I had no
party and.
That
I don't know if it's a good
value or not for a residential
property owner.
and when you're especially
talking about low income
hurt taxpayers
I get very concerned because
there are no consumer
protections for that loan of
that are that are on the books
are to be worked out.
That's primarily why Bernalillo
county
my County said let's do a third
party administrator for this
program because again the two
pieces there talk about.
Educating the taxpayer on what
kind of residential.
In energy
is appropriate for their
property
which is very is greatly from
property to property
and especially when you get into
older homes that require some
some upgrading
we were also running into
finding out some predatory
practices that were happening
that we will reported to us as
treasurers which primarily led
to us going to our our state
representatives in the southern
part of the state which led them
to ask the Attorney General of
for a letter of of what the what
Ph.D thought about this so
that's that's kind of the
history there that that we had
that we were seen which is why
Bernalillo county wanted again
just a third party administrator
for a commercial pace program.
No no so we're.
Solar that we haven't Bernalillo
county or as I said anywhere
else where pace has been voted
on by the board of commissioners
has never materialized.
Mr chair and representative hi
my information is that the AG
found no evidence of predatory
action and there's nothing to
prevent the county from docking
at consumer protection in a
special assessment district
program and solar energy
improvement of that special
assessment allows the county
treasurer and administrative the
and also third party help so I'm
Mr chairman and representative I
I don't think this bill is.
It's fair to the people who are
trying to increase their
capacity to reduce their
a utility expenses thank you Mr
chair that's all.
Thank you Representative Ferrary
next up we have Representative
Strickler.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
up Representative black.
And also treasure beers
so what you're telling me that
yet often on this program and
only two counties have done that
so for that Santa Fe and
Bernalillo county.
And and there they probably
primarily did that for the
commercial application of this.
Is that right.
Mr chair representative that is
correct.
And so correct me if I'm wrong
another thirty thousand of the
solar panels
I mean thirty houses thirty
thousand.
Solar panels installed in our
state I don't know what our
inventory I don't know what our
housing inventory is probably a
million.
Houses
and no one has applied for the
residential pace program.
Mr Chairman representative yes
that is correct is it because
it's on workable.
Is is appealing to me you know
the market place.
That tells you you know what's
good and what's not in if if no
one is taking advantage of this
program then apparently there's
there's better avenues out there
and financing and so forth I'm
Mr Chairman representative yes I
would I would believe that is
true that you could go through
the process of getting
purchasing those and and it is
installing your house with you
know the prior contractor the
solar company whoever they may
be and and working out your
financing with them or your
local your local bank.
It and Representative and Mr
chairman and and Representative
black.
The lending institutions so they
they have a little issue with
this that I don't have a lane
on the on the property I guess
this would service Elaine if if
they financed through this
mechanism and they have to in in
the.
The treasury will have to
administer this I guess the
third party.
That is correct Mr Chairman
representative yes I it would.
Potentially place going on the
on the home and then at actually
make it more difficult for a
homeowner to refinance or to
sell the property because it is
then attached as a lean to the
property so if the home owner
decided to sell Mr chairman and
and Representative black if the
homeowner tries to sell their
property they're going to have
to probably
extinguish this liability before
they can sell it maybe act and
clear the lane clear the line
free up the title and then they
they they may have to get an
interim loan or you know a
interim financing to pay off
the.
the solar panels and then then
there they would be for a to to
sell the house I'm Mr Chairman
representative actually the way
this actually reads is that you
can sell the property and the
new owner would acquire this
debt.
Okay I'm just that in itself is
troubling.
Thank you Mr chairman thank
representative about okay I
think I understand it the the
ticket I mean the the racial
bills get K. big the counties
can often.
and and we just have to counties
thirty three that have opted in.
And and that the Russian dental
component to
the the market is not not too
keen about that that approach
so.
The one I this is kind of a head
scratcher here.
the the practicality of Original
Bill and and and you tried to
clarifier clean it up so thank
you Mr chairman thank you
Representative black.
Thank you Representative
Strickler except we have
Representative Scott.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative black.
Just a couple questions.
Yes.
So request to.
Installed with conventional
financing.
That would put a lien on the
court or the property.
I thank you Mr Chairman
representative so I at I believe
it's on conventional financing
not through that the assessment
on your tax bill
and that would be just like you
are purchasing a.
You.
If you decided as you take your
car with you I'm or you leave it
as an attachment for I'm
basically.
Let's say I I dishwasher you go
to Lowes you get at you get a
loan.
Dishwasher in your house then
that is a collateral is the
dishwasher not it has nothing to
do with your actual home is that
makes sense Mr Chairman
representative.
Mr Chairman representative but
going.
Through the property tax
assessment process does that
fundamentally change the nature
of the.
Of the lady in all is now on the
entire property not just.
The install solar equipment.
Mr Chairman representative that
is correct.
Mr Chairman representative with
the current wording that we
have.
What was essentially done is
made to the.
Collection of students to.
Tax coal collector.
The treasurer the collector of
fish.
For this.
Commercially installed.
Equipment is that.
Understand that is correct.
Essentially you're putting the
driver in a position to collect
a debt that they have no.
And basically nothing to do
with.
Mr Chairman representative to
assist happen with any other
equipment.
That can be installed on a
property of water wells for
example or.
What.
Or anything else.
I'm Mr Chairman representative
now it does not.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative for your answers
at all I have.
Your.
There any further debate from
the committee.
Representative black would you
like to add anything before you
but.
I thank you Mr chairman and
committee for having me here
today and like a we discussed I
think it is a in our first
priority is that we believe that
it was a a drafting and it was
left in I'm and.
I what is that earlier I I'm not
against solar panels I.
M. you know I'm.
So I'm I'm basically looking
this at as clinic language and
perhaps we could gets
legislation that is more clearly
written for for residential.
thank you Mr chairman.
Black for very yes I move to
table house bill one seventy
three.
Their second second.
Representative Sarinana.
shall we need to take a look
please.
Representative Chandler yes.
Representative Dixon.
Yes thank you Representative
Ferrary yes.
Representative Montoya and.
Representative Ortez.
Yes.
Thank you Representative Syriana
yes.
Representative Scott no.
Representative Strickler no.
Representative Townsend.
Representative Townsend.
Representative Montoya.
And looks like Representative
Townsend is calling in.
Townsend Here muted on your end
you you yourself.
Representative Townsend if you
can hear me we cannot hear you.
Okay let's move on.
By your Stansbury will step
paper.
And you're in the green yes.
And that is eight zero zero with
a vote of seven to to.
Thank you Representative black.
Thank you.
Our final bill of the date going
back to Representative Ortez.
The committee substitute let's
remember that house bill two of
six utility affordability and
relief act.
Representative Ortez you have
any experts that we should
promote to the panel.
Thank you Mr chair yes I have a
two experts at ten we can be
fickle corn and again sinak.
Just give them a.
Eight.
Thank you.
Okay Representative Ortez
whenever you're ready.
Right this is a R. committee
some of which is like the to the
two number.
Yes the committee sent.
Representative Dixon is the
committee set up their second.
In.
There are yes could you read the
to a two number on your
committee so.
Mr chair absolutely it's two one
nine nine eight seven point two.
Members of the committee.
If you have a few of a hard copy
of the the sub please do check
that number I think there are a
couple different committee subs
in the Citrix folder so so make
sure you have the correct one it
was two one nine nine eight
seven point two.
Representative gorgeous.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee
good afternoon.
Here's what we knew for sure.
COVID has shown a strong and
harsh light on some financial
truths about our neighbors.
Families all of the state many
in my district have had to make
the toughest of choices whether
to pay their rent buy groceries
or pay their utility bills.
Our neighbors are going into
deeper debt and they're
suffering under great financial
burden.
Two oh six is a COVID relief
bill that also sets into motion
a plan to really address utility
affordability for all New
Mexicans especially those that
are struggling financially.
This guilt this bill gives us a
standard way across the state to
address debt that's been
incurred by folks who have been
unable to pay their utility
bills during the COVID.
This bill gives customers the
opportunity to repeat that death
with dignity if you owe money
you get two months for every
month
to pay back if you're
experiencing hardship or low
income half of those arrears are
forgiven if you pay half half is
forgiven I'd like to take a
moment right now to tell you how
many people this would affect
without the current moratoriums
in place fifty seven thousand
families across the state would
have received a letter and
electricity disconnection notice
twenty seven thousand families
would have received a gas
disconnection notice these
families just don't have the
means to pay their bills and
COVID.
I know what it's like to grow up
in poverty I know what it's like
to choose between the rents or
the light bill that was my
childhood and we were just
regular poor we weren't COVID
por.
We've got to act right now to
help these families.
This bill does a lot of good in
other ways as well establishes a
fund to empower local
governments and tribal entities
to implement energy efficiency
programs in their communities
that's the community energy
efficiency development block
grant we hope this will be
seated by the significant
federal funds that we hope are
coming our way very very soon.
This bill establishes reporting
requirements for utilities so
that we can better understand
who in the state has utilities
and who doesn't this will help
us set the stage for utility
affordability and equity across
the state.
We've done a lot of work on this
bill we work with a number of
utilities and in various
departments within the state to
reduce the barriers for success
of these programs since the last
committee we've added language
to better integrate the arrears
forgiveness program was renters
assistant pro assistance
programs we've simplified and
change the hearts of ship
requirements and certifications
we've adjusted the seat program
to ensure that the MFA is
included as a qualified entity
and that we're not competing for
the same weather is ation funds
a program that MFA is already in
charge of lastly this is now an
emergency bill I'd like to
invite Representative Ferrary
sponsor this bill to join me
here in addition the two experts
will also we'll also talk thank
you.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Representative I'm glad to be a
co sponsor of this bill
New Mexicans living in rural low
income and other underserved
community spent a high portion
of their income on utility bills
and on average those living
below the poverty line pay
fifteen percent of their income
and some of rural residents as
high as thirty seven percent
towards towards energy bills
alone and under current law
utilities are required to offer
customers who are behind on
their bills installment
agreements but if the customer
cannot make those monthly
Bills and their arrears payments
after the moratorium Maez
utilities must disconnect the
customer in order to recover
their uncollectible debt and
without this bill New Mexico
could see as already pointed out
thousands of disconnects after
the moratorium ends and
reasonable uncollectible debt
costs will be passed on to
ratepayers anyway on this bill
provides a way to keep families
connected well they get back on
their feet and that's why I
support this bill.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative.
Thank you Representative Ferrary
Representative Ortez you want
your experts say something
before you go to the public.
At Mr chair yes thank you Mr
sinak.
Mr chair members of the
committee and tapes American
associate professor at the
university New Mexico School of
Law and I've been working with
Representative for testing
Ferrary and others in the
development of this bill I just
want to highlight some of the
changes in the committee
substitute they are the product
of many conversations that we've
had with utilities with mortgage
finance the toward the the Human
Services Department TFA and
other stakeholders I just want
to emphasize that when it comes
utility the utility rears
portion of this bill the goal is
not to reinvent the wheel rather
work with the current structure
for dealing with the rears
established by the PRC under the
public utility act but to
provide additional safeguards
within that structure for
customers in tools for the PRC
and utilities that only
legislature's can find through
legislation.
slide for you that that as
Representative Ortez mentioned
the central tool here's this
partial you rears forgiveness
program the goal here is really
to incentivize customers to make
payments in the utility plants
through this partial years
program.
But I want to flag that this
differs from the current
mechanisms because where as
utilities are already required
under it the PRC regulations to
enter into installment plans if
possible if a customer owes a
thousand dollars right now and
we have at least one utility
worth on average customers over
a thousand dollars in arrears if
they were to pay back over the
course of the year that would
mean that they would need to pay
eighty dollars a month on top of
their current utility bills in
this program we seek to give
customers a reasonable path out
of this utility debt without
being disconnected and so under
this program a customer to
thousand dollars in debt would
only need to pay twenty dollars
a month over the course of two
years.
This bill also recognizes that
utilities are mandated to
continue to provide services to
customers who could not pay
during this extraordinary crisis
and so therefore explicitly
allows utilities recover the
reasonable costs subject to PRC
review but first requires
utilities in PRC work to apply
any federal funds available to
the for the program and there
are very substantial funds
available for some people the
only renters who are in danger
of losing their rental housing
and this bill seeks to make sure
that those funds are applied to
the maximum extent possible I
also want to flag the H. B. two
oh six has specific provisions
to address unique role of
nonprofit role of Tricity
cooperatives because of the
unique status cooperatives can
cap entry into the program for
those above two hundred fifty
percent of federal poverty level
to protect the exposure of the
cooperatives and they can
recover some of their costs by
deducting fees that would
otherwise go to the PRC.
I also want to flag that this
matching partial credit program
is not a new tool three other
states already offered this
matching arrears forgiveness
program in fact whenever
utility says propose this kind
of program in Minnesota.
And I'll just flag that the
other two elements of HB two oh
six are focused on the longer
term issues reducing
disproportion Energy bring
paper work by New Mexicans and
those issues are substantial low
income New Mexicans pay on
average fifteen percent of their
income towards utility bills and
that is what's considered
affordable is five percent in
some counties like controlling
Guadalupe Harding Lincoln
Torrance inTaos for New Mexicans
pay an average of twenty three
percent of their income or more
on utility bills the seed
program.
And the components of utility
reporting planning C. to address
that long term energy burden to
reduce energy bills improve for
the housing.
One of the tools that this bill
would allow but would not
require would be to allow the
PRC to improve to approve low
income discount rates that's
something that twenty other
states already allow thank you
very much I'll be happy to
answer questions later.
Thank you for that the the final
part.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee I am Tammy people
corn with southwest energy
efficiency project and over the
last year we've been incredibly
concerned about what's happening
in New Mexico with low income
families and COVID and as stated
by the previous speakers you
know we think that the arrears
forgiving as part of this
legislation is incredibly
important but equally important
to the provisions that address
long term affordability for low
income New Mexicans COVID
impacts will be felt for a very
long time is these low income
families dig themselves out of
their financial holes which were
created through no fault of
their own we need to do
everything we can to reduce
their energy burden and keep
utility bills manageable in the
future it's important to note
several people have that New
Mexicans experience very high
energy for some over thirty
percent just to put that in
context money energy burden is
one percent.
So we are unable into were able
to address the high energy
versions that these folks are
experiencing three things like
low income rates and energy
efficiency for all low income
homes we are going to have
people who have been crushed by
COVID in a continually
precarious position in terms of
being able to pay their bills
provide a safe home for their
family and weather future storms
whether that's a pandemic and
economic downfall or climate
change so for those reasons we
really think that this bill
addresses the short term and
long term needs of our most
vulnerable populations we've
worked incredibly hard with all
interested parties over many
months to make sure that this
bill is as good as it can
possibly be we're very proud of
the committee substitute it's
before you today thank you.
Thank you for that
Representative Ortez any final
thoughts before we go to the
public.
Okay thank you and
So for members of the public the
first we're going to pull in on
your screen you'll be able to
indicate your support or
opposition to this bill and then
we will go
Allow people to speak people
begin to minutes we'll see how
many people want to speak there
may be a total cap on the time
but first we'll see how many
people just see speak and before
that.
We'll do the polls so shall be
whenever you're ready with the
Paul put this up for thirty
seconds.
And more seconds.
Okay so we have twenty three in
support and seven in opposition
that seventy seven percent in
support and twenty three percent
in opposition so now we're gonna
go to the public and first we're
gonna do opposition.
So if you support this bill
please put your hand there.
If you would like to speak in
opposition to this bill please
put your hand up.
First up we have might the
interview.
Good morning chairman members
committee Mike and Tony with
Xcel energy thank you for the
opportunity to comment on this
first thing I want to say this
the substitute don't substitute
here as a much improved and up
we thank the sponsors we thank
you experts for working with us
and to to make it a better bill
we however still remain opposed
to the bill for a couple reasons
one the PRC order that came out
of coverage for this very simple
straightforward solution to the
arrears issue all residential
customers qualify you have to be
low income but you can be you
know if you're recently fell on
hard times.
Which some of the folks have
that what we do not qualify
under low low income they've got
to go through another process
but hardship process to make
sure they qualified for this
bill this bill to this
forgiveness we're as the PRC
order the came out everyone all
residential customers qualify
should makes it very simple as
that it's that process in detail
as of yet used for decades with
their customers we think it
should be continued.
The other issue that I guess it
creates the arrears forgiveness
creates are a subsidy issue for
those customers that are.
Just above the poverty level
they will be picking up the cost
of the we're still giving us
from our customers so that's an
issue the other thing a long
term basis the low income rates
we thank all the also creates a
so city issue and we would.
Don't really think that to
remember mixing a lot of apples
and oranges in this bill we're
okay with the energy efficiency
community block grant but get
the sheets with the low income
rates as well so I'll leave it
at that thank you members
members the committee.
Thank you Mr Dantonio next up we
have Kevin grumbled.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee on Kevin grown
walled in on those CEO The New
Mexico rule like trick coop
Association.
And.
Yeah we've had discussion deal
with the experts in this bill
and we understand it is it is an
issue but
Over the last fifteen months
what we see in our total
leverage is due in state New
Mexico for my fourteen
distribution members gone up
about.
Less than twenty five percent.
at the residential level we
route have about fourteen
thousand customers in the rears.
not too much more than other
times.
for an average of about two
hundred seventy dollars total
next thirty sixty ninety day
Regis also thirty days staff
will be paid sixteen ninety
become a little more dicey
so.
We think that the PRC process we
have in place through rule for
ten and with put in place for
years was a customer bill of
rights addresses this we don't
see the need for this bill.
I would add that on page ten
eleven at limits costs tell one
percent of total electric bills
but we have a lot more that the
rears we got about fourteen
thousand out of a hundred forty
eight thousand to ten percent
the biggest thing I'd like to
have everyone focus on these
pages thirty four thirty five
which is essentially implements
social right making based on
income level certainly as coops
we don't want income information
from member owners.
the the PRC once that
information as well and would
like everyone to remember that
our culture member owners we're
not gonna shut him off
you can't collect the dead
anyway so thank you we
respectfully opposes bill.
Thank you next up with Carlos
the Serra.
Yes good afternoon chairman the
queen and members of the
committee Carlos is our with the
Public Service Company New
Mexico we appreciate the Sanchez
addressing our key concerns in
the committee subs to by having
the PRC qualified customers to
fall below the two hundred fifty
percent of the federal poverty
level and determine economic
hardship as well as making an
option for utilities and Raul
customers based on hardship.
We don't necessarily oppose the
bill but still prefer addressing
bill bill relates to the PRC's
disconnection moratorium process
PNM at work to comply with the
PRC moratorium order since March
twenty eight twenty twenty and
have already put payment plans
assistance programs are really
fun programs in place including
our good neighbor fund and the
COVID nineteen relief fund with
that was what which is an
additional two million dollars
from our shareholders for
residential small business
customers we believe this is a
better way to handle bill really
because these mechanisms
mechanisms are working.
PNM also believes all utilities
including municipalities should
be included in this legislation
no spoke delays also have
customers of harsher during
these these COVID nineteen
pandemic or this to this time we
thank Representative Ortez that
our team for taking time to
discuss the bill and address our
most pressing concerns this
committee substitute for those
and so we thank you for your
time.
Thank you for that and the
others in opposition.
Cena and we're gonna go to
people who are speaking support
if you would like to speak in
support please raise your hand.
You'll be given two minutes the
the screen the the the timers on
the screen if you're calling in
New Mexico press star nine seven
else that sooner we're gonna
we're gonna limit this to twenty
minutes just because it's
getting late.
Of so first up we have created
here.
Mr Chairman can you hear me yes
thank you Mr chairman Craig hair
speaking in support of H. B. two
oh six I like to say that a
chain is only as strong as its
weakest link and severally our
society our state is only as
strong as we take care of the
most disadvantaged involved
vulnerable among us that's the
beauty of HB two oh six with
respect to are looking after
their electric and gas utility
and water needs and having a
compassionate approach to making
sure they still have utility
service one thing I'd like to
draw attention to is the
authorization in the bill to
direct the PRC to have our
utilities establish subsidized
low rates for low income
families the utilities already
testified in opposition to that
approach but the reality is we
already have subsidize lower
rates for certain utility
customers unfortunately it's not
for low income families it's for
large industry we have a a
economic development right that
utilities apply to large
industries that are basically a
subsidy that the rest of us rate
payers Hey in the name of
economic development job
creation and I think that's a
perfectly fine policy but I find
it curious that curious and a
little bit disappointing that we
don't have a similar rate for
the most needy families and in
our state and so H. B. two oh
six.
Establishes that subsidize low
income rate for families and I
think that's really important
I'm I'm certainly provide as a
right pair to pay a few more
Bucks on my electric bills to
subsidize rates for for low
income people so they can
continue to afford their utility
bills and not not have to get
disconnected so with that in
mind I I urge you to support I
H. B. two oh six thank you very
much.
Thank you for that we have John
Brown.
Good afternoon speaker and
committee can you hear me.
Yes okay thank you thank you and
Sanchez this HB two oh six thank
you for bringing this bill
forward my name is John Brown a
Franciscan sister and the
director of New Mexico
interfaith power and light we
work with faith communities and
people of faith all of the state
and we see this bill as part of
our moral responsibility to care
for our neighbors in especially
in times like this of COVID when
it's most difficult we believe
that this bill not only assists
people financially but also
health wise because if people
have unpaid bills it's stressful
that may have health problems
and it's just a spiral down the
affected utilities in addition
we're very grateful that this
bill has in its an effort for
the future which is energy
efficiency to help homes be
healthier to lower energy bills
and to to care by these
healthier homes for those who
are most vulnerable the children
infants elderly and those with
health problems we also see that
as a way of caring for god's
creation so we thank you for
this bill and we're very much in
support it will also help our
many of our faith communities
that help people with energy
assistance and that money only
goes so far so this would really
assist with that long term
effort to be a good neighbor so
thank you and blessings.
Thank you next up we have any
Miller.
Good afternoon Mister chair and
members of the committee my name
is Amy Miller and I'm
representing southwest energy
efficiency project I encourage
you to support house bill two oh
six this is so needed during
these challenging times to
protect that thousands of
families who have fallen behind
on their utility bills.
What's most important is this
bill provides the perfect
combination of short term
solutions to help provide
immediate assistance to the
families right now but also long
term solutions related to energy
efficiency.
Focusing on energy efficiency
helps these New Mexicans reduce
their energy bills and hopefully
helps them avoid getting into
this situation again.
One thing I think the last week
the situation in Texas has
reminded us is that access to
utilities is critical to our
public health.
I also just want to reiterate
that work on this bill has been
an open collaborative process
southwest energy efficiency
project started discussions with
New Mexico utilities on this
bill many months ago this
substitute legislation is a
direct result of these ongoing
discussions thank you for your
consideration.
Thank you for that next step we
have Nathan Smith.
Hello chairman and committee my
name's Megan Smith I represent
myself by May taxpayer and
resident of New Mexico and I
fully support this bill it was
mentioned that some of the costs
for paying the arrears might
need to be paid by other people
I would be more than glad to do
that as a resident and a
taxpayer and then the longer
term energy assistance the
actions that are in this bill
are necessary and look forward
thank you.
Thank you for that you know I
appreciate that the brief
comments we're going to about
one forty one if you speak
quickly more of your
colleagues in the Los supporters
can also speak next up we have
some at the top.
Thank you everybody hear me yes.
Okay great.
One I'm so sorry.
I thank you Mr chairman and
members of this committee and
thank you to the sponsor
sponsors of this bill my name is
Samantha account I'm with the
crime in your and the climate
energy advocate with
conservation voters Mexico and
thank you for allowing me time
to testify for House Bill to a
sixty day we urge this committee
to also support house bill two
execs.
Throughout this COVID crisis New
Mexico have shown resilience and
compassion to our communities
and this bill is a continuation
of that spirit as you heard from
our experts in from previous
testimony are C. S. you am our
main concern surrounding the
transition from oil and gas to
renewable energy our equity and
inclusion I'm really making sure
that our decision making Senator
around our most at risk
communities and this bill will
help low income Kate communities
regain that financial stability
while also promoting New
Mexico's initiatives to be a
hundred percent crop increased
by twenty fifteen which we all
know will lower energy costs
statewide.
I want that just quickly add
that no along from in our DC
requests that I added brief no
of support on his behalf he
strongly supports this bill
thank you for everyone's time
today Mr chair and members of
the committee for these reasons
and others I hope you also
support house bill two oh six
thank you.
Thank you next up we have
Christian because yes.
Thank you chair and committee
members my name is Christian can
see just with the coalition is
sustainable Communities New
Mexico and as you heard earlier
today we Representative cities
of Albuquerque R. Scrase in
Santa Fe and Santa Fe County our
members strongly support H. B.
two oh six for many of the
reasons that were mentioned
today in addition New Mexico as
many families that live in
manufactured housing and multi
generational hired it houses
that often have insulation or
within efficient appliances and
potentially and safe
infrastructure wall our electric
utilities required by statute to
devote five percent of energy
efficiency program dollars to
low income households retrofits
it's far too little to meet
statewide demand
through the creation of energy
efficiency community development
block grant which can receive
federal dollars our members can
develop targeted energy
efficiency and housing retrofits
for that purpose community
members complementing these
utility programs in addition the
bill also requires utility
reporting on the scope of the
energy efficiency improvements
needed to address fifty percent
of all low income households by
twenty thirty hundred percent by
twenty fifty this sort of
benchmarking and transparency is
long overdue it is necessary for
creating targeted solutions this
bill as much as any other one in
the legislative session provides
concrete solutions for ushering
in a more equitable energy
transition for our most
vulnerable households hired you
to vote in favor of HB two oh
six thank you.
Thank you for that next up with
Kurt Rader.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee my name
is Kirk record I'm the director
of loose Act seamless trip New
Mexico we also speak on behalf
of New Mexico Congress of
churches will simply state that
we support the state of New
Mexico in its efforts to help
and protect the most vulnerable
in our communities and believe
it to be good public policy for
that reason and the others
already stated I urge your
support for the committee
substitute for H. B. two oh six
thank you.
Thank you next up I believe that
would be the center for civic
policy if you get there just
yourself.
Hi good afternoon Mister
chairman members of the
committee I thank you for the
opportunity to speak today my
name is James Kobe wine I am the
policy director for the center
for civic policy we support to
the committee sub for H. B. two
oh six you still need
affordability relief act this
legislation will help protect
low income families during the
economic downturn that we are
experiencing during this global
pandemic and avoid the ambiguity
around what utilities will do to
protect vulnerable families
among the critical portions of
this legislation is the
allowance and I repeat not the
mandate but the allowance for
utilities to create rates for
low income consumers an argument
can be made that a contributing
factor to the significant
arrears crisis we're talking
about today is the fact that
rates that take into account low
income consumers are not in
place this language will help to
find long term solutions to
address the energy burden
experienced by some of New
Mexicos most vulnerable
communities and get ahead of the
future crisis we thank the
sponsors Representative Ortez
Romero and Ferrari for their
work on this legislation and the
leadership of organizations like
southwest energy efficiency
project and the University of
New Mexico School of law to
support this policy initiative
this concludes my remarks Mr
chair and committee members I
urge you to vote yes for a do
pass on the committee sub for H.
B. two oh six thank you.
Thank you for that thanks we've
Charles good marker.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee appreciate the
opportunity to share some
thoughts speak in support of HB
two oh six on behalf of policy
solutions Institute and also the
New Mexico voices for children
action fund.
You may be aware that adverse
childhood experiences such as
living in poverty in the
stresses that is
What was mentioned earlier that
spiral in families as on in
poverty and allowing electric
bills and other bills
it that those are have harmful
health consequences especially
for children and especially for
their mental health development
the capacity to succeed in
school and life in fifty in my
New Mexico households with
children fifty one percent of
adults have lost substantial
income from employment during
the last year.
This bill is very much needed
it's good for families here now
and it's good for the
development of our children in
the years to come thank you very
much.
Thank you next step we have.
And I did point out with your
name last time my and urgent.
There you go hi good morning
sorry good afternoon Mr chairman
and committee members my name is
my neighborhood and I'm
representing vote solar today we
are an organization dedicated to
increasing access to the clean
energy transition I'm from Santo
Domingo pueblo and New Mexico
born and raised with the really
deep love for our state in our
community I think many of us can
attest that COVID has impacted
all of our lives in different
ways loss of our loved ones an
ongoing anxiety about public
health in the state of the world
is compounded by the
unprecedented economic hardship
we are witnessing.
I'm certain all of us know the
those who struggle to make ends
meet prior to comment and now
under the pandemic families and
individuals are forced to have
everything on the line including
their comfort warmth and what
constitutes the bare minimum
electors electric and gas
service should not be considered
a luxury for those able to
afford a utility bills as a
native woman I have seen and
felt also charges impact those
who have disproportionate and
energy burden especially tribal
members and those living on low
or what is now no income.
Many of those behind energy
bills will never have the equity
to pay off their electric bills
even with the payment plan which
is why we need that forgiveness
New Mexicans in meeting
meaningful comment really from
the media and long term.
Thank you Representative Ortez
Ferrari Romero for carrying this
out for ensuring that our
community members are able to
stay warm and breathe a sigh of
relief after very long here.
This is beyond initial capital
profit which is why we stand in
support of H. B. two oh six
today and hope you yes thank you
for your time.
Thank you for that we have Jason
Thompson.
Thank you Mr Chairman can you
hear me.
Yes.
Thank you Mr chairman good
afternoon members of the
committee my name is Jason
Thompson I'm a registered
lobbyist for western resource
advocates we have greatly
appreciate the Sanchez bringing
this bill forward and all those
who spoke previously and we
stand in full support of the
bill we urge the committee to
vote yes on this bill thank you
very much.
Thank you next up with Louise
Carroll.
Yes hello a good afternoon
Mister chair members of the
committee so he's got it on the
provided a political organizer
with the Sierra Club real planet
chapter representing more than
thirty five thousand members and
supporters across southern New
Mexico and we strongly support
HB tools six the COVID nineteen
pandemic has brought to light a
lot of inequalities that exist
in our society people help of
lost jobs and also lower once.
Yes Representative or or does
mention and I really want to
thank her and representative for
argument for bringing this bill
to you today over fifty seven
thousand families will be
eligible for this connection if
it wasn't for the PRC
disconnection works program and
over twenty seven thousand
families will be eligible for
disconnection from natural gas
services these families between
two hundred forty four dollars
and a thousand average the
ending the utility this large
amounts will be difficult to pay
back in addition to other bills
for people who are unemployed or
working reduced hours due to the
pandemic this pandemic has
created an additional burden on
many New Mexico families and
bills like this one.
Can help take care of some of
that burden is begin can you on
a path to re to economic
recovery I urge you to vote yes
on this bill today thank you
very much for your time.
Thank you for that and possibly
allow speaker is on a.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee my name
is Tony Porter and I'm the
founder emeritus include energy
leader for prosperity works.
Key features of this bill
address both short and long term
solutions to the difficulties so
many people are having paying
their essential coat the
essential commodities of energy
and also water.
It is interesting to me that
when the wolf is at the door as
it is now that we find some way
to address that but rarely do we
ask the question why is the will
to the door.
This bill not only addresses
that will but it also says.
What has happened talks
specifically about what has
happened or not happened that
could have avoided this the two
features this bill that could
have avoided this our energy
efficiency and also a low income
discount rate for which we have
been arguing at prosperity works
for probably fifteen years.
It is the there is not a reason
not to do this.
Of forgiveness nor is there a
reason not to do a low income
discount rate because it's
actually in favor not only of
the families but also of the
companies themselves they get
paid and the families get
released but the other issue is
really energy efficiency in the
last about eighteen months we
have provided energy efficiency
retrofits in over three hundred
homes where we found that most
of the people there are living
on ten thousand dollars or less
in a family of two to five.
The it's clear that the
difficulties of doing this are
not really creating stress but
also really impacting the health
and safety of at home we urge
your support to address both the
short and long term of
initiatives that are included in
this bill thank you.
Thank you for that and that ends
our public comment in in twenty
minutes we actually got through
the whole list so that's great.
Representative Ortez would you
like to add anything before we
get to the committee Mr chair
members of the committee will
with that we stand for questions
thank you.
Thank you Martinez okay members
of the committee.
Representative Strickler thank
you thank you Mr chairman thank
you Representative and
yeah I want to understand this
this little better
currently the PRC is put out an
order that know what's going to
be without power is that
correct.
Mr chair representative
Strickler are that is correct we
believe it is ending soon.
It will make you think that.
Mr Chairman.
In general.
Mr chair representative
Strickler I believe they have
said that but I wanted I want to
turn to Mr Bissonnette to answer
that.
Thank you Mr chair
representative Strickler that's
correct the PRC is put in an
order that has started a
transition period to ended the
moratorium they're different
periods for large utilities and
small utilities I believe the
period is about a hundred eighty
days
complete until the utilities
would be allowed to use the
disconnection procedures for
large utilities ninety days for
small utilities so we have
protection in place in in and
hopefully it'll get us through
this of this pandemic Mr
Chairman representative or
educational I serve on the tax
committee and we just recently
past a for two hundred million
dollar short term
you know relief program for
unemployed and for our our low
income folks and and also for
small businesses so
we are trying our best to get
through this this economic
shutdown or surrounding states
are open for business open for
business in New Mexico start
open for business or four major
counties.
or up and running and we hope
the remaining the remainder of
our state will be up and running
to the quicker we get the
businesses open the quicker
these people get back to work
the quicker they can pay their
bills and
there there were some comment to
others some Mr chairman and and
and the gentle lady.
I think we need to give
ourselves some time to heal this
year shut down it's been very
difficult on the only state in
Mexico with the the whole
country the whole world and
the Great Recession.
Eleven years ago one as bad as
this in my opinion our
unemployment rate is at a point.
Nine percent it's just it's just
rough and other quick we get
people back to work and I know
people are just chomping on the
bit.
to get back to work I know in my
community that's certainly the
case and and Mr chairman and and
Representative a.
I'm sure that's the case in your
area to an PTA's County
and and and people are you know
frustrated.
they they want to work and I
just have been able to no fault
of their own so there's a lot of
things were also doing on a low
income tax credit that helps pay
help so low income people to pay
their bills and it sounds like
there's going to be a
the.
The repayment program is gonna
be extended so I'm just
wondering if this is.
A bit premature since we're
starting to pull out.
Of this you know this government
shutdown and a again you know
for.
Very good reasons.
Of the the weather is warming up
and and I I think of schools are
opening up in in this sort of
thing so I understand I
understand that the goals and
objectives of this.
But I think we need to give our
economy a little time to heal
it is bad as it is and we're
saying some some improvements
for chairman gentlelady their
unemployment rate is starting to
drop a little bit.
is still high and just you know
we want to get back to four
point eight percent that's going
to be this gonna take this wall
so
Most so worried about to having
at this lower tier of of of
rates
no that's a real popular idea
Mr chairman and and gentle lady
and I think that's part of your
bill
and.
And I'm just wondering I mean I
guess I guess what that means is
that the other right holders
will kind of subsidize the the
the lower income folks and no
New Mexico Mr chairman gentle
lady does a real good job
in in easing the tax burden is
over low income folks they may
get cash back
with Y. thanks you know the
where tax structure is in the
federal government is a pump a
lot of money and unemployment
and continues to do so so
Again I understand I understand
the concept and I just I'm just
saying that were saying light in
the tunnel.
And of people are you know
people I should get back to work
and I think that's going to
happen sooner than later so
thank you Mr chairman and thank
you gentle lady at I think that
that account as of my comments.
Thank you Representative
Strickler Representative Scott.
Thank you.
Mr chair.
Representative two.
With this.
Legislation do you.
What average.
Retail price of residential
electricity is state.
Yes.
Mr chair Representative
Representative Scott I'd I don't
have that number but I imagine
that my aunt one of my experts
to.
Yes Mr chair representative I
thank you and I have a list
right here of of the average
prices high utility in the state
which range from nine cents per
kilowatt hour all the way up to
twenty four cents per kilowatt
hour.
Representative expert according
to the EIA.
State for each is just a
whisker.
Thirteen cents per KW.
Mr chair representative to
explore.
Do you have.
Would you have sent or
installation instructions.
Five years ago.
Both with respect.
The state of New Mexico.
National average.
If you don't I can answer.
Mr.
Mr Mr chair representative that
when you go ahead and answer
that question for us that be
helpful.
Mr Chairman representative.
I have rich.
Two thousand and eleven was ten
cents it remains very years.
Should only.
New Mexico.
With its.
Public policy.
Has raised electricity rates for
all consumers.
Thirty percent.
Mr chair.
Representative give.
Yes.
Would you.
Laughs.
Mr chair representative Scott
I'm not sure if that is
I really don't know how to
answer that but but I will say
that
this is really about this bill
is about lowering the utility
burden for for low income folks
who are experiencing hardship on
who have higher rates of
unemployment right now who are
keen you know upwards of you
twenty percent of the very
little money that they bring in
toward utilities
you know what we we are really
trying to help folks get back on
their feet and to you know keep
them on their feet in the future
I'm sorry I can't answer that
that was chairman
representative this is exactly
this exactly my line of
questioning because.
Of the.
Because of our rates being
higher than the national average
that translates into real
dollars how are consumers.
In two thousand twenty those
real dollars we're seventeen
million.
That's the money that our
consumers were paying above.
Consumers.
No leverage now.
My concern is.
Our public policy is tracking
these rates up on your consumers
to the point where.
Owners can no longer afford to
pay their bills at which point.
With this legislation right now
want to socialize utility bill.
Which I believe is the affect
the long term thank.
This legislation that concerns
which you address.
Mr chair representative Scott we
are we're not changing the range
in this with this legislation
the rates are are something that
PRC can can change we're just
allowing for the PRC to be able
to to look at that you Mr
Synacor
And and miss corn would you like
to.
Thank you Representative Ortez
that that's right Representative
Mr chair representative you're
correcting and identifier or
thank you for identifying the
fact that address the rates are
a substantial burden and
especially on for New Mexicans
we have higher levels of energy
burdens in states around us this
bill is intended to address that
by providing relief it does not
require low income discount
rates it's simply authorizes low
income discount rates as the
public utility act already
authorizes separate rates for
economic development.
Mr Chairman representative
experts we're basically making.
Attempting to make your energy
usage for lowincome.
For the low income customers.
Sri is that.
Substantially correct.
Mr chair representative god at I
think that's not correct this
will authorize again it would
only authorize low income
discount rates it would allow
for partial forgiveness for
those people who are in arrears
only because of COVID who
qualifies low income or or have
economic hardship it would allow
them to enter a partial for
readers forgiveness program they
would only get arrears
forgiveness unless there's an
extraordinary circumstance that
matches every payment that they
make a payment plan lowincome
discounted rates don't give away
a treaty for free they simply
provide a discount as twenty
states other states authorized.
Mr Chairman representative Mr
past.
Going forward.
What would.
What percentage of full retail
rates would.
Low income folks be obligated to
pay.
Mr chair representative Scott
this bill does not mandate low
income discount rates it's it
requires it authorizes it takes
away a prohibition on disco low
income discount rates the PRC
would continue to play the role
assigned to it under the public
utility act with the PRC would
approve just and reasonable
rates.
Mr Chairman representative Mr
Best Actor.
With this authorization.
Certainly people could
represent.
The ability to pay their bills
and have your utility rates
substantially reduced with the.
Not be correct.
Mr chair representative Scott
this again this bill authorizes
low income discount rates but
there is a rate setting process
that all utilities that go
through the process is different
for investor owned utilities in
rural cooperatives this bill
does not there's a special
utility appears forgiveness
program that only applies to
readers for comment
after outside of that program
everything stays the same as it
is so low income customer only
has the same rights that they
have outside of COVID readers
out in the PRC rate making
process
in other entities can intervene
in that process and argue for
what it just and reasonable rate
it is and this bill also does
require utilities to develop a
report identifying whether they
rates are affordable but does
not mandate lowincome discount
rates doesn't say with those low
income just coverage would be if
utilities propose those rates
for the PRC approve such rates
that's left to the to the
utility ratemaking process that
already exists in statute.
Mr Chairman.
Representative.
So it would be accurate to
describe this as an able and
legislation for socialized
utility rates.
Mr chair representative Scott
this legislation does authorize
low income discount rates does
not mandate that.
Mr Chairman representative and
expert.
That is contrary to the current
system of right losses if you
will we're all residential
customers pay the same rate all
industrial customers I just like
to.
All in certain classes of
customers
right would that be accurate.
Mr chair representative Scott
that would not be completely
accurate because under the
current system utilities may
offer discounted rates to
attract industrial customers
under the Economic Development
portion they may also offer
discounted rates to retain
industrial customers to retain
loan so they're already already
please in the existing system
it's certain types of customers
get discounted rates thank you
and there are twenty states the
couple of courts who have
weighed in and said that it's
acceptable under utility
ratemaking principles to
identify a different class of
customers residential customer
base in New Mexico.
Thank you for that Sir.
Mr Chairman representative
missed past.
Now let me shift over to the
mechanics if you will of how
this might be implemented would
it be the responsibility of.
The utility.
Or.
What.
To make determinations with
respect to customer New Mexico.
Mr chair representative Scott
the bill is silent on that when
it comes to low income discount
rate so if you're asking about
the low end to come discount
rates the bill doesn't win and
that began to disadvantaged
lowincome discount rates it's
simply authorize them everything
else is according to the status
quo to the public utility act.
If your question is with regards
to utility rears program.
We talked with the.
Human Services Department the
utilities already
incorporate the low income home
energy assistance program which
is the federal energy assistance
program and we use that which is
a hundred fifty percent of
federal poverty level income
determination we understand from
HSD that utilities already
interface with their system to
identify customers who qualify
for that.
We in that for the rears program
we've expanded that after
talking with HSD so that people
can qualify based on other
public assistance programs that
they get again based on HSD is
recommendation they've pointed
out that there is a precedent
for customers self certifying
their income we allow customers
who would be below two and fifty
percent of poverty to do that
through utilities we took this
approach so that we can make
sure that those people who are
suffering economic hardship
under this extraordinary crisis
to be able to take advantage of
the arrears forgiveness program
it only applies the restrictive
this program.
so thank you.
Mr Chairman representative Mr.
Yes.
When will the crisis.
The over.
Mr chair representative Scott of
of course we don't know and what
this program does is it starts
providing limited relief
immediately and so it seems to
work within the existing PRC
process it doesn't require the
PRC change what it's already
done it simply creates
safeguards increased gives
additional tools utilities so
that there is a minimum amount
of time that customers who have
arrears incurred during the
COVID you can get a payment plan
so particularly here if you have
a years worth of arrears to get
two years to pay it back it it
provides more certainty to to
tell you that they'll recover
their
the cost of this program and it
it to the fullest extent
possible we'll use federal funds
including two hundred million
dollars that is available just
the state of New Mexico to pay
for a combination of rental and
utility arrears but that's only
available to renters were
experiencing hardship under
federal.
Mr Chairman representative.
Mr Pasternak we.
Apparently still believe the
COVID crisis is ongoing so those
careers are still.
Cuculidae god will be until.
Someone decides to crisis is
over.
Is that not correct.
Mr chairman Mr Scott that's not
correct because the PRC has
already started to phase down
the moratorium that was a action
of the PRC under its authority
it's not it is has been tacked
to a governor Lujan Grisham's
emergency public health
emergency but it is now winding
down and so this bill aims to
address the disconnection cliff
that would be created one
session session period ends.
Mr Chairman representative Mr
pressed Act yes.
Just one last question.
Would be.
With a utility rates for lower
income people.
Perhaps substantially reduced
or.
Perhaps even some cases reduced
to zero how.
Would affect the.
Conservation efforts.
With respect to consumption.
Mr chair representative Scott
this bill is designed to work
hand in hand energy to community
energy efficiency development
bloc Act portion of this bill
into directly address your
points to use as much as
possible leverage federal
dollars for every dollar
invested in energy efficiency
means that the Energy burden is
lessened for ever going forward
center question of giving a
subsidy we think that energy
efficiency is the most important
strategy and that's why it's a
significant portion of this bill
energy efficiency can work
together with lowincome discount
rates to ensure that utility
bills are.
Are affordable for all going to
New Mexico.
Mr Chairman representative and
Mr pressed Act you would agree
with me.
Transaction hard utility bills
the incentives.
concerns.
Electricity usage would be
diminished.
Mr chair representative Scott
it's it's true that there would
be less the of this the pricing
will be slightly diminished but
I'll point out that one of the
reasons that low income New
Mexicans have such high bills is
that because of rates it's
because they live in housing
that is very inefficient and
therefore they have to spend a
lot more energy to keep that
housing and find all the other
services.
Yes Mr Chairman representative
and Mr past.
They spent seventeen million
dollars last year more than they
should have.
Because of right so long thank
you Mr chairman thank you
Representative and Mister
president thorough answers are
you.
Thank you Scott Representative
Dixon.
Good afternoon thank you
Mr chair and representative or
yes
I want to start by saying that I
think I received more emails in
support of this bill than many
of the other bills that we have
been voting on and discussing
and so I wanted to our knowledge
the building also in my outrage
to constituents I've heard from
a lot of people who are
struggling to make payments
To their utilities and so Mr
chair and representative Ortez I
do want to highlight that I
really appreciate and I'm proud
of the work that PNM for
instance has been doing here in
my district with regard to
through their good neighbor fund
to help some of my constituents
and so I do know that this is a
very it's an important issue and
when that I I think we should
all take very seriously I do
have a question about
If you could clarify for me how
this bill affects.
energy utilities as compared to
municipal water utilities I
would appreciate that because I
do believe that folks are
struggling with with both of
those financial burdens thank
you thank you Mr chair
representative Dixon I'll start
and then I'll on.
Mr present and and miss corn to
to add in of this bill is really
focused on public utilities that
are regulated by the PRC that's
that's that's really that's the
answer there you know I think we
wish it could have been bigger
and added in municipal utilities
mutual water utilities are
regulated by NMED and NMED but I
think it just this is what we
had to focus on right now.
Mr sinak or Mr.
Mr chair Representative Dixon
it's I don't have much to add
except that we were really of
there's different authorities
that regulate different those
different to different types of
utilities and municipal and.
Utilities that operate by
municipalities and counties are
exempted from PRC regulations.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative or yes
one of the things that I really
appreciate about this process is
hearing the
sort of amendments and
considerations that you have
been able to incorporate
throughout this process and I do
know that you've been working on
this bill for a long time and
trying to work with all of the
various stakeholders and so I
really want to commend you for
that and let you know that I
hope that that continues so that
you know when this comes to the
floor and potentially makes its
way further it can be the best
bills
to help everyone so with that
thank you very much.
Thank you for that.
Further debate from the
committee.
What's the what's the will of
the committee.
impacts of that commitment
committee substitute I move it
to pass of that house bill two
of the state and the house of
the substitute you do not passed
house bill two of.
Probably do not pass the house
consumer Public Affairs
Committee substitute for House
Bill to a six and a do pass of
the House Energy Environment
natural resources committee
substitute for House Bill to a
six thank you motion
representation indeed that was
my motion thank you Mr chair
there's a second okay.
We can take a look please.
Representative Chandler.
Representative Chandler.
Representative Dixon.
Yes thank you Representative
Ferrary.
Yes.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Ortez yes.
Representative Sarinana yes.
Representative Scott.
Thank you Representative
Strickler now.
Representative Townsend.
Representative Chandler.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Townsend.
vice chair Stansbury yes.
And chairman McQueen.
Yes.
And that is a do pass with a
vote of sixty two.
Thank you
You have to pass thank you to
our experts would appreciate
that.
Thank you to the the committee
and especially the staff.
Who came in on a Sunday to work
on the important work of the
people of New Mexico and thank
you to all the members of the
public who stuck with us
it is all after two o'clock
hopefully everyone can enjoy
some of the rest of their day.
Returned.
Thank you everybody.
