Training programs are to the
public works apprentice and
training fund for all public
works construction projects
house bill twenty one does a
couple of important things that
stops some technical language in
the public works apprentice and
training act popularly known as
P. what.
And it requires contributions to
apprentice and training
programs.
All.
Public works.
Although not I'm.
Okay there we go.
Okay are we okay can I just
continue yes ma'am I'm I think
what is that at a time when
we're really striving to expand
job opportunities across the
state in all industries and
really create ladders career
ladders for our young people of
people that are leaving the
military or are people changing
jobs and when there's a shortage
of highway journeyman's
operating engineers laborers
ironworkers.
And carpenters this bill
promotes the expansion of
apprenticeship programs
I think it's a win win for
everybody but most of all I
think it's a win for New
Mexicans seeking to identify and
build a career ladder I'm just
going to make a couple of points
and then I have expert witness
Brian Condit and I believe
secretary bill mccamley pro
workforce solutions is also here
to answer technical questions.
This would benefit of potential
contractors because if you if
you have a registered apprentice
program that you're dealing with
or you
you actually end up not paying a
contribution you get money back
I believe last year twenty
twenty of funding out of over a
million dollars was returned to
the participants also the State
partnership council which
oversees the apprenticeship
programs.
About as it's composed of
diverse representatives from
industries includes public keep
people
include that government entities
for example the city of
Farmington operates for
apprenticeship programs others
labor organizations and the
private industry have
representatives on the actual
council there's currently forty
one registered apprenticeship
programs
Among these groups so with that
I'm gonna turn it over to my
expert witness Brian Condit.
My job was.
Brian you are muted.
Are there yes there can you hear
me all Erica.
Good thank you thank you that
thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee all my name is
Brian Condit I'm executive
director of the New Mexico
building trades council we
strongly support house bill
twenty one as we did in two
thousand nineteen our and really
believe that it lines up with
the policy directives of
governor Michelle on Grisham on
increasing oppression are pretty
job opportunities in New Mexico
it also aligns
type a construction with tribes
B. C. NH of which currently do
contribute to the public works
department ship and training all
assisted act so we we hopefully
will be able to answer any
questions or concerns you have
regarding this item all stand
for any questions the the thank
you Representative care.
And with secretary McKinley want
to add anything to our
presentation before we go to
questions.
You Mr chair representative I'm
not here to endorse the bill but
I am here to answer technical
questions as our department is
in charge of the apprenticeship
of services for the state I will
say that the governor in general
strongly supports apprenticeship
programs we've been working very
hard the last couple years to
move forward and increase the
amount of apprentices we had in
the state of both within the
construction trades in in other
types of nontraditional areas of
representation thank you very
much and I look for to answer
any specific questions on my
hand.
And before we go to questions I
just want to add Mr chairman and
part
I section one part a of the bill
you see the cleanup language.
Public works is the training
that shall be administered by
the public works bureau it used
to be that labor and industrial
vision of the labor department
that has changed to the labor
relations division of the
workforce solutions departments
about system the cleanup
language that's part of this
bill and with that Mr chairman
and members of the committee are
open for your questions.
Thank you representative I have
a.
The one VRA stand that I have is
a Representative Black.
Questions.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you Representative for
bringing this spell I just have
a couple of questions let's see.
So this is is not creating a new
division is that correct Mr
chairman.
That is that is correct Mr chair
representative black it is not
creating a new division there's
just where it's located and
slightly changed.
Okay thank thank you for that
and.
Mr chair representative.
Is there anything what would
happen if we did not act this
legislation.
Mr chairman and and
Representative Black.
It would just mean that the
option and the expectation for
partnerships in the category a
would not take place.
And that this statute language
would not be changed.
Thank you for that Mr chair
representative you said section
a is that correct.
Yes section it just shows the
cleanup language it's cleanup
language it's not establishing
anything new.
Okay thank you for that I think
I got half I think that and.
Mr.
So does it all take away
a choice for them I mean does
this make them required to
contribute.
Is is an additional requirement
I guess would be my question Mr
chair representative.
Chair representative it and my I
invite my expert witness to also
add to this right now if you
have your own apprenticeship
program you don't have to
continue you will.
Sure program.
Mr chairman Mr Representative
may I may answer that question
for Representative blacks okay.
So so Representative Black I Mr
Representative like the way it
works is on every public works
project currently in the state
with the exception of highways a
jury the required to have an
apprenticeship program or you
required to contribute funds
into this pot of money which is
then used to have other folks
run apprenticeships as of now
currently there is an exemption
to the US for highway
contractors and if this bill was
passed than that exams would no
longer insist and that the
highway folks would have to
contribute just like the rest of
the public works do you folks do
as of now that's just the
technical answer and that answer
question yes thank you thank you
Mr Kelly
Secretary I would
not you said they're they're
basically is an exemption Mr
secretary will what are the
remix an exemption for them I I
guess I do I background you give
me some Mr president I'm not
aware of that situation I don't
know why the question was put
into place.
Thank you for that thank you for
that okay I'm Mr chair
representative I guess that's
all I have thank you so much.
I have no
way of that Mr Representative us
as just so you handle up.
Do you have questions yes are
you a couple questions and I
heard a the gentleman excuse me
yes Sir Mr chair and
representative
I heard Joe Mannix was trying to
pressure program.
How they
How it works and how they could
how the actual construction
company or whatever the the
public works.
Object how they contribute to I
guess they can do it on their
own the apprenticeship program
on their own or they contribute
to a school can I can that be
clarified a little better for
me.
Sure presented would you like to
answer for me to answer that
question is that.
Eight yes Sir I'm sorry Sir
thank you Mr Representative so
the way this works and I'm sure
Mr Khan that's going to correct
me if I get a technical thing
wrong because he's been doing
this a lot longer but the way
this works is that if you get a
contract to work on a public
works project so you're building
a school you are doing a water
construction project whatever
you're either required either
have your own apprenticeship
system where someone comes in
and and as we you're going to
have your own registered
apprenticeship system that's
really important distinction to
make because to become a
registered apprenticeship
program you have to go throw the
state apprenticeship council get
vetted and come up with a system
of tears by which people who get
in can become premises and then
advance to different levels of
expertise and get paid more and
and that's really what the magic
of the apprenticeship system is
is you can get in and learn a
trade make good money and not go
into debt while doing so that's
one of the reasons the governor
promotes apprenticeships so
thoroughly as a concept and what
we're trying to expand that
to different areas not just
construction trades but for this
situation at any company we the
have to have their own system or
they would agree to punch money
into a.
Basically another program that
would do apprenticeships for
them so the union examples of
that would be the carpenters
electricians sheet metal workers
etcetera and so on on the line
you side you have your associate
general contractors in your
associated building contractors
ABC introducing the other big
one is from the Nanyang side is
the there's some regional
attrition programs and so all of
those kind of work for what
we're talking about Mr
Representative answer question
is to get him by the way Mr
mccamley thank you this morning
for your help I'll tell you this
I'm really a appreciate you Mr
chairman he help me this morning
another issue up with some
layoffs is wonderful so.
Does this in any way
Cost more or or create more of a
cost when building highways.
Second affected anyway Mr
McCormick said.
Mr Representative I don't have
those kind of numbers right now
in front of me in terms of the
cost for highways that would be
a probably a better question for
the secretary of transportation.
All Mr chairman and members the
committee is representative Ross
just I can I can give you a kind
of a thumbnail of what it looks
like if you look at the current
two hundred fifty million
dollars appropriation
our industry standard says
probably twenty percent of that
is directly across so if you
take a median of the wages
required to be paid on public
works minimum wage act all and
and and divided into the twenty
percent you're probably looking
at less than half a percent
increase now in the the offset
to that is under the public
works minimum wage act you're
required to either or for
instance used a journeyman
ironworker or not printed start
work so as the graduated wage
rates and bridge budget for not
permission are substantially
lower to begin with that
judgment that more than offset
by utilizing operatives is an
act of a crew mix
actually that the the other side
of that is is creating our our
pipeline to the labor shortage
that all of the contract
organizations will acknowledge
that we're facing right now so
again I'll page for the bill by
saying I graduated the
electrical apprenticeship
program in nineteen seventy
eight we have electricity back
then
We we've we've got about
eighteen hundred in the state we
should probably be and hopefully
will be in the next few years
with the cooperation of the
we've had with industry and the
administration workforce
solutions secretary mccamly
hopefully we can be up around
twenty five hundred or three
thousand work is minimally or we
should say so I don't really
think there you'll you'll hear
from some that the sixty cents
per hour requirement to either
be invested into apprenticeship
program or paid into the public
works apprenticeship training
fund actually cost money it
actually pays it pays our
infrastructure back all.
Many times over.
Thank you Sir Mr Condit right
yes Sir thank you Mr thank you
Mr Connor thank you so much for
answering that I just didn't
know how if that was going to
cause us to you know increase
the I know you know our highways
is it the infrastructure very
important to me and I'm sure
many of the.
People New Mexico legislators
and I just didn't want to affect
that in that I didn't know how
it would how it would affect
what the and so is that is that
figure that you're talking about
my understanding maybe I got I
just would want some
clarification is that public
works personnel do they.
Given this information to the
director.
Workforce solutions Mr Clarke
mccamley do they share that
information.
I'm sorry.
Do they do they share that
information so that so that
she can figure out.
I guess cost control or do you
have any affect on a cost
control that resent a set thing.
Mr represented all that
information is public knowledge
in terms of our current programs
and so it's all public
information we actually have a
published wage rates for every
single
public bargaining unit in the
state of New Mexico.
And those are hard upon and they
were actually just published a
couple of weeks ago for for the
the current year.
Mr chair Mister McKinney thank
you I am learning so I'm just
asking questions I just didn't
know if it was going to if it
was if that meant that it was
going to.
Is it altered every year is
changed every year to say does
it yes
inflation growth on that how how
is that I mean can that be
inflated so Mr Representative
the way it works is that every
year the organizations will
submit their proposals and then
we go through actually a whole
public forum where we hear from
everybody involved in the
situations and then we actually
use that to come up with a a new
series of guidelines and that's
done through public comment
every year through our
department yeah.
You Mr chairman Mr McLean thank
you so much so I just yeah that
was pretty much it I the other
questions I think you answered
it by them either having it on
their own or or doing it through
the suppression program as far
as that the contractors it is a
I think that answers my my where
it was if they invest in in in
an apprenticeship in it before
on for a.
An employee and then.
They leave to another you know
to the is there some sort of
mechanism in investing in this
approach a program for contract
themselves to retain that
employee and I'm not floating
around at it but but I think
you're pretty well as are that
for me earlier on how how the
program sort of works so I I'm
just going through the reading
this thing and I was just I had
a few questions and you guys
have answered everything thank
you Mr mccamley and Mr chairman.
Mr chair and representative
tosses thank you for really us
that really important question
about the cost I really
appreciate your concern about
that thank you thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you I don't have anybody
else for funding coming comment
but my
vice chair reminded me that I
have some housekeeping to do I
went ahead and started the
review without doing roll call.
The that even calling me to
meeting to order I mean the
shape often home Reno so maybe
I'm just too relaxed.
Go over for you.
To do that Mr secretary at maybe
you can do the the formalities
and then I'll do the higher
order as that sounds like to me
for so.
The.
I was always told everybody I
did sixteen years of judging.
And the I. number one excuse
going gavel in sixteen years and
the internecine in New.
What was going on just by
looking at the.
And then you want to bring the
are you meant to and then go to
a close so with that in mind
madam secretary when you call
the rule.
Yes Representative bash.
Representative block.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Rubio.
Here.
Representative Stapleton.
Representative.
President a key.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Mr chair and meal.
Okay we can go to public comment
out of the.
Is there anybody that the wishes
to comment on this there is on
the list.
I'm going to and you Giuliana
coop.
Thank you.
Mr chair I'm alive I have no
comment on this bill logo's
yeah.
Well as it down now yes thank
you sorry about that.
R. Carter Bundy.
Mr chairman of the committee
Carter Bundy with actually we
stand in full support of this
bill thank you.
Who's next.
Courtney.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name's Courtney
Eichorst I'm the business
manager for you a local for
twelve plumbers and pipefitters
in the great state of New Mexico
and I'm the building trades
president
thank you Representative Gary
for bringing this bill forward
again.
And thank you secretary mccamley
thank you Brian for taking care
of us on this matter.
Does this is something it's
extremely important for New
Mexico and we continue to grow
our pressure programs thanks to
the help of the state I'm
currently local for twelve has
fifteen brand new college
graduates going to a welding
program at our union hall which
is free to them they're not
paying a penny to learn how to
be successful welders when
they're done with this welding
program they'll be making German
wages in the field welding.
For these projects coming to the
state that we don't have enough
trained welders for so this is
extremely important for all of
us and we appreciate your
continued efforts to grow our
partnership funds integrate our
partnership programs and we
stand strong support of this
bill thank you.
Tomas Trujillo.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and members my name is to muster
Human W. W. six eleven I just
want to say that we stand in
full support of this bill and
thank you.
Representative shirts.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee John
live shoots with the our New
Mexico federation of labor
AFL-CIO on behalf of our all of
the labor affiliates that fall
within the AFL-CIO we stand in
strong support of this bill.
This
is.
The chairman members services
changer and again with the New
Mexico utility contractors
association.
although we do support
partnership programs that is not
the reason why we stand against
this bill it's because some
public works contractors do not
have access to apprenticeship
programs money's money sent to
support partnership programs
that we have no access to
increase the amount of funds
that these contractors can spend
on in house and other training
for their employees the
currently exempted trades that
do not have specific
apprenticeship programs are
still very highly trained in
their field and insight and I
and in safety and are held to
the same safety and training
standards of other tribes that
do have specific apprenticeship
programs.
Forcing traits to contribute to
a fund that they cannot benefit
from a strong allow the exempted
trade state.
There are workforce and as
secretary mccamley pointed out
that sixty cents an hour for a
comp for a contractor with about
two hundred employees that work
forty hours a week that's four
hundred sixteen thousand hours a
year time sixty cents an hour is
two hundred forty nine thousand
six hundred dollars setting to
training.
No act.
So I I.
On this bill thank you.
M. Garcia.
One or twelve no I'm here the
last.
Hello.
Garcia and he's on a needed now.
Yes ready to go Marcela is not
needed ma'am
Can you hear me now yes.
Okay thank you I agree with the
judges and first of all I would
like to tell you that the spirit
of the.
Of the bill we love the bill we
just would like to New
Hampshire.
I represent ACM associated
contractors of New Mexico and in
conjunction with them in India
T. we.
Continue to offer industry
specific training certification
programs that meet all the
federal highway standards and
requirements and have done that
since nineteen ninety three our
programs address industry
specific training needs that are
not currently found in the
apprentice training program
offers elsewhere like traffic
control trenching showing fall
protection mineshaft safety
health administration materials
testing and certification well
we recognize the tremendous
value of the apprenticeship
programs provided provide the
specific traits they are
designed for contractors
performing work for and then D.
O. T. and other transportation
related construction in these
are not in a position to gain
substantially from these works
while programs their primary
needs for more relative to
industry specific programs
required by if that if H. W. A.
N. M. D. O. T. with that we are
just requesting that we continue
with the exemption that we had
the same as we had in House Bill
five fifty from two years ago
Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you for your
time.
Local for twelve.
Mr chair then steamed
Representative is my name's
right Trujillo on the training
director from your local for
trial plumbers pipefitters H.
back technicians and welders we
directly benefit from the P.
what contributions my program it
my budget to to to train
approximately two hundred fifty
apprentices is about one point
five million dollars a year the
contributions that we get from
P. what helps to go and and
expand our training base and
we're also heavily involved in
trying to get the trades into
high schools because Mister
Condit has already madam we got
a diminishing workforce that we
got to replenish in contributing
to the friendship programs in
their and their development is
very very crucial
thank you very much Mr chairman
representatives.
We have eyes.
Hello chairman and members of
the committee my name is Is is
empty I am the Representative
and this for the sheet metal
workers local forty nine.
I am a strong supporter of this
bill because it is unethical for
a contractor to accept public
funding dollars on public works
projects in the highway industry
without having to pay into the
public works apprenticeship
training fund this additional
monies from highway contractors
will greatly benefit New
Mexicans looking to join approve
New Mexico state apprenticeship
program.
These apprenticeship programs
approval rating in America is an
all time high and approving this
measure would provide more
opportunities for your
constituents these programs take
everyday New Mexicans with a
high school or GED diploma and
give them an opportunity to
become part of the middle class
America these programs
Representative provide free
tuition and an opportunity to
earn wages and attend an
apprenticeship program hence the
earn while you learn and I would
also encourage highway
contractors to open
appropriation programs.
So that we can.
Open up training more to your to
your workforce.
Thank you.
I don't see any more hands Mr
chairman.
The others there are still a
few.
This I see the Trujillo lawn
begins remarked to this is
usually he'll.
This is Rudy Martinez.
Yes.
Mr chairman.
Right.
We can hear you.
Mr chair and Representative
Garrett thank you for bringing
this bill for
I did for love for it when it
came up last time.
I did serve electrical
apprenticeship member of IBEW
six eleven I stand in.
Strong support of this bill I am
also the current.
The chairman of the.
Committee for veterans advocacy.
I feel this these opportunities
for apprenticeships will
certainly help those military
individuals that are leaving our
country service.
And I have great opportunities
for employment so thank you Mr
chairman.
Mr chairman members of the
committee.
Can you hear me.
We can hear you.
Okay thank you for your time we
are both supported house bill
twenty one my name is Bobby gets
on the director of the New
Mexico joint apprenticeship
training committee for the
electrical industry the IBEW six
eleven
what is really benefited us and
it can only help us to expand
you know at times we get snow
right now we're in a time where
we can't get enough workers you
know currently expanding our
building to accommodate I just
think the P. what what helps all
trades and also killed all
skilled workers across the state
so I I think it's a great
benefit for everybody thank you.
And we have P. Trujillo.
Thank you chairman members of
the committee feature here IBEW
local six eleven business
manager all we're strongly in
support of this bill is New
Mexico has plenty of opportunity
for a workforce out there that
some trained in we're starting
for all people to get into a
pressure programs and get a
livelihood to benefit themselves
and their family and we're
strongly in support of this bill
for the future
Craft workers in New Mexico and
the future of New Mexico trained
workforce in the future thank
you very much.
James hello one.
Ma'am.
Yes we can hear you good
afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee my name
is James B. hill on the train
director for New Mexico labor's
training.
We with the labors local sixteen
we stand by this bill
contrary to what another
gentleman said earlier we do
train traffic control we do
train entrenching we do training
money seeking help so there
really shouldn't be an excuse as
to why somebody should have an
apprentice or have an
apprenticeship program this P.
what money benefits us quite a
bit every year and like I said I
stand by this bill and hopefully
everyone else does too thank
you.
We have Joey Atencio.
Good afternoon chairman and
board members.
The members my name is Joe
Atencio I'm the business manager
for laborers International Union
of North America local sixteen
and as my training director said
we directly benefit from this
budget we have several
contractors that are highway
contractors and our members that
are trained through our
partnership program and our
training.
we don't only do apprentices but
we also do re certification of
the journey then to make sure
that they're up to date on all
their certifications so we
Spanish strong support of this
bill thanks Sir have a good day.
We have Daniel Silva.
We can hear you okay thank you
very much and Mr chairman and
committee and committee members
thank you for your service we
appreciate what do you do
we up.
Please sure that we have I
represents to the contractors
subcontractors small New Mexico
contractors are and and and that
employee people here in New
Mexico and we we are a hundred
percent for training friendship
so matter of fact we we hire
some carpenters if we needed
more we hires.
Any kind of a of those trained
employee but that's done through
the the contractors and with all
due respect and everything but
are.
Great players are harbingers of
plumbers.
Can't build a highway kind of
that situation I'm not.
Speaking negative but we have
specific training needs that we
need and that is why for all
these years I research as much
as I could and it's we went back
forty fifty years the highway
construction industry has been
exempt and like I say we have
our own training programs that
we partner with the department
of transportation deal T. and we
follow the requirements from the
Federal Highway Administration
that they require for for OSHA
or whatever that is but we do
hire union trained
workers if we need to for that
but for asphalt and.
Transient but say we don't we
don't ask if their union or not
we just hire those employees
that is example that project
there on Bridge Street and cores
which a Representative capital
is a familiar we don't know if
there are unions are not or non
union we don't care we just want
to hire and train people to put
people to work it's very
difficult now to train even
train hire and to train because
of the pandemic you can even
have classroom training so we're
gonna run out of workers and I
think that's going to affect and
I think our goal everybody's
goal should be to.
To hire people so that they can
continue to work and I do wanna
take the opportunity though Mr
chairman Jim thank
Representative stash and also
the secretary of workforce
solutions set up help is allowed
to get into the corrections
department this past year we we
went in there and we did one we
could training and certification
of the of the the inmates that
would be coming out this next
year so that they would be
certified in specific.
Jobs and that we could hire so
we hope to continue that but I
want to I want to really thank
workforce solutions secretary
for a helping us with that and
also the corrections secretary
and with that Mr chairman that's
all I have and thank you for
allowing me to make these
comments.
We have Bobby Baca.
Good afternoon good afternoon
good afternoon chairman al cone
members of the committee.
My name is Bobby Baca I sit on
the New Mexico GTC.
The ship training committee.
I've been sitting on that
committee for a few years now
and
I've been fortunate to this you
know to know exactly where this
imported money comes from and
how it helps our apprenticeship
programme.
Now not only does it help our
appreciate program that helps
all apprenticeship programs
state registered pension
programs with their union or
not.
So also you know we've been
seeing a lot of
Highly skilled very qualified
candidates coming into on the
interviewing for our
apprenticeship programme.
Now a lot of these people coming
in are former military members.
So the people from the
community.
So as you heard the green is you
still being in an apprenticeship
program you still we would.
These the way.
To round trip money that
funding.
Mr Chavis.
I still got the floor.
My.
If
Bobby Baca I don't know who's.
Thank you that's.
Hold on let's ask anybody that
is not speaking to mute that
this time round I think life
would be easier thank you.
Yes Sir Mr chair all Cohn thank
you for that
Also like I was saying you know
we've we've been.
Having interviews every single
week you know we we rely on
these findings to continue to
train the next generation of
skilled labor skilled workers
collect coworker like somebody
had mentioned there in the past
and be good to see you know more
apprenticeship program start up
for the hi we constructors also
you know even during the
pandemic we thought we have
found a way to continue.
We have found we to continue to
run our friendship program you
know it's it's put lots of us
through very difficult task but
I think the whole entire world
going through that right now so
we're finding a way we're making
it through it we're trying to
train more more people are
friendship programs still
driving through this pandemic
and we want to continue to do so
so thank you.
Representative all come members
of the committee thank you so
much have a good day.
They're all.
Yes I'm here.
Good afternoon the
Representative cone and members
of the committee my name is
Gerald yeah well the president
for a when your local sixteen
that's a labor union and the and
we're strong support of this
bill for all the reasons
previously stated but I'd like
to add that the the employers
who face difficult challenges
but skills shortages of skill
gaps and that limits the biz
businesses ability to grow.
And these programs provide a
positive path for the
apprentices to not only have a
job but to actually have a
career thank you.
What rules.
We have Matthew waters your
needed.
Thank you my name is Max what is
I'm Representative with coverage
in here in New Mexico Mr chair
and members the committee we
sent support of of this bill for
opportunities for training a
partnership in any highway and
look forward to building many
bridges going forward thank you.
Representative tell us.
About the question.
Hold on madam secretary the
we're done with the public
comment.
Am I correct.
Since.
The case we're coming back to
the committee again and
Representative dass normally.
we allow for a.
No members to ask their
questions before we go to public
what do you want to go for
second round
Sure well yes Sir and and thank
you.
Thank you chairman of going for
a allow me to do that I and all
that I'm new to this but I just
wanted to hear once perspective
factors before I can ask.
I never heard
the answer of why hi was were
exempt in the first place is
there I never heard that answer
can that be answered for me why
there were exempt in the
originally that I'm sure there
was a reason.
There is.
Chair and representative crosses
I look for that answer myself
some people attribute it to pass
political issues some people
attributed to the fact that the
federal highway training program
was involved there's a number of
reasons I was given.
There's already a federal.
Right in the requirement is that
what you're saying.
That the federal highway Mr
chair and representative the
folder I'm looking more into
this right now but.
Certainly you interviewed
Representative.
I'm sorry Mr chairman sorry Mr
president attempt.
Federal highway eight
Administration dictates certain
training because they fund
highways and because that
training money was provided by
them.
An explanation I received is
that some people in the
government felt that because
contractors were using that
training that it wasn't
necessary to establish a more
traditional apprenticeship
program.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr Mrs
Representative also Mister
chairman I've got a question so
does does that sixty cents
because I didn't realize is that
sixty cents.
Apply to every employee employed
on that job or just to.
For certain employees.
Mr chair representative can
either Mr Condit or secretary
mccamley answer that question.
Mr Representative since that Mr
Condit was the one that brought
that up I'll let him kind of
defined that that's okay.
Okay got it you should.
It's kind of a polite way I
guess so.
The the the.
Contribution is required for
every employee covered under the
provisions of the public works
minimum wage act which would
include all apprentices
journeymen and the and the Our
Lady by actually perform the
construction work on the site.
This representative Mr Condit so
what you're saying is every
every person on that site and
that particular site or every
employee employed by that
contractor.
It would exempt it would exempt
superintendents are engineers US
safety people are so all the
work School provided on the part
public works then wait Jack
gives the work scope solve what
all operating engineers laborers
carpenters iron workers
electrical workers do so all
when you fall into the
provisions the requirements of
the public works minimum wage
act all that it provides for the
wages and fringe benefits
threshold that you're required
to pay that would be
incorporated in two of the
employees that would be required
to be reported on and paid off.
Mr chair representative I can
just add on to that real quick
this is this is for project
right so for contractor gets
into private sector job acts or
whatever that is not following
the public works minimum wage
then they're not obviously
that's not enforceable.
I would admit sorry Mr chair the
agency representative.
Mr McKinley can you please
repeat that Mr chair
representative the public works
minimum wages for public
projects right so if I am a
contractor and I did a on
building acts because currently
highways are accepted so I build
a building acts playground why
water projects the then I have
been on that and then the
workers on that project are
required then to at the rate
according to what the public
works minimum wage act is if I
have a company because you have
specifically that cover every
employee it does not cover
employees would be working on
different projects.
That is not covered by the act.
Thanks fine and Mr chair
representative I I just want to
repeat that companies that have
apprenticeship programs get that
money the P. what funds back
it's it's you know there's a new
one here that you can't forget
thank you Mr chairman.
This is representative so just
so you know I mean I I'm one of
those that I I got my.
Mortuary degree through an
apprenticeship program and I and
I understand it was done through
through the employer themselves
and I myself employee of quite a
few a British ships in my
business so that I can get them
to
I promote them to get more
education and and and get
further training so I'm a big
believer in apprenticeship my my
my question is is that is that
sixty sets set across the board
no matter what.
person or is there because I
mean in in all reality I mean I
don't know enough about
everyone's costs and and and.
In doing projects but is this is
this figure set where every
single project it anybody that
wasn't exempt before has to pay
and and so my point is this I
mean some.
Industries have Senator margins
than others and and and and and
I mean it's just.
I'm thinking as if I'm betting
on a project and my margins only
two three percent net and I have
to pay this this sixty cents per
all you know all my employees
and I figure that number I'm
actually I'm going to have to
figure that in to my bed the
next time I bid it it's just I
mean that's the way it works I
mean it they won't be able to
absorb it
Midian on Leicester unnecessary
there they have a.
Hi your
profit margin than that but most
of them by the time some not
every industry is the same and
that's my question is that maybe
why that that that
the industry was exempt or is it
that they were already.
Really they already are required
to have an apprenticeship
program and that was my question
cannot be answered.
I'd like to take a shot at
Representative operating conduct
your
so the requirements of the
public works then wage act would
require all employers it doesn't
put one contractor at an
advantage or disadvantage or
anybody else so they're all
required to pay the published
way to bridge budget per
classification.
Plus the our contribution to
either a currently registered
apprenticeship program or into
this public works apprenticeship
assistance training fund of that
is then distributed amongst a
registered construction
apprenticeship programs in the
state so all as a consequence of
that you have increases and
decreases and a lot of other
components of any construction
projects whether it's highway
whether it's a school whether
it's anything else concrete goes
up and down still goes up and
down copper goes up and down so
at the end of the day this is a
policy that the state has
decided to all of incorporate
into as we said earlier type B.
C. N. H. and this bill merrily
R. A. corporations Taipei
construction into it.
Representative Mike my my last
question will be the.
When out of state companies come
in.
Are they exempt from this or do
they have to follow the same
deal because they they bid on a
state project.
Representative R. trusses and
chairman I don't know the answer
to that particular question Mr
Condit yes ma'am or miss
secretary do you know the answer
to that I'd be glad to answer
that one I in the in the in the
contractor whether it's our New
Mexico based contractor
traveling contract from out of
state is subject to the
provisions all of public works
minimum wage act the public
works operation assistance act
if it's a public works project
in New Mexico so all of them are
required to bid under the other
laws covering construction of
public works construction in the
state.
Mr president that's correct.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
this representative and members
and all the participants thank
you for all answered all my
questions.
Mr chair.
I'm still still needed would
would a here to ask Mr chairman.
Representative bash yes.
I would like to move it to pass.
I can't.
There was a proper most improper
do this on this.
Twenty one.
Thanks I in my nose.
I will ask the clerk to call the
roll.
Representative bash.
Yes.
Representative Black.
Representative RCS yes.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Rubio.
Yes.
Representative Stapleton.
Representative.
As of two thousand.
Yeah.
Please.
Thanks committee because he was.
Representative Roybal Caballero
yes.
Mr chairman.
Yes.
It was then go for it.
Back to the.
Representative and I'm as I
believe the best yes.
Representative they're not
there's always a yes vote yes
okay thank you.
So did we lose anybody.
Representative Black.
The trouble with their mute.
Now this.
I know the feeling.
I'm.
Thank you.
It's.
If.
You would please.
Representative was passed vote
yes yes you voted yes.
So.
Mr chairman we have eight in the
affirmative.
So it's two passed.
Two zero negative the.
Representative.
Good luck list waiting.
Thank you chair and thank you
everybody on the committee for
making my first our remote
presentation workable I
appreciate it thank you.
Thank you.
Okay we will go on to House Bill
thirty one.
This representative
representatives are not it will
make Indian.
She was in the.
In in the.
Appropriation yes he's done in
the money place.
I.
The scandal over if he doesn't I
will present the bill of this
somebody has any problem with
that but I will present the bill
for her.
So.
We have the.
House bill forty four.
Twenty one thirty one.
Forty four now
well well sure a promo to ladle
the.
Thank you Mr chair and a
I want to make sure that we also
on anti and the
Expert witnesses for House Bill
forty for my salad again I'm
ready thank you Mr chair and
thank you members of the
committee this is really a
really.
I think you know I think it's
exciting to be seen each other
this way it gives us a lot of
opportunity I understand there's
many challenges so on patients
on to everybody for helping us
work through whatever challenges
were faced with so I'm happy
today
on introduced house bill forty
four which is a bill relating to
unemployment compensation and
it's a particularly important at
this particular time Mr chairman
members of the committee what
this bill does is a Nancy
unemployment compensation law to
respond to the current public
health crisis that we're faced
with the and it provides
Make provisions to provide
temporarily the ability to
expand unemployment insurance
eligibility as many of you have
I'm sure hearing from your
constituents Mr chair members of
the committee around the state.
Our our workforce.
The experience.
A great deal on stress under
these conditions so this bill
provides the ability to ease
some of the eligibility
restrictions for unemployment
compensation through January of
twenty twenty three and this is
a particularly important and has
an emergency clause to it
because it is tied into the
current.
Additions that we're facing with
the pandemic at this time Mr
chair of like to have I'd like
to introduce the three expert
witnesses with us today with me
today and that they are Tracy
McDaniel.
Are we can letter in Carolyn
Massey.
And Suzanne recreation if they
can be allowed in and I would Mr
chair light for each one to make
to introduce themselves and to
speak briefly about the
importance of this bill and what
the bill proposes to do from
that perspective thank you Mr
chair.
Tracy.
Yes thank you thank you Mr
chairman and members of the
committee Mr Simic Danielle and
I'm a policy advocate with
southwest women's Law Center in
my role there I focus on
policies that support Economic
Security for New Mexico women
and their families.
New Mexico l'esprit became clear
that many workers are facing an
impossible choice between paying
their bills and attending to
their care giving
responsibilities and health care
needs this is particularly true
in our communities of color the
lower wage earners and for women
who tend to bear the burden of
care giving for both elders and
children.
H. B. forty four one offer a
temporary solution to support
those who are unable to
participate in the work force
you to comment related
conditions at the onset of the
pandemic the federal government
acted quickly to provide limited
paid sick and paid family leave
protections to individuals who
were diagnosed with COVID we're
quarantine due to exposure or
who needed to care
needed to care for children due
to comment related school
closures however these
provisions were limited in scope
and many New Mexicans were
unable to access leave through
these provisions it paid sick
and paid family leave provisions
expired at the end of twenty
twenty under house bill forty
four if new federal paid leave
provisions are implemented in
the coming months individuals
accessing those prop those
programs would be ineligible to
receive simultaneous support
through this you why expansion.
Following the passage of the
families first virus relief act
the US department of labor
issued guidance to states that
encourage them to consider
temporarily modifying
unemployment insurance the cost
provisions to comply with social
distancing recommendations
including the need to the report
due to reasonable risk of
exposure or to care for a family
member who is affected by the
virus to date seven states have
enacted such provisions as part
of their COVID really action and
so that's why we're here today
we would like to bring these
state support Mexicans who are
unable to participate in the
work force due to health or care
giving needs related
specifically to COVID nineteen.
Thank you for the opportunity to
join you today and I look
forward to taking any questions
you might have.
Thank you and next can we have
to Aleem Masih thank you Mr
chair.
Mr.
Mr chair minimize chair members
of the committee can you all
hear me.
Okay.
Yes my name is Carolyn Massey
and I'm the executive director
for the southwest women's Law
Center our mission at the law
center is to create
opportunities for women and
girls to realize their full
economic and personal potential
I.
Working on eliminating gender
bias discrimination and
harassment let the women and
their families out of poverty
and ensuring that all women have
full control over there
reproductive health this is our
our our mission and this bill
it's into the work that we do in
terms of helping trying to find
ways for women and their
families to
to get out of poverty and so
what we are doing is.
We look at how Covid nineteen
has impacted our state our
citizens for some of us it has
impacted our personal family
members or loved ones who got
sick or unfortunately who passed
away which is what happened in
my situation Graham my
grandfather passed away from
COVID
and other other significant ways
that people have been impacted
in our state is basically by
losing employment or I'm having
my reduced our work hours and
therefore not able to provide
for their families pay for their
mortgages their rents for food
and so these are the different
levels of impact that we're
seeing and we we looked at how
states how.
New Mexico can better address
these types of issues for our
citizens we did look at other
states thank you.
Thank you.
Suzanne Regan.
Thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
vice chair.
My name Susan regular I work at
UNM pure of Business and
Economic Research we're we've
been.
Closely following all the data
this past year in New Mexico in
December twenty twenty the
unemployment rate was eight
point two percent which is a one
point zero increase over what
was on November what easily
three point four increase over
what we saw in December of
twenty nineteen.
No initial claims continue to be
high six thousand three hundred
seventy seven for the week
ending January sixteen and
continue cooking claims remained
about forty three thousand at
the end of January ninth we know
that a lot of people are
employed right now due to the
pandemic employment losses a
really due to businesses not
being able to be open and it is
equal to or greater than what we
saw during the Great Recession
total loss of jobs in December
was sixty five thousand eight
hundred year over year and if we
step in and we look at the
second quarter correlations
employment wage data more than
eighty five thousand jobs were
lost at the outset of the
pandemic all the data suggests
as we're looking at the data and
saying how are we doing although
other states have been hit
harder at the beginning of the
pandemic then I think we saw in
New Mexico were already showing
signs of recovery that looks
slower to our peers which in
some ways a similar to what we
saw with the Great Recession
something that illustrates the
difference between what happened
at the Great Recession and with
this pandemic or the industries
that were hit very hard leisure
and hospitality industries
administrative services I need
temporary jobs and employment
agencies wholesale trade retail
trade and other services like
nail and hair salons were hit
particularly hard for obviously
reasons that you have to be
there in person face to face to
do things
also in New Mexico there is a
little bit of strangeness
because of mining specifically
oil that industry also took a
hit in terms of employment when
prices fell but then again how
to interesting oil production
has remained higher than is
expected in at least that should
offset some of the the issues
that we.
Or provide a little bit of
buffer that we see for the state
budget.
We already have a large number
of claimants who are
unemployment insurance hello we
have individuals who are
currently on you extended
benefits including sole
proprietors and other groups
that have been and identified
for specific pandemic
employment that's not gonna
change quickly and so when I
look at
opening up and making it
available extending the
eligibility to criteria to
working parents
with young children or of
workers whose family obligations
are to care for ill of family
members.
This extending this criteria
really provides protection to
our workforce while allowing
sick individuals or people who
are taking care of sick time to
become healthy before returning
to work and so with that I'd
like to just say that I think
that we should look at extending
those benefits to be a little
more thanks.
Thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Mr chan thank you
expert witnesses for your
presentation and just real
quickly Mr chair I want to call
the attention to pages to the
committee four pages five
through eight and it is those
pages that includes the new
provisions which basically are
what we just spoke about as a
collective and that is the
criteria for eligibility who is
we're expanding those
definitions of of family member
so all the changes occur in the
existing law in pages five
through eight as you see on the
bill so Mr chair with that I'll
go ahead and
B. we stand for questions Mr
chair.
Do I have any questions from
members of the committee.
I don't have any hands race.
Okay can we go to a public
comment anybody would like to
comment on this bill.
Chair I'm sorry I didn't hear
your question.
The first screen.
Question was there anybody on
the committee questions.
yes Sir.
Chair race hands I'm sorry let
me raise my hand here okay duly
now will head.
G. don't worry about your hand
anymore.
I Mr chairman would it be
possible for me to hear all the
other
Comments again so what did I not
hear that is there no one
against it.
Members say anything yet.
Okay okay I just wanted to hear
or a commentator at this
questions also will present.
Go ahead all right so
there's no public comment right
away.
We'll go with the Representative
my god I mean Representative
mccamly I am promoting unanimous
secretary.
You have no idea how much of a
promotion that is
thank you thank you Mr chair so
I'm a secretary of the workforce
solutions department where the
state department is in charge of
enforcing and distributing
unemployment policy in the
state.
Unfortunately this bill would be
very very detrimental to the
program as a whole it it runs in
direct contradiction to federal
guidelines regarding
unemployment Mr chair when I had
your job which is would probably
be a promotion right now I'll be
honest with you I didn't know
all that much about how
unemployment worked and when I
got selected for this role
especially when the pandemic
started I had to get a master's
degree in unemployment policy
and what I learned was the S.
unemployment is a.
Combined program between the
federal government and the state
government there are rules on
both sides of the game however
the issue is that the federal
government pretty much provides
all the money to run our
department almost a hundred
percent of the dollars that the
unemployment office here in New
Mexico uses to broaden our I. T.
services are H. R. services all
the people in the call center
answering those thousands of
phone calls every day come from
the federal government and the
federal government has pretty
strict rules regarding
eligibility through their
regulations for unemployment
this bill would directly run
contrary to their rules as a
couple of specific areas which
they actually pointed out to us
the first is monetary
determinations that means if.
I have to make a certain amount
of money to be able to get on
unemployment under the standard
unemployment program and this
bill would require us to look
past those in give people
benefits even though they might
be what we call monetarily
ineligible the other one and
this is the one that that the
federal folks that we asked
about this bill had particular
issues with with what we call
able and available the question.
Under this bill it would require
us to be able to give
unemployment to people even if
they weren't quote unquote able
and available to work now we
tried as a state to be flexible
on that question at the
beginning of the pandemic and we
actually took the question off
of the weekly certification
form that people are required to
get unemployment every week well
there was an audit done by the
federal government.
I actually found against us and
they ordered us very very
specifically and very very
forcefully to put that able and
available question back on all
our forms if this bill were
passed
We would be stuck between a rock
and a hard place because people
come to us and say I'm not able
and available to work because of
the provisions of this bill but
I want unemployment anyway if we
gave money to those folks and we
follow state law then there is
an extremely good chance this
would be kind of our second
strike with the federal
government that they would this
again fine that we were in
violation of federal regulations
and there's a strong chance they
could cut off for money in that
case if they did that
significantly no one would be
able to get unemployment because
we would be able to operate so
Mr chair as much as I am deeply
sympathetic because to the folks
on this bill because I hear this
stuff every day thousands of
people trying to get
unemployment and I know exactly
in deeply the.
People are going through but if
this bill were passed and we
were to follow it unfortunately
we would be pretty much in
direct violation of federal
policy and that would put us in
a very very dangerous place for
the program as a whole Mr chair
I appreciate letting me talk and
I'd be happy to try to answer
any specific questions folks
would have because I know this
is a a pretty complicated
situation.
Mr speaker if you are wanted to
go that we have
we're able to answer some
questions or of you want to go
ahead or wait.
Until.
Wait okay.
We can't hear you Mr chair.
Purpose we have three people on
the on the attendees have their
hand raised.
will be more so that would you
like to listen then.
Reppert.
I'm sorry Sir did you say the
attendees are the panelists the
these.
We have Jacob.
Hello can you hear me.
Yes yes.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name's Jacob
Vigil I'm a research and policy
analyst in New Mexico voices for
children and I'm we stand in
strong support of this bill as a
children's advocacy organization
where we are
really deeply immersed in the in
the data that show the really
adverse impact that comment and
the recession of had on
particularly on children know
that half of adults in the
state.
With children have lost
employment income about a third
of kids are projected to be food
insecure these are just some of
the statistics and so we know
that
the more if ever there was a
time for hold public action on
supporting working families this
would be the time we know that
our children you know have
experience disruption some
schools not to mention just all
the other serve destructions and
difficulties that come with this
time so to have families and
parents who who are able to have
a safety net is they've lost
income or are in need of to
secure childcare or to care for
loved ones that would just be a
huge benefit for our children
who even before the pandemic
we're struggling at the bottom
of a lot of list in terms of a
child well being so with that Mr
chairman members the committee
with a New Mexico voices for
children stand and support thank
you.
We think you're on mute it.
Can you hear me.
Yes.
A good afternoon Mr chairman and
committee members my name is for
the big about it I'm a workers
rights attorney at the New
Mexico Center on Law and Poverty
and we started in strong support
of this bill all New Mexican
workers deserve an opportunity
to receive unemployment benefits
if COVID nineteen disrupts their
ability to work on New Mexico
has done a significant amount to
address COVID nineteen and its
effect on workers the states you
I lost continue to lack
provisions prevent protecting
workers unable to work because
of COVID nineteen currently
there is a federal U. I.
programs establishes COVID
nineteen thank you reasons for
receive federal benefits but it
expires at the end of March
twenty twenty one through this
bill New Mexicans can be certain
even when the federal you are
benefits expire that they will
continue to receive you wipe
benefits if they are unable to
work for COVID nineteen related
results this bill puts you
Mexicans first and we have the
New Mexico Center on poverty
urged committee to pass thank
you.
Tracing your unmuted.
Members are chairman members of
the committee my name's Jason
Espinoza I'm the state director
with the national federation of
independent business and we
service the voices small
business and exclusively promote
the interests of small
independent businesses here in
New Mexico and across the
country although we are
sympathetic to the concerns
raised by the by the sponsor as
well as the expert witnesses we
do stand in opposition to this
piece of legislation our first
we are concerned about the
potential conflicts with federal
law on the unemployment
insurance guidelines and and
really concerned about the
impact that would have on our
entire unemployment insurance
system seconds the unemployment
insurance system is funded
purely by.
Eral taxes by the employer
as we have seen throughout the
pandemic our unemployment
insurance trust fund has
significantly dropped from its
peak of around four hundred and
sixty million dollars the state
has already had to borrow two
hundred and six million dollars
as of January twenty seconds
from the federal government to
keep our trust fund a float
This bill would expand the
budget which would expand the
cost and certainly increase the
impact on the unemployment
insurance trust fund and as
we're looking towards economic
recovery the only way to recover
that trust fund is through
increased taxes on on employers
we feel that that would really
be an obstacle to economic
recovery place a heavy burden on
our small businesses across the
state as we're trying to look
forward forward to rebuilding
the economy in rebuilding our
workforce we do stand in
opposition thank you.
We have I do you plan on mute.
Can you hear me now.
Yes.
Hello good afternoon members Mr
chair members of the committee
our my name is Patsy Romero I'm
the chief executive officer four
some the money I'll meet of the
lord we are an essential
provider of residential care for
individuals with intellectual
disabilities and we are also
sympathetic to the our
legislation that is proposed to
you here today but we do stand
in opposition of the bill for
several reasons number one again
we are concerned it back out the
opposition to federal law it
also is an essential provider
this legislation does not
recognize the tremendous
challenges and workforce issues
that is central providers had
continuing to provide services
for those individuals who are in
our residential facilities the
R. the legislation often times
provides an of and alternatives
to working I in this in in our
our in our organizations and it
negatively impacts and depletes
the the workforce that we have
right now we are in crisis in
the direct care workforce area
in both the our.
In both the nursing homes and in
ICF facilities like ours it's
important to recognize that New
Mexicans do need assistance in
this area but it does not the
legislation does not address the
language needed for those of us
that are considered essential
providers so with our with that
consideration we request that we
stand in opposition at the our
current legislation as written
thank you Mr chair members of
the committee.
Mr chair there's no more public
comment.
Actually I have my hand wrist
raced.
This.
Thank
you for your.
It's always.
The
other committee on it.
We.
No.
Freshman.
Thank you.
Hey everybody my name's Julie on
a coup but I love the with the
southwest winds Law Center I
stand in strong support of house
bill forty four I want to just
take this opportunity to thank
secretary only he has been in
conversation with us trying to
figure out ways to help our New
Mexico plant families during
this crisis during the races we
we know that other states have
this crisis response and so
there are ways to comply with
federal law and has this
assistance in place and I'm sure
the expert witnesses will talk
more about that I really
appreciate all that the
secretary is done in this these
really difficult times and this
bill absolutely can be done we
want to make sure that the
secretary
Is able to implement it but we
know that other states have and
we strongly encourage the
committee will dock this thank
you.
Everybody members of the
committee were related.
For a hand right there Mr.
Yes.
I would like to move to table
this.
I second.
Okay.
We have a promotion proper
second we're still losses for
the discussion okay I will take
that load the thank you the that
will be the first most of the
day you can discussion Mr.
Is taking care of so I will do
Representative stable does.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee and Mr chairman
and Representative Roybal
Caballero.
What you're aware regarding.
Anything related to.
Comment.
Funding.
Of the money meant regular
insurance and federal dollars
for unemployment is that what
your bill is targeting by put
chance.
Mr chair and
Representative.
The bill is I'm I'm not want to
make sure that I understand your
question correctly the the bill
is proposing to
Expand the existing
unemployment.
Definitions criteria.
And eligibility in order to
address the current
circumstances that we are under.
In the pandemic it is
intended to be temporary and it
defines temporary on effective
until January twenty twenty
third Mr chair
when a feather in it I'm reading
directly from the bill one of
federal or state public health
emergency is declared in
response to or pursuant to
public health emergency response
at and for thirty days after the
expiration of the emergency
declaration as Mr chair we have
heard seven other states have
executed these type of
extensions and expansions in
order to be able to as as say.
Compliment the ability or
complement the federal
government in rid their response
to
expanding benefits and to reduce
the hardships on our families
and so and that's why the
provisions also Mr chair in the
bill I then finding on even
further what defines family
members as well as the various
conditions related to what would
be on associated with
eligibility criteria so I I'm
gonna call on Mr chair if if I
may
however of the expert witnesses
that wishes to step up in for
the clarifying.
The answer to that question
whoever would like to do that
Tracy Suzanne are generally.
Quick stab at it and then we'll
all look at the trees here
caroling backed me up
my understanding is that we want
to extend some of the same
provisions that we're already in
the cares Act that have expired
on to cover those situations
where people are still unable to
go back to work for these
reasons do the pandemic reasons.
So I don't know that
We're looking at.
Continuing those criteria if
it's not a pandemic.
Meet some of the question go
ahead so I'm.
Mr chairman Representative
Roybal Caballero.
I'm Susan just talked about.
The money's being available to
kia's Act that's the possibility
for this expansion however your
bill goes all the way to twenty
twenty three.
And nobody knows we don't know
what's going to happen in the
summer of the end of the year or
twenty two all the way to the
end of twenty three in regards
to this pandemic situation it
more resolve itself out over a
period of time where we wouldn't
have the element of these
workers in these families
having to depend on federal
funding to the unemployment and
so what I'm trying to find out.
You're asking to expand the
unemployment eligibility
temporary for that period of
time fall.
For people who are able and
available to work according to
the secretary.
I am not understanding how would
we do that without the funding
because kids funding is for a
limited amount of time and so is
any federal dollars related to
the pandemic.
So I I'm I'm I'm trying to
understand and to understand
clearly.
The monetary give termination
that would be given what kind of
funding money would this be
would this be the regular
unemployment federal dollars all
insurance funding money that
normally goes into the
unemployment because if that is
the case we would be passing a
piece of legislation that goes
way beyond.
And when it goes way beyond we
will affect the the people that
actually needs to get
unemployment.
Over a longer period of time
kind can you explain that to me
please Susan.
Yeah was may I just say real
quickly bring your attention Mr
chair and representative back to
the original point in the bill
that I pointed out to which is
on page five which says that it
is effective until that date or
until the public health
emergency response is lifted
this is an important point it is
not automatically Mr chair
extending the benefits through
that period okay if the Madam Mr
chair and representative if
there it will work to left the
emergency.
Whenever month down the road two
months down the road.
This would not extend
automatically it would it would
not apply as the and that's the
language that and that's why
it's important to point that out
the other thing I would point
out just real quickly and and we
can have any any one of the
experts step up in for the
clear funny is that right now
currently the unemployment
benefits at the federal level go
through March thirtieth of
twenty twenty one this year.
All of this was in anticipation
of.
I moving with a left of the
public health emergency or with
the understanding of further
expanding we all know that we
have a new administration we all
know that we have a new COVID
relief across the board
administratively that is being
executed as we currently speak
by the new administration how so
this is why the language in this
bill is written in such a manner
that it responds to that.
Health emergency response act so
Mr chair and Representative I'll
let I guess Tracy are you going
to further clarify this.
Yes Mr chair members of the
committee so the I think I'd
like to defer to Susan to this
to in relation to that the cost
and and the federal funding and
those pieces that what I would
like to point out is and and I
mentioned this in my opening
remarks as well
but the on March twenty second
of twenty twenty the department
of labor issued guidance to
states and it this was as part
of that there guidance around
the families first current virus
relief act and in that guidance
they had section five which was
called emergency flexibility and
sectors subsection C. which was
the cons and it provided
guidance specifically on state
eligibility expansion and from
that section that said we
encourage states to consider
temporarily modifying their good
because provisions in such a way
as to comply with social is that
the recommendations examples
that states may consider and
allowing good costs include
leaving work you too a
reasonable risk of exposure or
to care for a family member
affected by the virus and like I
said since then seven states
have enacted these temporary
Expansions of eligibility to
include that causes that are
reflective of what we have in
the proposed in house bill forty
four I'm so expanded until when
it's given extension until
approximately when and those
other states Mr chairman and Mr
chair and representative and
Tracy I'm if the X. X. if the
expansion exist isn't until the
end of the year did they go out
all the way to three years and
what funding are they trying to
go I'll Stewart in three years
because Care Act is not going to
be around the federal gave a
deadline on all those monies so
what is the deadline for those
funding.
What is the deadline in our
state is the deadline you know
states March thirtieth twenty
twenty one.
Okay no Mr chair was going to do
for your go head to answer.
So
Mr chair members of the
committee each of those states
has has done it a little bit
differently and what did it at
different
at different points in the
pandemic so the first few states
this happened very early on in
March or April the most recent
one was Michigan and I believe
it went through twenty twenty
one if I'm remembering correctly
And then Susan I'd like to defer
to you actually to regarding the
funding he's.
Thank you Mr chair and the Tracy
so I'm.
It is funded by home employers
and it is funded through the
federal unemployment insurance
system right now many states are
borrowing and have exist have
exhausted their funds and not
requiring against the funds or
from the fence to cover those I
expected that is going to
continue whether or not this
bill passes that spending is
going to continue on for the
foreseeable future Intel we get
through the pandemic and then
the funds will have to be repaid
back over time as it's been done
in the past so the answer is at
the federal level.
It's still going to continue
that way what we're arguing here
is that to be fair for all alone
all of our families in all of
our workers in New Mexico that
we should have that extension to
cover them to.
During this period of time so
that's my response a well that
doesn't give you brought dollars
I think that
until we reach a point where.
Vaccines are out there and
people are able to businesses
are able to open up and serve
people face to face again
until we are doing those things
that are are.
Slowing the pandemic down.
Our families and our workers
actually need the support we can
provide them.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative Roybal Caballero
and Susan.
What I'm trying to figure out is
if we don't have the money used
other states are borrowing
money.
What we if we if we don't have
the money just for the regular
people who qualify for regular
unemployment but we want to help
those school who don't fit into
the category of being qualified
but according to the chair the
secretary he said something
about this money would go to a
plan available to work people
which is a violation of the
federal policy.
Where is this money going to
come from and how much would it
bankruptcies unemployment
insurance situation.
Mr chair and representative.
I think that I'm gonna go ahead
and ask the secretary to clarify
because I think it's important
for him to as he stated in his
presentation early on he was he
made it really clear
relationship between the feds
and the state tenant how each
one aligning each other to each
other and so I think it's
helpful for him to clarify that
and then also clarify how Mr
chair the monetary on also
aligns because I I think it's
really important for everybody
to have a clear understanding
we're not we're not looking at
additional lining that
relationship between the state
and the feds however I think we
need to further clarify what
that relationship is Mr chair Mr
secretary thank you.
Thank you thank you
representative at madam Majority
Leader
This gets really really
complicated so let me try and
I'm trying to figure out how to
explain this because we use
jargon internally.
So regular unemployment.
Is paid for by a combination of
two places the benefits
themselves are paid for by
payroll taxes from New Mexico
businesses.
So if I'm you know Intel if
Sony's burrito company or
whatever and I employ people as
W. two employees I'd pay payroll
taxes every paycheck into the
unemployment trust fund so
benefits are paid for in the
regular system out of that fund
and by the way if you ever want
to stop and ask questions please
do so it took me forever to
figure all this stuff out.
The operations of how the
unemployment division of
workforce solutions works are
completely funded by the federal
government.
So the paychecks of the people
that answer the phones that do
the determinations about whether
people are eligible or not it's
center and so on that's all paid
for by the federal government we
get money from them based on how
many people are unemployment
through formula to run our
offices so in normal non
pandemic non crazy years it's a
combination of state payroll
taxes for state companies going
into a fund which pays benefits
and federal dollars which fund
our operations and I making
sense so far yes okay.
In March of this year because of
the pandemic there were two.
Major bills passed by the
federal government.
The first was in the middle of
March it was called the families
first Corona virus act.
And it's set up paid family
leave and paid sick leave
through the end of the year.
Has nothing to do with the
unemployment system zero through
that it is asking businesses it
asked businesses to pay for two
weeks of sickly and then two
thirds of the salary for family
leave for folks that could
provide that they were in those
situations because of the
pandemic.
Those businesses got paid back
through the IRS.
So that that families first act
that miss Reagan was talking
about that that has nothing to
do with unemployment zero in
terms of the sick leave and paid
family.
Day cares act that was passed a
couple weeks later.
Set up three new big
unemployment programs that are
all paid for by the federal
government the first was an
additional six hundred dollars a
week this call the F. P. U. C.
you guys heard about that we're
ready to do a three hundred
dollars a week now all paid for
by the federal government the
second was the T. E. UC that's
answer pandemic extended
unemployment compensation.
That gives folks in the original
program an additional thirteen
weeks of eligibility and regular
unemployment you only get twenty
six weeks of eligibility and
after you run to that twenty six
weeks in regular years you can't
get anymore this gave an
additional thirteen weeks of
eligibility on top of that
twenty six weeks for the regular
program and also set up the
pandemic unemployment assistance
program what we call a for self
employed folks.
And that allows people who are
you'll get workers and people
that work as contractors
musicians etcetera so they can
show that they make money but
not as W. two employees to get
money in the reason they're not
normally eligible for regular
unemployment is because they
don't have an employer that paid
into the fall I will say
unemployment was created in
nineteen thirty five for a
economy that does not exist
today and there should be some
discussions of the federal level
on restructuring that to make it
more pertinent to today can I
stop you a second yes ma'am if
if they don't have an employer
who paid into the fund.
Then depending to get the money
from the kids all the federal
pandemic funding yes ma'am that
is correct and so according to
do we get a cold other states
have found ways around it why
couldn't New Mexico then if
you're getting all this federal
dollars.
That would help these
individuals doing this difficult
time why why it would be a
detriment to us not to be able
to help them sure so Mr chair
representative unemployment was
not set up as sick leave our
family that's not what the the
it's not about unemployment set
up with a sickly but then leave
it's the unemployment being to
be set up is in result of having
these funding that you're
getting from the federal
government for the pandemic and
that's what I'm asking about not
the regular money because you
all are saying two things you
talk about the regular
unemployment federal dollars I
of the state but the benefits
from the New Mexico businesses
the eighteen into that and
people what improve all your is
that read that it qualifies for
unemployment.
But then you have all these
other people who are desperately
hurting at a time like this when
you what department has received
some type of federal dollars for
the pandemic I'm the question is
how Mr chairman I apologize
Mister chairman how is it that
you are department cannot find
is there no also motion to find
in a way to help these
individuals with that particular
set of dollars.
Mr chair representative all the
money that we get for
unemployment has to go through a
system and that system has rules
that are set up by the federal
government and so one of those
rules requires you as to be.
To be eligible for unemployment
every week every week you got to
fill out what we call a
certification for.
And one of the rules that the
federal government requires of
us is that we ask a question to
people whether you are and this
is specific language able and
available to work.
If someone answers and no on
that question.
And we are not allowed to give
them benefits and like I said in
the presentation I gave earlier
we actually we tried to get away
from that during the heart of
the pandemic in the spring and
summer we remove that question
from our weekly certification
forms the federal government ran
an audit on our programs it
basically said that has to be in
there and you cannot give money
to people who are not quote
unquote able and available to
work now I'd love to know the
six other states other than
Michigan that have put
provisions into what they call
good because and I'm getting
deep into the weeds here good
because means I can quit a job
if I can show that there was
what we legally called good
because then I am eligible for
unemployment now that
traditionally is not something
that.
The employee the worker has
control over its usually I had
abusive supervisor I have unsafe
working conditions my employer
wants to transfer me across town
and I don't have a car those
things are generally what we
consider good because because
unemployment traditionally is
not set up to be paid sick leave
and paid family leave and and
that's kind of what is going on
with this bill that there there
is a lot by the Sanchez to
change unemployment to be paid
sick and paid family leave
through the course of the
pandemic now I'm not here
debating the the the good or the
bad about that what I'm saying
is my worry.
Is if we change state law and
start enforcing a new state law
that goes away from requiring
someone to be able and available
to work the federal government
could and there is a change of
administration so maybe that
would change how they do this
but the federal government could
cut off the funds that we need
to run the program and when we
spoke with our program officer
with our lawyer spoke with our
program officer yesterday that
was their specific question
regarding this bill was this
bill would not take into account
of someone needing to be able
and available to work to be
eligible for unemployment now Mr
Representative once again I'd
like to answer any specific
questions you have the stuff is
very very complicated and very
clunky and very hard to
understand and that's been one
of my hardest things is trying
to explain this to folks running
through but I I will I will try
and I hope I'm making some sense
here thank you thank you Mr
chairman Mr chair I think other
people might have questions and
and I I have a lot of questions
that and the situation is a
little bit confusing to me but
simply because I have in one
hand.
I am concerned about the
unemployment compensation pool
New Mexicans who who need to
receive it who needs to who will
qualify for we on the policies
that exist on the other hand we
have some federal dollars that
has come in based on pandemic
situations and the we don't have
anything in place in our state
to enable us to help these
individuals that don't have any
other resource and don't have
any other way and according to
that secretary we can't so I
don't know I truly don't know I
I and I think the secretary
knows me well enough to know
that I want to support whatever
is necessary Mr chairman that
represents some unemployment
than to keep it going for the
masses of unemployed people in
the state of New Mexico in the
correct way and at the same time
my heart aches for those people
who don't have a solution to
help them and if we have
pandemic money going to the
unemployment and it says okay.
We you can only receive the
money based on these policies
and these guidelines.
Then here is this the
representative saying we can
change some of the guidelines
the secretary saying we can't is
that correct Mr Mr Mr Secretary.
The chair with the secretary Mr
chair representative when we
spoke with our representatives
at the US department of labor
who need to sign off and
everything we do in order for
them to give us money to run our
programs they brought this up as
a very specific
Concern of theirs and here
here's the thing if I'm at home
Let let let me let me go back a
little bit because miss McDaniel
was correct we did change we
were allowed some flexibility to
change what we call good because
because of the pandemic so we
allowed some people for instance
to quit their jobs and get
unemployment when they normally
wouldn't be able to because of
the pandemic that was mostly for
health related issues so we
basically said if you
have a specific health condition
that puts you at great risk.
To getting that the COVID virus
and you work in a place where
you work face to face with folks
then if you quit and show us
from a doctors know Hey look I
was working in a supermarket and
I've had cancer or I'm over the
age of sixty five or any of the
eight or nine things that the
health department told us would
put you really great west then
we allowed you to get
unemployment now the issue is.
You still have to be able and
available to work in jobs that
you could work with so you could
still work from home you could
still look for a job doing
telemarketing at home you still
could look for other jobs where
you work going to be at risk the
problem with this bill that our
lawyers have.
What through is that it says
blanket as long as you have
child care needs then then you
will be given unemployment even
if you are unable or unavailable
to work and that would mean
according to the the folks that
we just talked with yesterday
the US department of labor that
that would put us in danger of
being completely contrary to
federal rules on this and that
would put us in danger of losing
the funding that we need to run
our department now I do I had
one conversation with the
advocates on this months ago if
they want to give us some of the
other states that they've talked
to I'd be happy to talk to some
of my compatriots in those other
states I I broke down Michigan
is one I think New Jersey they
said was another one but I can't
remember the other one's but we
we didn't really have any input
into crafting this this piece of
legislation in our worry is that
if it is passed it puts us
between one big rock and one big
hard place because.
Representative Mr Representative
I feel for you to.
This job has swallowed a large
part of my soul I'll be honest
with you it is one of the most
heartbreaking things I have ever
done
there's no way that I have help
less than ten thousand people
directly through this thing and
I hear the stories all the time
so I know what the issues are
and I know how hard it is.
But it's also my job in this in
this station to run a department
and make sure that we can
continue to keep an organization
that allows us to get money to
the vast majority of folks and
that's my worry is that yes this
is don contrary department of
labor they control our purse
strings on not only the money
that they're doing for these
extra programs but are
operational funding and if that
gets cut we will be able to run
our our department to get money
to people and that's that's my
fear here so if they want to
give me the other states I'll be
happy to reach out I have a call
on Thursday with our national
association of state workforce
agencies and ask them how they
did this and how they they look
to see they're getting around it
and then we have to go back to
the deal well because they were
pretty black and white with us
yesterday but that once again Mr
chair representative want to
dominate this conversation but
this is this is my job to worry
about the functions of the
program as a whole and and the
way this bill is written
according to the the rules have
been given to us it it could
possibly really hurt our ability
to provide unemployment to the
people that that do qualify
without any kind of question.
Thank thank you for your call
for the clarification thank you
Mr chairman thank you
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Mr chairman we offer those
states now.
Tracy if if I may Mr chair just
so that we can put them on the
record.
Yes Mr chair
And Mr chair this the state that
I have listed here and I
actually have the numbers if
you'd like them I'm guessing you
don't are Alaska Arizona
Massachusetts Michigan
Minnesota Vermont and Washington
at all have some kind of
component
to this or have explicitly done
this said there been three
different ways that it's been
it's been done in other states
one is a standalone COVID
emergency built specifically for
this purpose to expand you
eligibility also an amendment to
the existing you I legislation.
as part of the larger amendment
that includes this expanded
eligibility and then also I
believe Minnesota is an example
of one that included this is a
section of a large comprehensive
COVID relief bill that covered
multiple multiple issues not
just related to unemployment
workforce so those are the ones
that I have like I said Michigan
is the most recent.
Alaska what is an example of one
that was is very straightforward
and I looked and I believe it's
there is it is until sixty days
after the
The public health emergency is
and.
You know and we and again Mr
chair representative we're
talking about.
Only associated with on pandemic
relief process so I want to keep
stressing that we're not opening
up the unemployment in general
or only for pandemic related
thank you Mr chair
deferred further questions thank
you.
Representative do you see on.
Thank you Mr.
Representative Roybal Caballero
In the special session that we
have November twenty fourth.
We did some incredible things
relating to.
The unemployment.
And the our communities in
general.
Of that seven hundred fifty
million dollars.
That we had and cares Act money
that we needed to expand by the
twenty eighth of December.
We put under ninety four
million.
In on one thousand two hundred
dollar payments to the
unemployed but lost the fifty
two weeks a budget.
we put a hundred million in to
small businesses requests well
business requests.
Under hundred trolleys.
five million that went for low
income individuals.
That no stimulus check initially
selected for developers.
that was very amenable because
that included some of our
undocumented.
And fifty million to emergency
housing assistance Clemente
emergency with that thank this
is the.
But the big bang for the money
in terms of its own entity
million.
Was four hundred thirty.
Million to the unemployment
insurance trust fund.
And the reason for that is
because we had depleted at.
And
And we had had.
To have to so we have to have to
step in.
Insurance fund.
To be able to kind of make ends
meet.
for those eligible unemployed in
terms of the budget.
And whenever our state has to go
to the fence.
Well money to pay for uninsured
unemployment insurance benefits.
There's interest.
The.
Process to that number.
So it's not it's not kind of a
straight across loan.
zero interest no.
And and I learned the hard way
in terms of trying to kind of
our we.
Mr chair these federal
requirements.
Because I went to a.
The secretary my family.
And I and I told them this part.
I mean.
Senator story in terms of an
unemployed individual.
Was caring for to implement
family members frantically of.
And.
He was employed.
For four years when on on then
of they are.
When I'm unemployment insurance.
Found a job.
But because of the way things
happen with people and kind of
those chaos in their homes.
Didn't report it.
To the workforce solutions so he
got like maybe
Some weeks of unemployment
insurance that he didn't qualify
for because you have gotten the
job.
So Mr chair.
What happened is that
They basically impose a penalty
on this matter.
It's called the basically a
fraud penalty whenever.
You find work thank you continue
to receive unemployment
insurance thank all the profit
of the.
And and it was twelve hundred
dollars any data.
So now comes.
Comment.
Now comes all these workers
being furloughed.
He's Mr chair kind of in line
for being furloughed.
And he says you know me again I
need your help.
This is the new the new COVID
policies are coming down from
the feds in the state.
Kind of allowing people in my
situation.
To kind of forego the penalty
and be able to qualify for some
of those benefits.
And actually.
Senator mccamley was real
Canada.
You sent me again we love to do
that.
But the feds don't allow that.
If you've if you're on a fraud
penalty.
Term you have to.
Do the term in the case of this
individual fifty two weeks.
And so to still to this day he
can apply for unemployment
insurance if he's for.
From his job.
Many because that's the law.
In our state can do anything
about it.
That's the federal law.
And I see a similar scenario
with this piece of legislation.
You know we want to do good but
I don't think this is the
instrument to do it with.
Is it just not.
You know it
the parameters are not
solidified.
In terms of how we can move this
concept forward still fall
within the framework of federal
law in terms of compliance is
still able to move forward we
want to accomplish.
I can see happening with this
piece of legislation.
So
you know I I empathize you know
with the applicants and and I've
been in the labor but I
understand these dynamics mainly
because I've experienced in my
term as chair of labour some of
these scenarios when it comes to
federal government.
And the and I see that that's
what's happening now.
They were trying to do something
that is.
Our heartfelt.
But it's not.
Relevant.
You know in terms of the outcome
and.
The possibility of still
complying with all federal
mandates thank you Mr chair.
Yes all of
your Mr chair.
The.
I have a Representative Dow
asked us.
Thank you.
Mr chair the.
You know I just want to say
Representative go it'll.
We all are trying to do the best
we can for all those that are
suffering the loss of their
jobs.
and I and and and so I
understand you're legislation I
I I know that you're trying we
all want the best
I appreciate Representative
Garcia's comments
Representative Stapleton and
director McKinley all of us are
the same boat that we feel that.
Would love to help every person
but with those parameters with
the language that is there.
You know it scares me because I
know there's a lot of our.
I can tell you I'm gonna I'm
gonna go back to what
Director with the clan we said.
You said that they were they
were giving out budget when the
benefits were they they were on
I guess in gray area and and I
have I have proof of that we're
we're the that the department
was doing everything they could
and and we're giving those out I
have copies of them were were
people were getting we're not
being denied and and there were
there even waiting in the the
possibility of having a.
What is it called a
appeal.
And so you know
everyone I mean we want to help
people as much as we can but the
fear that I have is that we
don't meet those parameters the
unemployment fund is.
Right now very it is what has
been an.
Rubble I know because we're
borrowing all that money and it
scares me to know that if we
what for this and then it's not
available.
We're the unintended consequence
because we want to do good and
it sounds good and it is all
there.
Would we would fail at the end
and so I just wanted to thank
everyone for that
there are many small businesses
that are they're just hanging in
there and if they were required
to pay that back in the in a
pandemic we also have to see the
other side the size of these the
small businesses
Would then be required to
replenish that that that fund
and the only way to do that is
to raise the rate and that would
that would
that would that would hurt our
our small business that is is
struggling right now.
Struggling right now to to.
To flow and in turn because of
that well then it affects the
employees because guess what
then they have to maybe well
someone or maybe they can't call
someone back to work so I
appreciate everyone's efforts I
and I and and I truly feel hard
or sad for all the those who are
struggling with this and we we
pray that that we can open up
and and get back to work to get
those individuals back to work
thank you chair and
representative for all of your
efforts.
Mr chair.
I'm not sure if we were seen any
other hands.
Anybody else representative
would come later or later do.
Of I have I'm if you would allow
me I have on a few
clarifications and a closing
okay please go ahead thank you
Mr chair and thank you everyone
I think that during this
pandemic we have an obligation
across the board to find a way
and we offered other states that
were in the of that have done
some type of modification or
changes in order to find a way
we've been struggling with Mr
chair and members of the
committee with issues that I've
had not just in effect not just
an adverse effect but a
devastating life threatening
effect on our families and so
that this bill.
Has a much greater mission to it
and it's much greater mission is
we've got a forces us to find
the way as the secretary
mentioned if there are other
states that if found that way
then I beg that the secretary
along with all of the
administrative bodies that are
moving forward as per our
governor's address today in
trying to provide relief that
we.
It's together and put our
tremendous assets that we have
and we bring to the table and
find a way we have an obligation
to do that we have an obligation
Mr chair to address the
intricate details that have been
outlined today and raise the
question of what it is that we
need to address and again I
wanted to clarify some points Mr
chair and that is that.
Up to the entire crisis of the
pandemic we've been modifying
the way we do business in order
to address the pandemic in order
to be able to
Be flexible and adapt so what
this legislation does is it
forces us into a position to be
able to
Look at the systems that we have
in place.
Be able to relax so systems in a
manner in which we can to the
best of our ability we have an
obligation to work with our
federal on entities and as I
mentioned earlier Mr chair we
have a new administration we we
are going to be approaching
based on the new administration
and the presentations that were
made today and actually last
week we have a new
Administration that's looking at
relaxing just the very things
that we're doing and proposing
to do today relaxing the our
relationship between the feds
and the state in order to
provide security to our
populations and and and ensure
that we can do that and so there
were some questions raised Mr
chair that the secretary asked
if he could address those if we
could gain more clarity if we
have an opportunity to be able
to look at ways in which we can
relax in manner in a manner in
which would complement and not
be conflicted with on the
federal government and the
federal regulations we know Mr
chair that we're not gonna be
able to change those federal
regulations overnight we know
that the president has committed
to extending whatever needs to
be extended in terms of the
COVID relief which includes
unemployment we that was a
statement that was made it was
roled out again today so we know
that there's a commitment
already why not place New Mexico
in a position to be part of
those other states that have
taken a proactive position to
look at this particular area of
expansion and redefinition on an
eligibility only as it relates
to the pandemic and the COVID
relief why not take that step.
This is one of two committees I
think that we have a lot of
questions that we were asked
today and I wanted to ask Mr
chair I believe that I'm not
sure if it was telling or Tracy
that asked if they could just
clarify just a few things that
were rates just so that we could
continue it was telling thank
you Mr chair just a race and
because there were specific
questions raised Mr chair
telling.
Thank you again and I'm Mr chair
chair and members of the
committee secretary mccamley I
wanted to just verify a few
things
The first one the first issue is
regarding the way that the bank
which is being construed we're
looking at this vero very
narrowly
in terms of when.
He is impacted by COVID this
could be when an office or
workplace and employers
workstation they're they're
forced to close and then for or
it could be that the number of
employees who are there on a
daily basis is reduce and it's
because of the public health
order so and the other situation
is this is when a person is not
able to work from home remotely
that would apply to me for
example because my thank you
know I'm fortunate that I have
an employer who allows me to
work from home at this time
Part of that is the cause of the
childcare issues but I also have
the second reason the second is
that this is also implies when
employees are may be required to
quarantine after they may have
been exposed or after they may
have been diagnosed by a COVID
nineteen so it's very narrow
it's just you know not like any
office you know like you know
let's close it down and apply
for unemployment it's not ready
to be ride it's it's a very
narrow the other is
You know there are some some of
our workers out there in our
state who have underlying health
conditions and they may be
afraid to go back to work
because they're afraid that they
might be exposed to comment so I
hear this a lot with that and
that we are Rancho Public
schools being a Rio Rancho
resident having my kids go there
sometimes teachers are afraid
that you know they may be
exposed you know to comment you
know whether it's from other
staff people or four children
you know.
Reality is that we're living
with right now the other is also
It is also when a family member
gets COVID so it's it's just not
yet
like my neighbor you may have
gotten COVID you know it's it's
not meant to be brought so I'm
just really questioning or you
know us that everyone look at
this more narrowly one of the
other things that was raised by
a secretary mccamley is the
issue regarding child care and
school closures this is when the
way we see it's what parents are
not able to take their kids
somewhere safely for the day
while they work
So in the long it actually says
that you know that the
individual will make a good
faith effort to arrange
alternative child care and and
when working remotely is some
possible so again it would apply
to me you know because because
I'm working from home so it's a
very narrowly construed that's
what we're saying.
Tracy answered the questions
regarding the other states so I
won't go into that but when it
is
I'm able and available.
I know Mr secretary stated that
he talked to the federal
officials yesterday so I would
be interested to learn more
about that he's we did have a
previous conversation with the
secretary months ago but we that
that is a big piece that we
haven't been privy to so I just
wanted to just to point that out
for the record
and lastly there are other costs
to the state you know with the
when you know the state is
picking up cause for.
government they're picking up
these costs that are related to
comment you know.
Through food stamps or you what
do they call that now the EBT
cards.
And then also like get rental
assistance we're looking at and
what does that's another issue
that we're also working on we're
trying to help
being lost center we are trying
to help individual women get
some legal advice and counseling
regarding working with other
people I think there may be
their brand for landlords
regulate rental arrangements
regarding payments well and so
we're facing
as well but there's other ways
that the state is picking up the
costs you know this is not the
way here we have the cares Act
and the chairs was provided as a
source of funding for the states
to do this and those who are
trying to follow or those other
seven states that were.
I thank you Mr chairman and vice
chair.
Thank you thank you Mr.
Thank you Committee I ask in the
spirit of I don't want us to
send the wrong message to our
public I don't want us to send
the wrong message that we're
being
not looking at the entire on
entirety and the and clarifying
some questions that need to be
clarified and I think the
secretary for offering
to to look at this for either
side I respectfully when asked
that you're we could roll this
over so we can have the
opportunity to speak to
with the secretary to clarify
with the fans also to look a
little bit more in depth to the
other states because if they
could find the way I want to
send a strong message to our
population that's hurting right
now we want to find a way so if
I could work with the secretary
if I could work with madam
leader I and others said and
Representative devices and
others that have waste
the the heart felt pain that
we're feeling then Mr chair at
best that we could have that
opportunity let us roll it over
let us not send the wrong
message and leftist this
consideration
on failed to move forward and in
a in the most comprehensively
researched manner that we can
possibly deal so I would hope
that we we we could do that I
would hope that the
representatives are all at in
this committee would assist me
and making sure that we address
this to the fullest so that if
we can find a way in New Mexico
and if we can work with the
fence to find the way that will
not constrict are funds that
will not of conflict and cause
any want to suffer as
Representative Miguel has
described and that in fact will
lift are are on communities and
be able to address the pandemic
as it continues to unfold in
ways that.
We still don't know what can so
respectfully I would ask that Mr
chair if we could please just
roll this over to give us that
opportunity I think we owe that
to our our are are hurting
public right now thank you.
Okay.
from that that he will
respectfully at the request of
the sponsor rolled over.
you will let us know if there is
any reason why we should bring
it back and only if there is a
reason to re reading it back
will I bring it back.
Okay so thank you.
Thank you for the opportunity
thank you committee on.
Lawson discussion anyway.
The next thing on our agenda we
have.
The right.
House bill sixty five.
Yes Mister chairman I'm adding
him right now that is the right
now Kate.
Representative Rience.
Yes I'm here wonderful your and
muted.
Representative Townsend Here is
yours okay thank you and we also
need to bring in Anthony mon
Toyo from the.
Legislative Council.
Analysts Nasser okay thank you.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee house bill sixty five
is to address our shortfalls in
P. E. R. A. funding.
Our I've provided a handout for
everyone to kind of follow on my
presentation.
So we begin on page one we see
that our state constitution
article twenty section twenty
two deals with the E. R. A. N.
E. R. B. I'm not going to be
addressing any E. R. B. just be
E. R. eight.
So we begin on I've highlighted
the real important point of this
if we take paragraph eight and
it's the state shall be held by
each respective system in a
trust fund to be administered
and invested by each respective
system for the sole and
exclusive benefits of the
members retirees and other
beneficiaries of that system.
And that's this will be very
important so each fund is gonna
stand on its own.
It also says a system Trust Fund
shall never be used Dovber to
one wound a sign language
investors or it could be
encumbered or appropriated for
another purpose so we can't
can't take money out of one fund
that such as all show you built
like the state police and
corrections fund that has a
surplus and move it over into
one of these other under funded
plants.
We go to section see the
legislature shall not enact any
law that increases the benefits
paid by the system in any manner
or changes the funding formula
for retirement plan unless
adequate funding is provided.
Do.
A member of the plan shall
acquire vested property rights
with do protection due process
protection under the apple gold
provisions of the New Mexico in
the others US constitution.
And then finally in need it says
nothing in this section shall be
construed to prohibit
modifications to retirement
plans that enhance or preserve
the actuarial soundness of an
affected Trust Fund or
individual plant so if the plan
is becoming on funded the
legislature can go in and change
the benefits of that plan and
that's real important when we
get down looking at these.
So I'd like to give the the as
we move to page two and like to
get of the the committee a
little bit of history.
In two thousand six right before
the big recession.
Kero was actually funded at over
a hundred percent it was after
the recession that.
The funding went below a hundred
percent and the other thing that
occurred after the recession is
called gas speak and gas B. is
another way to calculate the
funding ratio of these
retirement plans it's a more
restrictive
way to go ahead and and it
calculates.
So
Gaspee also picked it.
So if we look at about the last
ten years so in twenty thirteen
Mr props are from para came over
and said.
One of the things that's really
hurting our funding ratio is is
that we have three percent coli.
And if we take one percent of
the call that we will very and
shore up this plan so that's
what I have Senate bill twenty
seven dead is removed one
percent of the coal coal is cost
of living adjustment that occurs
every year.
And in twenty seventeen Mr props
made a presentation to the
pension oversight committee and
these to these.
What's more we hear this graph
is actually the same graph but
just two copies I want in on the
top copy it's hard to tell but
the wind on the bottom the solid
line going down that is to say
general fund.
The second wind that is going in
a downward trend is the fire
municipal fire fund.
And these funds are projected to
go to zero in twenty seventeen
in the year twenty sixty six.
Are the.
The
dotted lines on the upper part
or showing the under funded
liability how it's going up
that's what this stable shows.
Last year in January of twenty
twenty I asked Mr props for a
table showing water is the
contribution and what is the
unfunded or the contribution
shortfall based by each plan.
So when we look at this table
you can see what the employee
and the employer is contributing
and what is the shortfall.
And this my legislation I just
it isn't just looking at this
shortfall I am trying to shore
up these plants.
So there's also been a lot of
discussion about your baby
verses the R. P. so I have two
from miscarried one one E. R. B.
R..
Our contributions are and put
that in there just if you have
that question.
Last year there was a Senate
bill seventy two.
And this was supported by P. E.
R. A. and it made some changes
it thanks the Cola to a.
To tying it to the CPI the
consumer prices index is what
that is.
Retirees so seventy five years
and older would receive a two
point five hello percent Cola.
And the legislature would fund
what is termed the thirteen
track so the Cola check for the
next or from last year for the
next three years so two more
years will come from the
legislature and
and that's how that check that's
what it's called the thirteen
check.
The legislature also in creased
contributions into each fund by
two percent.
Our my current legislation does
Amanda what happened last year
we're gonna let those things go
on except for the coal and I'll
explain that in a minute.
As we go to the top of page
four.
I learned last year that we had
ninety thousand para employees
about forty eight thousand of
them are retired.
there are approximately twenty
three hundred firefighters
working.
And about nineteen hundred
retired.
So I noted that these twenty
seventeen and twenty twenty
plans really point out that what
we have is we have a
contribution shortfall.
And it's clear it's a shortfall
we need to address that.
So I asked a if we have the
Anthony monitory on here to help
us on technical questions is
what Legislative Council ink yet
advocate for or against this
bill is just here to help us
when I ask Anthony if you could
kind of right down there changes
that I have in this year's bill.
And that's what he's done that's
his break down so down below my
legislation our well what Senate
bill seventy two of all of its
changes go ahead and continue
on.
However what we will do is in my
legislation we're going to
increase the contributions based
on these tables we're not going
to go to the full amount but
we're going to get close to it.
So the state so remember we've
got to present coming into the
fund from.
Senate bill seventy two so the
statement is both general will
increase by ten percent so it'll
be.
There will be one percent per
year for the next ten years
after the two percent goes into
effect.
We go to the page I the meniscal
police fund will increase and I
have a typo it should be
increased by four percent.
Plus the two percent that
occurred so again the municipal
police increase at one percent
per year for the next four
years.
Once the two percent could set
up the municipal fire fund will
increase by ten percent after
the two percent unemployment
Tatian again one percent per
year for ten years.
The other thing is this allows
the employee who retired to
remain working ask the ad is
current employment but his our
budget will increase by one
percent per year that he
continues to work beyond is
retirement eligibility.
And this is to address the
return to work issues these
employees will be making full
contributions under the
frontier.
And the employee is not
collecting a retirement benefit
at the time there's some people
who want to remain working for
government and this allows them
to go ahead and do that and not
be taking funds out.
I'm.
Retiree is what we're finding is
a lot of a retiring in their mid
forties.
Those people are going back to
work so retire please won't
receive a call up under this
legislation and tell they reach
age sixty.
Or if they're disabled they're
gonna recieve it right after.
They retire with a disability or
their income is less than twenty
five thousand a year or less.
The.
Seventy five and above
Retirees will remain with their
two point five percent I don't
touch that.
Anyway these these changes are
proposed to go ahead and shore
up our pair of funds.
With that Mr chairman all stand
for questions and I have Anthony
if we have some technical what's
thank you.
Okay go to
To.
The staff.
Anybody want to comment on this
bill.
I needed Wayne.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Wayne prosecuted secretary
director of the public employees
retirement association.
Every January the up a board of
trustees passes a resolution
authorizing the our executive
director.
consultation with the airports
chair and the chair of the
legislative committee of the
boards take positions.
On legislation.
Ms before committees of the
legislature report is not.
Opportunity to review the board
has not had an opportunity to
review this legislation leading
consultation with the board
Cher share our legislative
committee we do stand in
opposition.
Mr chairman members of the
committee.
I'm just a little bit less than
a year ago.
Are you passed Senate bill
seventy two.
The most comprehensive reform.
Of the pair budget in the
seventy four year history of
this of the association.
That legislation was intended.
To pay down our unfunded
liability and returned hello to
a path of long term solvency.
Mr chairman you probably
remember the debate on Senate
bill seventy two very well it
was contentious it was a complex
piece of legislation but
ultimately both the house and
Senate and bipartisan manner
bipartisan manner a past Senate
bill seventy two and the
governor signed.
Senate Bill Senator was the
outgrowth of three years of
effort by the terrible work.
L. solvency legislation it was
the offer most of the task force
formed by.
The governor Longduration.
And it was the work of the
investments and pensions
oversight committee as well Mr
chairman well the ink is barely
dry on Senate bill seventy two I
can report.
The initial reviews of its
impact are very good.
It has reduced our unfunded
liability Mr chair members the
committee if you have not passed
Senate bill seventy two our
unfunded liability this year
would have been almost eight
hundred million dollars higher.
It has stabilized.
The funding projection for
parent total as well as all of
our.
Divisions within up with a pair
of fire division police division
no school division our state
general division.
All of those.
Provisions again parent total
the solvency outlook has
improved significantly as a
result of Senate bill seventy
two.
And that is after Mr chairman
what was a very difficult
investment year and FY twenty
one as a result of the pandemic
impact on global markets Mr
chairman
nobody is crystal ball is
perfectly clear but what is
clear Mr chairman is that by
passing Senate bill seventy two
are you have put on back on a
path thank you doctor unfunded
liability and back on a path to
long term solvency.
Mr chair even before passing
Senate bill seventy two.
The contributions of public
employees pay in New Mexico
towards their pensions were
amongst the highest in the
country.
As part of Senate bill seventy
two those contributions for
employees were raised by two
percent.
This bill would raise those
contributions by between another
four and nine percent.
So Mr chairman that's another
forty nine percent it is going
to be coming out of.
Public health nurse nurses
salaries firefighters police
officers salaries
public employees throughout the
state in your communities I will
be paying in some cases almost
double what they're paying now
and the contributions they're
paying now are the highest in
the country simply put Mr
chairman this legislative
session.
It is not necessary having done
the hard work of passing pension
reform in two thousand twenty
eight.
The board believes that what
needs to happen now is a period
where we allow Senate bill
seventy to be fully implemented
it has been fully implemented
contribution increases that were
included in Senate bill seventy
two will be phased in over the
next year this.
The legislature did on that
the pair were trustees did all
not the governor did on that
piece of legislation to take
effect to see what the results
are.
Down the road we may need to
make further adjustments right
now all based on the most recent
analysis that we have.
Senate bill seventy two is doing
exactly what we intended it to
do.
A couple of final comments Mr
chairman.
I would note that the.
Analysis on.
Page one that was provided.
When we were first to respective
systems and I trust.
Mr chairman I believe in a maybe
Mr Montoya can correct me if I'm
wrong but system I believe
refers to your B. and pair are
not divisions within those two
entities.
Mr chair in terms of looking at
page two and the.
The funded ratios that are are
demonstrated from there on that
side Mr chairman I think a
Representative Bridget indicated
those are from two thousand and
seventeen.
As I just noted
airboard received updated
funding projections updated
unfunded liability analysis
just a couple months ago we
reported that to the investments
and pensions oversight committee
and the grass on page two are
are no longer relevant because
they do not take into account
the changes that were made to
the pair benefit the increases
of the contributions which I
mentioned that were part of
Senate bill seventy two.
And so if you were to look at
a an updated version of those
charts they would look
significantly different so the
Mr chairman of the committee
thank you for the opportunity to
discuss this a bit in eight but
thank you thank you on behalf of
Paris ninety thousand members
for the hard work that you did
in two thousand twenty the
difficult work with the voted
for Senate bill seventy two or
didn't know first Senate bill
seventy two it was still hard
work is this still a difficult
vote.
Chair board of trustees
appreciates the work that you
did in passing legislation
because it has become a patron
on our unfunded liability and
has put her back on a path to
long term solvency and right
now.
The contribution increases in
particular that are contained
and house bill sixty five simply
are premature and not necessary
thank you Mr.
Carter you're on mute it.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Carter Bundy with
asked me I don't want to repeat
what director Propst said he
really covered almost all of it
I will note that for the twenty
years I've been doing this we
always hear that all the money
from all the different
contributors New Mexico goes
ultimately into the same fund
and they're paid out of the same
funds so I think that's a pretty
important piece that it's not
like each of these different
plans has a requirement to be a
certain solvency level I would
also note that with the
exception of state corrections
and please.
all of them have room to grow
there's a little bit of a false
division here when we talk about
these plans because for example
a and administrative assistant
in the City of Albuquerque and
an administrative assistant for
the state of New Mexico who
works in Albuquerque work in the
same place are often on the same
demographics they're pulled from
the same labor pool they pay
virtually the same amount into
the plan to get the exact same
benefits out of it they have the
same jobs they have the same
requirements for when they can
retire and to say that just
because of the happenstance of
the State may be our under
employment under staffing there
people that now the state
employees are going to pay a ten
percent above what they
currently pay one slight
correction I think from director
Propst is for some of these
employees it is actually more
than double what they currently
pay for example firefighters
currently pay nine point five
percent and would be going up to
twenty one point five percent
this is a massive massive hit
the public employees who have
already in both twenty thirteen
and twenty twenty come to the
table and taken sacrifices both
in terms of pain and a lot more
money and having some of their
budget decrease so we would ask
that we give these type these
plans these changes in SB twenty
seven per twenty thirteen and SB
seventy two for twenty twenty
time to work and and another
final point is Representative
Rehm is one of my favorite
people in the building we
certainly respect can there has
been no outreach to ask me to
The New Mexico federation of
labor to my knowledge to the
firefighters who may not be able
to attend today but they gave us
authority to say that they also
oppose this I don't believe.
Be there without reach to CBA
none of the organizations which
represent thousands and
thousands of these employees who
are about to take a massive in
some cases about ten thousand
dollar hit to their pay none of
these organizations were
consulted even I and a cursory
manner much less having this go
through a full vetting process
as the previous bills had so
with all due respect to our good
friend Representative bring we
would respectfully ask you to
oppose this bill thank you.
John you are muted.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee John
Lipschutz with The New Mexico
federation of labor AFL-CIO
there is really nothing more
that we can add except that all
of the R. union affiliates that
are represented by the AFL-CIO
stand in opposition to this bill
thank you.
Trust your unmuted.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee Josh Anderson with
us council eighteen also would
just like to echo the comments
made by the previous speakers
and asked the committee to
please oppose house bill sixty
five thank you Mr chairman.
Members of the committee.
Representative sure Stapleton.
Thank you Mr chairman
and Marcella
Mr chair and representative
redeem.
Based on the fact that we did
this piece of legislation house
bill seventy two just recently
and it hasn't done its
functionality yet.
But the fact that it's
it's taking PM that unfunded
liability so far.
What.
Maybe you want to change going
to that bill I mean Madam to
that into P. R. right at this
time.
Mr chairman and
Representative Stapleton before
I begin this outline was sent to
when Propst who never responded.
And he didn't answer my phone
call today it was also sent to
the firefighters and to the
police just to clarify that but
if you look on.
Page.
At the top of page three.
This is the I'm funded.
Shortfall of each one of those
plans and now I'm not opposed to
reducing that amount but this is
what was given to us given to me
January of last year I Mr props
and in twenty thirteen.
When he took one percent of the
colon he said exactly what he
did just a minute ago about that
change and then we were back
five years later.
What I don't want to do is see
us back five years from now with
even a worse position.
So that's why I went ahead
minute is this.
We have a funding contribution
problem not a coal.
But you don't agree Mr chair and
representative we you do not
agree with weighing that.
The process of what took place
in seventy pool resolve what he
gave you in January of twenty.
Mr chairman and Representative
Stapleton and no I don't agree.
So therefore that is why you
bring in this piece of
legislation.
Mr chairman Representative
Stapleton yes and if the
committee wants to adjust some
of the increases that's fine
with me what we need to do is
get more money into that pair
Fund.
Representative Mr chair and
representative ream.
I supported house bill seventy
two.
To the detriment of rules in
some of my closest friends.
I'm.
Especially one of them whose.
Directly involved with.
How are up to this they don't
talk to me.
And so.
I don't I'm and and that have
nothing to do with what you want
to do except for me to say.
I personally would be very
careful about touch in something
that
The majority of us felt in the
legislature at the time that we
would do in a good deed by
trying to shore up.
Yeah right and according to you
we haven't done so but according
to the sources according to the
sources of the people that works
within the P. E. R. right and
work with the funding they're
saying what you're requesting is
not needed at this time.
So thank you very much and thank
you Mr chairman.
Thank you Mr chair.
and thank you Representative
Rehm.
I presentation and and nine.
Your your sincere.
Arguments in support of your
legislation.
And you know I about Mr chair I
sat on the end this
interventions oversight
committee.
Or well over.
I'm gonna say sixteen years.
And in all that time
Every piece of legislation that
seeks to reform.
Our pension funds.
In a bipartisan manner.
We ran it in the committee.
And this legislation before us.
The budget increases in terms
of.
Of
It remains
This presentations on certain
issues that come before the I
pod committee.
In its entirety this piece of
legislation has not been vetted.
By the I investment pensions
oversight committee.
And the other I think downturn
with the legislation is that it
has no bipartisan support.
And any time we see to.
tweak.
These pension funds anyway it's
it really requires a bipartisan
effort.
And and fully venting in the
proper
interim committees this.
so you know I applied.
Representative rain for.
S. trying to kind of address
what he sees the discrepancy in
terms of how we're pursuing
Making more of these
or Fund some.
Fans are.
but I think the.
Thank you.
Run it.
Those changes through this
legislation without.
bye bye passings
You know committee.
Rep Devin Spence betting.
And also because of know what
partisan support it's so
difficult for me to really
support this legislation thank
you Mr chair thank AeroCentury.
Chair rice zero way it'll.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee and I
want to I want to thank you
Wayne procs because he did an
excellent job of recapping what
I think is is valuable history
and Mr chairman members of the
committee I vice chair of the
immense investment pension and
oversight committee and I can
tell you for a fact that we went
through a grueling vetting
process grueling meaning that we
asked all of the questions are
we gained all of the answers
we entertained in current from
across sectors of all affected
parties of everyone that would
be involved directly in these
processes Mr chair it really
bothers me Representative it's
not anything
you know I want to work with
with the representative remind
many locations in rare occasions
of of being together but it it I
want to respond Mr chair and
value of the processes and the
fact that we have included all
of the parties that need to be
included when we are betting
especially this major reform and
this was a major reform effort
that involved hearing how many
people and from all sides and
and we brought in extensive
agenda full of experts we
compared with other states I
mean this was legislation and
and I mean reform effort that
truly reflected on the the
process and I want to honor that
and I also Mr chair one eight
knowledge of the fact that we
just and rolling
the M. as
As Mr pope's mentioned R. H. B.
seventy two there are a lot of
factors that still have to ruby
rolled out there a lot of
consideration to have to be
taken into the into factors that
have to be taken into
consideration and it just seems
very untimely I think that
having a property value to
furious a proper period for I'm
not just evaluating but
measuring the absolute benefits
across the board and maybe
looking for how is those
benefits are on rolling how we
can close the gap and
work to continue to improve on
the efforts that we put in place
is a better way to go as opposed
to trying to undo or to try to
take a step back I I always have
difficulty Mr chair with taking
steps back to progress because
we made significant progress and
it was as Representative leader
stable madam many of us suffered
yes director gets in the
positions that we took and and
they and and the direct hits
came in many different forms
that put at risk some of our
positions but we were willing to
take the risks because with the
understanding that the process
was all inclusive as inclusive
as inclusive can get and we had
all the bodies in at the table
and Representative so we didn't
collect any ones voices we may
not have Mr chair on been in
full agreement but that's what
what the negotiations and
compromises all about reaching
common ground and then being
able to get those principles of
unity and common ground move
forward in the best possible way
and I will agree with
Representative leader Stapleton
in that the hits that we took
personally and in our positions
the state Representative.
Senator apps
we're not easy wants to take and
that we are still going to
suffer the the ramifications I'm
sure through other election
cycles down the road another
cycles as we unfold our work in
the community but that's okay
because in the end as Mister
Probst mentioned Mr chair and
members of the committee and the
and we have to have something in
place in order to begin to
measure so that we can begin
this systemically address the
changes so that we don't have to
be repeating these processes as
you would suggest Representative
Rehm on that we do right now
unnecessarily thank you Mr chair
I did have a question but I I
just want to Representative to
renew your part of this as well
and so I want you to to to
please acknowledge that we did
that we get to go through this
and I do respect the points that
you want to raise but I think we
need to give it a little bit
more time to unfold and unravel
and then be able to measure its
effect as we go along thank you
Mr chair.
Mr chairman.
We have a question for
Representative.
What are the laws of.
I keep asking questions so
you'll find to be able to.
pronounce my name
A way out look I'm gonna say you
know what.
Mr chair and.
Representative Rehm.
You know this what you did took
a lot of effort a lot of effort
a lot of time this is not easy
to do and it's and it's tough
you know.
I I I see it all right through
here and I see that you know I'm
a look at one of the
the bill Maria synopsis and I
see that you know you're trying
to help the lower income
retirees and see that that the
state police is is is funded a
hundred and twenty seven percent
and others are under funded but
we it's it's evident in this but
expressed that.
That the legislature last time
did what they could to try to
pull back an under funded.
A pension for many many many
employees
I I just want to tell you I I
really appreciate all the hard
work that you put into this and
it's and I and and I understand
what you're trying to do and I I
I I also I'm someone that is you
know it's a promise when you go
to work for somebody and you're
going to work for the state it
is concerning to know that your
that your pension may not be
there in the future orders under
funded or or and and and what
will end up happening is a it's
a promise the state has and the
state will have to pay it in
terms of staff the taxpayers
will possibly be
responsible for that there are
some counties in and we're not
counties but
other entities that local
governments that promise to pay
the difference but you know how
that is sometimes that doesn't
materialize and they're they're
not able to financially handle
that.
Obviously and in it you know
you're you're given the
narrative of how this happened
and how it ended up being under
funded I will say that it does
concern me I mean for those that
are that have a a lower that you
don't have a a lower salary or
or wages that if the if the if
it increases and I appreciate
that you that you expressed that
you would lower it but I think
it's for some people right now
it's a lot of money and but then
I I really appreciate Sir all
the hard work that you that you
the your best I know that it's
tough and and I and and I.
My hat's off to you thank you Mr
chair Mr ram god bless you.
Representative are there any
other questions from the
committee.
And more someone do we have I
thought I saw my hand on.
Representative former
representative really my thing
as was he on the list to speak
okay no ma'am would you.
Right me too and you have yes
would you please because I just
saw his hand and I'm not quite
sure we noticed before thank you
your unmuted.
Mr Martinez.
I'm Rudy Martinez can you hear
us your unmuted you have the
four if you'd like to raise your
question.
Representative perhaps not so if
there are no further questions
what is the will of the
committee.
Madam chair to table.
Thank you representative Rubio
most to table.
Thank.
And that's seconded by
Representative me and that CLR.
And
Will you go ahead and take the
role please yes ma'am.
Representative bash.
Representative Black.
Representative Garcia yes the
table Representative Hernandez.
Yes Representative Rubio.
Yes to table.
Representative Stapleton yes.
Representative.
Lows.
What to to table it.
Thank vice chair Roybal
Caballero.
Yes to table.
Mr chair.
Mr chair deferred to me here at
the take care of something so
I'm not quite sure he's back on.
I don't see him.
So how will you go hand and
read the.
The vote please.
We have seven two table.
Thank you so we have eight seven
to table and zero mace.
The motion passes the table
thank you representative REME
very much for the time we took
to be the for committee.
Thank you committee and well
what see as soon thank you yes
we will thank you.
So
We are now I'm I I know that we
rolled over house bill thirty
one I'm not quite sure if it's
going to come back on today but
we have next on the
the gender H. R. B. one one
three is that correct my summer.
Yes our madam vice chair we have
Representative Garcia.
Madam chair did you say house
bill twenty one was roled over
not rolled over front nine of
thirty one point
thirty one from the committee
not necessarily rolled over I
think that chair was holding it
to see what was going to happen
with Representative descending
and.
He was gonna present on it
Representative Perry.
I do want to handle it Mr chair
going.
Go ahead.
Right away if the we we will
allow me as offices house bill
thirty one for the Military and
Veterans Affairs Committee in.
And we basically.
It is relating to the code of
military justice amending the
elements of the definitions of a
Senator six crimes and what it
will do is allow you.
Especially people that serve in
the New Mexico National Guard
the New Mexico
There are a.
We've got.
If.
They fall under the code and
Justice of the military.
And that's all this does is
allow the state of New Mexico
the people that are serving.
As similar to in the military to
fall under the code of the
military code of military
justice if something happens in
this case in the case of a
basically six.
The sex crimes or something that
the state of New Mexico and the
military coders totally
different so this brings it in
college.
With.
You see J..
But the last year I will stand
for questions.
I will go.
I'm
asking there's one.
To address in support of this
bill if you're in the attendees
do we have any one more summer.
Representative Rudy Martinez I'm
going to and you can now.
Okay.
Mr Martinez your unmuted.
Yeah I'm not quite sure what's
happening Mr Martinez in the
meantime maybe we can
communicate with him and then we
have another hand Elena Elena
you are muted.
Hello can every hear me.
Yes we can hear you okay good
afternoon Mister chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Elena rid themselves and I am
the legal director for the New
Mexico coalition of sexual
assault programs the coalition
leads the state's efforts to
reduce sexual abuse and sexual
violence through training and
technical assistance to service
providers throughout our state
we also collect and analyze the
sexual assault and domestic
violence data and produce annual
reports of those findings
through our work we aim to
ensure that all New Mexicans
survivors can access the
services justice and healing
they want and need I'm here
today to express the coalition
strong support for house bill
thirty one as advocates for
sexual assault survivors we know
that this bill would help ensure
that all survivors in New Mexico
have a road to justice and
healing as you've heard that New
Mexico military of code contains
outdated language that prevents
some who commit rape
and sexual assault from being
prosecuted and the term limit
survivors access to justice more
specifically the code currently
states that whites cannot be
raped or sexually assaulted by
their husbands the code also
currently refers to service
providers as females the
coalition knows and I'm sure you
all know as well that anyone can
be rates regardless of their
marital status sex or gender
identity.
It's time to modernize this
language HB thirty one updates
are states military code so that
it aligns with the federal
military code eliminates the
spousal rape exception which
states that wives could not be
raped or sexually assaulted and
also eliminates language
referring to survivors as
females ensuring that all
survivors can seek justice
hunter the state military code
regardless of sex or gender
identity HB thirty one also
elaborates on the definitions of
rape and other sex crimes and
related terms so that they are
detailed clear and modern and H.
B. thirty one guarantees that
all survivors can access justice
as all those who commit rape and
sexual and excuse me as a and
all those who commit rape and
sexual assault can be held
legally accountable for their
actions on behalf of the New
Mexico coalition of sexual
assault programs I ask you Mr
chairman members of the
committee to please vote yes on
house bill thirty one as doing
so would support all survivors
in our state in accessing the
justice and healing they deserve
thank you so much for your time.
Thank you Mr.
Do we have another hand.
Your unmuted Alex.
Earthy you're on mute and.
Now can you hear me.
Yes okay great this is Dorothy
State
army and Army National Guard
veteran
I serve on the.
Veterans caucus committee for
veterans advocacy as a volunteer
I I read through Representative
sure neon this bill and I
strongly support it.
Having been a woman in the
military myself that was over.
About twenty one years of
service these issues are really
important for good order in the
military and holding people
accountable for the the
standards of behavior that are
sat
unlimited is a spill or job of
outlining why are you good built
on taking away the defense of of
very much.
Brings us into the century I
think.
And
Also outlining the specific
behaviors makes it clear to
anybody and everybody what our
standards are so with that Mr
chair and members of the
committee I strongly support the
bill.
Thank you Mr.
what you're on needed.
You Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Charlotte
mother when you I work with
Julianna Koob along with the
coalition for change and I'm
here to ask you to vote yes in
support of age thirty one thank
you.
Thank you.
Anyone else.
Are there any member is any part
of individuals in attendance
that wish to speak in
opposition.
Do we see any madam vice chair
I'm going to try to allow Rudy
Martinez to talk again I think
you may be having technical
issues okay Mr Martinez can you
hear us.
Your and muted.
Mr Rudy Martinez I'm mute unmute
yourself and then your you've
got the floor.
We hear you.
I think it's you.
Rudy Martinez do you hear us.
Madam chair that's the only.
But let me put you on.
I'm.
Yes madam chair
Representative Martínez can hear
you but you can't hear him so
I have them on a speaker on my
phone.
Let's try.
Representative.
Thank you for waiting all.
Chair of the committee for.
This is a bill that we are
supporting.
Because.
How much made by
Representative.
Well I don't support of this
bill which sure no.
I stand in support of this bill
thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you Representative me
getting a feel for making this
happen.
Thank you I see
do we have any other we don't
have any up in opposition
correct so
I will go back to the committee
are there any questions for Mr
chair representative.
I'm going from the committee.
Any questions.
Representative Colossus.
You have the four.
Thank you madam chair
Or or I guess you're serving as
a chair right and chair of
course thank you very much the
beautiful bill
I have a daughter in the
military shoes in the airforce
she's twenty she's pretty.
I love her very much and this is
a bureau this is a wonderful
bill I would like to vote for
the bill and I just was asking
if there be any way that I could
have a friendly amendment that
would consider just striking the
the punished by death on on the
bill would that be something
that could could happen.
Mr chair.
As we discuss this during the
interim committee and military
veterans.
And it was left there because we
talked about the same with the
same subject the death penalty
is not that something that the
latter in New Mexico however it
is left there because of some of
the happens in another state for
the death penalty is allowed
then you can go on but it would
not happen in the state of New
Mexico because state in New
Mexico does not have the death
penalty.
Thank you Mr chair I understand
that this brings up to par with
the language in the with the
federal government and and with
the military federal wise is
that correct yes.
Madam chair
Representative says that is
correct is brings as a
in with the military Kodi
justice.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative my of corn that
is wonderful god bless you thank
you.
Are you.
You were there any other
questions from the committee.
Over the past.
Thank you.
There's a motion made by
Representative on Haley got
Rubio or do pass and then I
really don't know who's who all
stepped up next and everybody
was what
Okay.
Madam chair I I make the motion
but I will deferred to the
individual that wishes to also
make a motion.
my motion to the individual that
also wish to make.
Representative dresses thank you
thank you Representative Garcia
you're you're too kind.
Representative I've gone chair
you have a tremendous amount of
support on the so there's been a
motion made in a second
representative Karen bass I
recognize as the session and
Is there any opposition from the
committee to house bill thirty
one.
Any opposition.
All right so we have a due pass
for house bill thirty one thank
you representative on this is a
fantastic bill very much needed
timely thank you.
Are you gonna take over now.
Okay.
I believe we have a
Representative Garcia.
Can you hear me.
I presented chambers in the he's
an attendee.
Can you hear me.
We.
Thank you Mr chairman this bill.
Related to the Human Rights
permitting termination based on
military or veteran status.
What I'm trying to do here is a
lot of veterans again
discriminated against.
Who would been there forever and
I'm strategies that pool we can
put a stop to discrimination
part Mr chairman the.
The Representative Chandler but
you have anything to put into
this.
You Garcia very happy to be co
sponsoring this bill with you it
really is a pretty simple right
I know that's a big joke around
around house but it simply adds
on additional protective staff
status to the Human Rights Act
and to ensure that our veterans
and our our military servicemen
or women are not.
Against and that they have a re
remedy in state law.
Mr chairman and committee
members.
I myself am a Vietnam veteran.
I went to Vietnam in nineteen
sixty eight rightfully to
eighteen years old.
Right out of high school full
this week
kind of the reason being is
bill stand for any questions
from.
What else.
Do I have a motion committee Mr
chair point of order Mr chair.
Mr chair by order.
This is you might want to go to
the audience before you go to
the committee.
Yes you're right use I have no
public comment L. I.
Thank you Mr thank you Mr
chairman.
I just I will go to the audience
and see if there's anybody in
support of the bill.
I see a way we know has over
there so we'll start with you.
Thank you Mr chair I sure
appreciate the opportunity for
those of you all the don't know
the Human Rights bureau is
actually another workforce
solutions department just like
unemployment and labor relations
and a bunch of other stuff we
looked over this bill is just
too quick small points
our staff had some issues with
some of the definitions of what
a veteran is according to this
one their biggest issue is that
our in this language that
an applicant could be considered
some of someone who could be
protected and our folks had some
issues with that one of our
staffers did get some proposed
language Representative Chandler
she said should be amenable work
and so it's kind of work those
things for so you know we're
okay with that as long as you
know that language can be worked
on before the next committee we
don't have a problem with the
bill as a whole just on those
definitions and then the other
thing Mr chair I just want to
remind everybody because this
one's not gonna be too big a
deal our staff call over to
California which is one of the
other states that has this
provision in its law and they
said last year there was only
like six hundred cases brought
up in the entire state of
California which isn't too bad
so the workload on our office we
we don't think that'll be a big
deal for office but I would say
though is the more provisions
that get put in means the more
work for our staff and if we're
not given additional
appropriations to hire more
people than not only do.
The things that you want to get
passed by law not get taken care
of in force but the other things
that we're supposed to enforce
like race religion gender gender
identity etcetera don't get
enforced either so like I said
this one shouldn't be a big deal
we don't imagine our workloads
going up and we are actually
asking for some additional staff
from appropriations this year we
just like to remind everybody
that every time something new is
added it adds more for us to do
and it it means we need more
resources and I just want to.
Make sure that that message is
out there at I really appreciate
it Mr chair thank you for let me
tell you can lose anymore hair
anyway let me ask this one how
old she is let me ask this one
question okay be that I got the
parotid do with the chair choose
an applicant you're saying
somebody that applies for
unemployment could claim it was
dated Mr chair right now the
right now the way that this bill
is written if I apply for the
military then I would be
considered a protected class and
our folks said that that opens a
lot of can of worms for a lot of
things and that's why they
worked on some definitions they
Senator Representative Chandler
Representative Garcia we would
be happy to work with you as
well I don't think it's real
controversial and our our folks
are just they're saying as long
as that language is tightened up
on those definitions it should
be okay but this has nothing to
do with unemployment.
Go ahead.
Of the criminal the victim
Cameri I've talked to a couple
of general during the military
right now and he said three
qualified to be a veterans you
have to serve a hundred eighty
days consecutive in the military
so applicant the big word and we
can and that the problem but the
verify what is a veteran you
have to be an active duty for a
hundred eighty days consecutive
to be qualified as a better.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
secretary.
Okay we have other a really
common to.
Else.
What else okay.
Okay now added to the other
members of the committee.
So what do passed Mr.
I have a brother Moses would do
best in a proper second go ahead
with the opposition to that
motion Mr chair point of order I
think there's a member that has
their hand up to speak.
Those sorry sorry Representative
Hernandez you you almost got me
have.
It would have been okay I just
wanted to Mr chair and
representative.
Garcia I think I want to thank
you for bringing this bill
forward sorry I'm.
Back from what.
We just want to thank you for
bringing this bill from a family
of military veterans except for
myself we we all appreciate it
thank you.
Okay.
Mr for the water Mr market is so
you want to speak thank you.
Yes.
Can you hear me now.
All right.
Again as the
chair of the
Committee for veterans advocacy.
We sent a strong strong support
of this bill.
It really affects the.
Not only veterans but military
Servicemen as they're currently
serving.
the bill does contain that it
allows.
Army National Guard and Air
National Guard members to be
under this protection.
Although that date may be
Not served a hundred eighty days
but there's still serving our
country by wearing the uniform.
So I status on Justice strong
support Mr chairman thank you.
Would you believe that might the
my computer mutually all by
itself I wonder what it's
telling me at this time I do
have a promotion a proper second
do I have any opposition to that
motion.
See none please note to
everybody present voting in the
affirmative.
And you have a new
Representative Garcia
Representative Chandler.
Thank you.
Committee members.
Thank you.
And I think with that we're done
with their business for the day.
We work we over time.
We probably meet Thursday the
genesis should be published
already for Thursday is that
right the destructive no Sir I
am just waiting.
So right now to send it in and
I'll be ready by tomorrow
morning okay.
Mr chair this is Representative
to me again Mr chair that we
start earlier than three o'clock
because I tend like run a couple
minutes before three and you
guys are already into a bill.
Where we were starting earlier.
And and and I I have to
apologize to both of you to both
you and that Representative
Sheryl Williams Stapleton
because
I said on the floor three
o'clock
goldenrod it says two o'clock.
As a message to you Mr chairman
and use effectively told my
staff this is how I apologize
dollars the.
Sorry I I will make sure that
unit together okay so with that
in mind everybody we will see
you Thursday if not sooner.
And everybody have a good
evening.
