Representative Gallegos here.
Representative Martinez.
Here.
Representative one.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Representative small.
Here.
Representative.
Tom.
I'm here.
Representative Townsend.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Andrea.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Chairman of Garrett.
Madam chair.
Thank you very much too late I
without will get started on our
agenda our first presenter is
Representative popular Martinez.
Thank you madam chair thank you
members of the committee could
see all of you this morning I'm
here to present the house budget
piece of the feed bill and with
me our our steam Madam chief
clerk Lisa Ortiz McCutchen and
our Director Legislative Council
Service I would would see I got
we've got major areas will be
increased expenses in the budget
front of you session budget in
front of you after discussion
amongst leadership of both sides
of the aisle but you'd clerk's
office has increased the rate of
pay for all sessions staff to
address the need for better
compensation.
as you know the demands on our
staff or hi and even more
difficult with with COVID as as
people come back into the
building and and staff our
legislative session.
In addition to provide safer and
healthier work environment for
all of our members and staff.
The chief clerks office has
proposed additional mask wipes
and sanitizers cleansers be made
available readily available for
all of us.
There are some cost savings in
the house it session budget as
well that I should but I should
note in terms of general
expenses the chief clerks office
continues to be mindful of
unnecessary session expenses and
Lisa the chief clerk as on the
job removing or reducing
whenever possible and you can
dive deeper into those details.
Other considerations include in
the budget that you should know
about the timing of the current
pay period and the date of the
session when the session begins
have created a challenge to pay
staff under PreSession funds for
the period beginning January
tenth.
For example recognizing that
they would not be enough money
in the PreSession budget to
PreSession staff in mileage
Representative permit for
members it's been decided that
staff would be paid from regular
session drugs the impact the
salaries and I guys
approximately eighty eight
thousand dollars for the past
week this is the same scenario
that occurred last year for the
twenty twenty and the twenty
twenty one sessions with that
madam chair members I'll be
happy to respond to any
questions again with our chief
clerk in our Director
Legislative Council Service
available to respond to those
thank you madam chair.
Your muted madam chair.
And so good.
Steve clerk Ortiz is there
anything you want to add before
we go to questions.
no I actually there's nothing
really this this budget is very
vanilla pardon me.
This budget is very vanilla
compared to last couple sessions
if you look at some of the line
items that run down the sideline
if you don't mind sharing the
screen we had a couple of big
expenses under info technology
last year we purchased the
virtual voting console which was
up by almost fifty thousand
dollars there now we have a
place that's not here the year
before you can see there's
another eighteen thousand two
hundred dollars expense that was
for a Xerox machine we needed to
purchase so
Outside there's nothing big are
extraordinary out of this
of this budget just like I said
this the increase to properly
compensate staff that support
you to do your duty here that
you've been elected to do and
and just the extra
the subsidies to make sure that
this is a safe place for us
staff and for you and the
public.
Thank you for court case will
now go to questions I see
Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair two or
three very quick questions and
the opening comments I believe I
heard the Mr Martinez
Representative Martinez
mentioned that there is some
compensation increased within
this.
Can you tell me what percent is
it increased by a percent or.
How did they do the increased so
Excuse me part of the backstory
is that well basically there's
about twenty nine percent
increase across the entire board
from the lowest K. person all
the way to the highest paid
person along each of that
the ranges that we have here in
part of that is the cost of
living and also the
the living wage or the minimum
wage that's going to be
increasing so leadership also
felt it was important to get to
a higher rate especially for the
staff that that take care of
everybody the lowest paid person
on the originally that was on
there was custodial which is
about eleven dollars and eighty
cents now they've been booked up
to fifteen and everybody's gone
up from there.
Okay thank you for that I guess
my last follow up question would
be both the executive and the
legislative branch are
contemplating a seven percent
pay raise three percent twenty
two for the last quarter
additional four percent in the
twenty three budget so is that
pay raise in addition to what
you've already embedded in this.
No no and the thing is is what
the executive is proposing for
for you know the legislative
staff and for the executive that
is completely separate from the
house budget we it's done in a
different fashion we don't
necessarily follow the pay
increases this is just something
to get us where we need to be
and will follow in the future so
there's not necessarily next
year there there are chances are
pretty good that there may not
be an increase to the grid that
we have right now okay it's just
curious that I knew that was
taking place the other elected
to question on internet services
it with from
Eight thousand four hundred ten
on the last thirty day session
the seventeen thousand nine
hundred this time.
What what cost the big increase
in the legal the attorneys and
so the internet is for the legal
counsel that's provided to the
speaker and each of the
leadership offices
stay up of a pool of money that
they can use for their analyst
for the respective duties this
individual is being compensated
more but that money is actually
being subtracted from that pool
of money that you would see the
salaries and benefits so there's
a wash in there so okay if there
there's no.
It takes care of itself okay
then the.
Madam chair and in the land
Clark the only other one is a
communications I notice there's
a five thousand dollar figure in
that block and there's no
history of us using funding in
that line item
I'm curious why it.
How that happened I thought that
would be part of IT or something
that the white white is that
separated out of what is
communications.
for so I must apologize madam
chair I have not been speaking
through you first and foremost
so madam chair Representative
Crowder
we are for security purposes we
are purchasing some handheld
equipment that as allows them to
speak
along with our capital security
it also ties in with state quit
when they're here so that
there's better collaboration
amongst all the entities that
are here to keep us all safe so
these are just items that were
purchasing the with the it's a
one time purchase
it includes the phone
the protective cover that comes
around it in the ear pieces that
go with it and the docking
stations to charge I'm so that's
the whole thing is that way
there's better communication
among all entities are in the
building okay thank you madam
Clark madam chair I I a.
I'm very pleased to see that the
total cost everything is a very
very minimal increase this
thirty day over the last thirty
day
that that's good to see I can
see some I instruct their pencil
work hard to get that that type
well done thank you madam chair
thank you Representative Crowder
for great questions anymore
questions.
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair that I
have my hand raised I just don't
know that you can see at but
thank you madam chair and thank
you for the presentation the
only mothers I I had the same
questions as Representative
Crowder but the only other one
madam chair that I'm curious
about is
under contractual services under
other services that went from
fifteen hundred dollars in the
last thirty data seventy five
hundred dollars and is that
something that you've already
explained if it is I understand
if not please address that.
Madam chair representative
Armstrong
as you can see last year in last
year's calculations there's a
ten thousand dollar
increase to that that is
actually for interpretation
services and as many of you know
last year we didn't have we did
everything virtually we had
people doing interpretation via
the user for those people that
couldn't be here so I anticipate
this is might be another need
again I made it I made it less
than last year but I still felt
it might be important to have
that extra cushion there just in
case interpretation services are
important again since many
people would be testifying
hopefully it many people be
testifying offsite.
Thank you so much thank you
madam chair.
Thank you are there any more
questions.
I do not see any raised hands I
do have one question myself
Madam chief clerk how has hiring
gone have we've been able to
hire all the legislative aides
and analysts that we need for
the thirty day session.
Madam chair it is been difficult
this year
with the the pandemic people are
nervous about being here
the the most difficult positions
that we have had a in hiring R.
some LA's and custodial.
People and security also
but that's just we're we're
pretty close to capacity but
we're working our darnedest to
see if we can get these
positions filled and also I need
to add to is the vaccination
status is also made it just a a
little bit difficult.
Thank you very much.
I see no more has raised with
that I'll take a motion to
accept the budget.
Some of.
Okay and seconded
is there anybody who objects.
I see no objections of the
budget is accepted as presented
by the speaker in the by the
Majority Leader and the chief
clerk.
Are there any more questions
issues that anybody wants to
bring out before we and our
meeting.
Madam chair made to read comment
I I please
to see this going forward right
at the very end of the special
session
thank you weeks ago the minority
leader and with that approach me
and the Majority Leader in the
clerk to talk about this
compensation increased so this
is a.
The this is done in a bipartisan
basis the increase to the pay
grade I really have at the
request of both for leisure and
so glad that we're able to start
the session off with a bit of
bipartisanship to get start.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Anybody else want to make a
comment.
I would like to give a round of
applause to at least so Ortiz
the incredible job she does.
Thank you to where Madam parties
are madam speaker court case.
Okay see no further discussion
or question of will now adjourn
the meeting.
Thank you madam chair the
session everybody.
Thank you Sir.
Thank you a lame.
You're welcome madam chair.
