We have a quorum.
Thank you. We have a quorum and
a housekeeping after the 3
Senate bills, we are going to
insert house bill 477 with the
committee substitute, which was
rolled last Friday. So with that
uh senator and Representative.
And your expert witness.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you committee. We're bringing
you Senate Bill 16 this morning,
which is a bill this committee
has seen multiple times, and I
have to say, Madam Chair and
committee, it's a pleasure to be
back with you in this room. It's
good to see everybody.
At this bill allows 330,000
unaffiliated voters in New
Mexico to participate in the
public primary elections without
jumping through the hoops of
same-day registration on primary
election day, such a voter would
choose a ballot from one of the
parties holding an election, um,
holding a primary, and this
would relieve our unnecessary
administrative burden on our
county clerks.
Um, and with that, Madam Chair,
I know you have a tight agenda.
Um, I'll introduce co-sponsor
Representative Kates, um,
Senator Wirth, and Reps Rubio
and Parajon could not be here
this morning and our expert
witness Sala Abel.
And we have a national expert
online if we need it.
But with that, Madam Chair, I
think we will let you go to
public comment.
Thank you, Senator. We miss you
on our committee.
Uh, let's go to the audience,
those in support of the bill,
please raise your hands. OK,
let's take 5.
Public comments uh within one
minute. Thank you.
Madame Chair and committee
members, I'm Aa Chavez, CEO of
NAVA and EDF NM Native Vote. We
are in deep support of SB 16.
We've been working on electoral
and voter access since the
1990s. We hear very often from
young voters in our communities
who want to participate and
engage, but are not beholden to
or aligned 100% with any
particular party. DTS voters are
increasing amongst youth and
native voters every election.
41% of young indigenous voters
under
age 35 are registered as
independents or declined to
state. 28% of all native voters
are registered DTS. These
percentages are higher in the
Navajo Nation. This bill will
invite them to participate in
primaries without added
barriers, allowing for more of
our voters being represented in
crucial elections,
reenfranchising 25% are
approximately 347,000 of
registered voters, allowing them
the ability to vote for their
preferred candidate during these
elections.
We passed the New Mexico VRA in
Navra. This is a common sense
step. Thank you. Good morning,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Lindsay Bachmann with
the Secretary of State's office.
The Secretary has long been a
supporter of semi-open primaries
and the approaches outlined by
the bill. She thinks the
sponsors for bringing it
forward, and I will be available
should there be any technical
questions during the course of
this hearing. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee members. I'm Molly
Swank and I'm the executive
director for Common Cause New
Mexico. Common Cause supports SB
16 and semi-open primaries
because we understand voting is
a right, not a privilege.
Um, we believe everyone should
be able to participate in
primary elections, not just
folks from major parties. For
too long, hundreds of thousands
of New Mexicans have been denied
the dignity of voting in primary
elections, and we know that this
number will only continue to
climb as more individuals
register to vote. Please support
SB 16 today and allow all voters
who want to participate in our
elections to do so. Thank you.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, members of the
committee. My name is John
Martinez, and I'm here
representing conservation
Voterss New Mexico. Uh, we stand
in support of this bill for
several reasons, some of which
you've already heard. Uh, one is
simple fairness. There is are
New Mexicans who are funding
primary elections with their tax
dollars, yet who cannot
participate in those primaries
because of the registration
status. The other reason, and we
think this is a critical reason
is to combat the cynicism and
disconnect from the political
process that has led us to this
moment in our country.
When people do not believe that
the system is meant for them,
they're less likely to stand up
and fight to preserve it, uh,
looking at DC we can see where
this gets us.
Let's make sure that every New
Mexican voter knows that the
system is for them, and that
their participation is eagerly
welcomed. Uh, we urge you to
pass this bill, please.
Good morning, Madam Chair. My
name is Frank Smith. I am with
and members of the committee. My
name is Frank Smith. I'm with
the New Mexico Veterans and
Military Families Caucus and
Veterans for all voters in New
Mexico. SB 16 is about fairness.
Right now, nearly 70,000
veterans in New Mexico, those
who are proudly served under
both Democratic and Republican
commanders in chief are being
denied the voice in primary
elections simply because they
are DTS voters. These veterans,
like all New Mexicans, help fund
our elections, yet they're shut
out of the most critical stages.
the democratic process. Nearly
49% of veterans are DTS.
But our current system excludes
them from primaries simply by
the fact that they
Do not choose a political party,
SB 16 would change that. It
would allow DTS voters.
To participate in the primary of
their choice without having to
be registered with the party.
This is not a radical bill. 34
other states already do it.
Veterans served this country
with honor.
Veterans fought for the right to
vote. It's time we honor their
service. Thank you very much.
Thank you. Let's go online. Do
we have any comments in support.
We're going to take 2 today.
We'll start with, uh, Heather
Wallis. Heather, can you hear
us?
I sure can. Uh, good morning,
uh, members of the committee,
uh, Madam Chair, this, my name
is Heather Ballas. I'm the vice
president of programs for the
election reformers Network,
where national public policy
organization that works every
day to make elections more fair
and inclusive for all voters. I
just want to let you know that
we stand in support today of
Senate Bill 16 enabling
semi-open primaries in New
Mexico and we applaud the
sponsors for their leadership on
this important matter. I wanted
To just very quickly remind the
members of the committee that in
the last general election, 40.4%
of eligible New Mexico voters
opted not to cast a ballot. That
makes us one of the states with
the lowest voter turnout in the
country. We need to find as many
ways as possible to make sure
voters want to engage in our
electoral process. So with the
full quarter of New Mexico's
registered voters unaffiliated
with a major party and excluded
from the process of the prime
level, we have to know that that
has an impact on how many of
them vote in the general. So
those are, that's one more
reason for us to think about uh
uh the importance of passing
this bill. We do urge a due pass
today on SB 16. Thank you so
much. Heather.
All right. Catherine McGill.
Katherine, can you hear us?
Yes, I can hear you. You have
one minute.
My name is Catherine McGill. I'm
the founder and director of the
New Mexico Black Leadership
Council, and I'm here in support
of SB 16. I would just say that,
you know, to repeat what other
people have said and not to
belabor the point, but our
democracy is stronger when every
eligible voter has a fair and
legal opportunity to
participate. Our binary system
of party primaries leads at a
growing number of independent
and declined estate voters.
That's just the truth of the
matter. And if we are who we say
we are, and we believe what we
say we believe.
The government needs to be uh in
the power of the people, then we
must affirm that all voters,
regardless of party affiliation,
deserve a voice in the leaders
who will represent them. So, uh,
coming from my communities and
really working to use all the
tools in our kit to convince
more people to participate in
this process. I think this is a
really good way and not a, as,
as others have said, a radical
thing that we're doing, um, to
have semi-open primaries, so
We stand in support of SB 16.
Thank you so much, Katherine.
OK, let's stay online. Do we
have any comments in opposition?
OK, anybody hoping to make any
comments in opposition, please
raise your hand.
OK, let's go back to the
audience. Anyone in opposition
who would like to make a
comment, seeing non-committee
members.
Representative Aaarnu.
Good Morning, Madam Chair. Good
morning, committee members, um,
good morning, Senator. Oh, I
keep good morning senator. It's
nice to have you back. Um, I'm
gonna keep my comments very
brief because I have spoken at
length with the sponsors and
with the advocates on this bill,
um.
And I do think, and I as I read
this version of the bill, I do
see.
Considerable improvements, but
my core concerns remain the
same, and that's that the
Supreme Court, circuit courts,
district courts have said time
and again that political parties
having a right, have the right
to association. You cannot be
compelled to include or exclude
non-affiliated voters from their
primaries, um, and so, you know,
we saw it in like California
Democratic Party v. Jones and
Tosh GN versus the Republican
Party of Connecticut. They were
kind of like,
Opposite arguments that led to
the same holding. So really my
main concern here is that should
this pass, I don't see a world
where this passes and the state
does not end up getting sued as
a result of this, so I am still
going to be a no. I know that
the most constitutional way to
have an open primary because I
do believe in including as many
people in the.
democratic process as possible.
I don't see how we do that
without just doing like a top
two party primary. So I, I, but
I do commit if you bring me that
bill, I will vote for that. Um,
it's really just the
constitutionally,
constitutionality piece. That's
the biggest hurdle for me. So,
thank you.
Representative Lujan.
Madam Chair, you um mentioned in
your opening comments about the
burden on our.
This is cost a burden. I just
want clarification on that for
our local um clerks, Madam Chair
and committee in 2019, New
Mexico made a work around to try
and include non-affiliated
voters in our primary elections
and in 2019, we made a decision
to allow unaffiliated voters or
anyone to do same day
registration on a primary day,
so they can go in and do all the
paperwork, change their
registration for a day.
vote in the primary and then.
Undo that change on their own
digitally at home the next day
should they so choose. So this
is, I mean that was our
compromise at the time in in our
fear of big dramatic change. Um,
and since 2019, we've learned
that it doesn't cause a big
dramatic change in our, in our
voter um results. What it does
is place a burden on our county
clerks that seems to be
unnecessary.
So this bill would allow an
affiliated voters to simply go
in, choose a primary ballot, get
that ballot and vote without
doing the same day registration.
Hoop that we currently require.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I did
hear from uh our county
affiliates, our clerks
affiliates that, you know, that
it was very burdensome and in
that that process costly as
well, and timely, I think is the
biggest burden for not just them
but for our voters, and I just
wanted to echo that and say that
if we are going to remedy that
and.
Um, I would say moving forward,
how we do this, if this is part
of that solution as well, and
we're already in a compromise
of, of essentially trying to get
to this point, I think that this
is, this is helpful. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Susanna Zamora, Madam Chair,
move the table.
Thank you, Madam Fle leader
Skipanski.
Thank you, Madam Chair. um,
thank you, Senator and
Representative for bringing this
legislation forward. Um, I just
had a couple of questions, um,
but first I'll say, uh, I was
not always sure how I felt about
this proposal. Um, but you know
what has convinced me, um, that
this would be a positive change
are a couple of things, um.
One, I think for.
Younger folks, there is just a
lot of.
Um, there's a lot more
registration is affiliated and
You know, I think that not
having a role in selecting who
will appear on the general
election ballot is a problem.
You know, I think we want people
to be involved with candidates
and looking at the profiles of
candidates as early as possible.
We want people to feel that they
are included and involved and um
I think that that.
is is a critical process for the
long term health of our
democracy.
Um
And, and
Secondly, um,
I think
You know,
I, I hope
Um, and I don't know that we
have research on this, but I
would hope that.
You know, when we all get
elected into this building, we
represent everyone. We don't
just represent the members of
our party.
We represent each and every
resident of our districts, um,
to the best of our abilities and
starting that early, I think is
a good thing for candidates, you
know, to do the outreach to
really consider what voters in
their district might be
requesting this ballot who are
unaffiliated and reach out to
them and talk to them. Um, and I
know that that's gonna be more
expensive and I need a lot more
work, um, depending on the
district, but I think it's well
worth the effort.
Um, and
You know, certainly some of the
folks that I met.
On the campaign trail are still
some of the folks that email me
all the time because they know
me, they met me at the door and
they feel comfortable. And so
extending that kind of outreach,
I think is great.
Um
Could you, I, we have
unfortunately the amendments in
context version of the bill, and
I don't understand exactly what
the status is of the minor party
candidates. Um, it's, it's
it's just marked up confusing. I
think maybe because it's not in
color, so I can't tell what
happened in the Senate, Madam
Chair, and representative, um,
we narrowed the bill with the
bill started with anyone not
affiliated with one of the major
parties, Democrat, Republican,
or
libertarian could request a
ballot on the primary day. The
amendments narrow it and say
anyone who is not a member of
any party, major or minor, can
request a ballot, so it is truly
just the DTS unaffiliated voters
who can vote in the primary or
who can request a ballot and
vote in one of the major party
primaries.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
senator. Uh, I really appreciate
that change because I think it
makes it very clear that these
are individuals who have chosen
not to participate in the
process, um, and
Um
Madame Chariot and Senator and
Representative, um.
How do you
How will the Secretary of State
or the clerks ensure that people
are only participating in one.
I don't know if you can comment.
Would you like to?
OK. Gonna stand if you all can
hear me.
That's a really great question,
Madam Chair Representative, um,
and, and the way that it
currently functions is that
voters receive a voter credit
status related to their
participation in the election in
our systems that will continue
to be the case. What I can share
is that there will be a place,
um, in regards to
reconciliation, canvassing, all
the different pieces, um, in the
new system, just as we would
with and so some of that
transparency piece will
Great. Thank, thank you, Ms.
Bachman. Um, and my last
question would be, um,
You know how many states have
adopted this and
Um, you know, are there
Or something similar, um, and
are there states sort of across
the political spectrum or or
another um.
Currently. Thank you, Madam
Chair and Representative, we can
absolutely go down that rabbit
hole, but I can tell you that
only 10 states have New Mexico's
current closed system, 4040
states have some version of
open. The NCSL report says there
are 9 states that are partially
closed.
Um, 4 states that are partially
open, 7 states that are opened
on affiliated, that's kind of
the model we are looking at
here, 15 states are fully open,
um, and then there are 5 that
throw all parties on the ballot,
so truly all the states in our
country do this in a different
way. Um, we are looking for kind
of the middle of the road
compromise truly open doesn't
suit New Mexico. This is
semi-open open to unaffiliated
voters.
Madam Chair, uh, and I'm looking
forward to supporting you. Thank
you, Vice Chair Little, and then
we'll go.
To
Well, let's go to Representative
Zamora first.
Like
Madam Chair, the motion was
removed.
Uh, Madam Flo leader asked me to
remove it. Thank you. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
So, now I lost my place
doesn't take much to throw me
off.
Especially on a Monday morning.
So, so, uh, Madam Chair and
senator.
The bill's pretty
straightforward, what you want
to do, I understand the bill,
everything except on, on the
last page.
Uh
On, on page 14 line 9.
The the underlying language
there.
And I think this, this pertains
to the question that you were
just asked.
But, but would you go through
that for us?
Uh, Madam Chair and senator,
yes, madam chairs
representative, that is to
clarify a voter may vote in a
presidential primary election on
the ballot of only one of the
parties that gets to the
unaffiliated voter on primary
day would walk in and choose one
ballad.
So if there's a democratic
ballot and a Republican ballot,
they would choose one or the
other.
He could not vote halfway on one
and halfway on the other, and
that's, that's what I wanted to
make, make clear and make sure.
and even in your answers like,
wait a minute, one or the other
and it's like.
OK, so, so we've got that
cleared up.
And then
When, when you chose
A minority that the minority
party could come in and vote.
On the, on the other
On a, on a major part my
feelings on that is, is there's
people.
That are trying to build up that
party.
And this is more of a statement.
But then we're taking their
strength away from them.
By pulling them away from their
party.
And, and I have a lot of respect
for him.
To to go DTS or, or other, other
affiliations, and I think
That were were manipulating him.
and weakening them.
Madam Chair, if you care to
respond to that.
Madam Chair and Representative,
that is exactly the part that
was amended out.
So if folks are affiliated with
a minor party, they cannot come
in on primary day and request a
ballot.
Uh,
And to clarify, Madam Chair,
current law allows anyone to
come in and change that
registration on primary day, and
that would still be allowed.
We're not changing that piece of
law, but only with the
amendment, if you, if you look
at the bill with the amendments
in there, only folks who are um
unaffiliated or DTS.
Can come in on primary day under
this bill and request a ballot.
Other folks, minor party members
would have to change their
registration.
OK. And
And I'll talk about my weakness
again is I don't.
I don't know if I'm on the right
bill.
Because going over the weekend
and everything and things got
changed around and I didn't get
my bills till early this
morning. So can we go over that
amendment that that you're
talking about that.
Madam Chair, the original bill
said anyone not affiliated with
a major party.
could come in on primary day,
request a ballot and vote.
With the amendments.
It says anyone not affiliated
with any party.
So
So then, Madam Chair, and, and
senator, we're not picking and
choosing. Are we leaving some of
the minority parties out in this
bill.
We, we are, right? It's just
decline declined to stay.
Declined voters are who will be
affected this bill. OK, OK, so
then, Madam Chair, does
Does then that make.
Representative Ananorous
statement, a very strong
statement about the
constitutionality of.
No, actually, Madam Chair,
because it narrowed the bill.
It used to be very broad, anyone
not affiliated uh with the major
party. Now it's narrower. Anyone
not affiliated with any party.
We actually never.
So, I understand that you, Madam
Chair, uh, but
Madam Chair Representative, but
then you're picking and choosing
which of the minority parties.
Am I correct?
No, madam chair.
Because none of the minority
parties, so we're not picking
and choosing.
So
he is not a party.
affiliation. It's a pretty, it's
not a group, it's a status.
Unaffiliated
Madam chaired and
representative, so, so the Green
Party and the Constitution.
Uh, the Green Party and, and
Better for America and all that,
is that included in here in
this?
Madame Terne.
So then, Madam Chair and, and
Senator, I, I'm confused and we
are picking and choosing which
ones and what not.
No,
no, the bill, the bills just
declined the state, but it
doesn't let these other ones do
it, right?
Madam Chair,
OK
I think I, I think I understand
the question.
There are 13,01,200995.
12,995. So round to 13,000
voters in those minor parties.
Um, and there's 330,000 folks
who are unaffiliated with any
party in the asssemi-open
primary model that we have
is directed towards unaffiliated
voters who choose not to
affiliate with any party, club,
but they still want to vote in a
publicly funded election.
Those are the folks that this
film were allowed to go and
choose a ballad and vote during
our publicly funded primary. And
then I'll, I'll go on to
something else, Madam Chair, and
senator. So then, uh,
My county clerk says our poll
workers are going to need a road
map to explain.
This to voters.
How much complicated is that
gonna be? And, and we're, we're
talking about
In in the testimony and
everything else that we're
talking about, we said that.
It's too much work for the, for
the clerks to be.
Changing somebody's
voter
Registration, but then here we
give them the same amount of
work or more or
What's your opinion, Madam Chair
and Senator Representative on
election day they would have no
voter registration change work
to do, um, because this would
allow folks to just go in and
request their ballot.
So it lessens all of that same
day registration workload.
And, and Madam Chair and, and
Representative, that's if they
understand it and and don't need
walking through.
So, so there still might be some
work to be done.
Uh
Chair and representative every
time we make a decision as a
legislature to change the
election code. All of the
training and revamping has to be
done from the Secretary of
State's office down at the
county clerk's office, down to
the county clerks and all of the
volunteers. We do that every
time we have an election because
every time we change something.
This particular change is gonna
open up voting access to 31
quarter.
Of the voters in New Mexico, 1
out of every 4.
And then Madam Chair, and the
senator.
How are we going to protect
those, those voters' privacy.
Privacy whenever it comes to
them.
Picking that ballot.
How is, how are they gonna, how
are we gonna protect them from
having any kind of Madam Chair,
voter privacy is always
protected. That is a prime goal
of our Secretary of State's
office. And if you'd like her to
respond, Lindsay from the
Secretary of State's office you
can, but every step of their
process is to verify accuracy
and protect privacy.
Madam Chair Representative,
thank you for the question.
Again, part of what will be done
following um this bill should it
pass is rulemaking that will
outline for everyone, um, how
that will take federal standards
of voter privacyation of new
statute, and that we continue to
meet in the administration of
elections in the state.
Thank you. Thank you for that
answer. That concludes my
question, Ben.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
thank you, sponsor.
And supporters as co-sponsors
for bringing this bill forward.
Um, Madam Chair, I'd like to
begin with, um.
Actually, uh, my experience in
working to on voter education
and empowerment.
And what I saw, what I've seen
since 2003 when I really became
involved in voter education.
There are, and it was largely in
native communities.
Um, and it expanded into rural
communities, uh, members who
would come, uh, citizens who
would come in, uh, members of
the voting public, potentially
who would come in.
To cast their ballots.
And what I remember vividly is
the
Mistrust of our uh native
communities and rural
communities.
Um, about the
Because some of the things they
were told years ago.
Um, by those in charge, um,
influenced how they perceived
elections, Madam Chair.
And if, for example, in native
communities, if you voted, you
were going to lose your land,
you were gonna lose your
culture, you were gonna lose
your water rights. I mean, and
it instilled fear into many
communities. It wasn't just
native communities that were
rural communities as well, where
those in.
powers that be at the time, uh.
Perhaps they thought it was a
good thing that they wanted to
promote.
Whatever it was they were
looking to do, but it did
instill fear and because our New
Mexico culture is so strong in
oral history, those experiences
are very hard to shake.
So, uh, to overcome.
So coming back to working at
polling locations or in getting
people to interested in, in
In the uh civic.
Civic engagement.
Uh, there were still a lot of
people with questions. And they
would often ask those of us who
are working in these communities
in our, in these communities.
Uh, well, which one, which party
should I be? Which one should I
join?
That was not our purpose, and I
felt then as I do now.
I know that I'm a Democrat. I am
a registered Democrat, but I
would never tell them. That was
illegal. One, you don't do that.
That is the responsibility of
the party. Republican, Democrat,
green, brown socialist well
whoever partied, that's their
responsibility.
And so I would guide them to
those individuals, and I, if I
had the names, I would provide
them.
But what's dismaying is the idea
that uh we're going to suddenly
become overwhelmed on polling
locations. My experience has
been quite the opposite, Madam
Chair.
Those polling locations in
tribal and rural communities are
so dead.
We would go.
Find volunteers to go remind
people who were registered to
vote to come out to vote, and
they were still
Reticent about doing that.
Um
And to see that to hear the
numbers 41%.
41% of Native American.
Uh, communities are declined to
stay. That's very telling to me.
So, Madam Chair, um,
Members of the committee.
I think my sense is that this is
an important step. I appreciated
the work that it took.
Previously to get for the same
day voter registration, which
still exists, does not change if
somebody feels so strongly that
they want to pick a party and
they want to continue on long
afterwards.
But I think that I having this
opportunity to become engaged is
gonna benefit us.
And rather than having the
17 people that come in to vote
on primary election today rather
than having the 30 some.
In smaller communities. I look
to see that this is gonna engage
more people to come in to check
it out. We'll see whether they
continue down the road.
But I suspect that when they
choose a ballot for the parties
that are on the ballot during a
primary, they will be become
more engaged and maybe and and
look at other options that they
have for candidates, but I,
Madam Chair, I would also say.
Um
I would also say that uh.
These poll workers.
are going to welcome.
Additional people into their
polling location.
I have been there with them.
They have been lonely places,
very lonely places on election
day.
And it is true, we're laughing
cause it's so true and so
looking to I it's, I think it's
a good problem to have county
clerks.
Be overwhelmed to do the job
that they're supposed to do. So
I'm encouraged by this, by this
opportunity to include those,
and I think once the parties.
are alerted to
The turnout of voters, my sense
is that they will become
activated to go reach out to
these communities, which is
their responsibility in the
first place.
Not mine, not yours, not anybody
else's.
They want us to be part of their
party. Please come talk to me.
So, Madam Chair, uh, I know that
there are other questions and
I've taken quite a bit of time,
but I
I appreciate.
The effort, um, and I look
forward to supporting this.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair, for the
2nd opportunity. I did think of
a question, and thank you so
much, Vice Chair Little for your
comments and your perspective. I
really appreciate that. Um, so,
the many conversations that we
have had, uh, I did think of a
question that I had not.
I don't think we've talked about
it at all yet, so should this
bill pass go through, be
implemented.
Who then is responsible, I guess
is the word I'm looking for for
notifying DTS voters that
they're now eligible to vote in
the primary, but
Would that be the Secretary of
State or.
OK, so it's not like the
candidates have to.
Do the unique outreach. OK.
All right, thank you. That's it.
Thank you I do that. I'm just
kidding.
Representative block.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Senator. Good to see
you back in this room again and
the representative, good to see
you. So, I do have just uh
I'll make a motion for Depas.
2nd
I was gonna make motion, OK, so,
um, I did have representative
Rego on the list, so we have a
motion for Du pass by
representative.
Um, block
And second,
please call roll.
Or do, do we have any
opposition?
Representative Au Nonu. No.
Representative block. No.
Representative Borego.
Yes. Representative Lujan.
Representative Mejia, no.
Madame Floor Leader.
Representative Zamora.
No.
Madam Vice Chair, yes.
Madam Chair
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you committee.
Madam Che I was just gonna
mention that I thought we had
block.
I
Thank you
for it.
That means he wants to bring it
back.
Right.
All right, let's go ahead and
begin with Senate bill 36
sentimented senator and your
guests, your expert witnesses,
you may begin.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
This bill does two things. It
creates a new section in chapter
10 called the Non-Disclosure of
sensitive Personal Information
Act. It would create a uniform
policy of how state employees
must handle our personal
sensitive information. It
establishes a list of categories
of sensitive information, not to
be disclosed to outside
agencies, as well as enforcement
mechanisms and civil penalties.
It also contains exceptions to
when this information can be
disclosed.
The second part amends the motor
Vehicle Code to add safeguards
when it comes to information
within the MVD database and
enforcing federal criminal
immigration law.
This is important because in
order for our government to
function properly and ensure
public health and safety, it
must connect, collect
information and data from its
citizens.
But New Mexicans have a
reasonable expectation this
information is safeguarded and
that there are clear rules on
when, how and to whom they are
shared.
Some of this data is sensitive
information that in the wrong
hands could put vulnerable New
Mexicans in harm's way.
This act, the first part of the
bill.
was passed by the legislature
with bipartisan support in 2021.
This is the year of COI, uh,
COVID, but it was not signed, it
was pocket vetoed by the
governor because of one agency's
concerns.
We have now addressed that
agency's concerns.
The second part of the bill is a
new part because we learned that
MVD information is sold.
And we also learned that it can
be used for federal immigration
immigration enforcement.
Whether by government or
non-government entities has
these 3 3rd party data brokers
that to whom the personal
information is sold.
Just to be clear, MVD sells our
driver's records to a private
data broker called New Mexico
Interactive, which is owned by
the same parent company as Tyler
Technologies. Some of you may be
familiar with this organization.
They packaged the the they
packaged our information, they
slice and dice it, and they
redistribute, they redistribute
it to government agencies and
private dataakers such as
LexisNexis, Experian, and
Thompson Reuters.
They in turn sell this
information through
multi-million dollar contracts
with private companies and
government agencies such as ICE.
If this bill passes private data
breakers would have to certify
that they will not sell driver's
information for immigration
enforcement purposes in order to
continue receiving access to
MVD's, uh, records.
As many of you know, I was a
director of Elasa Communitario,
which is a center focused on
assisting victims of domestic
violence through their legal
battles.
Accessing therapy and receiving
other services, including legal
services.
Our clients needed to be
reassured that their sensitive
information was not going to be
shared or made public.
Our clients sometimes did not
have access to programs because
of their fear.
With every assurance we could
make, their sense of information
is not going to be divulged. It
build trust and encourage their
cooperation.
I'm proposing these amendments
because when New Mexicans,
immigrants and non-immigrants
alike share their personal
information with state agencies,
we should all have a reasonable
expectation of privacy.
And we should know that our own
information will not be used in
ways we did not anticipate.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I have
two expert witnesses, Marcela
Diaz, who is the executive
director of Somosum Pueblo Unido
and Gabriela Ivanez Guzman, who
is a staff attorney at Somos.
Um, we
No, no,
they're available to answer
questions, and we know that
there are several supporters of
the bill in the room and online.
Thank you. So with that, we'll
go to the audience, those in
support, please raise your
hands.
OK, so there are many of you, so
we will take 5 public comments
for one minute. Please stand so
that you can be
Hold on.
Oh, OK, thank you. Um, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
my name is Alan Sanchez. I'm the
executive director of the New
Mexico Conference of Catholic
Bishops, uh, the bishops, uh, we
are here today, not to impose
but to propose and that we
propose that you support this
legislation. We've heard
recently a letter from uh Pope
Francis to all the bishops in
the United States and to all
people of good will, uh, to keep
in mind in all policy making
that are our nation does, our
states and municipalities.
That we recognize the dignity of
the human being, and this
legislation does that. It
protects people, people's
rights, uh, people's freedom,
and we know this is clearly
directed and and important for
immigrants. We want to remind
you that, that, uh, the Nazarene
family married, uh, you know,
Joseph and Jesus had to be
immigrants. Jesus subjected
himself as an immigrant to run
away.
from an ungodly king.
We ask you to support this.
Thank you.
When the
del Centro
er to the contribugo puestopos
personas cuentrote salada porque
queas personas gen
the viao estamosa.
relics unidos is no travida
pulque.
Uh
Uh, good morning, Madam Chair,
uh, and members of the
committee. My name is Maria de
Jesus Gallardo, and I'm a, I am
a member of El Centro de Guala
derechos. I am very proud to
contribute to this state as a
business owner, I pay my taxes
on time and I create jobs for
others. However, I am very sad
because now we understand that
people and agencies have our
information and they're able to
share it, um, I had a huge
script I wanted to read, but I
just want to go straight to the
point because I only had a
minute. Um, I want to, I want
you to remember, um, that uh
they have our information.
We, um, as immigrants, uh,
immigrants need licenses, um,
uh, whether or not they have an
immigration status. The driver's
license is our life. We use it
to identify ourselves in the
banks, um, other places, um, but
also importantly with the
police.
Ms Francisco Mata is.
and and have.
Moanos.
Your.
OK
You, uh, I mean
so
You, uh, I mean
bro.
Una or the
the shows the
immigrantees.
Estamos
Just
Prees in no.
Goal.
No
rural.
McKinley
Eto.
Good afternoon, Madam President
and members of the committee.
Uh, this will be the
interpretation from Francisco
Matta. I'm Francisco Mata and I
am, I have lived in hops for
more than 16 years, I support my
family, and I am the one who
takes my grandchildren to
school. I am a member of Samasum
Palonito, a
Grassroots, uh, immigrant and
worker rights.
Organization, we are present in
8 counties, 7 of them are rural,
including Lee, Eddie, and
McKinley. I am here supporting
SB 36 because it is, it is
important for me, uh, that my
community be able to go to MVD
to be able to get their driver's
licenses, but it is also
important that my state protect
my information. I have a
driver's license and it is
important that, and it is
important for the functioning of
the county, but I don't want to
be uh worried that my
information will reach the wrong
hands. I asked that you support
SB 3.
6 to protect our data and
prevent it from reaching the
hands of ice, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, my
name is Nathan Svara. I'm the
program manager at Equality New
Mexico, here to speak in support
of Senate Bill 36. LGBTQ people
and their identities are under
increasingly more attacks every
single day. We are now
vulnerable to our federal
government, as well as a
multitude of state governments,
including our neighbors,
entities who would choose to
harm us if given the knowledge
and the chance to do so.
Information about our gender
identities is especially
sensitive. Transgender New Mexic
s who choose to change their
gender identity on official
documents deserve to note that
that information is shielded
against entities who would like
to see us erased, harassed, or
prosecuted.
New Mexico needs to do what it
can to protect its citizens, and
that starts with this bill and
providing a statewide process to
protect our sensitive
information in a clear and
consistent way. A transgender
New Mexican should not have to
fear leaving the safety of our
borders when traveling to
another state's jurisdiction. We
protect our own, and that starts
with ensuring the safety and
privacy of all vulnerable
communities, especially now.
Equality in New Mexico is
strongly urges the due pass.
Thank you.
When seniors.
Thomas is an organization in
petrolio.
Los immigrantee and Mexico.
Estoyakola is a veterans
functions.
The memos
or loss.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Mireia Rivera. I am a
member of Samos Pueblo Unido. We
are a grassroots, uh, state
organization with members in 8
counties working in different
industries, including uh gas,
uh, oil and gas. I immigrants
contribute greatly to New
Mexico, even though we represent
10% of the population. We are
13% of the workforce. I am here
supporting SB 36 because I
wanted that or information be
protected. Our state agencies
require that require our
personal data to be able to.
function, but we are afraid that
they will be able to be able to
share it, since we will be
exposing, um, and we will be
exposing all of our data. Uh, I
am a working mother, um, and I
work daily with my children. We
take that, I take them to
school. I go to work, to the
doctors, to the store, and I am
in constant movement going back
and forth. I have a driver's
license, and although I have
always followed the law. I am
exposed to having my information
being shared, please support SB
30.
6 because our communities, uh,
so that our communities can feel
safe and comfortable, uh,
without having their data
shared, um, as they, and they
can be, they can contribute to
public uh safety. Thank you. OK,
let's go online. Let's
We have Jessica Martinez.
Jessica, can you hear us?
Yes, I can. Can you hear me
OK, great. Good morning, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Jessica
Inez Martinez, and I'm an
immigration attorney and the
director of policy and coalition
building at New Mexico Immigrant
Law Center. As one of New
Mexico's only organizations
providing legal services to
immigrant communities, in
particular, specializing in
serving survivors of crime and
children who have endured
trauma, we support SB 36. The
immigration statuses of
immigrants in New Mexico.
many of whom have lived here for
decades and have citizen
children should remain
confidential. Many families
qualify for forms of relief that
lead to legal statuses and may
be at risk of separation before
getting the legal services they
need, if that data gets into the
wrong hands. We support
safeguards to protect sensitive
information, including
immigration status, LGBTQ
status, statuses of as a victim
of a crime and information
regarding traumas and abusive
children should not be
disclosed.
Thank you very much.
Thank you so much, Jessica.
We have, let's see, Mary Ellen
Garcia, Mary, Mary Ellen, can
you hear us?
Yes, uh, thank you, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, Mary
Ellen Garcia, CEO of the New
Mexico Coalition Against
Domestic Violence, and on behalf
of us, we stand in strong
support of the Senate Bill 36.
This bill is not just about
policy, it's about public
safety, trust in our
institutions and ensuring that
all New Mexicans can live
without fear of violence or
retaliation. Survivors of
domestic violence rely on
confidential support systems to
escape dangerous situations and
rebuild their lives. Yeah,
without strong protections for
their personal information,
state systems meant to
them can be instead used and
weaponized by abusers. No
survivors should have to choose
between their safety and their
privacy. When personal
information isn't protected,
trust in our institutions break
down, abusers go unpunished, and
public safety is compromised.
This is especially true for our
immigrant survivors, sent about
36 is not just about
confidentiality. It's about
survival, justice, and ensuring
that no system meant to protect
victims should be a tool used
for their harm. Cenel 36 upholds
our values as New Mexicans of
survivor safety, offender
accountability. It ensures that
state agencies cannot disclose
sensitive information with um
survivor data, empowering
survivors to come forward, seek
justice and rebuild their lives.
Anyone hoping to make comments
in opposition to the bill,
please raise your hand.
OK, looks like we have one.
Janet, were you hoping to make a
comment in opposition to the
bill?
No, mine was uh in, in favor.
OK. Thank you so much, Janet.
Uh, anyone else hoping to make
comments in opposition to the
bill?
position.
Seeing non-committee members.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, uh, senator and um your
guests.
Um, you know, I think about this
bill and I think back to the
time that I was city council
president, he put in in um
Into uh law at the city of
Albuquerque.
Protections exactly for this
reason, um, especially when it
came to a piece of our staff.
Um, to
Not intervene when it came to
ice coming.
Into, um,
Into the city.
Um, and there were, there was a
lot of fear, Madam Chair and
representatives during that
time, especially during COVID,
and I got to see firsthand, but
one of the things that really um
comes to mind, Madam Chair, and
representative, um, and senator,
um, representatives and senator,
um,
is
You know, having grown up in New
Mexico, my entire life.
Um
You know, knowing our history in
all due respect to our Native
American brothers and sisters,
um,
You know, our history of New
Mexico is very unique, Madam
Chair, and representatives and
senator, um, in terms of the way
that New Mexico developed.
Um, and I might remind us of um
the wars that we, we endured,
um, Madam Chair and
Representative and, as I said,
all due respect to our native
brothers and sisters, um, you
know, there was the
Mexican-American War, there was
a Spanish war. I mean, there
were all of these instances
where
New Mexico developed.
And there were cultures and
there were blending and there
were, I mean, even in war there
was.
Inner racial.
Um, sort of, uh,
And let's just put it on the
table, madam chair. There was
interracial blending.
And I think that that makes New
Mexico a very unique place to
live.
A very unique place to grow up.
Because we grow up.
Knowing
And all and and all due respect
to our Anglo brothers and
sisters as well, um, we grow up
knowing and by the way.
History was my minor in college,
so it was very even more
ingrained in in my, in my, um,
You know, my growing up.
Um, but, you know, it was normal
to know that.
We were part at one time, a big
part of Mexico.
And what concerns me, Madam
Chair and Representatives and
and senator is that it seems
like there's been this
Um, focus.
Um, I mean, in a sense, we're
all immigrants, you know, but
there's been this.
Negative focus and it really
bothers me on the Mexican, um,
people.
And it, you know, especially
when this was all part of Mexico
at one time.
Um, you know, it's, it just.
It's just appalling and nobody
wants criminals in, you know,
criminals belong where they
belong, um, and I think we can
all agree on that, um.
But I think that it's imperative
that we do protect people who
are trying to become um
Citizens and they're trying to
follow the law, and they're
trying to have a good life for
their family, because that's.
What America was built on.
You know, our, our founding
fathers, Madam Chair, and, and
senator, um, that was what the
foundation of this very country
is to provide a, a better
opportunity for all immigrants.
And so, you know, I think this
is sort of a no brainer, Madam
Chair and representatives and
senator. I worked in tax and
revenue at one time, long time
ago, um, and, you know, it, this
should be across the board.
For all all state departments,
all city departments, um, is
that, you know, we
Protect people's identities. I
mean, we talk about identity
protection when it comes to our
technology.
You know, just our very own
technology and, and we worry
about people taking our
identities every single day.
You know, and so I just feel
like
This is kind of a no brainer,
but um thank you, Madam Chair,
and sorry, uh, I'm sort of like
becoming a John Bloch or
following in trying to follow in
his footsteps a little bit.
Anyway, uh, thank you all for
bringing this bill forward
Mejia.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you.
Can you
Thank you. I really appreciate
that question. Um, when we
originally did the bill in 2021,
we were trying to fix was um
There was uneven protection of
sensitive data across like if an
employee of, I believe it is uh
tax if an employee in the tax
department employed tax
information, that was a
misdemeanor and criminal, um,
and in other, in other areas.
There was no consequence for
disclosing information, and
there was a time not in this
administration but in prior
administrations that MVD was
giving out, uh, personal data
and harming our people.
And so that's what this is
trying to fix. It's to help
provide a uniform, um, system.
For protecting our data across
all state agencies and having a.
Thank you for that answer. My
next question is, right now, I'm
resident or if you have a work
authorization, automatically
that tells them, Madam Chair,
uh, um, Madam Chair, I
Have, I do not have a real idea.
I don't have a star star in the
corner of my driver's license. I
don't need to get a real ID
because I have a passport, so if
I get on a plane, I can use my
passport and I think it's very
important to stand in support
of, that's why I don't get, I,
the reason I don't get it is I
want to stand in support of
those individuals who cannot get
a real ID.
So there are um and there are
400,000 people who have a
standard ID, um, New Mexicans,
400,000 635 New Mexicans who
have a standard, um, ID, uh, the
driver's license, regular
standard driver's license and
1,479 692 people who have the
real ID.
So that's a lot of people, 400,
400,000 who have a real ID who
do, do not have a real ID.
The little star. Well, thank
you, and actually what they are
saying is um that's actually
what's dangerous about, you
know, the the the um
Standard ID does not connote
your status, whether you're
whether you're undocumented or
not, however, MVD sells that
information.
And I would not want MVD to show
up at my house just because I
don't have a real ID.
Madam Chair, representative, I
don't think. Well, maybe I
might.
Maybe I might, if they sold the
information and concluded by
whatever the method and
algorithms or whatever that uh
perhaps I wasn't a US citizen.
That's what it puts me in danger
of.
Man representative. Well, if
you're not a US citizen, you can
be a permanent residence.
You can have a work
authorization, or you can have a
permit to be in the United
States.
Instill
I work for immigration.
So there's a lot of people,
there's.
And they don't driver's license.
My question is, why? Why, why?
Because it could be misused,
Madam Chair. Um.
It could be misused in, well,
We sell that data to uh private
data brokers.
And private data brokers could
sell that information to ICE.
That is not the intention of
providing the real ID and the
standard license.
Um, and, and selling that
information to an entity like
ICE.
Or two other entities, I mean,
uh, one of the Republicans on
the floor said when this when
this we took this bill on the
floor is why do we let them sell
it to anybody, and I suggested
if you wanted to bring that
bill, maybe we could bring it
next year and co-sponsor it. Um,
it is kind of distasteful that
we have our personal data being
shared with anyone, but in
particular, anyone who could
harm our residents.
I only uh goes after the people
they have, um,
a criminal.
Um, as of right now.
Um,
Madam Chair, that has not been
my experience, um, I remember
when I was at UCLA.
And um this was during the
Reagan administration. I was
walking to um the bus stop in
Santa Monica.
I all of a sudden there was a
non nondescript building kind of
on the side. And all of a
sudden, a bunch of people ran
out of that building. And then I
Agents ran out of that building.
And I stood there and I froze.
It was the most disturbing scene
to imagine in the United States
to see that.
These, these, these individuals
were not criminals.
These individuals had not
committed a crime, it was back
in Reagan's time, it was work
rates, and that's my
understanding of one of the
possibilities that we want to
prevent.
Thank you, Representative. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
So you don't see a a coming
illegally to the country,
breaking a federal loan
representative.
Not all of the individuals who
do not have documentation have
broken a federal law.
Madam Chair, Senator.
Can you repeat the answer? I, I
got caught up in.
Madam chair, not all individuals
who do not have documentation
have broken a. I'm sorry, madam
chair, Senator.
No.
Thank you, man. That concludes
my questions. Thank you.
Presentative Anya Nonu and then
representative Zamora.
Madam Chair, I'd like to move a
due pass.
call the votes.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Madam Madam Chair and senator,
is this a preempted
Uh, solution. Is this a
preemption? No, no, Madam Chair,
it is not.
And Madam Chair, I guess we
could sit here and debate that
one for 3 hours, probably.
So, so on section C of your of
your bill, uh, it talks about
Uh, that, that an entity shall
not.
Expose uh disclose any
information for the purpose of
enforcing.
Federal immigrational uh.
For the enforcing of the federal
immigration.
Nationality law.
Except when a felony
Criminal
Provision of that act.
Is, is, uh,
Is affected
So
Madam Chair, and Senator, so how
would that process take place?
If, if I
is investigating somebody and we
don't release the information.
Then how, how do we know?
If there's a law that has been
broken that that doesn't pertain
Madam Chair, anyone using the
information would have to
certify why they are using the
information, um, and I have an
expert who could explain the
very detailed process of this,
but just in general law
enforcement, uh, access the,
the, just in a very nutshell,
uh, law enforcement accesses
the, the data differently. They
have special um special
passwords and, and they were
not, they, we
amended this bill to make sure
that this did not interfere with
law, with law enforcement's
access to the bill for any other
criminal activity other than
federal immigration law.
And, and Madam Chair, I'll ask
the same question again.
Madam Chair and Senator, how is
that process going to take
place?
If we're not letting them look
at this
information, law enforcement,
it's, um, and I could go into a
little bit more detail, but law
enforcement has access to
certain databases.
For law enforcement purposes.
And, and, and um this only deals
with the MVD database, and that
is, is put into law enforcement
databases and they will have
complete and total access to
those databases. This will not
interfere with their access.
So, Madam Chair and senator,
then what you're telling me is
we're not really a, madam Chair,
our local law enforcement does
not enforce immigration law,
they will have access to
investigate crimes.
What this bill will do, will, it
will protect sensitive data from
being shared with anybody,
private, um, companies, uh,
private individuals, um,
Other agencies, so that's very,
very powerful and the ice data,
the MVD data will not be sold if
it is going to be used by ICE.
So that's very significant. So,
so, Madam Chair and senator. So
then is the information
That law enforcement has.
That can be shared with ICE.
Madam. Uh, Madam Chair, if they
are investigating a crime,
absolutely.
So Madam chair.
So I'm getting kind of confused
there.
So, so this information that,
and we, and we keep, Madam
Chair, we keep bringing ice into
the picture.
Even though we're talking about
a lot of other
Uh, companies or, or individuals
that you said would buy this
information and then sell it.
But we keep putting ice on top
of the, on top of the, this
whole picture.
I don't know if ICE has been
mentioned like 20 times already
in this committee.
So
Madam Chair
It seems like in, in, in
senator, it seems like what
we're trying to prevent
His eyes to get a hold of this
information.
Is, is our primary goal and am I
correct in, in asking that,
Madam Chair and senator.
Madam Chair, I brought this uh
bill in 2021.
And because of the privacy
issue. And the reason we had
bipartisan support is because
there was no uniform, um,
Uniforms policy for state
employees, so state employees
could make money by selling
data, if they wanted to
individually, um, and with no
consequence in some agencies,
and some agencies there were a
consequence. And the governor
pocket vetoed it because there
was a, in my, in my view, a
misunderstanding of, of what it
meant, um, in particular with
the Department of Health, they,
the doctors Grace was concerned
that it
put an additional requirement on
them. However, there is no
additional requirement if you,
if, if the agency, Department of
Health is complying with HIPAA.
Then they don't have to worry
about this bill, about any,
because it's much more stringent
about protecting HIPA is much
more stringent about protecting
information than this bill is.
And, and Madam Chair and and uh.
Senator, we've, we've had a lot
of bills come through and it's
talking about everybody's
information and AI and
everything else.
And I'm wondering
I'm just wondering how.
this is gonna affect the system.
And, and there's other, there's
gonna be other entities.
For other governmental groups,
government, the the.
Within the state.
They're gonna need this
information.
For, for a lot of different
purposes.
And, and
Man, I'm sure if, if, if you
want to go ahead and answer,
Madam Chair and Senator. I, I
apologize. I didn't let you
finish the question. If you
finish, you're good, you're
good. You, you know where I was
going with that. Yes, I did, but
if I, I'll just, but if I
understand the question is, will
other agency, other state
agencies, you need to use, uh,
be able to get it and um on page
To, um, it a state agency.
Shall not intentionally disclose
sensitive personal information
acquired by virtue of the
employee's position with the
state agency to anyone outside
the state agency, except when
such disclosure is necessary to
carry the function of the state
agency. And so data sharing is
still allowed.
As long as it's necessary.
And, and Madam Chair and
senator.
And it goes back to the same
question time and time again.
Why are we picking and, and I
know there's, I know there's a
lot of, and I know this country
is made up of immigrants.
there's a lot of good
Immigrants here. I
I
As a little kid, used to stand
out in the bar ditch.
And when we'd see Mexicans
walking up the road.
We would take a
Last jar of water, the mason
jars.
And me and my brother would fill
them up with water.
In which still tortillas from
inside the house and the can of
potted meat or tuna or
Or sardines or something and we
would take them.
Take this food to the immigrant,
and they would walk for miles.
And they still do today
probably.
And they come into this country
with good intention.
And, and, and we would give them
food and water and my mom.
My mother would get mad because
she would she feared for our
safety.
We, we had the innocence of a
child that God gives us and we,
we didn't, we didn't even look
at that.
We wanted to give them food and
water.
And I've worked
With immigrants my whole life.
I worked on a, on a dairy for
22.5 years.
I'm, I'm bilingual.
I can't speak
Fluent English
And write it, I can speak fluent
Spanish and write it. And I,
and, and I've always worked with
him, Madam Chair and senator,
but we have a problem in this
country.
And, and, and, and we all know.
What's going on at the national
level.
And, and we all know.
That there's conspiracy theories
and there's controversy and
everything else mixed in the, in
the whole.
thing there.
But we also
No
Madam Chair, and, and senator.
That there are.
Issues
With people
Coming into this country.
And trying
To impose, almost like impose
their own laws and rules,
whether it be gangs or, or
individuals doing different
things. We know, we know we
have, we know we have
Huge problems and we could, we
could go into those.
And be another 3-hour debate.
But, but the
But the
The current administration at
the federal level is trying to
fix that.
We, we, we have.
A problem that needs fixing.
And, and we're, in the language
in this bill.
We're going to restrict
A certain
Part of the government from
doing their job.
By imposing a law that says that
they can't have certain
information.
And in doing that,
I believe that there's people in
this country.
That are
Involved in criminal activity,
but they might not have a record
on them yet.
So how, how are we as
legislators.
To look at that.
If, if there's somebody here
that doesn't have a criminal
record.
And there's still involved in
crime.
And I knows about it.
Why should we keep the, keep
this information from them.
That they need, that they can do
their job, Madam Chair and
senator.
Madam Chair.
There is nothing in this bill
that will perform prevent law
enforcement from doing their
job.
There is absolutely nothing in
this bill that will stop.
Madam Chair.
And Senator.
We're, we're almost
We're almost to a point here
where
Where we're, we're almost saying
that ICE is a criminal.
And, and, and we're gonna, and
we're gonna keep information.
Away from this criminal because
we're afraid they're gonna do
bad things with this
information.
Madam Chair, that concludes my
questions and, and thank you,
Senator, for your, for your
debate and very well
appreciated.
Thank you, Representative Luhan
quickly.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um.
I just like to ask that the the
review, um.
reviews what if this bill
passes. Well, um, that was an
amendment that we put in um in
uh Senate Judiciary because
they're um
Mm
Uh, we inserted on page 7, we
inserted if the director of the
motor vehicle division of the
Taxation Revenue Department
determines a non-governmental
entity as used or disclosed
records or information for the
purpose of enforcing the federal
immigration and Nationality Act
other than federal criminal
provisions of that act. The
director shall revoke the
non-governmental agencies access
to personal information pursuant
to subsection A of this section.
The reason we added that, and
again, you notice there's the
exception. Um, this
provides MVD, the authority to
revoke data broker access to New
Mexico's MDD data.
So I mean I'm sure they would be
the reviewers.
Correct. Thank you. Um, that's
my question. I wanna make sure,
and that would mean that their
general counsel under the law
that if this is the law, Madam
Chair, if this is the law, it
would be um up to MVD to
delegate someone, I would expect
they would delegate it to an
attorney. I would believe so
too. Madam Chair, I think that
this is really important uh
legislation. I just want to put
that on the record. We are, we
are looking at the amount of
information that could be
disclosed and used against
anybody. I think that we need
to, we need
to protect
Those individuals and they
should feel like they can work
government in a safe workplace.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Your representative, I have a
representatives on in our new.
Representative Aar.
Yes. Representative block,
Representative Borego.
Yeah. Representative Lujan.
Represented Mejia. No.
Madame F floor leader.
Yes.
Representative Zamora.
Oh
Madam Vice Chair.
Madam Chair.
Madam Char by a vote of 62, you
have a due pass.
2, there's only 20, she did.
We will now hear Senate Bill 124
as amended. The Madam Floor
leader Skansky.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members.
You ready? Um.
I am here on Senate Bill 124,
which allows the superintendent
of uh of insurance, the
authority to issue civil
investigative subpoenas before
initiating formal enforcement
actions. So this just ensures
that the superintendent is able
to get access to the
information, uh, that she needs,
um, in order to hold uh folks
accountable, uh, if they are in
violation of the insurance code.
Um, and I have with me the
superintendent of insurance,
Alice Kane.
Madam Chair, representatives,
uh.
Uh, thank you for this time to
discuss this, um, uh, I would
like to say that, uh, most other
agencies in the state do have
subpoena power, uh, in addition,
most other insurance departments
in the country do have subpoena
power earlier. The problem we're
having right now is that we can
only issue subpoenas after we
started a hearing or involved in
litigation, and as you know, one
of the major purposes of the uh
office of uh Superintendent of
insurance is to protect
consumers.
And the way we do that is to, we
can do it better is to do
investigations, uh, in addition,
there are times when we do data
calls and other requests to uh
uh.
Insurance companies and if they
don't respond fully, we, if we
had the power, we would issue a
subpoena. In addition, there are
times we need third party
entities that have information.
Again, before we're in a hearing
and we need the power of a
subpoena. So, uh, I, I
appreciate your consideration of
this request.
OK, thank you. Let's go to the
audience. Do we have any
comments and?
hoping to make a comment, please
raise your hand.
No
Opposition.
hoping to make comments in
opposition to the bill, please
raise your hand.
Hey, Representative Zamora.
Adam Chair.
We just finished debating a bill
to keep somebody from getting
information here we're gonna
want to get information. I'm in
a spin.
I don't think your bill stands a
chance, Madam Flo leader.
We're just, according to the
last vote.
Madam, madam chair, uh, getting
on a more serious note.
And Madame Floor leader, so.
This, this smells pretty clear
on what intends to do.
Apparently we've had some people
that
Either haven't put the
information on the table quick
enough or don't want to put the
information on the table.
And so we have
In-state players and people that
are from out of state.
Uh
Kind of, would you kind of
explain to us uh uh.
Madam Chen may be expert witness
as to.
Why this came
Along and, and why we need to do
this, uh, means that we haven't
been having to be.
Having had to do this in the
past, uh, Madam Chair, an expert
witness. Madam Chair
Representative, um, I've been
here for a year and a half and
uh we have had some instances
where it would have been helpful
to have subpoena power uh to
find information, to decide
whether we would bring a hearing
or not. I, I think we've been
more, we are more focused right
now at OSI on consumer
protection and enforcement, and
I'm I'm hoping to
together uh a whole compliance
enforcement division to make
sure people are complying with
the law, uh, and again, our
hands are tied in situations uh
where until we have a hearing,
which means we don't really know
if we have a good case because
we haven't been able to do a
sufficient investigation. We we
often don't take the actions
that I think would be
appropriate.
And, and Madam Chair and
An expert witness. I'm sorry, I
didn't, I didn't write your name
down and my apologies, I didn't
introduce myself.
I'm superintendent Alice Kane.
Yes Representative.
So
So Madam Chan and uh
And, and, uh
representative or I keep going
directly to you and that's kind
of disrespectful.
Or, or uh.
But Madam Chair. So then,
I'm surprised you didn't have
subpoena power before.
Is, is that in statute that you
could not subpoena?
Madam Chair and Representative
is only takes place after uh a
notice of contemplated action
occurs now. That's right now,
so the advantage of this
legislation is it allows the
superintendent to get access to
the information that that office
needs, so they can decide, do we
need to take this further? Is
there fraud?
Is there an unfair practice
happening? Is there a violation
of the
And I haven't been thrown in
jail very many times, so I don't
know all the processes and
everything, but, but, uh, so, so
then, Madam Chair, and, and, and
representative, what would
happen is some, there would have
to be an action through the
court.
Through a judge, and then, and
then the subpoena could be
issued, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair representative, uh,
we could also call a hearing or
a hearing could be called
against us, and then we have
subpoena power.
But it seems.
We want to be more proactive in
protecting consumers. We want to
do investigations and determine
if there are practices that
should be looked into.
And, and then make the decision,
do we call a hearing or do we go
to court?
So, so Madam Chair and
representatives, so then does
this have anything to do with
the Constitution?
Or no, or it just has to do with
law. Uh no, uh.
Um, Madam Chair and
Representative, so the
superintendent of insurance is,
has an adjudicatory process and
administrative hearing process
within the superintendent's
office. So it doesn't always
involve a court of law, if that
makes sense. So if, if an
insurance company say is
unfairly denying someone access,
the superintendent would begin
investigating that maybe they
got a complaint, they would
begin investigation, what this
would do is allow.
The office to issue a subpoena
to get all of the information to
see if that was unfairly
actually happening.
Without this bill, they have to
wait, so they actually have to
start the hearing process, say
we think that you are doing this
unfairly and in violation of the
insurance code, then they can
issue the subpoena, get all the
information, but they're already
in the middle of a hearing
process, so everyone's lawyers
are involved. It's more
expensive. It's further down the
road, so this way they can
actually get the information
beforehand in order to determine
do we even need to go to that
step.
OK, and, and Madam Chair, and
Representative
Was there anybody fighting you
on this, not wanting it?
To happen
3
Uh
Madam Chair Representative,
today nobody is uh there are
times,
there have been other moments I,
I think I wasn't at one hearing
where there was an opposition
from the insurance industry. I
can tell you one of the key
things we have, we do data calls
and when the data calls
information is not complete at
that point, we have no other
recourse, but perhaps to go to a
hearing, which often is
expensive and we don't do this
way with a subpoena, we go back
to the insurance, the insurance
company and ask them.
to give us more complete and
accurate information and as in
other states that seems to
improve the quality of what they
get.
OK, and the amount of a chair.
And representative, so
One last, one last question is,
this is gonna give you the
authority to directly
Right
place a subpoena in place.
And, and you have to, you don't
have to go through any other
process. You can write up the
subpoena yourself and send it.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
And thank you, uh, Alice and.
Madam Flo leader, uh, that
concludes my question.
Yeah, are you, are you, no, no
opposition, no, seeing no
opposition.
Representative.
Y Bene, good morning, Madam
Chair, um, Madam Vice Chair.
Ranking member, uh John Block,
uh, members of the committee,
thank you for um before you is
House Bill 386 before I get into
the details of that, Madam
Chair. I just want to give some
background information. The
first week of our legislative
session, I, I received a a
office visit from the Curtland
Central High School business
professionals of America, and
one thing that they
told me about was there.
The continued
Interest, the continued pathway
in the field of business uh
accounting and finance. And, and
Madam Chair, uh, that, that is
where I, I started to ask more
questions about um how are we as
a state helping to ensure or
doing everything we can to uh
keep our graduates here.
And help support those that are
entering the fields of business,
finance, and accounting. House
bill, Madam Chair, House Bill
386 appropriates a 500,000 from
the general fund to the Office
of State Auditor for the use in
fiscal year 2026 through 2028 to
provide funding for a class in
compensation study distinct to
the OSA's governmental audit and
accounting procedures. Madam
Chair, with me is uh my, my
Expert witness, uh, the uh state
auditor Joseph Maestus and he
has his team as well. So I'm,
I'm gonna turn it over to um to
the state auditor.
Madam Chair, Madam Vice Chair
ranking member, it's uh great to
be with you this morning. I'm
Joe Maestas.
Uh, state audit drum, I have my
deputy, uh, Mr. Ricky Bejarano.
And I had my policy director
David Pena right behind me as
well.
So what this bill is about,
Madam Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
ranking member is that we're
facing a workforce crisis in the
accounting industry. Uh.
We're seeing a, an alarming
contraction in the form of fewer
CPAs in the state of New Mexico.
We're seeing fewer independent
public accounting firms that the
Office of the State Auditor vets
and approves every year, once we
do this vetting and approval,
uh, and approval, they found out
and they, they contract with
public entities throughout the
state.
There's a a a lack of interest
in accounting. Uh, there's a lot
of misconceptions about the
field itself.
Uh, there's some issues with the
requirements to sit for a CPA
exam because as you know,
When you have a license like a
CPA license, it needs to have
the necessary mobility.
So we're, we feel that doing
this compensation and
classification study.
will really help us get a handle
on how, where the state of New
Mexico stands with respect to
the rest of the country.
Not just the public sector, but
the private sector.
We've already done an analysis
in terms of how we, how we
compare against state auditor
offices in the Southwest region,
and we are lagging.
Incredibly
Uh, and so why is this like so
unique to my office because our
auditing positions have special
qualifications.
That cannot be substituted for
experience and, and these are
required by the auditing
standards and so.
Last year we had proposed a
special appropriation for the
same reason, but we were waved
off by a Senate Finance and, and
the message was,
simmer down, Mister. State
Auditor will include you.
In the the state personnel
office compensation and
classification study that was
just completed.
However, that study excluded
auditors.
So
You know, unfortunately, you
know, we didn't think we'd have
to come back.
to make this request, but we're
facing a crisis here, uh, the
percentage of late audits.
are on the rise, the number of
disputes between public entities
and their accounting firms are
on the rise.
Requests by a small public
entities.
To retain the same auditor in
excess of the of the limited 8
consecutive years, we're seeing
a lot of this. So there's a lot
of symptoms, Madam Chair, that
are really telling us that this
workforce crisis has come home
to roost.
Here in New Mexico. And so we
feel this comping class study
will establish a badly needed
baseline so we can determine how
to address the wage gaps, not
just with the public sector, but
also.
the private sector.
We now stand for questions.
Thank you. Let's go to the
audience. Do we have any
comments and support?
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee. I'm Scott Groginsky,
deputy secretary of the New
Mexico Department of Workforce
Solutions, EWS and DWS is in
support of this bill.
Accountants and auditors are in
demand in broadband in many
sectors throughout New Mexico
just over a year ago, we heard
from the broadband industry that
accountants and their auditors
are key to success. We've
recently done some analyses and
broadband-related jobs and found
that accountants and auditors
are high quality and high
priority occupations. The class
and compensation study proposed
by this bill would help inform
the development.
And supply of these important
professions in New Mexico.
Anyone hoping to make any
comments and support, please
raise your hand
Anybody hoping to make uh
comments in opposition to the
bill.
I'm sure we'd like to move a due
pass.
Before we.
Have representative Zamora.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, uh.
Representative
Is this your first bill you
bring to committee?
To this committee, Madam Chair,
uh, Representative Zamora, yes.
I don't know if Madam Chair will
let us, but we might, uh, we
might have to make you sing in
here.
Madam Chair, and uh
Representative and, and uh
Mr. Maestas, uh.
On a more serious note.
How much do you pay on a, on a,
uh
An auditor when they come into.
Go ahead, Ricky.
Madame Chair Representative,
approximately 65,000 per year.
And uh
Madam Chair and uh.
Mr. Myers thus
Uh
What, what does your budget look
like?
Have, have you had an increase
in your budget in
How long, how long has it been
since you've had an increase in
your
Madam
We, we haven't had any expansion
in over 5 years.
Uh, the current budget
recommendation that was adopted
has us with the flat budget,
although we a little over 15%
increase.
We're having to keep mission
critical positions open.
Uh, or vacant for budgetary
reasons and so.
Uh, I think we're already
experiencing this crisis in
terms of
A lack of budget for us to to
move ahead.
And meet the demands uh.
And hold public entities
accountable.
For the management of public
funds, so.
This is an unfortunate
situation.
Will we have the money to fill
positions even when we have this
data.
Uh, we hope so.
We hope so. And, and, and Madam
Chair, and, and uh
Mr. Master, that's exactly the
point I want to get to.
I
As we as a state.
Have all these departments.
And
And then a department needs a
little bit of money.
And they almost have to come up
here through the, through the
system.
And almost begged for that
money, and chances are that
they're not gonna get it even
though we have billions.
Of dollars in excess in the
state.
And, and you, and you always
bump your head against the walls
and wonder why do we do this?
It's, it's, to me,
If there's somebody out there
that has the qualifications.
To me
Your standards of.
The person that you need to
hire.
And they can go make more than
65,000.
Dollars somewhere else, they're
gonna go somewhere else.
And then
We come in here and we do.
A bill
That imposes a study, but yet it
doesn't put any money for FTEs
in your department and, and, and
Madam Chair, and I'll go ahead
and let you respond to that.
Well, uh, Madam Chair, Madam
Vice Chair, ranking member, um.
Uh, I think if we have a, a real
compelling reason in the form of
hard data.
Uh, assuming that we get the
funds to conduct this
compensation study, then we can
maybe get appropriators to focus
on.
More specific wage increases
that are needed and I think if
we can tie them.
To uh mission critical vacancies
that we currently experience
now, uh, I think we can get the
budget.
That we need, um, but, you know,
I served on the PRC as well, and
there's, there doesn't seem to
be uh an emphasis on fully
funding regulatory agencies and
agencies like ours, uh, you
know, we do regulate independent
public accounting firms.
But uh it's, it's difficult
really to
To get the understanding and
consensus on the needs of
agencies like mine. If you look
at one of our biggest entities
that we audit, it's a University
of New Mexico, that's, it's
multiple billions of dollars.
But yet my office subsists on a
budget of about $6 million and
uh I'd like to say we're, but
given the trends in the industry
and the contraction in the
industry, uh, we're in a full
blown, full blown crisis. I
mean, uh, we're up there with
the nursing, with medical
specialists with water and
wastewater operators, a lack of
law enforcement people. I mean,
we're there already and there is
a national movement to
incorporate accounting into STEM
at the national level, that
would open the door.
uh, for K through 12 grants. So
this is a national issue, but I
hope that during the course of
our discussion that many of you
members can understand what
we're experiencing right now,
right here.
in New Mexico.
And, and
Madam Chair and
Mr. Myers, that's another thing.
In the state of New Mexico is,
is we have
These little communities were
very rural.
And we have these little
communities who wants to live in
Vonn and be in.
Ivan,
who wants to live in Melrose and
be an accountant or.
An auditor or
You know, we just
We, we, we have
The character about the state
that, that does create some
challenges.
But at your level,
Uh, Mr. Maestas and, and Madam
Chair and at your level and
where you sit here in Santa Fe
and stuff.
$65,000 in in the cost of a home
here in Santa Fe.
It's just
It's ridiculous.
I'm sorry, but, but we need
We need to create some fixes.
And
I like the bill.
But I think we need to look.
Deeper into the, into the
system.
And wouldn't it be
Comical if this bill said, how
can we
Educate and hire auditors for
under
$65,000 a year.
Which is the truth.
Yeah.
It would and it's sad to be, be
here and saying that here at
this table cause we're, we're
better than that.
But yet we don't get there.
And, and Madam Chair, and, and,
uh,
Representative and you have a
tough bill to carry here
but, but I'm sure it'll get a
lot of support. I look forward
to supporting it.
And, but, but we have some
issues we need to address. We
don't need a study to address
these issues. We know where
they're at.
Madam Chair, that, that
concludes my statements and
questions. Thank you. Thank you.
OK, madam chair, um, and I'll
just kind of lead on studies
done and I wanna say um it left
out a lot of components, um, we
are now going to be.
Uh, Madam Chair, ranking member,
um,
I would, I would encourage us to
uh.
Um
I want to call it a master plan,
but I don't know if it is that
they are um addressingies and
try to limit and and keep things
at a minimum this year as far as
recurring budget.
Because of the crisis, we are
even within our our smaller um
work at home, flexibility, Madam
Chair.
Madam Chair, Madam vice chair,
ranking member, uh, we do have a
hybrid telework.
Um, when I took the oath of
office, we're 100% teleer.
Um, but right now, our, our
hybrid telework is 3 days in the
office, um, and it is stabilized
the office.
Um, but we still have more to
do, and if I may, just to
respond to this nextO study.
what our proposed study would
not just benchmark our wages
against the public sector, it
would benchmark it against the
private sector because
It's the private sector that's
doing all the poaching of our
best and brightest, and there's
not very many best and
brightest, so we have to address
the pipeline issue, but we, we
need to compete.
Not just in the public sector,
but the private sector. And so I
just want to make it clear this
study, that's why it has such a
high price tag because getting
that kind of private wage
information from private
accounting firms is not easy.
Uh, so I just wanna
Add the benchmarking is very,
very.
Pardon me, I'm sorry. uh allowed
to hire out or do contractual.
Um, there's difficulties and
conflicts if we hire uh.
vendors on a contractual basis.
Uh, and it's kind of steeped in
the standards, so we don't have
any contractual auditors, uh,
right now, in fact, our
Our contractual budget is is
paltry. So we're really even
limited in terms of what we can
do, uh, on the procurement side
to.
Expenditure representative and
Mr. Auditor, good to see you
here. So I just have a couple of
questions. So I like the idea of
this study, but I'm wondering.
Even when we get the data back
from the study, how could New
Mexico?
Compete
With the Deloitte and the Price
WaterhouseCooper and EY how,
what kind of salaries do those
companies have and could we even
see competition.
From us and our state auditor
with those because I don't want
them to poach our good people
who've already been trained with
this new training that you have
here. I mean, I would hate for
this to actually backfire in
some way by we train them, then
they go work for Price
WaterhouseCoopers, and they're
gone.
I'm just wondering if you could
tell me more about Madam Chair,
Madam Vice Chair ranking member,
uh, great question, um, I, I
think where the edge could be is
if we can compete from a wage
standpoint with the private
sector.
Then you throw in all the
benefits and your 40 hour work
week, which is quite attractive.
I think that we would, we would
attract folks that would
otherwise go to the private
sector.
Um, because right now, that's
one of the
One of the misconceptions is
that all auditing positions,
they're overworked, there's a
lack of work-life balance, uh,
but the private sector makes up
for that in the form of wages.
So I think if we elevate our
wages to be competitive, we can
win them over with, with the
benefits and the schedule.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative, and I, I agree
and I think hopefully in this
study we're also looking at
other perks that some of these
companies have, because I've
contracted for Deloitte before
I've contracted for Boston
Consulting Group, and they,
their offices.
are totally their own little.
Oasis in some some cases,
because they all have these
really cool, uh, like rooms
where you can take private
calls. They've got all day snack
bar. I mean, so I'm not saying
do that on the state level,
people would probably give me
crap if I proposed putting snack
bars in every state office. But
we do want people to come work
here. And we do want people to
be pulled away from
Deloitte and all those other
places, even though good good
for them, they do great work. I
just want to make sure that they
stay in Mexico and work for your
office with competitive wages.
So I do support the bill. I, I
love the bill and I don't know
if you have any other ideas on
that. I do, uh, Madam Chair,
Madam vice chair, ranking
member, uh, we also have other
benefits and this is a national
priority in that.
For us to to attract and retain,
you know, qualified auditors. We
need to support them throughout
their, their journey to achieve
a CPA.
And so right now we've, we've
had what, 2 successful uh CPA,
um, folks that passed their
license, we granted them
educational leave. We, we paid
for all associated expenses. Uh,
we write as soon as they achieve
their CPA license, we gave them
an appropriate bump in pay, and
so we're doing everything we can
to keep our new CPAs in-house,
but it's just a matter of time.
Until they they go elsewhere and
that's the.
We also have a wellness uh
policy we grant 2 hours a week.
Uh, um, no questions asked.
So we're, we're doing everything
we can to retain and I think
that
We have stabilized the office
when I took office, we had a 40%
vacancy rate. Our vacancy rate
now is just under 25%.
And uh so,
It's kind of where it's, it's
triage, right? We're kind of
like stopping the bleeding, but
I need your help to come up.
And get them into ICU, so to
speak. God, I'm like really
reaching here, but really
that's, that's the situation
that we're dealing with. I'm,
I'm really, I'm not
exaggerating. um.
Ricky, did you have anything
else to
Add to that dramatic.
Uh, Madam Chair, Madam Vice
Chair ranking member, uh, if I
may, I'm
I've been in this, I call it the
racket for 46 years.
And I vacillated between public
accounting and state government.
And
There is quite a difference.
Uh, I made a heck of a lot more
money in in private industry,
but one of the things that has
to be considered about this
office in particular, is that
this office under the Audit Act
is considered a public
accounting office, so our
competition is not, there's this
misconceived notion that we
compete.
That our competition as other
agencies. Well, it is and it
isn't.
We're actually competing with
public accounting offices.
There's the Clifton Larsson
Allans.
The Carrig Ingrams, the KPMG's,
my alma mater.
Uh
It's, we, I know every
Agency that comes before you.
stakes the claim that they're
different.
In this case, technically we are
different.
And there are other things we
can't allow, for example, uh.
A person might have as much
experience as I do, but can be
in um.
Accounting manager or an
auditing manager in our office
unless they are a CPA.
With aed experience.
So there's a huge difference in
trying to find one, is very
difficult.
Um
I think uh the other thing I
would say is that there are a
lot of perks. I'm a KPMG alum.
And there were the pay was the
primary perk, you get bonuses,
you get bumps, you get advanced,
they figured out a way to
promote you. You can do that in
private industry. You can't do
that in state government.
Because in state government,
especially in our system, there
tends to be this.
Painted with a broad brush type
of system.
And now I'll set up. Thank you,
madam. Thank you, Madam Chair,
and that's pretty much all I had
and I, I
I would ask another question,
but I know that.
The AEGA.
The Association of Government
Accountants. I'm sure that they
have some data as well. So you
could just use something that's
already there as well in your,
in your
Research and thank you, Madam
Chair and thank you,
Representative and Mr. Auditor
and appreciate you for being
here today. Good Bill. I like
it.
Presentedrego and then
representative Zamora.
Thank you, Madam Chair. It's
always good to be last again,
uh, I just want to welcome the
state auditor and my homie who I
grew up with, um,
We, um, one of the and I can't
remember what I was gonna ask
now, um, because everybody else
asked a lot of the questions I
was thinking, um, the
compensation study that state
personnel is doing was supposed
to be done this summer, so I
guess that's not done yet. And I
understand that's very intense,
Madam Chair, and, and, uh,
representative, uh Hernandez for
bringing this forward. Um,
So
In light of most of my questions
being asked, um, I wanted to
ask, how would you use this
study to
Because this is not only
happening for auditors, it's
happening for engineers. It's
happening for so many of our
areas across the state. Um, how
would you use this study to work
with the universities in order
to encourage some of those
graduates to come and apply for
state jobs and, you know, all of
the benefits that state's a
great question, Madam Chair,
Madam Vice Chair, ranking
member, uh represent Borego.
Um
This, this is a national crisis,
as I mentioned, and the AICPA,
the American Institute of CPAs
formed up, it's called the
National Pipeline Advisory Group
NPEG, one of the recommendations
is higher education has a very
integral role in totally
transforming the curricula for
accounting majors.
We've all seen the effect of AI
and data analytics, and so
nationally, higher education is
being encouraged.
To transform the curriculum to
attract more students.
Um, by integrating.
Uh technology applications into
accounting. So there is a role
for higher education. I've met
with all the flagship
universities. We're asking the
governor to increase the HED
endowment fund and specifically
call out this accounting crisis
as a priority.
Cause I've assisted some of the
flagship universities in
pursuing some of these higher ed
endowments. So, uh definitely
higher education has a very,
very important role. So you
would, um, madam, Madam Chair,
and, and Representative and uh
New Mexico State Auditor, um,
then you would be using this
information to meet with the
universities. Is that what
you're saying Madam Madam Vice,
yes.
OK.
And um
OK, that's, that would be my
question. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Ben, you have a due pass. Thank
you.
you auditor. Thank you very much
for your time. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you and happy
espaniola.
We have 3 bills.
Ladies and gentlemen and uh we
have to be on the floor at 3. So
House Bill 405.
OK. So let's do 468.
We
Madam Chair, can we have a
3-minute bathroom break, I mean.
Yeah
A representative, we are ready.
Good morning, uh, Madam Chair
and members of the committee. My
name is uh Mark Murphy. I'm a
represent uh House District 59
in Roswell.
First time in front of
Many of you and uh I welcome the
opportunity. My predecessor
Jared Hembury, who fell ill, um,
just about 2 weeks before the
session started, um,
I am pleased to report that he's
been through a 2nd surgery. We
spoke, uh, the day before
yesterday, um, he's about a week
past it, still feeling pretty
sore and tired, but expects a
full recovery in time. So
that's, and, um, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, um,
Jared represented Henry was
approached by the Girl Scouts in
Roswell and asked to carry this
bill.
And what this bill does is
basically applies, um, the same
standards that are expected for
the retirement of the US flag to
um applies the same requirements
for the uh state flag.
And um there's actually um
federal law, uh, the US flag
code Title IV, Chapter 1.
Um, that we, the way I
understand the bill was drafted
was originally um thinking that
perhaps they would just
reference that code.
But instead
Lifted the materials out of that
code and put them directly here
in the bill. So basically, uh,
uh, reads from what I've been
told uh verbatim, um, so the Zia
symbol in the in the, in the
state flag is something that we
always show some reverence to,
um, certainly every day that we
come into session, we, uh, do
the state pledge and and honor
the state flag and just the Girl
Scouts felt like uh it's
important to have some standards
uh for
I'll stand for questions, madam
chair, if it's, if that's your
pleasure.
Let's go to the audience. Do we
have any supporting comments?
Do we have any opposing
Anyone hoping to make public
comment in support of the bill,
please raise your hand.
Anyone hoping to make uh
comments in opposition to the
bill, please raise your hand.
Hey, Vice Chair Little.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Good
morning and welcome. Um, I was
talking with your co-sponsors
this morning, uh, to check in. I
had a couple of, I have a couple
of questions.
As you know, or you may know, I
don't want to presume the symbol
is actually that owned by uh and
created by the pueblo of Zia.
And uh it is in the public
domain, but the Pueblo requests
permission for entities to use
that symbol, including the state
flag. And so, um, with that in
mind, I'm not sure how much the
Girl Scouts have uh research
this and I appreciate the
opportunity to ask Madam Chair,
but, um, I'm wondering if you've
had a chance, if they have had a
chance to explore this with the
Pueblo of Zia because it
is a sacred symbol, it is not
one that's just drawn in put
about everywhere.
And so while it appears on
different uh.
Um
Instruments, uh, it's a good
thing that they want to do this
respectfully, and so, uh, I'm
wondering if you've heard from
the tribal leadership if you've
talked to the governor and the
religious leaders about how they
feel about, um,
In this case, ah, a ceremonial
type burning. I know that it,
it's intended to be respectful
as well.
Please.
Yesmanitarian representative, I
have not spoken to the, the
office of the governor at the Za
Pueblo, but Rebecca, excuse me,
Representative Dow did this
morning. Um, she also spoke with
the Native American Veterans
Association and a number of
other people, including Sandra
Jeff, I so, uh, maybe an hour
ago when she handed me her note,
she said that she had spoken to
the governor's office and they
were supportive.
This was from the governor's
office.
Madam Chair, I'm Bobpologies.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
my, my understanding is, is I, I
don't know who she spoke to in
the in the office of the
governor of Za Pueblo, but she
did speak to the, the governor's
office at um.
Thank you, representative, and I
in no way mean to impede the
action of the Girl Scouts.
But uh it was my reaching out to
them at that time, she hadn't
heard from them and hadn't had
been able to speak to the tribal
historic preservation officer,
the tippo.
Uh, as it's known. So,
Um, I'm reticent, very much so
to support this without hearing
directly from the tribe that
Um, they would be supportive of
This
Respectful
Uh, discontinuing the use of
flags. So, and uh especially
because Madam Chair, if I may
just finish my comment is,
because this will be
incorporated into statute and
I'm really hesitant if I don't
hear from the.
From the leadership. Thank you.
Madam Chair.
Spans.
Madam Chair, Representative
Murphy, welcome to the
committee. Um, I wonder, given
that commentary and that
question, if we might.
Roll the bill just until we
receive that feedback committee
hearing, which would be when?
Excuse me, I interrupted you.
I'm sorry, representative.
I wondered if that'd be all
right with you. Yes, madam
chair, um.
I've asked that the bill be
rolled in until we get that
confirmation. Um, cause I, I did
ask Rebecca Dow, Representative
Doll said, do I need to call
these people? And she goes, no,
I've talked to them all and
we're OK, but I would feel
better too, hearing directly. So
thank you for your time
committee and, and Madam Chair.
Your representative will place
your bill back on uh Wednesday's
agenda, item number 293.
Madam Chair, and, uh,
representatives, um, so I just,
uh, before.
I start the bill of House Bill
493. I just wanted to introduce
my guests.
Um, our state auditor, um,
Joe Maestas, our uh deputy
auditor, Mr. Peano, is that
right? OK, I'm sorry, I didn't
wanna.
Mispronounce your name and also
David Pena with the state
auditor's office. Um, Madam
Chair and Representatives, uh,
thank you for pushing us a
little bit forward today and
I'll try to make this as fast as
possible. Um, cause I know we
have to be out on the floor, uh,
relating to public finance and
acting the public finance
accountability Act, creating the
public finance accountability
fund establishing funding
criteria and grant management
and oversight requirements.
Enumerating deputies of the
Department of Finance
Administration and making an
appropriation. These uh items
are all covered in this bill and
Madam Chair, um, basically what
this bill does is it creates a a
process or more efficiency in
government and um
I think I might have mentioned
this to the committee at one
time, uh, when I worked for the
city, we had uh audits all the
time, um, and actually helped
ensure our processes were more
effective and efficient, uh, in
one instance, uh, when I was a
division manager, um, and I, I
relate this because it really um
It really uh relates to what
we're doing here is oftentimes
those audits help create a a.
City or a
State Department in this case,
uh, run more effectively and
more efficiently and so with
that, Madam Chair, I stand for
questions of my witnesses are
prepared to also give their um
answer any questions that
You might, might have or um
provide their
The um guidance. Thank you. OK.
Yeah. Do we have any audience
hosts?
Make comments. All right, let's
go online.
Anyone hoping to make comments
in favor of the bill, please
raise your hand.
Anyone hoping to make a public
comment in opposition to the
bill,
Please member block.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Representative
and uh.
Uh gentlemen, experts, um, uh, a
couple of questions. First off
the bat is has the many uh the
funding for this 2.6, if I'm not
mistaken, as I was reading the
bill in House Bill 2.
Is it already established?
Uh, Madam Chair, uh, Madam Vice
Chair ranking member, there is
no uh finances attached to this
bill. Uh, I know it does mention
a fund, but there's no
appropriation, and there's no
appropriation in House Bill 2
for this.
Uh, and I just want to state
also for the record that this is
our 2nd attempt.
At, at codifying executive Order
2013006, it's executive policy,
we think it should be made state
law because it's one of the
primary mechanisms to
incentivize financial compliance
by public entities so that they
can access their capital outlay.
This policy also allows for
public entities if they're not
compliant, either through a late
audit or a current audit that
has significant deficiencies in
material weaknesses. They can
find a fiscal agent to manage
their
loudly.
But time is running out.
And I do want to state also
that.
Last year's attempt was in the
form of House Bill 271.
It had two committee referrals
on the House side, one on the
Senate side. It passed
unanimously uh on those House
committees and on the House
floor, passed unanimously in the
sole Senate committee referral,
but unfortunately, it was uh it
was not permitted to be heard.
On the Senate floor last year,
so.
Uh, we feel that this is vital,
I think vital to ensure that
public entities uh stay
compliant.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair. Um, my concern is that,
and I just want to clarify, you
said that there is no funding
for the 2.6 million that's gonna
be needed for not yet. Madam
Chair, Madam Vice Chair, ranking
member, uh maybe your
Referring to DFA's fiscal
impact.
Um
Yes, for recurring and
non-recurring. Yes, sir. Yes,
know that there's not, but I do
want to state also that last
year in the fiscal impact
report, DFA did not indicate any
fiscal impact because this has
been policy for over 10 years
and so it, this is not a new
policy, uh, that executive order
goes all the way back to 2013,
but I, I will state that
enforcement does fall on DFA and
maybe they're realizing they
need more resources to
Reinforce this existing policy.
Thank you, Madam Chair. OK, then
I'll move on from that piece,
um, to ask if the issues that
were significant issues that
were raised, uh, uh, by the
agency uh responses have been
addressed or are they
incorporated?
Into the
Into, into your considerations
for this bill, uh, that was the
attorney uh district.
Attorney General's office, DFA
and Economic Development.
Department.
Oh, you want me to take that,
Madam Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
ranking member, um, I think the
Attorney General's issues are
very technical in nature if you
look at them, uh, they're not
very substantial.
Uh, I'm sure we can, we can talk
with a sponsor and see if we can
implement some of those
recommended changes. In terms of
DFA again, I have to restate
that they've been implementing
this policy, uh, enforcing this
policy for the last 10 years,
so.
I, I can't speak for that
agency, but one must ask, well,
How have they been enforcing
this policy over the last 10
years and all of a sudden, they
need 2 million. And so perhaps
this is an issue that could be
addressed in the next budget
session, and we would certainly
advocate for more budget for DFA
to enforce this, especially if
it becomes the law of the land.
Ma'am, and I just would mention
also that, you know, probably
some of these issues were raised
with regard to smaller, um,
municipalities or counties that,
you know,
Now they have an audit question
on their lap and, and there may
be some funding that may need to
be.
Uh, allocated in the future to
help some of those smaller
agencies because I remind us
that we have a lot of money
sitting in capital that's not
being spent, and really what
we're trying to do is we're
trying to force, not really
forced, but
Create a situation where people
are really looking at their
shovel ready projects instead of
just putting money aside and
waiting for that project to.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
I guess uh for me, I would like
to see uh if this bill goes go
through this committee that it
be addressed. I see that you
have an additional committee,
uh, behind. OK, so that um we
can talk offline and I'd like to
because I know we have to get on
the floor. Thank you, Madam
Madam Chair and Representative
Little, uh, vice, vice chair
little um definitely we can work
on that, I think.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Representative Lujan.
Madam Chair, uh, thank you,
Representative, uh, for bringing
this forward again and, and Mr.
Auditor and
Representative little um for
your comments as well, maybe
some concerns, um, the concerns
that I have, Madam Chair is that
that we
We went through a very detailed,
uh,
Conversations with DFA over this
matter during the interim.
Um, not that we don't want to
have uh the, the capacity and
the oversight, but rather the um
unintentional consequences of
enforcement, and I believe
Representative Little and I and
Representative Ellen Martinez
and I all gathered together to
try to um expand on the
conversation of uh.
One of the things I did ask was
there further uh conversation
with DFA as an alternative.
Review or alternative plan to
To this for those unintentional
you're trying to do.
Um, auditor, uh, Madam Chair, is
to really uplift those local
governments and some of the
issues that they have,
especially with their audits, so
was that a conversation that was
had after that?
Madam Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
ranking member, we have regular
meetings with DFA, uh, as you
know, they have a program
evaluation unit that used to
reside in the office of the
state auditor, so we always
coordinate.
On upcoming evaluations and DFA
is expressed on many occasions
that they support this bill.
But again, as they've been
implementing this or enforcing
this with very little resources.
So
They do support it. Yes, we've
been in constant contact with
them regarding this bill because
again, this is our 2nd attempt.
At making this executive policy,
the law of the land.
Madam Chair, uh, uh,
representative, they are also on
record for saying they may
support this, but there are
alternatives put in place before
this is codified because of
those through, through the
enactment of the executive
order, Madam Chair, I myself,
uh, here in Santa Fe have
experienced that where we've had
to come back and then implement
other um types of policies to
remedy uh
Uh, the, the local governments
from not having access to
To implement the dollars that
are supposed to go to our
community benefits. I take great
concern with that, um,
particularly for my district as
my district is.
Most entirely encompassed in the
city of Santa Fe and although,
uh, I do believe heavily believe
that there needs to be
accountability, and I have cast
my my voice on on that as well.
I do believe that if we codify
this, then we're not gonna be in
the place to look for those
alternative remedies, which I
think are swimming around there,
and I think there's a Senate
bill and um
Out there as well. I don't
really want to get into the
conversation of a Senate bill
that is not before us, Madam
Chair, but I do believe that
there is one there, a Senate
Bill 355.
That has some differences. Madam
Chair, I just at this time
cannot support this until
there's further work issues and
um unintentional consequences,
especially with our, our small,
smaller local governments are
experiencing, as you mentioned
before in previous conversation,
we don't even have enough
auditors to be doing the work
we're not and getting that work
done and I think that that is
part of this issue, and I think
until we get to those, those
real um deeper issues of how we
can remedy, especially rule um
governments.
I, I can't support this right
now. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Apologies, ranking member block.
No worries.
I don't know. I just had one
question about the FIR. I'm on
the bottom of page two of the
FIR if you have it.
And according to your office, it
says
That this bill decreases the
rigor of financial performance
already implemented in the
executive order.
It says existing processes
require entities seeking grants
to remedy any material weakness
or significant deficiencies to
DFA satisfaction.
But the bill requires only the
grantee.
To create a plan to remedy and
not actually remedy it. So,
Madam Chair Representative, I'm,
I'm just kind of concerned. We
said this was codifying the
executive order, but it doesn't
have the same provisions as the
EO. Can you tell me more about
that, Representative Madam
Chair.
Uh, Mr. Auditor. Thank you,
Representative Block. I'll let
my
Madam Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
uh, ranking member,
Representative.
Um, it, it does. It's still,
it's still preserves the
enforcement authority with DFA.
It doesn't change anything, uh,
of that nature. And in terms of
uh other measures.
The bill mirrors the executive
order which, as I mentioned
earlier,
It's not, it's not like death,
if you get capital outly and
you're not compliant, you can
find a fiscal agent.
To manage your capital outlay.
Um, and, you know, if, if
they're current on their audits
and they still have some
significant deficiencies.
There's some subjectivity
involved in there where the
entity that's noncompliant can
put forth a plan to address
those deficiencies and material
weaknesses. So this is not a
hard and fast compliance uh
instrument. It does provide
measures to continue to allow
that public entity uh to access
capitally.
In fact, you know, we, we're
helping small local public
bodies across the state, there's
a deficit of patients.
And these are bodies that have
under a half a million in
revenue and the appropriators
and the legislators have been,
uh, I think a student enough to
to grant my office, uh, money to
launch this program, so we're
providing direct accelerated
assistance.
The local public bodies to hire
an accounting firm for them
instead of them having to find
one, cause as you said,
representative Samoa, it's hard
for them to find accountants and
we're addressing that and and
the whole premise is this
executive order, and it's not
just to access capitally, if
there's an assea that wants to
apply for infrastructure funds,
they have to be compliant at the
application stage. If a public
entity wants to apply for water
funding through NMFA, they have
to be
financially compliant. It's
called EO compliance. So this
affects
All major funding throughout the
state of New Mexico. And could
you imagine if it goes away,
there's no incentive to comply.
You'll continue granting capital
outlay without even knowing if
that entity is capable from a
financial management standpoint
to, to be transparent and
accountable in managing that
capital.
Madam Chair and Representative,
so.
I, I just want to make sure. So
this does not include tribes,
nations, pueblos.
So there's no checks and
balances with Madam Chair, Madam
Vice Chair ranking member, no,
there's no tribal oversight.
Right. And then when it comes to
the staffing, I did have a
concern with Representative
Lujan's question, since you
already don't, don't really have
staff.
I mean, I, I just want to know
how this could even be possible,
but it's kind of a rhetorical
question, I suppose, but
Yeah, I still have a little
heartburn with the bill, but
I'll listen to the debate, but
if you have anything to respond,
please, please go ahead.
Only that this is kind of the
second dance, the 2nd attempt at
this.
And uh
Uh, we feel it's, it's vital
before this governor leaves
office.
To, to make this the law of the
land, and if there are more
measures that are needed in this
bill.
Well, we're, I think we would
welcome any amendments that
would offer other alternatives
to access miniature.
Thank you.
Representative Nonu.
Represented block.
Yes.
Representative Borego.
Yes.
Representative Lujan.
No, explain my vote.
Was it yeah.
Yes.
Madame Flourlier
Yes.
Representative Zamora.
Yes.
Representative Vanna.
Yes.
Representative Block.
Yes, Madam Vice Chair.
explanation.
Mm
And I'm Jed by.
I'll be brief, I appreciate that
you want to work with and I
would, um.
I gladly work with you and I'd
like to vote for something like
this, to be quite honest, I
understand the significance and
the importance of the, the good
governance around this, but I, I
also like to um know where those
other, those other parts that
are included in your bill at
this time can be added. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. I echo, um,
Representative Luhans, and I'm
looking for the discussions
adopted to clarify those
significant issues that were
raised. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you.
Thank you. Committee members, we
are adjourned.
I'm sorry.
No.
