Are we good online?
Let's go ahead and call Roll.
Represented by
Representative Block.
Representative Borego.
I was in Lujan.
resented Mia.
Madame Flourlier
Representative Zamora.
He
Madam Vice Chair, here.
Madam Chair.
Here we have a quorum. Thank
you. We have a quorum and before
we begin, I'd like to announce a
couple of housekeeping.
Um, we have accidentally listed
house Bill 319 on the what's
happening calendar on our
website.
If anyone is here for that bill,
I will allow public comment, but
we will not officially hear that
bill, it will have to be
rescheduled as it was a
misprint.
Uh, we will hear, uh, what
should have been printed, which
is printed on the website on the
calendar is HJR 4.
So that was a mistake.
That I will allow public comment
and then we have simultaneous
committees going on today. So I
will allow and give time to
committee members to come back
from other committees to vote,
so we'll pause if we need to.
And with that, um,
You may begin, Representative.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you members of the
committee. Good morning. Um,
House Bill 214 uh creates the
doula credentialing and Access
Act. This act mandates that the
Department of Health established
a voluntary prudentialing
process for doulas. The
credentials, uh, enable doulas
to enroll as a Medicaid provider
and the current fis uh in the
current fiscal year, the
legislator funded the healthcare
authority to provide dua
services for.
members. However, the state
still needs credentialed
providers. Dua credentialing is
a voluntary process that would
allow jewelers to bill Medicaid.
It is not required to practice
as a doula in the state,
however, without certification,
a doula would be unable to bill
Medicaid for services. HB 214
also creates the Doula
credentialing Advisory Council
to advise the Department of
Health and requires hospitals.
freestanding birth centers to
develop policies allowing doulas
to accompany patients during
specific services. Additionally,
the the bill creates a dula fund
to support these initiatives.
The LFC budget recommendation
for House Bill 2 includes
600,000 to DOH to administer
this program uh contingent on
this enactment of legislation.
Sorry, I couldn't get that out.
Um, and with that, Madam Chair,
I'll stand for.
questions.
Thank you. Would you like to
introduce your expert witness.
I'm gonna have her introduce
herself and her credentials.
Thank you. Uh, Ms. Chair,
members of the committee, my
name is Alana Dances. I'm the
chief medical officer of the
Medicaid program.
And Madam Chair, I'll also, um,
would like to recognize uh
Representative Sarah Silva.
She's also uh named on the bill.
OK, let's go ahead and begin
with public comment. Let's go
with the audience and support of
the bill.
Please raise your hands.
And let's go ahead and do one
minute.
Supporting comments.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, carry
Robin Bruder. I'm actually a
volunteer board member at
Daralo's Birth and Health
Center. That's where Shiloh was
born just in 2023. Uh, we had a
doula for both of our births,
um, doulas are incredibly
important. The science is also
there to prove that when a doula
attends your birth, you have a
lower risk of cesarean section,
and it's a really great way to
make sure that partners are
taken care of, um, both the
birthing person and their
partner themselves. So we are
very excited about this bill.
and hope it passes, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, Marla
Shots registered lobbyist for
Blue Cross Blue Shield of New
Mexico, and we stand in support
of this legislation. We really
believe that this expansion for
the doulas is going to be
imperative to increasing access
in the state of New Mexico and
enhancing the importance of the
sensitivity of our population
with different types of
providers, thank you.
Madam Chair and members of the
community. My name is
Gwendolinomana and I serve as a
productive justice program
manager. Women United, a
nonprofit on the lands.
We work to ensure that building
people, especially in rural and
indigenous communities have
access to culturally grounded
support.
Iaindiulla training, we prepare
local doulas to address critical
maternal health gaps in northern
New Mexico. In this rural and
indigenous communities, long
travels.
Providers sort a.
And cultural barriers create har
harmful gaps in care. Dolas
breached those gaps, lowering
C-sections as we just heard, and
also saving money to the
economic because we don't have
those extra things that happen
after after not having a Dola in
the hospital. HV2, like, like
unnecessary, well, necessary but
um medical interventions that
sometimes happens because we
don't have, we didn't have the
emotional and physical support
during.
pregnancy?
This bill will expand access to
Doula care for families who need
it most. addressing systematic
inequality inequities in
maternal health, uplifts bird
workers by ensuring fair pay
through medicated reimbursement
and improves outcomes as we just
heard in our health. Thank you
so much.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
board members. My name is Shelby
Ski. I reside in Albuquerque,
New Mexico. I am an indigenous
full spectrum doula here in the
state of New Mexico, and I do
offer care to all of our
expecting parents and expecting
women, and I do give that care
to them, and it is proven that
with us as dualists here in New
Mexico, we do provide that
support with it not only the
mother, but the growing families
and expecting families. It is
very important for Dola to get
the reimbursement because as a
current dual, it is hard to get
that funding.
in for we are only um funded
through, we are funded through
grants. So whatever the grant's
approved for us is all that we
get paid, which is just a little
bit of what we, our services
offer. We offer anything from
postpartum, all all the way to
prenatal. So with this
scientifically, it has also
proven that with that, we are
preparing parents for the next
steps of parenthood. So not only
are we doing the work before the
child is born, but we are also
doing it with the parents as the
child is developing.
So I think it is very important
for this as well as our rural
areas and communities do not
have the access and the funds to
afford us as dualists. Thank
you.
Hi, good morning, committee, uh,
Representative Sarah Silva just
wanted to express my support as
a co-sponsor of this bill.
Again, as you've heard, many
others, um, having a doula in
our communities reduces the
maternal mortality rate in New
Mexico, and that can be really
high, especially in communities
of color, um, and so that's
partly why I signed on, and also
just letting you know, like
Doula's helped write this bill.
So it has the spirit of their
work, their profession, and
a number of other stakeholders,
um, that are involved in uh
Doula and and other birth worker
work in New Mexico. So thank you
so much.
Thank you. Do we have any
comments online supporting.
OK, let's take 3.
Nicole Martin, can you hear us?
Yeah, you have to open it, um.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee. Can you hear me? Yes,
we can hear you. have one
minute. Thank you.
Uh, good morning, everyone. My
name is Nicole Martin. I am a
full spectrum indigenous doula,
uh, residing in uh Rio Rancho
area. Um, I support HB um is it
2:14, um,
The
I'm currently, well, I'm gonna
be transitioning out of the
community co-chair for the New
Mexico Department of Health's
maternal mortality Review
Committee, and for the past 3
years,
Um, you know, I look at uh
stories of relatives who've been
um
Let down by the healthcare
system and could have had the
support of a doula with them
during their navigating, um, the
prenatal um delivery and labor
and postpartum care and it's
Our MM
are maternal mortality rates in
New Mexico are super high, and
so I think passing this bill
we'll be able to give pregnant
people the access to safe, um,
prenatal, um,
Delivery labor and postpartum
care. So I urge for a due pass
on this bill yet. Thank you.
Thank you so much, Nicole.
Now we have the doula program
coordinator from New Mexico
Department of Health. Can you
hear us?
Hello, good morning everybody.
My name is Jessica Luhan. I am a
mother, a full spectrum doula,
and currently serving in the
role of Doula program
coordinator for the Mexico
Department of Health.
17 years ago today, I was in
labor with my child. The care
and the support that I received
from my doula made such a
difference that I decided to do
everything I could to make the
support available to others.
Since then, I have made Doula
work my career.
I was part of the state's first
community-based training
program. I was a founding member
of the New Mexico Dula
Association and now have the
honor to certify doulas through
the New Mexico Department of
Health.
I'm here today to uplift what
others have said about the
benefits of dula care in both my
official role on behalf of the
New Mexico Department of Health,
who is in full support of this
bill, as well as in my personal
roles as a mother in full
spectrum doula to ask for a due
pass. Thank you so much.
Thank you so much.
Vicky, can you hear us?
We'll move on. Um, let's see.
Melissa Lopez, can you hear us?
I can hear you. Thank you. My
name is Melissa Marie. Excuse
me, Lopez Sullivan, and I am the
executive director of the New
Mexico Doula Association, a full
spectrum doula certified
lactation counselor, student
midwife, and commissioner on the
New Mexico Commission on the
Status of Women.
I urge you to support HB 214,
the Doula credentialing and
Access Act legislation that is
both a matter of equity and a
smart financial investment. HB
214 leverages existing Medicaid
payment structures to expand
access to Duaa, which is proven
to reduce preterm births,
cesarean sections, and
postpartum complications. With
Medicaid covering over 71% of
births in New Mexico. This is
both a cost-effective strategy
to improve outcomes while saving
the state money. HB 2
also strengthens the healthcare
workforce establishing state
certification, hospital access,
and workforce development
pathways that will help to
sustain doulas, many of whom
currently serve for little or no
pay. By passing this bill,
you're not only investing in
healthier families. You're
honoring the wisdom of our
ancestors, protecting our
present and building a just and
sustainable future for New
Mexico. I urge you to support HB
214. Thank you. Thank you so
much, Melissa.
I'll do 2 more. Paulo Rice, can
you hear us?
Pollen
Yes.
Hi. um, hello,
I'm, uh, thank you very much.
Um, I am here to encourage you
to um support house bill 21, um,
I came to do a work late in my
life, um, when I learned um what
a difference a doula could make,
um, in a family, uh, in, in
their development. Um, I am a
co-founder and.
Director of the new uh UNM birth
companion program. We are
volunteer to us, um, I'm also a
co-founder of the um New Mexico
Du Association. um, as others
have already said doulass can
make a huge difference, not only
in reducing interventions, but
also reducing preterm birth and
low birth weight.
Um, the effect, um, extends well
into the postpartum period and
um the well-being of children
and the families. Um.
And it's thank you. No, thank
you. I really encourage support
of this bill. Thank you so much,
Paula.
Janet Williams, can you hear us?
Yes, Janet Williams. Thank you.
Uh, Madam Chair and members of
the committee, I'm Janet
Williams with the National
Organization for Women, and we
strongly support this bill. We
believe it will save lives.
Thank you very much.
Thank you so much, Janet.
Thank you as we can see, we have
a long list, uh, but we, I think
we've heard enough comments. Um,
do we have any comments in the
opposition to the bill in the
audience.
Online
Let's double check if they're
opposing.
OK, yeah. Is there any anyone
here hoping to make a comment in
opposition.
OK, we have one, Daniela.
Dalia, we're hoping to make a
comment in opposition? No, I was
hoping to make a comment for.
Oh, OK. Thank you so much.
OK. Let's go ahead and go to
committee members.
Representative Zamora.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
Madam Chair, with, with all due
respect before we start, I'd,
I'd like to talk a little bit
about our committee.
And, and, uh, our bills, uh.
Friday when we left committee.
Uh
We were told that we weren't
going to have committee on
Saturday.
And then, uh
It took till late yesterday
afternoon.
For the bills to be.
Uh, for us to know which bills
uh we were gonna hear.
And it puts, it puts
A lot of stress on us.
And
I think that that we should be a
little more considerate.
And not only for the, for the
people that work in this
committee, but for the public
that
Doesn't get the announcement
enough far ahead enough of time.
To watch some of this.
Uh
Debating and, and understanding.
Which, which bills come to
committee.
Uh
My concerns are as much for the
constituents. We're, we're here
to work.
And, and I know that we're all.
I guess kind of overloaded on
work right now and in this time
of the session.
Because of the way the mechanics
of the bills and, and.
And how everything works in in
the system.
Uh
But
I would
I would appreciate a little
harder work on, on the
On your side, madam Chair, and,
and also the speaker.
And
We, we have, uh,
For example, Representative John
Block right now in another
committee.
And
So he's not here in this
committee to listen to the
Bills that are important to
listen to and he's gonna try to
shuffle back and forth like he
did last weekend, but it's just.
It's just, I think, I think we
need to work a little harder on.
On scheduling and, and
And how we do things so that we
can do a good job for the people
that stayed in New Mexico.
Madam Chair
Thank you for letting me make
that statement, uh.
And, and I'll get back on the
bill.
So, Madam Chair, and
Representative, thank you for
bringing this bill forward.
Can you explain to me.
I, I, I understand the bill and
everything.
There's nothing really too
complicated about it, but what
does a doula actually do? Is it
physicals, hands-on, or is it
just
More psychological, more talking
and making sure that
everything's in order through
the pregnancy or, or
And you kind of explain that to
us, uh, Representative, Madam
Chair Representative. So Madam
Chair, uh, representative, um, I
think when you
Talk about doulas, it's it's
very much holistic health. And
it can be hands-on, um, you
know, there's, there's several
parts of pregnancy that, you
know, just being able to calm
some of these fears down, uh,
being able to walk them through
that process, being with them,
um, so yeah, I guess it is a
little bit of psychological and
um and touching of, of, of
hands.
OK, and, and
And madam chair and, and
Representative, I understand
the, the this, this bill, what
it does, it, it is, is
Doulass already exist if I'm
correct.
And, and what this bill actually
does is it allows
The do list to uh.
Apply or claim.
Paid through Medicaid?
to receive
payment for their, for their
duties or for their work or?
Madam Chair, uh, representative,
that's correct. This the what
the bill does is it allows uh do
to be able to get payment
through Medicaid.
OK, and, and Madam Chair, and
Representative, so.
In, in some of the testimony we
heard that it would actually
bring down the cost of, of uh
childbirthing.
But the reality of it is that
it's gonna bring it up because
now Medicaid is gonna be.
If, if, if everything goes
through and Medicaid agrees and
everything works, the mechanics
of this bill works.
Medicaid will then be paying the
doulas.
And, and the cost of, of having
a child will go up. Am I, am I
correct in saying that?
Uh, Madam Chair and
Representative, I, I don't think
that's correct. Um, because when
you're working with is, there's
preventative medicine instead of
when we start talking about
mortality rates and we talked
about babies going into duress,
um, complications with
pregnancies. Those costs tend to
be a lot higher than if you've
got a doula helping navigate the
process. Um, it usually will
keep the cost down.
And, and thank you for that.
For that answer, Madam Chair,
and I look forward to supporting
the bill.
I like the bill, but I, but I
just want the people.
That we represent to understand.
So
So on a fiscal impact report
that I have.
Uh, it says we need.
One FTE for the doer uh
credentialing pay pay band.
And that's 70, uh.
70 at 3450 an hour.
So that would be at uh I guess
in a year's time of $71,000.
And then another.
fringe benefits of 28,479 and
then the 99,677 is estimated for
the program coordinator.
So then, uh, we also have per
diems in here.
And cost of the meetings and so.
Can, can you kind of, uh, Madam
Chair and Representative, tell
me why there's no money involved
in this bill to, to run the
program and all that?
And Madam Chair, uh,
Representative, I'm gonna have
my expert, um, I'm gonna defer
to my expert at this time. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative,
uh, so I'm, I'm work for
Medicaid and I think that is the
fiscal impact report that
Medicaid put together. So, um,
some things to kind of mention
about that. First is that we
actually received reimbursement
to start reimbursing, we
received funding to start
reimbursing for this benefit
last year, but because of the,
the lack of this bill, we
weren't, we weren't fully able
to make it operational yet. We
have almost all of the pieces in
place. We already have federal
approval.
We already have communicated
with managed care and providers,
but we need a, a credentialing
mechanism. So there isn't
appropriation cause that
actually came from last year. As
far as staff, um, that is, um,
occurring in other parts of the
budget. And I think we, the
Medicaid is trying to call out
that to make benefits
operational. We want to make
sure that we have people to
oversee it, um, that is, that is
covered elsewhere.
OK, and, and I just wanted to
point those things out so that,
so we all understand.
That there will be some cost to
this program.
And then
I
Is this gonna be optional for
the, for the hospital. Who, who
decides?
If a doula is gonna be.
Being is, is the doula gonna be
in the, in the delivery room?
And who decides that manager.
Um, the, the mother and the
family, Madam Chair and
Representative, um, they would
initially make those decisions.
OK. And, and how did the, how do
the Madam chair and
representative, how did the
hospitals feel about this?
Um, it's my understanding, Miss
Madam Chair, uh representative
that they are in support.
And, and Madam Chair and
representative, so, so how many
of the hospitals?
Did you talk to about
About the
If they were in support, how
many did you ask?
And, and who are they? Madam
Chair and and Representative,
I'll have to defer to my um my
uh my um
Expert, sorry.
Can't get that.
Mm
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative,
uh, we
Um, have
So, to kind of back up one step.
It is up to the mother and the
family if they have a doula, but
they act it actually needs to be
referred by a prescriber. That
was, that is mandated by federal
authority. So at the front end,
there is an OB or a midwife, uh,
referring the Doula service. So,
um, so that's one place that
there is that mechanism as far
as speaking to the hospitals, I
don't know their um as an
association their level of
support. We have spoken to um
At least you and I, we've been
working on this bill with them.
OK. And, and I
I remember
All the times, you know, me and
my wife raised two daughters,
and then my daughters have each
raised 3 kids.
And I remember there's so many
people in the room all the time.
And you, and you have to wonder,
you know, who
Who gets kicked out. Sometimes
it was me, so probably because
that's probably because I was.
Trying to give orders in there
or something, but so, so in some
of my notes I have, it says
facility would be hesitant to
integrate doulas into their
health system as it would
require a change in policy and
staff dynamics also liability
concerns.
Madam Cha and Representative,
how do you feel about that
statement?
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
once again, I think, you know,
we have to look at the holistic
experience of, of having a baby.
And I think that it, it really,
um, we should focus on, on the
family, on the mother. Uh, I
think you as a, as a father and
a grandfather understand, Madam
Chair, that, you know, if the
mother's calm, it helps the the
birthing experience go much
better. And so putting in that
parent in charge, I think is up
to that maybe that it moves it
forward and makes it.
easier for them.
Thank you, thank you for that
answer, Representative and Madam
Chair, and then another, another
thing I have here is integrating
doulas into the health care
system would be a challenge.
The effectiveness of doulas is
not fully accepted by the
medical community.
And I'm sure we could sit here
and debate that.
For our, you know, that I don't
think, I don't think you need to
answer that cause I'm sure
there's some doctors that would
agree, agree to it and some
wouldn't.
Uh
But, so, so is this, Madam Chair
and Representative, just one
more time for the record. Is
this, is this gonna be mandatory
that the hospitals have a doula
on staff.
Or
Or, or is there gonna be a a
doula that, that the
The patient brings.
With them, how many doulas are
there and is there gonna be a
doula at the hospital or is
there gonna be doulas coming in
with the patients or how will
that work out, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
so, um, two pieces I just kind
of wanted to circle back. Um, so
division of Healthcare
Improvement is also under
healthcare authorities, so they
are the ones that license the
hospitals. They're, they're not
in opposition to this bill.
They're comfortable with the
language, um, and so then the
second piece as far as
mandatory, this is a, a pretty
narrow, narrow bill. There's no
mandatory of having doulas. This
is just allowing um
Us in Medicaid to reimburse for
doulas, allowing a mechanism for
that, uh, and allowing the
mother to decide which doula
they would want, if they would
want, if, if the hospital
selected to hires. They, they
may select you, they may not.
Um, but if they did, that the
mother could also select their
own someone who maybe they had a
relationship with prenatally and
will continue to postpartum. But
there also might be a model
where there's a doula working at
the hospital and only is there.
for the birth. It kind of allows
a little bit of a broader
allowance for the mother to make
that choice.
So Madam Chair, and, and
Representative
I just see a little bit of
mechanical problems with it if,
if, if, say,
The child's, the, the baby's
coming.
Neighbors labor's going on, the
doctor's there to deliver a baby
the doula shows up a little
late. There's already people in
the room and they have a limit
on how many people are gonna let
in the room and the doula is not
allowed to go into the room.
Because they didn't have time to
decipher who's getting out and
had to take a vote on who's
getting out coming in. And I see
a doula getting upset and
saying, I had the right to be in
that room.
And I just have concerns like
that.
But I think, I think that could
be worked out, you know, and,
and.
If somebody wants to doula
there, well, they just have to
accept that they maybe have to.
Have one list family member in
the room or something. Madam
Chair, and Representative, thank
you for your answers and
That concludes my questions,
Madam Chair.
Representative Brego.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Do I get
as much time as representative
Zamora.
Just kidding. Um,
Uh, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Gallegos and your
guest, um, thank you for
bringing this bill forward. Um,
Dolas have been around for
hundreds of years and have uh
helped in the birthing process
for
And those hundreds of years that
they've been around, um, I think
that this bill is a long in
coming. I think that it helps
provide um you know, when we're
talking about lack of doctors in
New Mexico. I think that this
feels a very important space.
Um, personally, I have never had
children, but I've been with
people that have, and I've been
involved in in those processes,
um.
And I just think that this gives
a lot of.
independence to the mother and
her decision, um, obviously,
probably and more likely, um,
uh, a woman as she goes through
this process, um, probably has
has had this doula with her a
long time before the, the baby
was even born, I think, um, but
it gives, um,
You know, it gives us um as I
said, it helps fulfill that role
of
The lack of doctors in New
Mexico and it gives that support
to the family, but I think more
importantly, it gives a lot of
uh independence to the woman in
terms of what she's going to
experience, and her family, not
just the woman, but her family.
Be it whether they're married or
they're
Significant other or their
You know, whatever partners or
whatever the case may be cause
we define families in many ways
these days, um, but I think
that, you know, it
It's um, it really feels a need
for uh New Mexico, especially um
with our current environment,
Madam Chair, and, and I'm very
supportive of your bill, uh,
representative, uh, Gallegos and
Well, and then, and I know you,
you almost there, um, silver, I
think is the other sponsor of
this bill, and um I commend you
for bringing this.
I have a Representative Little
and then Representative Ona
Nonu. What did you have your
hand up?
And then represented a block.
Madam Chair, I'm actually moving
uh uh motion to.
I
I would like to make a motion
for a do pass for house built
214. Thank you.
Alright
Motion for due pass
representative on
and then we have a 2nd, so
representative block and then
we'll go to the motion,
so sorry, I've been in CPAC this
morning, but I've been watching
on the Zoom and been trying to
follow the closed captions. So I
don't know if this has been
addressed, but regarding the duo
fund creation, do we know if we
have that in the budget and then
I'm usually against creating new
funds. I'm not a big fan of new
funds for anything, but could
this also be lumped into a
different fund that's already
currently available?
Madam Chair, Representative
Guos. Thank you, thank you,
Madam Chair and good morning,
uh, Representative Block. Um, it
actually, the funding was
already put in the put in since
last year, um, we had the fund
was already built, but we needed
this legislation to be able to
start billing Medicaid to be
able to get the access to that.
It is also in house too.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
Representative, and my other
question was Doula's, uh, is
this just for birthing do list
or does this, is this end of
life do those as well, Madam
Chair, Representative Dagos.
Uh, Madam Chair, um,
I believe it covers both. I was
just going to take care of that.
Is there, it does not.
Madam Chair Representative, good
morning. Uh, it does not include
death toss.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, and, and I know
that do was a very important in
this state. I know that some of
my family members do list to
help them and
Difficult scenarios or very
happy scenarios bringing a baby
into the world. So I appreciate
you and thanks for those
answers, and that's all I had,
and I'm sure.
Thanks.
Thank you very much.
All right, Madam Chair's making
her way back to church here.
Thank you.
OK, uh, let's.
We have a motion for do pass a
second, let's call roll.
Representative
Representative.
A pass.
Representative Borego.
Representative Lujan.
But
Rosetta Mejia.
Yes.
Madam Flo leader
Representative Zamora.
Yes.
Representative Block.
Yes
Madam Vice Chair.
Yes, Madam Chair, yes, 80.
Representative, you have a due
pass. Thank you. I appreciate
your committee and for getting
us in today. Thank you. OK.
Thank you. OK, we're gonna do,
we're gonna move on with our
agenda to House Bill 77 and then
we are going to hear how HJR 4
after House Bill 77. I see a
Representative Martinez here and
then we'll go back to 117.
Morning, Madam Chair and members
of the committee. So I'm here to
present House Bill 77. It's,
it's a very simple bill. What it
does is um requires
The, uh, healthcare authority to
develop an annual federal sup
snaps supplemental nutrition
assistance programs state
outreach plans. So, uh, they are
currently doing this.
And we, this is just to put in
law that they will continue as
long as there's funding
available.
And my, I will let my experts
say a few words and then what
would be, we will be open for
questions.
Good morning, Madam Chair.
Representatives, my name is Shae
Satrian and I'm a licensed
clinical social worker and a
healthcare advocate with the New
Mexico Center on Law and
Poverty. Every New Mexican
deserves access to affordable,
high quality food, yet far too
many of our families can
continue to struggle with food
insecurity. Um, currently 1 in 5
children and 1 in 7 adults in
New Mexico face this challenge.
Um, the supplemental nutrition
assistance program, SNAP, or
formerly known as food stamps is
our primary tool for addressing
food insecurity by providing
families with federally funded
monthly benefits that can be
used to purchase unprepared
food. Um, Snap is critical in
supporting families,
particularly those with
children, older adults, and
individuals with disabilities.
Despite this, we know that many
New Mexicans qualify for this
assistance, but they do not
receive it.
This is especially true for our
older adults, according to 2022
report from the AARP just 38% of
eligible adults age 50 or older
participate in SNAP in New
Mexico. HB 77 would leverage
federal funding to increase Snap
access for those who qualify
through the Snap Outreach plan.
The bill is very simple, like
representatives said, um, it
requires that the HCA submit an
annual plan to the USDA, the
United States Department of
Agriculture, detailing Snap
outreach efforts in New Mexico
and seeking federal matching
funds for nonprofit or other
state funds used for snap
outreach. Uh, New Mexico has
already begun submitting Snap
Outreach plans in 2023 and match
funds used by Road Runner
Foodbank.
Um, Snap Outreach plans are a
proven best practice in ensuring
that states are maximizing
federal food assistance, um,
neighboring states of Texas and
Colorado have already
implemented legislation
requiring the submission of
state outreach, uh, snap
outreach plans. Um, the benefits
of SNAP are extensive and very
well documented.
SNAP benefits reduce food
insecurity, which improves
health outcomes, especially for
very young children and our
older adults. Um, it Snap has
also been documented to improve
both educational and economic
outcomes for families, um, by
reducing food costs.
Uh, SNAP benefits are also spent
in over 1700 of our, our
businesses throughout New
Mexico, which generates a $1.50
in economic activity for every
dollar of SNAP benefits that are
spent. Um, I wanna thank the
sponsor for HB 77 as
community-based enrollment and
outreach ensures that for New
Mexican families can access
SNAP, um, including those that
face language barriers,
transportation challenges,
unlimited internet access. Um,
New Mexico
has been operating with a snap
outreach plan and has been
receiving federal funds since
2023. Um, so I will now turn it
over to Jason Riggs from Road
Runner Food Bank, um, who can
share some successes.
Um
Madam Chair Representatives, my
name is Jason Riggs. I'm the
director of advocacy and public
policy at Roadrunner Food Bank
and um real excited to be here
today to talk about this, uh, in
2012 or I'm sorry, 2013, I
helped start Road Runner Food
Banks Snap Outreach program, uh,
at that point we were extremely
independent of the healthcare
authority, uh, we, um, we
received a grant, as did many
food banks around the country to
begin Snap Outreach, uh, as hard
as
were working in the food bank
network, SNAP can provide 9
times the amount of meals as we
can. It's, it's a vital service
and vital to New Mexico. Um, it
started with just me and a
rolling cart and a clipboard,
eventually when the state
introduced its online
application, we we set up a call
center. Uh, so we're now able to
help people all around the
state, um, we started working
very closely with HCA during the
pandemic and we were very
excited when the state actually
submitted a snap outreach plan
to the US.
um,
It's helped us increase our
outreach. It's helped us, uh,
increase our scope. We were able
to hire an additional Spanish
speaker and we're doing a lot
more field outreach in uh places
all around New Mexico helping us
get into those rural areas and
tribal lands that we weren't
able to do before, uh, in uh
federal fiscal year 24, we
helped complete 371 SNAP
applications. When you run that
through the Feeding America snap
impact calculator. Uh, that's
going to give you 2
84,931 meals, uh, that would be
a major food pantry in and of
itself,
uh, I, I'm sorry, madam Chair, I
need it in my other committee to
vote, so I will let these two,
and I will run right back. Thank
you.
Um, let me go ahead and repeat
that. That's 284,931 meals due
to snap outreach efforts on the
part of Roadrunner Food Bank.
The amount of federal benefits
coming into the states, snap
dollars that people can spend in
their communities is uh
$1,57,094 and when you factor in
the economic impact that my
colleague just mentioned, uh,
that's $1.6 million in the state
of New Mexico that wasn't there
before, federal dollars that we
can bring in. Uh, so this bill
would
actually help us continue to
expand our efforts and it also,
uh, it's not just Roadrunner
Food Bank, it also includes the
uh Eco Food Bank now up in San
Juan County and uh looking to
partner with more organizations
to bring this on. Um, thank you
very much for your time.
Thank you. Let's go to the
audience now. Please raise your
hands if you're in support of
the bill.
OK, let's go ahead and take
those comments. One minute,
please.
Jerome Romero, CWA, uh, I just
wanted to stand in support of
the bill because of the
incredible amount of work that
um our food pantries do, uh, I'm
an inspector with the state of
New Mexico and inspector, their
food, um, and I know just here
in Santa Fe, we have 34 churches
that that feed um.
Uh, you know, the, the, the
unhoused and people in needy,
um, it's, it's, it's a massive
program and it extends
throughout New Mexico.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Sergio
Mata Cisneros, and I work for
the Food Depot, which is
northern New Mexico's food bank.
We're here in stand in support
of HB 77 because we see um
having the state submit an
outreach plan to the federal
government and using these funds
to leverage and
Like my colleague Jason
mentioned, get more food banks
and other community-based
organizations doing outreach to
enroll more people on the
internet.
Thank you, and we'll stay with
the audience for opposing
comments. Raise your hands,
seeing none, let's go online to
see if we have any comments
online in support of the bill
will take 3 comments.
Hi Guillermo or Guillermina, can
you hear us?
Yes, can you hear me?
Yes,
thank, thank you, everyone. Uh
my name is Guillermila sorry,
I'm a certified community health
worker. I'm also with Whittier
Elementary School,
and I'm also with Health Action
in Mexico, uh, they're bilingual
enrollment, uh, counselor for
the North
Mexico. I am in extremely in
support of this bill because one
that we service 100 seniors
there in the international
district for my full and also
over 300 families from Whittier
Elementary and the surrounding
neighborhood, uh, that are in
need of this uh program. I'm
also one of the directing goers
I help a lot of families enroll
into Snap all over the United
States. I mean, excuse me, all
over New Mexico.
And um it's very important that
we keep food.
And health and um in our family,
especially the families that are
low income and vulnerable to
continue to have full assets.
Um, thank you very much.
Thank you so much.
Judy, can you hear us?
Yes. Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
Judy Messel speaking on behalf
of Lutheran advocacy ministry
and New Mexico Conference of
Churches. We strongly support
House Bill 77 as a way to
institutionalize Snap Outreach
as some of our neighbor states
have done. We also appreciate
Roadrunner, food bank, and the
demonstration that they did to
show how um it can help eligible
people.
navigate the SNAP application
process. People have the right
to food and House Bill 77
supports that value. Thank you.
Thank you so much, Judy.
Songtree, can you hear us?
Yes, I can. Can you hear me?
Yes, you sure can. You have one
minute. Thank you so much.
Thank you. Good morning, Madam
Chair, Committee, and audience
online and in person. My name is
Songri Paochi. I'm Tas Pablo
Olala Lakota, married to Navajo,
um, speaking, I'm also um
commissioner in the New Mexico
Commission on the Status of
Women representing San Juan and
McKinley Counties. Speaking in
my role as a teacher and a
parent, I see firsthand the
relief of 10 and 11 year old 5th
graders when they received the
black bag full of.
food when they go home for a
long weekends like this weekend
or for spring break, um, they're
so happy to have food to eat
when they go home. So I strongly
support HB 77 and ask for your
support.
Tata
Thank you so much.
Thank you. OK, committee
members, representatives Zamora.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, uh, Representative for
bringing this bill forward.
Madam Chair, I move it do pass.
Do we have any opposition
representative block, you have a
question.
Thank you. I'm sorry I guess I
missed the boat on that one
again. I'm a little off today.
Uh, just wondering, Madam Chair,
Representative Thompson, this
bill with the USDA.
Services, uh, the SNAP program,
do they currently have funding
for
These kinds of programs when it
comes to uh
Just getting the word out, Madam
Chair, and I believe that's kind
of what your bill does, right?
Just alerts people to the
programs that are available, is
that through the USDA or the of
the federal programs are, did
they give funding? And is this
just transferring that funding
to the states so they can do
that, Madam Chair.
Representative and Madam Chair,
um,
There is funding. It, it, it's
in conjunction with the federal
program, but the intent of this
bill is to have the state
program put out.
Advertisements for lack of a
better word.
So that people know that this is
available to make it public.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. So this would be
through this healthcare
authority, which department
would do that advertising,
because I know we have great
advertising when it comes to the
Department of Tourism, but
representative and Madam Char's
the healthcare authority
Healthcare authority, OK.
Sounds good, Madam Chair
Representative. And then
advertising, do we, are we gonna
do studies on what's the most
effective way to reach these
people because I don't know
necessarily where these folks
live or what the demographics
are, and I don't know if a
billboard would be better than
a, than a radio advertisement,
for example, Madam Chair
Representative.
Um, Madam Chair Representative
block, uh, this is, um,
A little bit more than than
advertising. This is outreach in
communities working with
community-based organizations
like Roadrunner, like Echo Food
Bank and uh potential for
others, um, getting the word out
in their communities, actually
talking to the people that may
or may not qualify, that's
usually the first conversation,
uh, looking at eligibility
guidelines.
And helping people through what
can be a challenging application
process.
Uh, so that's, that's really the
intent of it. And so these are,
these are federal funds for that
kind of outreach that.
Would otherwise sit on the table
if the state of New Mexico
doesn't submit an outreach plan.
OK, thank you so much, Madam
Chair Representative, and I
appreciate that and I, I, I just
have that question because I
volunteered with the one in my
town. It's, it's through a
church. So how does that work?
Because I know the church, we,
they have uh like a billboard
that they put out outside of the
church says, oh, this the first
Thursday of the month. It's the
Roadrunner Food Bank time. So
how would that trans transfer to
those nonprofits who actually
administer that.
services and and the food, Madam
Chair, representative, uh, Madam
Chair Representative, um,
so in the, in, if, if that
organization that hosts the food
pantry, uh, and I'm assuming
they're hosting Road Runner food
from Roadrunner Food Bank. Um,
there's a variety of ways if, if
they have a staff member on hand
and have their own Snap Outreach
program, then they can get in
touch with HCA to see if they
could be a full-time partner,
um, to get some of those
matching funds, uh, if not,
uh as it now stands, um, you
know, we, we work really hard to
get the word out throughout our
food bank network that we have
this help center, uh, we
distribute a lot of flyers and
cards to let people know they
can call, we can help people
over the phone in English and in
Spanish.
So a few different ways in an
organization like the one you're
talking about could possibly uh
get involved with Snap Outreach.
Thank you, Madam Chair. That's
all I got. Appreciate it.
Thank you. Do we have any
opposition to the motion for do
pass an ass.
You do.
OK. Let's um seeing no
opposition.
I'm like, keep your hands down
No hand motions. We have a
motion for do pass the second,
seeing no opposition,
Representative Thompson, you
have a due pass.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee.
Thank you. Now, we will go ahead
and uh move.
Insert HJR 4,
because that was a bill that was
rolled in a previous committee
meeting.
Representative Martinez, and
then we will, uh, hear.
House Bill 117.
Yeah, we have to insert HDR4 it
was a roll bill. My apologies
representative Ferrari. We have
a committee substitute that is
going to be passed out.
Go ahead, representative.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, um, I bring to
you house joint resolution 4.
For the last 20 years we've
seen.
Since the establish the
establishment of the public
education department.
Different ideas, different, um,
Attempts to
Better education in New Mexico.
We've seen moonshots, we've seen
people hired from out of state.
We've seen teachers hired to run
a department.
Um
But we haven't, we can't seem to
be able to move the needle when
it comes to education in New
Mexico.
Um
HJR 4.
Is another idea that I bring to
the table, which would
Eliminate the, the uh public
education department and take us
back to a state board of
education.
This
State Board of Education would
have the authority over public
school policy, finances, and
operations.
It would replace the governor
appointed secretary of Public
Education with a board appointed
superintendent of public
instruction.
Would require the legislature to
establish by law an independent
state chartering authorities.
Through future legislation.
And it would transition existing
uh PEC districts into the state
board districts.
Until 2030 redistricting.
Um
I did have an amendment, but I
didn't get it to the committee
in time. So we will run it as
is.
Um
With me I have my, my co-sponsor
representative.
Martinez, we do have a committee
substitute if you would like to.
Wonderful.
and the 202 number.
Do you have the. Here we go.
202 number 230541.1.
Madam Cheryl, move the floor
substitute for discussion.
Thank you.
So we can now discuss the
committee substitute. We have a
motion for discussion.
Um, with me, madam chair members
of the committee, I have
Representative Catherine Cullen,
uh, who is my co-sponsor.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um
this is a bill that I believe
that we certainly need when we
have seen so many secretaries
that have gone um through.
Since we've had the change in
2003 under the Richardson
administration.
Um, I served 8 years on the Rio
Rancho school board, and I have
seen where uh when we had the
continuous change of
secretaries, it uh puts
Not only the
The school boards, but the
district's teachers on edge
because we are continuously
changing direction and so we do
need to have stability within
the education to be able to make
long term change and we are only
one of the few states that do
not have state school boards. So
thank you.
With that Madam Chair, we, uh,
stand for questions.
Thank you. We will now go to the
audience. Do we have any, please
raise your hand if you have.
Supporting comments to make in
the audience. OK, we have 11
minute, please.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, Willie
Mae Ortiz and I'm representing
the New Mexico School Board
Association, and the New
Mexicocuboard Association
membership, which is 450 strong
at our annual conference in
December, voted to support
passage of a resolution asking
voters to approve a
constitutional amendment to
re-establish a state board of
education as an independent body
with the authority to appoint a
state superintendent of
education with funding and
oversight.
For a robust and accountable
education system for all
students, educators, and
communities. Thecoboard
Association supports this
measure, we ask you to move it
forward, and we thank you for
your time and attention to this
very important statewide issue.
Do we have any
Comments and opposition to the
One minute, please. Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, uh,
thank you for the opportunity to
speak. I'm Steven Carrillo and
I'm the secretary of the Public
Education Commission
representing the PEC to express
our strong opposition to this
bill through this resolution.
Moving the needle is actually
something that our state
charters are doing very, very
well. At first glance, this may
seem like a simple structural
change. However, the
implications for our charter
schools are significant and
troubling. The PEC was very
intentionally created as an
independent authorizer of
charter schools separate from
the
Political shifts that often
affect traditional education
governance. This structure
allows us to focus on what truly
matters, ensuring that high
quality charters can thrive and
maintain accountability to the
students and families we serve.
Moving to a board of education
would fundamentally alter this
dynamic. A board would have
broader regulatory
responsibilities on charters,
inevitably diluting the focus of
charter oversight and
innovation. We have seen in
other states that when charter
authorization is absorbed into a
larger bureaucratic system,
responsiveness declines.
innovation stalls, schools
struggle under one size fits all
policy. I'm sorry.
As as quick as I final aside, we
have 5 Dems and 5 Republicans.
We operate very, very well,
often in complete agreement
because we're focused solely on
improving charters. Good
morning, Madam Chair and members
of the committee. My name is
Gregory Frosted. I'm assistant
secretary of Education at the
Public Education department, we
strongly oppose this bill and
hope that you do as well.
Uh, thank you for the
opportunity to speak in
opposition to this joint
resolution, the joint resolution
would take us back to the
governance structure of the last
century, having a state school
board was not better and the
legislature and voters replaced
it with what we have now, which
is a cabinet level agency and
secretary. There's no body of
research to support this joint
resolution, having a state board
of education has not been shown
to lead to improved student
outcomes. However, it would take
significant time and resources
to make the change. Time and
resources that would be better
spent.
on improving student outcomes.
The publication department works
very closely with our sister
agencies on many important
projects such as the
longitudinal data system, Ryz NM
literacy projects such as the
summer reading program and the
Office of Special Education, if
priorities and policies for
early childhood and higher
education were to be set by the
governor with the state board of
education setting policy for
K-12 public education
collaboration between the
agencies would decline to the
detriment of schools and
students.
Uh, thank you very much. And
again, uh, public education
department hopes you oppose this
bill. Thank you.
Uh, good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Scott Scanlon,
registered lobbyist for
excellent schools in New Mexico,
and we two stand in in
opposition to this bill and have
had a conversation with
Representative Martinez. We
understand the frustration with
the constant turnover
of PED leadership, but we just
don't think that this bill is
the right way forward.
Um, we tried this about 20 years
ago and it didn't work.
We think it's a step backward,
and we
This is a huge change and so we
would urge that this discussion
uh take place during the interim
in the LESC and for those
reasons, we respectfully oppose
the bill. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Let's go online. Do we have any
comments in support of the bill.
Emmons and supportermina or
Amanda Aragorn
Ergon.
I'm sorry, I meant to, I meant
to raise my hand for opposition.
OK. No worries, we will get
right back to that.
Hey, let's take comments in
opposition to the to the
resolution online, we'll take 3.
Amanda, can you still hear us?
We're ready.
Yes, I can hear you. Good
morning, Madam Chair, members of
the committee. My name is Amanda
Aragon. I'm the executive
director of New Mexico Kids can.
And like the sponsors, we share
our frustration with our lack of
moving the needle for student
achievement in New Mexico, but I
would also point out that there
are 49 states that rank above us
in education, and they each have
different governance structures.
We really feel that governance
is not our problem and we need
to focus our time on instruction
and improving instruction in our
classrooms. We have a great fear
that this will make education,
politics in New Mexico worse. In
fact, we can see that in our
school board elections across
the state, and amplifying that.
to a state school board is a
huge concern for us. In addition
to the fact that voters would
only vote for 1 out of 10
members of this board, meaning
they don't have a meaningful way
to show up and say I care about
how 45% of our state's budget is
being used, and I'm going to
vote for a governor who aligns
with my vision on education.
They would only vote for 1 out
of 10 people leading the charge
on education, and we don't feel
that that gives our constituents
enough say and oversight over
the education system.
As well as PEDs, um, notes that
this would really disrupt the
alignment between ECECD, PED,
and higher ed, um, and despite
our frustration with the
constant turnover, it really has
only been a more recent issue
and is not necessarily an issue
pertaining to all governance.
Thank you so much, Amanda.
Terry cold. Can you hear us?
I can. Thank you and good
morning, Madam Chair and members
of the committee. I'm Terry
Cole, president and CEO of the
Greater Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce. We respectfully oppose
this legislation because it
would inject more politics in
public education, and that's the
last thing we need. Putting a
large partially elected group of
people in charge of our state's
education system is a recipe for
more division and acrimony.
Local school boards across
America are under fire for
governance issues. Many local
boards are hotbeds of political
chaos, and they routinely lose
focus on student needs and
outcomes. Why would we want a
similar situation at the state
level. Please recall, New Mexico
once put an elected body in
charge of utility regulation in
our state and for many of the
same reasons we're talking about
a state school board today. We
ended up with a daily cocktail
of dysfunction.
poor decision making. And
rightly so, we retreated from
that model. We also want to
emphasize that this resolution
does not adequately protect
public charter schools. It would
eliminate the current state
charter school authorizer which
is performing very well. Thank
you very much. Please vote no.
Thank you so much, Terry.
Thank you.
Hope Morales, can you hear us?
Good morning. Can you hear me?
Thank you. Good morning, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Hope
Morales, and I'm the executive
director for Teach Plus New
Mexico. I work with over 800
teachers across the state, and
there is a deep concern about
potential consequences of HJR4
and how it may negatively impact
students, educators, and public
education as a whole. Madam
Chair and members of the
committee, we have an
educational emergency and it is
not our governance. Most
students, our children, our
future can't read or do math on
grade level, limiting their
potential.
let the future freedoms they
deserve. We owe it to our
students to ensure our teachers
are completing high quality
training programs that will make
them day one ready.
As a former local school board
member, I worked with members
that were often motivated
politically, did not participate
in mandatory training, and
oftentimes we're not even
prepared to engage in local
school board meetings. I worry
we will see similar dysfunction
in a state board of education.
Teachers don't want more
politics and education and
creating a system with more
elected officials threatens to
bring politics into their
classrooms. New Mexico students
deserve policies that prioritize
their learning and well-being.
I urge you to oppose HAR4 and
instead support initiatives that
focus on students, empower
educators and keep our promise.
Thank you so much. And then we
have Guillermina. Uh, can you
hear us, Guillermina?
Yes, can you hear me? I'm my
background is kind of loud. I, I
just have a question, um, how is
this bill?
Um, it's gonna help you outcome
for low-income families, family
of color, Hispanic and
indigenous. That, that's the
only question that I have.
Thank you so much we were only
doing public comment, right.
Thank you so much.
Thank you. Now, we'll, uh,
representative Zamora and then
Representative Block.
Senator B block.
Thanks, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative Zamora for
putting me in the hot seat.
Appreciate that. I wasn't ready.
No, I, I am. So Madam Chair
Representative, I heard, I heard
some comments earlier about
injecting politics and elections
into education and Madam Chair
Representative.
I, I, I understand that. I get
it, right? We don't want
politics and education, but the
way I see it right now in the
state.
We have a governor who's
elected.
In a partisan election.
That governor has the sole
authority to appoint.
Staff, including secretaries and
undersecretaries.
An entire cabinet and the entire
PED. So,
Can you just address that,
because we also have local
school boards, they are
political elections that are
elected as well. So if we want
to not inject.
Politics into any form
whatsoever, how would your, your
resolution do that because from
the way I see it, at least,
Madam Chair Representative.
We have a, we have certain
people who are elected by the
people.
But
They're from districts across
the state. So it's not just 11
governor gets to choose and I
think those terms are staggered,
if I'm not mistaken. So could
you just go into that for me,
Madam Chair Representatives,
experts.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative Block, that's a
great question.
Um
I will, I will make this comment
at the outset.
Um
I think we've already started to
accomplish what we wanted to.
By the wide range of people who
are opposed to this.
Now, if we could only get all
those voices to the table to
come up with a solution.
Um
The idea behind HJR4 is really
to return the, the
power structure to the local
school board. They're more in
touch with what's going on in
their community then somebody
sitting on the 3rd floor at the
public education department.
Um, we see huge
Turnover
And I understand it's a huge
bureaucracy.
And it's hard to manage
sometimes.
But I want to take
The focus
Away from pure politics, which
is what's going on now with
One governor appointing the the
uh secretary.
Back to the local school boards
and give the local school
boards.
The control necessary to
To um
Established policy and spending
priorities that are reflected.
By that local community.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
Representative, and, and that's
a good point that you bring up.
And to get more, more autonomy
for the local school boards, and
I, I sit on the LESD I'm, I'm an
advisory member, but I, I go to
the LESC meetings.
the interim, and we hear a lot
about folks in local school
boards.
They, they want more control.
And also, people just want more
local control in general. That's
something that a majority of
members that I've heard have
said we want more more control
so we can make those decisions.
And so, Madam Chair
Representative, I did have I did
have some concerns actually, and
I, I'd love you to address that.
Maybe it's addressed in your
substitute.
For the PEC versus the state
school board because in in full
disclosure, Madam Chair
Representative, I have my, I
have another resolution that I,
I put forward as well that's
similar to yours, but mine keeps
the PEC intact.
So they can do their jobs
regarding
Public charter schools, they can
keep the same structure. This
just creates the state school
board and it allows the state
school board to be under the the
PE. They they oversee the PED
and then they can hire the
superintendent, etc. So how does
yours differ from from those
ideas that I just mentioned,
Madam Chair, representatives.
Um, I'll take the first part of
that, Madam Chair Representative
Bloch.
Um
The PEC is probably the one
piece to this puzzle that's
far outpacing expectations.
Charter schools in this state
are.
The ones that are
Raising the boar.
And my question would be, why is
that?
It's because they're controlled
locally.
Um, and charter schools, I have
some great charter schools in my
district.
Um
Uh, you know, rearent your
public schools is is a well run.
District
But charter schools outpace in
my, in my opinion.
Um, public schools, because of
the local control.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, and I, I agree.
I think charter schools and the
community schools as well, have
both a place in that because I,
I know both to do a really
interesting and very unique
perspective from
Uh, full disclosure, I graduated
from a New Mexico charter school
by myself here in the state. So
I agree, I may have a vested
interest in supporting them,
because
You know, I, I had a good
education, and so I support
them. So I, I do think, Madam
Chair Representative, that we do
need to consider them when it
comes to our, our legislation.
So can you, can you tell me a
little bit about this? I think
we're still in discussion of the
committee's substitute or maybe
we're not, but whatever we just
adopted, could you just tell me
the main differences and does it
keep that PEC intact.
Thank you, Madam Chair. This,
uh, with the substitution, it is
going to keep the PEC in.
OK. Thank you so much, Madam
Chair Representative, and I
actually just forwarded it to
like 5 or 6 people who asked me,
I don't see the committee
because we don't usually put
them on online first. So, uh, I
think some of the opposition may
go away because of that, and I
still need to look through this
one. It's very short, of course,
but I just want to make sure
that
We're keeping those folks intact
cause
I, I'm one of the, the people
who doesn't like to create new
bureaucracies in any way,
bureaucracy is not, I'm not a
fan, but
If it's a new board that can be
autonomous from the PEC.
Can you tell me a little bit
about the role of the
superintendent now because I
know currently we're on our 5th
under this current
administration, I believe, maybe
6 if we're putting actings in
there. And so, Madam Chair, how
would this person be a little
more stable in the role.
Maybe not in the governance or
anything. I'm just asking
basically in the role when it
comes to overseeing the PEC
would it kind of be like a, like
a local school board or on a
local school board level, the,
the members they get to elect
the superintendent, and it's at
their at their will. And can you
just go into that a little bit
for me, Madam Chair,
representatives.
I said the state school board
would um appoint this state
superintendent, um, as you can
see in some of the analysis, um,
from
1963 to 2003, they only had
three state superintendents.
Um, since they have, um,
Back in 20003 when it was
changed, we've had over 9
superintendents. We changed
direction when you have one. So
I've gone through um with the
with our local school board in
Rio Rancho. I served through um
during two administrations, and
we've had difficulties with both
of those um administrations
where they're appointed, um.
Head secretaries. So I think
that with the state school
board, um, with all that we know
that all the different parts of
the state have different needs.
Within their students and so
that they would all have a voice
of being able to. OK, thank you,
Madam Chair. I think that's kind
of the big questions I had and I
appreciate you for keeping the
PEC and I see it says here right
here State School Board of
Education and the PEC so each
consists of 10 members, so
they're both gonna remain.
There, so we'll both have those.
So Madam Chair Representative, I
appreciate the answers,
representatives, and uh yeah,
I'll, I'll continue listening to
the discussion, but I feel like
it's very, a very interesting
idea. I think I have similar
ideas on my, my legislation and
I
I support good ideas in general,
so thanks. Appreciate you guys.
Usually, right? Usually it's a
note, but maybe this will be a
yes, could be.
Next on the list, I have
Representative Barrago and
Representative Lujan.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you both, um, I know that
you both cared very deeply. I
think we all do about our, our
students and our youth and sort
of the direction that we're all
going in, Madam Chair. Um,
I
I feel a little bit taken back
by the floor substitute I was
comparing the two.
And I know that our staff hasn't
had the opportunity to really
look at the substitute and
comment on that, so I, I feel
like I'm voting on something
with a little uncomfortableness,
Madam Chair, um, I also, um,
Probably representing one of.
3 of us that represent the
Albuquerque school system. Um,
this has huge implications in
terms of governance, Madam
Chair, and, um, I didn't hear a
lot of discussion from some of
our school boards, so I just,
you know, or, or
You know, uh, APS or Espanola
public schools or all of the
groups that it or agencies,
organizations that it would
affect.
And so today, Madam Chair, I'm
still very uncomfortable about
making any decisions because it
has huge implications.
And um I appreciate that you
brought this forward, but I
still think that um.
I would be very remiss in
wanting to vote on this today,
Madam Chair. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Lujan. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Um
Questions, uh, so the charter
schools would be
Basically excluded from.
With the superintendent
position, you created.
do this piece of legislation.
I'm
Madam Chair, uh, Representative
Lujan, there, it's kind of the
way it is now.
The charter schools are run by
the PEC and not directly run by
uh.
Well,
Ma'am, it had been much more
interesting conversation if you
had to put on all in an
equalization the way you had it
previously would be a little
more of an appetite. I would
have more of an appetite for
that and keeping things
segregated.
I'm very vocal about that. I
think that all schools should be
on the same page when we are
engaged in a with our budget and
uh the formula we use for the
state.
I think uh we should move into a
place where everything is equal,
and right now we're not.
So there's parody throughout our
budget and through the way that
we fund our schools.
Because we're not. So
previously,
He had my attention now that
you've segregated, madam chair,
I have to say I would, I'm
against this piece of
legislation, um, had other
concerns about it. I understand.
Um
Your concerns with the, you
know, being this being a cabinet
position, I too have had those
concerns in the past.
Based upon the previous
administration, to be quite
honest with you, Madam Chair,
uh, we saw some of the, um,
Some legislation that was really
high stakes, we had high stakes,
um.
Testing in place, we had, um,
school.
Um, grading systems and just it
was very unfair to our, our
educators. So I hear where
you're coming from there. So to
be quite honest, I understand
that.
But I'm more in the vein of
let's, let's have equalization
across all of our states funded
public funded schools, Madam
Chair, um, nothing against
charters in particular. It's
just the way that, you know, the
way things are set up that our
state engaged in under the
previous administration, again,
creating parity. I would like a
clear level playing field. I
think maybe that's where you're
coming from at this, so I
commend you on that. Um, not
quite sure what.
If there was a study or if there
has been, maybe a study on what
it would mean for us to move
things into, back into this,
this uh superintendent position.
Um, but I do understand that
there are consequences in uh to
different administrations with
Their, their fundamental views
on education. Right now, Madam
Chair, I'd also say that through
our funding on our budget, we do
have a lot of, you will see that
there's a lot of flexibility to
each district through the SCG,
the funding formula that we have
in place. So I'd just like to
say that just came up in
In um appropriations again and
and um asking the question,
what, what does it mean if we
put too many restrictions upon
the SCG and and uh allocations
and, and things like that. Well,
it means that we don't give the
flexibilities to our districts,
which we do now, which is much
needed. So I'd say, um,
Thank you for trying, um, but,
however, I cannot, I am not in
favor of your bill. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Can I
give a quick response to that.
Um, I agree with you, uh.
It should be equal across the
board. Unfortunately, the way
It's being run now. There's not
that equality, even if you take
charter schools out of the
picture.
You see some schools and some
school districts.
Getting a lot of attention, a
lot of love, and other schools
and school districts, not, I'm
not a voting member of either uh
LESC or LFC, so I would suggest,
uh, having those conversations
with
Um
Voting members of those
committees because
Um
Changes do need to happen with
the SCG and how the formula is
done, rearrange public schools,
they're short $20 million now.
are of no fault of their own
decisions being made here.
Um, and that's one of the
problems.
Uh, the way the budgeting
processes and I, I, I will be
the first to admit I have no
idea.
How that formula works.
Or, or even what the what the
process is.
Um, when it comes to the SCG.
But when my school district is
coming to me and saying,
We're now 20, between 20 and $22
million short.
There's a problem, um, and.
Really what I wanted to
accomplish with this is to start
a conversation.
We hear a lot during the
campaigns about, I want to fix
education, I wanna fix fix
crime, I wanna fix all these
problems.
And something happens when we
get to the
Elevation here in Santa Fe that.
And we kind of forget about
that.
Um, so the my idea.
Was to start the conversation.
I've had great conversations,
um, with a lot of the people
that are opposing this bill.
And I think if we can at least
get to that point.
Then I've accomplished what I
set out to do.
Madam Chair, um, if you wouldn't
mind, I would like to respond a
little bit earlier in reference
to the the school boards if they
support this and we did have
somebody from the New Mexico
school board Association, the
lobbyist, um, is stay in
support, so there is a committee
that the school board
association um puts together uh
with members from different
districts and they are were in
support. Thank you.
You committee members who
representative.
Little and then representative
block and then Representative
Zamora.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
I would like to move for a do
not pass.
On HJR 4.
Or
Forgive me, I have, I don't do
this very often, so I'm going to
try to do my best. Madam Chair,
my apologies to my committee
members. I am so sorry. Um, I
would like to move.
To table.
The commit HJR 4.
And committee substitute.
Madam Chair Poorer, um.
We did not adopt the committee
substitute yet.
Was it by acclamation? We did.
Was I?
I thought we just moved for a
discussion.
Apologies. OK.
Let's uh I'm sure I made that
motion I'll, I'll move the
committee substitute.
Mad, Madam Chair, point of
order.
Um, Madam Chair, I think that
because the committee substitute
has not been adopted, then what
is before the committee is the
actual bill. And so, um,
You had a motion to table the
HJR 4 from the vice chair.
And then this other motion was
made after that. So I think we
have to just take up one.
And then
The next one.
OK, so now we're going to
Move to adopt
the committee subs.
On the first.
OK.
Representative Little.
I moved to table, Madam Chair.
Thank you.
OK. So now,
We
I think we have to adopt.
The committee substitute for
HDR4.
Madam Cha's point of order, I
think the tabling motion takes.
Precedents.
Not that I want that to happen,
but OK.
I withdraw my motion.
OK, so we have a motion to
table.
And the second.
Me, Madam chair so the you just
withdrew your motion, right? So
nothing's on, nothing's
my motion I was on the committee
sub.
Not on the original bill, this
is getting complicated. I'd, I'd
like to move.
Move, move the bill forward and
without, without recommendation
is what I'd like to do, move to
table, uh takes uh precedence so
that's.
We have before us, Madam Chair.
Emotion for we have a motion to
table.
House joint resolution 4.
And we have a 2nd.
High Representative Anya Nonu,
please call Ro.
Representative Waa Nonu
representative block.
No the table the bill, not.
Substituted in any way borego.
Yes to table
The original Representative
Lujan.
The table.
Representative Mia.
No the table.
Madam floor leader.
That's a table. Representative
Zamora, note to.
Madam Vice Chair,
Yes to table, Madam Chair.
We have tabled house joint
resolution 4.
Now we will entertain emotion to
a to adopt committee substitute
for House Joint Resolution 4.
Madam Chair, I don't, I don't
think, I think we just killed
Bill. We can't adopt a
substitute on a dead bill or a
table bill, right, madam?
Madam Chair, that's correct.
So now we go back to
representative Little, no, no,
we're done. OK, we're done.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, I
appreciate the conversation, um,
and I hope
Um
That this is just the beginning
of the conversation, because we,
we definitely need to do.
Something to move the needle,
uh, regarding education in the
state, uh, but I appreciate your
indulgence, um, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. And
thank you Madam Chair and the
members of the committee. I will
work on this in the interim.
This is something that I've been
looking at for the last, uh,
Probably about 4 years, as well
as New Mexico School Board
Association as well as also the
uh superintendents Association,
so we'll work on that. Thank
you.
Representative Ferrari.
Madam chair, we don't have your
amended bill. We have the
original bill that was not
amended, so can you go over your
amendment. Our apologies. We're
getting your amended bill
printed.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair, and
I
The amendments.
And
I'm
Mm
Your
17.
Mad, Madam Chair, I think, point
of order, I think the
Uh, House Bill 117 was amended
in Health and Human Services.
And there is a 2nd Amendment
being proposed to this
committee? No.
Oh, this, OK, so this amendment
that's been passed out point
230247.2 has already been
adopted.
And there's no amendment for
this committee.
We are waiting for the updated
bill that has been amended. OK.
Committee members, let's go
ahead and begin.
Representative Ferrari, let's go
ahead and begin, and if you
would.
Explain your amendment in the
That was um approved in the
previous committee. We would
really appreciate it. Thank you
so much and our apologies.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Well, in
essence, the bill establishes um
in the absence of a physician or
nurse practitioner that the
medical cert certification of a
death may be um signed by a
physician assistant.
And this is because there's so
much backup.
Of, you know, doctors and
delaying people getting um their
death certificate signed and
through, um, and then a lot of
times, um, they have to go
through, um,
Office of the Medical Examiner
and OMI and the changes were
just um mostly um um
You know, grammatical and um
also we changed the last bill,
it accidentally was written as
um 10 days that um the last
person, the physician, um,
That worked with the person, the
patient who passed away, um, and
within 10 days, we changed that
to 180 days.
And not to further complicate
that, um, we need to change that
to uh 365 days.
And um
The reason is is because
sometimes people within that,
you know, 6 month term, haven't
seen a doctor, but they might
have within the past year. So
that is um
Uh, uh, an amendment I meant to
have done for this committee,
but for some reason it didn't
get through and people thought I
was talking about the other
amendments that were already
taken care of. Um, but with
that, I'd like to introduce um
my expert who is um
Doctor Heather, um Gerrell, and
she is head of OMI and will help
explain some of the
Ins and outs of this.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, um, as a
representative for I mentioned.
I'm Doctor Heather Jerem I'm the
chief medical examiner for the
Office of the Medical
Investigator. This bill would
accomplish two things, which
would allow PAs to sign death
certificates, um, and every year
about over 200 people die in the
state of New Mexico and their
primary care physician declines
to sign the death certificate.
Um, and these are clearly
natural deaths. Sometimes they
declined to sign the death
certificate because their PA has
seen the patient and they aren't
comfortable signing. This would
allow PAs to sign the death
certificate because they've seen
the patient. And so we're
talking about natural death, um,
and deaths that really shouldn't
or are decedents who shouldn't
be coming to the office of the
medical investigator. Oh, and
I'm sorry, I can add one more
thing if, if you will, um.
What representative Ferrari
tried to explain was that.
The law currently states that if
you haven't seen your primary
care physician in the past 10
days, and they don't, they're
not required to sign the death
certificate. Um, this changes,
this would change this time
period to what's more in
alignment in other states. And
we're still talking about
natural deaths.
If there's an unintended death,
and I'll be brief. If there's an
unattended death, meaning that
someone dies at their residence,
we send an investigator to the
residence to have a look around.
We look to see if there's
anything suspicious, um, they'll
count medications and they'll
look for papers and primary care
physician prescriptions, and
then we'll call and ask the
primary care physician if
they'll sign. And like I said,
there's about 200 deaths for the
primary care physician will not
sign.
The Office of the Medical
Investigator will subpoena that
primary care physician's medical
records. We'll review their own
records and issue a death
certificate, but the point is
that this delays that
certification for the family.
They can't do anything until
we've, they can't close the
states, they can't do anything
until we've issued a final death
certificate. So we're really not
providing a good service for the
people of New Mexico. Thank you.
Thank you. Now, we'll go to the
audience, those in support of
the bill, please raise your
hands. OK, let's do one minute
comments.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Keith Romero. I am the
registered lobbyist for the New
Mexico Academy of Physician
Assistant, and they stand in
support of this bill. We want to
thank Representative Ferrari for
this. Uh, we think that this
will improve.
This aspect of access to this
often neglected area of
healthcare, um, end of life, so,
uh, we encourage you for your
consideration and do pass on
this measure. Thank you. And any
amendments there too.
Madam Chair, members of the
community, I'm Mike Poley. I'm
with the government relations
Office for the University of New
Mexico. I'd like to thank the
sponsor for bringing this bill
and being willing to entertain
the amendments that we just
talked about that Doctor Gerald
described. Uh, thank you.
Thank you, and we'll stay with
the audience. Do we have any
When in opposition to the bill.
Please raise your hands.
Seeing none will go online. Do
we have any comments in support
of the bill. One hoping to make
comments and support, please
raise your hand.
Let's go to opposition. Anyone
hoping to speak in opposition,
please raise your hand.
committee members.
Representative Zamora.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'd, I'd
like for the committee to look.
And
See if, if
What I'm looking at, I think the
original bill and the amended
bill both have the same.
Number, is that the way it
should be or should it be a
different number, I'm sure.
Senator Ivana Nonu.
It is still the amendments in
context that we got just now
handed out the 22 number is the
same, but it's 0.1 AIC, so
amended in context. So OK, so
that's the difference and I just
didn't want you to have a, an
issue with your bill going
forward. I thought we'd bring it
out if there was a problem with
it.
And, and thank you, thank you
for that, Madam Chair and thank
you, Representative Arnon and
Narnia.
Madam Chair and, and
Representative, thank you for
bringing this bill forward.
So
My question is,
At what
You know, we we're talking about
a natural death and and.
And then at what point in time
does a medical, uh,
Investigator get brought in.
What, who makes that decision
whether that needs to be done or
not.
Madam, thank you.
And I'm sure Representative,
thank you for your question. The
medical examiner's office is
called for all unattended deaths
at that point, um, meaning a
death that hasn't happened in
the presence of a physician. At
that point, um, while the person
is, is deceased at the scene, we
send an investigator there to
have a look around and see if
there's anything suspicious. So
from the and they also arrive at
the scene to pronounce death as
well.
So, Madam Chair, and, and uh.
Expert witness and that line is
drawn here in the bill as to
when
There's not, there's not gonna
be any, any overlap.
On who gets to declare that body
dead.
Madam Chair.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
um, I think we may be talking
about two different.
things, um, what, what we're
asking for is if
The decedent as a patient has
seen their primary care
physician in the last year. Uh,
uh, I'm sorry.
OK. Now, there you go. If the
patient has seen their primary
care physician in the last year.
And, and then they pass away.
The OMI is called because it's
an unintended death, we still
send an investigator to the
scene to make sure that there's
nothing suspicious, and then we
call the primary care physician
and let them know their their
patient has passed away, and we
asked them to sign the death
certificate.
So Madam Chair and
I'd just like to make clear,
Madam Chair, and Representative,
that right now the bill says 180
days, 6 months, but we'd like to
make it in the past year.
OK, OK,
Madam Chair and Representative,
I think you explained that in
your
when you were explaining the
amendment. So thank you for, for
reiterating that, making sure
we're clear.
Uh
So, so I'm gonna conclude my
questions and, and look forward
to the debate.
And I might want a second
chance.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Block. Thank you
so much, Madam Chair
Representative Ferrari and
expert. So, uh, is this bill
allowing physicians' assistants
and nurse practitioners to
certified death of a patient.
Madam Chair representative, um,
nurse practitioners, as I
understand it, can already.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative.
OK, so they already can, so then
I'm looking on page 3.
And um it's a little confusing
language, and I apologize, uh,
I'm looking at
Subsection C.
I don't have a line number. It
looks like 12345. It looks like
7th line down.
Starting on C
The amendments in context.
And it, it, so I'm just going to
read how I, how I'm reading it a
little ways down it says,
The medical certificate
certification shall be completed
and signed within 48 hours after
death by a physician.
Nurse practitioner or physician
assistant in charge of the
patient's care, and then down
here it says except as provided
in subsection D of the section
in the absence of the physician,
nurse practitioner, or physician
assistant or with the physicians
or nurse practitioners or the
physician assistant's approval,
the medical certification may be
completed. So I'm just like, I'm
a little confused here, like,
this says NP twice, says.
PA twice. So except as provided.
In the absence of these people.
For these people.
It, it kind of duplicates that.
I'm just wondering why that says
it like that.
Madam Chair, Representative.
Madam Chair Representative, it
took out the word or, so it's
just listing physicians
associate physician, the nurse
practitioners associate nurse
practitioner, the physician's
assistants associate physicians
assistant.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. So, OK, so
there's an associates.
It, yeah, it did duplicate it
and that was removed in the
next, in the um amended.
So the nurse practitioners or
the physician's assistant's
approval.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
I'm just trying to figure out
this. OK, so in absence of that
physician, so except as
provided,
The absence of the physician NP
or PA.
With the physicians, nurse
practitioners.
Why don't we just say or their
approval because we're like
repeating that 3 times.
Because we already said who's
approval.
I'm just, I don't know. It's
just probably just a weird legal
thing. I don't know. I, I don't
know if this goes to judiciary,
but
Or the the floor next, but
It's just a little confusing for
me. Can you just clarify why we,
why we repeated them if we could
just say or there.
I'm sure.
Madam Chair of Representative
Block, um, we had this
discussion in House committee
too. And um it's referring to
the physician's assistants, and
then if
As an associate physician
assistant.
You know, they, if the physician
assistant has an associate.
OK, and I see that on on the
line, two lines down or by their
associate physician, but that
would already be the.
Physician
OK, I, I'm just gonna leave that
there. I don't know. It's super
confusing. It's still very
early. I know it's almost noon,
but it's still very early in my
brain. So that helps me and
that's all the questions I had,
Madam Chair. Thank you.
Thank you. I have Representative
Barrago and then Representative
Lujan.
Madam Chair and make a motion
for a due pass on House Bill
117.
Before we take the vote
Representative Lujan.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I, a
question on.
Adding um
And it uh associate physician
assistant.
Um, what it, what it
What is the um education or
background for an associate phys
an associate physician
assistant.
You know that?
What is, what is their
educational background?
From chair and representative,
it's.
Another physician assistant.
But associated with the
physicians.
Thank you for that
and I'm just going to the board
of Medical Examiner reports, it
does not know what an associate
physician assistant is, sounds
as if they're like a, uh,
another type of physicians a
lower level physician assisted,
but that is not the case. Is
that correct?
Um, my, Madam Chair and
Representative, my understanding
is that it is
A physician assistant, but it's
associated with the other
physician assistant. So there
would be other, Madam Chair, for
clarification, it would be other
physician assistants. Yes. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Representatives, uh.
Moura.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and it
is Madam Chair and
Representative.
Will there be any instances
Or a family member might want a
medical investigator to declare
the body dead.
Even though there was a
Medical professional.
There at the time that the
person passed away.
Madam Chair,
Madam Chair represents the more
I'll ask Maya.
Um
Madam Chair Representative, just
so that I understand your
question, a medical professional
is there, but they would still
like someone else to come.
Um
If I'm correct in your question,
the medical examiner's office,
we can send an investigator out
there and still have a look
around in the medical
investigator can pronounce.
OK. And, and I just wondered if
there was something going on
with the doctors and the patient
and the family and
If, if the family could still
Have a medical investigator to
clear the body.
And
And you're saying your answer is
yes to that, right? I'm sure.
Thank you, Madam Chair and.
I'm, I'm sure.
Thank you Representative.
Back to our motion, we have a
motion for to pass by
Representative Barrego.
And we have a second by Vice
Chair Little, please call Roll.
Representative on Oran? Yes.
Representative block? Yes, sir.
Representative Borego.
Representative Lujan.
Representative Mea
Yes
Madame Floor leader.
Yes.
Representative Zamora.
Madam Vice Chair. Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Ferrari. You have a due pass and
thank you.
Committee, I'm glad we got in.
OK, let's uh let's hear house
Bill 129.
And we have our majority, madam
floor leader here.
Thank you Madam Chair and
members. This is House Bill 129
and I do believe there's an
amendment that's been delivered
to the committee.
Yes, Olivia.
Madame Cherikin explained the
bill and um
The amendment
If, uh, when everyone's ready.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair. So,
um, House Bill 129 deals with
the probationary period for
state employees that are subject
to the state Personnel Act, um,
and I do have an expert witness,
uh Megan Greene on Zoom, um, and
she is president of CWA 7076 and
Basically, the concept behind
this bill is to, it's, it's kind
of an instance where we're
learning from the private
sector, some of the best
practices and often in the
private sector, probationary
periods are 3 months, um, very
occasionally as long as 6
months. Currently, the
probationary period is one year
and what we found with um having
such a lengthy probationary
period is that um.
We want to incentivize managers
within state government to
really work with their
employees, train them quickly,
get them up to speed quickly and
really identify whether this is
a good fit or not as quickly as
possible. What, uh,
unfortunately, with probationary
period of one year.
Uh, what is happening is that
sometimes employees are um
terminated right before the end
of that probationary period,
which then, uh, and on average
it takes another 2 months to get
that position filled and so
you've had someone in a role,
not necessarily meeting
expectations for as long as a
year, then you're taking another
couple months to fill that
position and meanwhile, the
other employees on those teams
are left to pick up the slack,
so that is the concept of this
legislation, um, and
I can explain the amendment,
which is just really a technical
fix to
Ensure that we are matching
state personnel uh rules and so
if uh currently, if you have a
break in service of one or more
days, you do have to repeat the
probationary period. So we
wanted that to match, um, and we
also wanted to ensure that uh if
um the person was subject to
reduction of force or job
related injury or illness that
that uh matched the rule.
So, um, Madam Chair and, um, if
Ms. Green is available on the
Zoom she may wish to add.
Um, a comment.
Yes.
Again, can you hear us?
Uh, yes. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative. I, I, as the
representative mentioned, I am
Megan Greene. I am a ten-year
state employee, but I am here
speaking to you in my role as
president of CWA 7076. We
appreciate the sponsor bringing
forward this bill, uh, the
vacancy rates of the state have
been high, exceptionally high
over the last 4 or 5 years,
between 20 and 25% and as she
mentioned, uh large number
folks are not making enough
probation. We believe a shorter
probationary period would help
get permanent employees in
permanent positions more
quickly. We hope this will both
reduce the vacancy rate and
reduce the strain on our their
current employees are
experiencing well constantly
training new folks to come into
these positions, only to have
them not finish their
probationary period and have to
restart the hiring and then
training process. Uh, thank you,
Madam Chair.
OK, thank you. So,
Would you like to read your 0.2
number representative for your
amendment.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So the
amendment 202 number is
0.230615.3.
OK.
I'll move to discuss the
amendment.
And we have a 2nd, so discussion
on the amendment.
To adopt
OK. We have a, a motion to adopt
the amendment. We have a second.
Now we can uh discuss the
Adopted Bill and will go to the
audience.
Those in support of the bill,
please raise your hand. We'll do
one minute comments. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Jerome Romero, CWA
7076 um this uh bill would uh
help to reduce the amount of
state employees that we see
leave state government within
the first year, um, you know,
for some departments, it's 50%
attrition rate of folks that
don't make it off of uh
probation, and so it leaves a
lot of us working and covering
those positions, um, I would
also just like to add that um,
the managers have every
opportunity, uh, underneath
state board rule and statute to
uh to uh
To review and evaluate those
employees that are required to
do it twice, and it also
wouldn't cut this, this what
this probationary period bill
wouldn't affect uh our patrol
officers, they're still in
training during that time, so.
That's it.
Madam Chair and committee, thank
you for the opportunity to
speak. My name is Lindsay Hurst.
I am currently serving as the
executive vice president for CWA
Local 7076.
Our union represents state
employees at 13 state agencies,
about 3000 positions. Are union
workers support a shortened
probationary period to improve
efficiency, reduce waste, and
give new employees career status
benefits such as alternative
work schedules sooner.
During my 10 years as state
employee, my 4 years as a union
officer, I've witnessed
employees let go during the last
week of probation with and
without cause. Upton state
agencies wait to take action on
letting go of employees who are
not a good fit, buzzing programs
to waste time and resources on
training for almost a year.
Generally, it is clear whether
or not an employee is going to
work out within the first month
or two on the job.
We have also lost competent
probationary employees because
they are forced to work a strict
8 to 5 schedule due to the
inability to adjust their
schedule to leave at 4:30 to
pick up their kids from daycare
or school on time.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Carter Bundy with
asks me, we want to thank the
sponsor for bringing this. I
don't want to repeat the points
that were made before, but I
think it is critical to realize
that especially with the ability
to have a flex schedule, that
flex schedule doesn't apply,
this has come up in previous, in
the last committee, the flex
schedule only applies if
management believes it's the
right thing to do and if it
works. So it's not for forward
facing positions or things like
corrections. So having that
flexibility only for those
positions where it does make
sense for the public and to
continue
the services really makes a
difference in the lives of a lot
of workers. We think this will
keep workers through the
probationary period, uh, and it
will help reduce our vacancy
rates. So thank you.
Thank you and we'll stay with
the audience. Uh, any
opposition? Let's go online. Any
supporting comments?
Going to supporting comments,
Monica Meehan, can you hear us?
Yes, can you hear me?
Sure can. You have one minute.
Thank you so much.
Thank you everyone. Thank you,
Madam Chair and committee
members. My name is Monica
Meehan, and I have worked for
the state for 18 years. I'm
speaking here in my capacity as
a union member, a steward, and a
board member of local CWA Local
7076.
The state personnel office's
quarterly reports to the
legislative Finance Committee
have over the past 3 years
revealed that on average almost
40% of hires do not complete
their probationary period.
Of those state workers, Spo
reports that for FY 24, only 25%
were, as they term it,
involuntarily terminated.
But if only 20%, 25% were fired,
that means the remaining 75%
quit. Whether that 75% of people
left for higher pay, better
benefits, or because of
management issues. This
represents a huge loss for the
state in both investment of time
and money to hire these workers
only to lose them less than a
year later. I urge you to please
pass HB 129. Thank you for your
time.
Thank you so much, Megan.
Dylan P Powell, can you hear us?
Hi, I can hear you. Can you hear
me.
Uh, Madam Chair and
representatives, I'm here to
speak in support of HB 129. My
name is Dylan Pell. I've worked
with the state for 6 years, and
I'm here with CWA 7076. The one
year probation period is too
long, compared the benefits that
might entice strong workers are
kept behind a one year wait,
which is just too long. If you
want the millions spent on
government initiatives to work,
we need workers to do it. If you
want your Mexico to improve in
rankings in health, child
welfare, and education. We need
a competitive workforce. This is
a common sense step
in the right direction. This
bill is necessary to build a
sustainable workforce, please
support HP 129. Thank you.
Thank you so much, Dylan.
Uh, Sina Brayley,
a Sea Sea Riley. Can you hear
us?
I can hear you, Madam Chair
Representatives, um, I support
House Bill 129. I
I'm speaking in my capacity as a
union steward, um, and in my
experience as an employee for
the state for 12 years.
Um, we've had lots of issues
with recruitment.
And when public employees look
at city and county jobs and
federal jobs.
Our,
our probationary period is
significantly longer. Most of
those are 3 months to 6 months,
and having a more competitive
probationary period, I think
would help make people make the
choice to come and work for the
state of New Mexico. Thank you.
Thank you so much, Iona.
Ann Keller, can you hear us?
Yes, I can. Thank you very much.
Good morning, vice chair and
committee members. My name is
Ann Keller, and I'm an 11-year
state employee and the treasurer
of the local CWA 7076. I am also
here in my union capacity. I
stand in support of this bill
and request your support as
well. A 6-month probationary
period for classified service
state employees would promote
employee recruitment and
retention by bringing New Mexico
in line with the city of
Albuquerque, more than 20 other
state governments, including
Texas,
Colorado and Utah, and private
industry. I respectfully request
that you support and pass House
Bill 129. Thank you for your
time and for listening.
Thank you so much, Anne.
Any online comments in
opposition.
If you would like to make a
common opposition, please raise
your hand.
Seeing none, let's go to
representative Luhan.
On House Bill 129 as amended.
As amended.
Thank you. Um.
I see that the, I was looking at
11 place, Madam Chair, the tech
technical issues, it's been
taken care of through the
The amendment here and I just
want to say thank you for
bringing this forward as, is one
of a point that I always didn't
understand the, the year time
for, uh, I, I received different
um reasons why, um,
So, and this is in compliance
with, with um
With our state uh personnel
rules, so very happy with that
as well. Um,
But I just wanted to make or ask
one question about the flex
schedules, um, so even after
their
probationary time if we
If and when we adopt this
legislation or if we adopt it.
It's still not guaranteed that
they will have the flex time,
Madam Chair, is that correct?
Madam Chair Representative
Lujan, yes, that's correct.
Thank you. Um,
I just think, thank you for
bringing it forward. I think
that the uh CWA is in the right
place with this and um this is,
this is good, um, policy moving
forward. Thank you.
Presented a block.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Madam Leader.
A few questions. I'm on this,
the committee analysis of the
committee.
And it says there's some
Concerns from HCA noting that
many of the organization's
positions are entry level
require extensive training,
mentoring, and they say that
that could go up until 8 to 11
months into the appropriationary
period. And so Madam Chair
Representative, this one says
HCA cautions that the shortened
probationary period will result
in increased dismissals.
prevent managers from being able
to provide feedback and
opportunities for improvement.
I'm just wondering, could you
address that concern for me and,
and uh has it been addressed
with your amendments, manager.
Madam Chair, uh, yes, and thank
you for bringing that up.
Um, because I do think that this
legislation will require our
state agencies to work a little
bit differently in some cases,
um, to address, um, lengthy
training periods and really
ensuring that managers are in
there with their employees,
ensuring that they are meeting
the benchmarks, and I also want
to make sure that um that Madam
Chair, the committee understands
it's not to say that someone
could not be terminated later
after the probationary period.
As concluded, um, it just means
that there needs to be
documentation in a process
followed, um, and the, the
employee, um, is kind of a
partner in that process, you
know, and as someone who's
managed a lot of employees and
unfortunately had to let go of
some employees, um, I have yet
to end a work relationship with
an employee where the person was
surprised because they knew,
because I was really
in my due diligence to say,
here's where we need to be,
these are the deadlines, this is
a concern that I have and so
that's really what we're asking
for. We're asking, I brought
this legislation forward because
I really believe in excellence
in management. And I think that
is really important and
something that um state agencies
need to be achieving as well.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
Representative, and then another
one that the HCA noted was
How does this address
Employees currently on probation
when the legislation will be
enacted. Could you just tell me
a little bit about that. That's
their second point on the
committee analysis.
I, I could just give you my copy
if you'd like to just look at
it, but I kind of wrote on it,
but.
Yeah that's that little
paragraph at the bottom there.
I'm sure, I might defer to my
expert wit witness, um, Miss
Green.
If um
If she has a comment on this.
Uh, madam chair representative,
uh, block was your question
about how this would be
implemented, um, and how it
affects current employees on
probation. Is that correct?
Uh, yes, Madam Chair
Representative expert, that's
correct.
I'm certainly not a legal
expert. My understanding would
be that this would um be
implemented on the date, the
date that was given in the bill,
and um at that point, I, my
understanding would be that
anyone who had completed 6
months of probation at that time
would come off probation and
then moving forward, uh, the
probation period would be 6
months, uh, but please, um,
representative, correct me if
I'm wrong.
Madam Chair and Representative
yes, now having had a minute to
look.
At the analysis and the uh
Section, so this would take
effect 90 days after signing.
Um, and so, um, probably that
date would be June 20th or
somewhere around that date and
so employees that were on
probation at that time would be
required to uh
Complete the 180 days.
OK, sounds good, Madam Chair. So
it starts the clock when it's
enacted, so.
Wherever they are in that.
OK, that makes sense. And then
one other thing I saw in the
that same analysis that Attorney
General's office, I believe, or
the Department of Justice, they
said there was a technical
Question they had about the
I think it's page 2.
Line 15, the words provided
that, they said that that was
not necessary.
I'm wondering if you could just
address that for me, Madam
Chair, and I think that was on
the committee analysis that we
just were talking about.
And it was the DOJ.
Adam Charon representative, um,
so the amendment
Modify, it does not modify the
provided that, um,
However, you know, that's
something I think we can look at
as we
If this bill, uh, it moves
forward.
Um, it's certainly a
Commonly used phrase in drafting
of legislation, Madam Chair and
Representatives, so I, um, I
will take a look.
And I'm happy to call the
Attorney General's office to
understand if they are now
concerned about the use of use
of that phraseology in, in
drafting legislation.
OK, thank you so much, Madam
Chair, representative. Yeah, I
just flagged that because I just
saw it in in that analysis, and
I didn't know if it was
something significant or
something that didn't really
matter. And if it's common in
drafting, then I suppose it's
not an issue. And then I guess I
just, I, I'm, I'm not really
sure how to vote on this yet
because I
My dad, he used to work in state
government. He retired from
state government.
And
It was really hard to fire
somebody who wasn't doing.
a very good job.
And it was, it was almost
impossible in some cases,
because it had to be so blatant
and it had to be documented to
the tee. And so when you have
somebody in a probationary
period, you're still training
them, you want to make sure that
they're
They're gonna do the work well
and
I
I think the 6 months could be a
good solution. I think the year.
Also
Has worked, but I still have
some questions about that, and I
talked to a representative, I
think it's Representative Reeb,
who had some concerns about that
in the previous committee, and I
think she just said she wanted a
year to decide whether that
person was a good fit in that
that department, so.
Still have some questions on
that, but thank you, Madam Chair
and Madam Leader for the idea.
You know, I think it's a good
idea and so I'll continue to
listen to the discussion. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Representative Barrago.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair. I
just wanted to make a motion to.
House house built.
129.
As mended.
Thank you. I have a motion for a
due pass by Representative Rego,
seconded by Vice Chair.
Will cover.
Representative on.
Yes. Representative block, no,
sir.
Representative Borego, yes, and
I'd like to explain.
Representative Lujan.
Representative Mejia.
No.
Madam Floor leader.
Representative Zamora.
Madam Vice Chair.
Yes.
Madam Chair.
Yes.
And represented Brego to explain
your, your vote.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I
just wanted to um
Explain that I have had some
experience with this at the
municipal level when we changed
from a year to 6 months.
And I was a division manager.
Um, and I just wanted to say
that it did actually help um
alleviate a lot of um.
Um
I mean it was a good, it was a
good move on the muni in the
municipal.
Ah, I don't think I need another
yogurt. It, it was a good move
on for the municipal employees,
um, when we went from, uh, the
year to 6 months, and it did
help alleviate, um, you know,
um,
Actually making things more
efficient.
And in terms of making those
transitions, so I, I just wanted
to mention that to some of my
colleagues who voted no. Thank
you.
Your representative, you have a,
you pass.
As cemented.
Representative Garrett.
Surprise, surprise.
representative, you may begin.
Thank you. Good afternoon,
everybody. Um, I'm here, uh, to
present House Bill 157 as
amended. Um, my expert witness
is Alvin Warren, who's worked
For the last 2 years, um,
On this spill as well.
Excuse me.
So House Bill 157 would align
school leader preparation and
licensure in New Mexico with
national practices.
And we know that school
leadership matters. Next to
teachers, principals and
superintendents are vital. I
can't tell you how many teachers
stop teaching because of
challenging relationships with
administrators who simply
haven't been prepared enough.
So this is really important.
This bill would align school
leader preparation program
requirements with best
practices, nationally, it would
establish separate licenses for
principals.
And superintendents, there's an
average of 2 years for
superintendents in this state,
uh, which makes it hard to
consistently bring results. We
know that when there's good
leadership at the school level,
the district level, um, that
this makes an incredible
positive impact on carrying out
effective uh teaching. This bill
is the product of 2 years of
collaborative work by educator
programs, uh, public
ation department, the
legislative education Study
Committee, the legislative
Finance Committee, uh, school
administrators here in New
Mexico and across the country,
national experts and well as
representatives of our business
community, particularly the
greater Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce and nonprofits like the
Lanno Foundation, um, the
Thornberg Foundation and the
foundation down in Southeast New
Mexico and can anybody remind
me their name.
Anyway, they're a great
education, uh, uh.
People, we've traveled to
Chicago, we, uh, people traveled
and, and worked. We had
consultants in as well. So as I
said, principles are second only
to teachers as the
school-related factors that
influence student outcomes and
as you know, raising up our
student outcomes is a vital goal
of all of us. We know that
effective principles have a
powerful impact on academic
achievement, student
absenteeism.
The school climate and as I
said, teacher retention. I have
left two schools. I'm a fairly
mature person. I found myself
leaving two schools as a teacher
simply because I found myself in
a toxic situation.
New Mexico has had high rates of
principal and superintendent
turnover. It's well above the
national uh averages and we do
believe that having extremely uh
more consistent and higher
levels of preparation would
help. So House Bill 157 would
implement 3 major policy levers
that research and experience
shows are vital.
That includes requiring
principal preparation programs
to implement the best practices,
so principals are better
prepared to work in schools.
Secondly, requiring d
differentiated preparation for
principles and superintendents
whose responsibilities are
different. Right now, you get
your 3B license.
You can be a principal, you can
be a superintendent. There's no
further training or experience
required.
And finally providing on the job
supports for principals and
superintendents, including
mentoring, induction programs,
professional development, and
principal residencies which have
worked very well for teachers.
So the primary goal of this bill
is to increase the quality of
our school principals and
superintendents and reduced the
turnover so that our schools and
our students can really soar,
and I'll see if Mr. Warren would
like to add anything else.
The, um, thank you for.
Considering this bill, Lino
Foundation has been part of a
partnership with several other
foundations, Thornberg
Foundation. This is really the,
the product of 2 years of work
by an array of stakeholders, a
task force was convened over the
summer, um, that included
superintendents, um, educational
preparation representatives,
union representatives, charter
schools, tribally controlled
schools, and of course, public
education department, the LFC
and the LESC. So this bill
that's, that's before you has,
has really had input from
experts.
across the spectrum is as um
Representative Garrett has
mentioned it really helps to
improve the prospects of us
attracting, retaining and
preparing the most vital school
leaders that we need. School
superintendents, um, and, and
principals. Um, we have such an
incredible amount of turnover in
our superintendents. And so all
of the investment that you all
make, um,
Run into more challenges at
getting implemented at the
school level, whether it's
translates into the kind of cash
balances that you all know, um,
or just the lack of
implementation of the policies,
it's that turnover and
leadership.
So we want to set up um our
school leaders for, for success,
uh, so a couple of things that I
think were mentioned that
deserve getting um emphasized is
that this bill will create 3
levels of site administrator
licensure, a provisional initial
and professional site uh uh
administrator license, the
outdated license that exists now
will be repealed, um, as of July
1st, 2028, and importantly,
Superintendents will have their
own separate licensure, uh,
which doesn't currently exist.
Uh, so we, we stand in very
strong support of this bill and
appreciate your consideration.
And I will just add one thing,
it is in the budget. And we
thought we'd stand for
questions.
You will go to the audience. Do
we have a supporting comment?
Yay, one minute though.
Thank you. Uh, good morning,
Madam Chair and members of the
committee. I'm Greg Frost,
Assistant Secretary of Education
for the Public Education
department and we support this
bill. We have worked closely
with the sponsor and with the um
with other stakeholders on
developing it over the interim
and um we hope that you will
support it as well. Thank you.
you. Let's go online. Do we have
any
Comments and support.
Comments and support one minute,
Terry Cole, can you hear us?
I can, and good afternoon again,
everyone. It's Terry Cole. I'm
president CEO for the Greater
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce.
I'm here today to support HB 157
because to improve education in
New Mexico, we think it's
helpful to think about turning
things around one school at a
time, which at its core is a
leadership challenge. There are
no documented instances
nationally of a school turning
around its achievement
performance in the absence of a
dynamic, effective leader at the
helm. Stronger, better prepared
principles are essential to
driving change. The final few
pages of this bill significantly
raised the standards for how we
train principals in New Mexico.
Things like rigorous on the job
training, aggressive recruitment
of top teaching talent, improved
tracking of graduates from
principal prep programs. We
commend the sponsor of the bill
and we put a lot of work into
this for the
last 2 to 3 years as sponsor
Garrett mentioned, and we hope
that you support the bill this
morning. Thank you so much.
Thank you so much, Terry Cole.
opposing comments online hoping
to make an opposing, please
raise your hand.
Seeing none representative
Zamora.
Representative Little and then
Representative Block.
Madam Chair, I would like to um
um.
A mover do pass and House Bill
157.
Second that.
As amended. Thank you. OK. We
have a motion. Did you have a
question, Representative
Barrego? OK. We'll go to you.
Um, uh, thank you, uh,
Representative Garrett, and
your, your guest.
Um, your witness, um, I just had
a question about um background
checks.
And uh to the amended statute,
that's the only question I have
because I've seen over the
years, unfortunately, in the
news.
You know, when we don't do um
thorough background checks.
Um
We've seen some of the instances
that have happened. Oh, school
officials are required to get,
oh, madam chair, sorry, Madam
Chair representative, a school
officials are required to get
background checks.
Madam Chair, um.
that's already in the, in the
system then, Madam Chair
Representative, yes. OK.
I just want to ensure that
they're thorough.
Especially when they're coming
from out of state.
Um
I mean, just because, you know,
we don't always know, I mean,
living in state, we know a lot
of people and um, but when
people come from out of state
and apply for those positions.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Now we'll go back to our motion
for do pass in a second. Do we
have anyop seeing then?
Representative Garrett and Mr.
Warren you have a due pass.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. Thanks for
the short.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee.
And we have representative
Romero on the way.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I am
here, here with House Bill 193,
which um
Addresses the role of the EESC
and does some technical cleanup
language.
Here
And um.
With that, I stand for
questions.
Hey
Do we have any comments in
support of the bill and the
audience.
Any opposing comments. Let's go
online.
Comments in support of the bill,
please raise your hand.
Loretta Trujillo, can you hear
us?
Yes, I can. Good morning.
Great. Thank you so much for
joining us. You have one minute.
Thank you. Good morning,
committee members. Um, my name
is Loretta Trujillo. I'm
executive director of Transform
Education in Mexico, and I'm
here to speak in strong support
of HB 1893. New Mexico's
education system can't meet the
needs of our students if we
don't fix the systemic capacity
issues that are holding us back.
That's why I'm urging you to
pass House Bill 183. This bill
ensures that the LESC can study
and address deep rooted
challenges by expanding its
scope to include higher
education, a crucial but often
overlooked piece of the puzzle.
We cannot transform K through 12
education without investing in
the institutions that train our
teachers. New Mexico's
institutions of higher ed have
the expertise and programs to
prepare bilingual and indigenous
language educators develop
culturally and linguistically
responsive curriculum and
provide the professional support
our current educators need. Yet
these programs remain
underfunded and underutilized.
Expanding the LESC's purview
through HB 193 is a game
changer. It means we stop
treating higher like an
afterthought and start
recognizing it as a key solution
to our
teacher shortage and curriculum
gaps. If we're serious about
equity, we have to be serious
about building institutional
capacity, please pass HB 193.
Our students can't wait any
longer. Thank you.
Thank you so much, Loretta.
Any opposing comments, please
raise your hand.
Hey, committee members
representative Zamora.
Madam Chair, I move a dope.
Motion for do pass and a second,
any opposition?
Seeing no.
Thank you, Representative Madam
Floor Leader, we have a due pass
on House Bill 193 and we are
adjourned.
