Oh, cause closed. We have a
Three.
Heavenly father.
Opportunity to come together.
And participate.
In this great and make
decisions.
There will affect the future of
this great state.
We humbly thank you for that
opportunity.
Please grant us
Here. Guidance.
Your wisdom.
And your patients.
As we go about our duties today.
We thank you for your son.
In his name We print members,
please remain standing for a
moment of silence for
Let's Cruces off Patrol Officer
Jonah Hernandez, who was killed
Rest in peace.
Gentle lady from Burleigh
representative Little with the
pleasure allegiance.
I pledge allegiance to the flag.
And the gentle lady from Chavez.
Curry Roosevelt presented of rib
with a salute to the New Mexico
flag.
I salute the flag Lady from
Berlin.
Mr Speaker. I move. We go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business. Objection. It is
order. Good afternoon members
almost afternoon, one minute
from noon. Good to see all of
you. I hope everybody had a
restful
Sunday, hopefully
As we enter the last few days of
this 2024 legislative session.
Um, gentlelady from
Bringing Leo representative but
a horn Willie's certificate.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise
today as we celebrate public
Health day in the roundhouse
I come from a long line of
public health professionals. I
was raised with alongside
community health workers in our
system here in the United
States, which is so focused on
sick care. Public health really
stands to redefine how our
communities can be healthier,
safer.
Um and happier.
Mr Speaker. I asked that the
certificate be red.
The clerk read this certificate.
Second, we'll get that ready to
In the meantime, do you have any
guests to introduce
I would like to introduce my
have a guest. Uh, my shadow
today. Even Torres, who is a
freshman at ST John's
University.
College has been working with
us not just today, but also on
significant, many other
significant bills in this house.
then where I'm really pleased to
have him today as my shadow.
Fantastic welcome and to all the
public health advocates and
experts up in the gallery.
Welcome to the house. Thank you
for all of your work.
Generally, I think we're gonna
wait on those certificate. I
think there's a little confusion
up here about the certificate,
so we'll just wait on reading it
any other comments on public
health day?
Okay?
Gentlemen from San Juan.
Okay, well, we'll come back to
the certificate here shortly and
make sure that it is clerk to
read.
The House of Representatives of
the State of New Mexico declares
February 1220 24 Public Health
Day.
Whereas public health promotes
and protects the health of
people in the communities where
they live, learn, work and play.
And whereas public health
organizations shepherded new
Mexicans through the coronavirus
disease 2019 pandemic
And whereas place based public
and community health
organizations play a critical
role in identifying the needs
and priorities of the
communities, most impacted by a
dire health inequities.
And whereas place based public
community health organizations
create, promote and carry out
programs and strategies that
connect new Mexicans to
essential resources and are the
backbone of New Mexico's public
health infrastructure.
And whereas the New Mexico
Public Health Association was
established in 1917, and whereas
the New Mexico Public Health
Association is the state
affiliate of the American Public
Health Association and has built
the capacity of New Mexico's
public health workers and
advanced health Equity in New
Mexico for 107 years
And whereas the New Mexico
Public Health Association and
the New Mexico Alliance of
Health Councils have a close,
ongoing partnership
And whereas New Mexico's
community health councils were
established under the auspices
of the 1991 County Maternal and
Child Health Plan Act, and
whereas the county Maternal and
Health Plan Act was amended in
2007 to include the community
health councils located in
tribal communities.
And whereas the county Maternal
and Child Health Plan Act was
repealed.
And in 2019, the county and
tribal Health Councils Act was
passed to update roles and
functions for tribal and county
health councils and the
Department of Health. And
whereas for 33 years New
Mexico's county and tribal
health councils have served the
state with dedication and
distinction to improve the
health of all new Mexicans.
And whereas health councils
continue to serve as the hub of
public health system in counties
and travel communities and
produced assessments and plans,
identify local health strengths,
needs priorities and strategies.
And whereas community health
councils have developed and
implemented programs and
services to address critical
health needs and to increase
access to essential services.
And whereas community health
councils have worked with
communities to attract federal,
state and private funding to
communities to support health
programs and services
And whereas community health
councils continue to provide
accurate up to date, information
on local health needs to state
agencies and nonprofit service
providers.
And whereas community health
councils have provided planning
and coordination of local health
services that result in reducing
duplication and filing gaps in
services, and whereas the New
Mexico Alliance of Health
Councils has provided critical
coordination, capacity, building
and advocacy on behalf of tribal
and county health councils,
And whereas the work and role of
the New Mexico Alliance of
Health Councils have allowed
tribal and county health
councils to carry out high
quality assessments, programs
and services
Now, therefore be it resolved by
the House of Representatives of
the state of New Mexico that
February 12th 2024 be proclaimed
Public Health Day in the House
of Representatives.
Be it further resolved that New
Mexico's public health
organizations, including the New
Mexico Public Health
Association in the New Mexico
Alliance of Health Councils and
its constituent county and
tribal health councils, along
with critical community based
organizations be recognized and
celebrated for their
accomplishments.
And their combined 140 years of
service and improving community
well being and advancing health
equity among the people of New
Mexico.
Signed and sealed at the capital
in the city of Santa Fe.
congratulations to public health
practitioners and professionals
out there on public health Day.
Please join me in welcoming
them.
Gentlemen from
Mm.
Colfax, Mano River River San
Miguel and towels representative
Sanchez. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
I have two guests and the
rostrum today. Ah!
One is a coach Ron Drake and the
others. Coach Joseph Hail from
Santa Fe Prep Mr Speaker.
And I'm proud to honor coach Ron
Drake with a certificate today.
He's the winning this high
school coaching girls'
basketball history, and the
clerk has a certificate. Hide
Asked to be read Mr Speaker
clerk to read.
The House of Representatives of
the state of New Mexico,
recognizing coach Ron Drake,
whereas Ron Drake is New
Mexico's winning his high school
coach in girls basketball,
earning 702 wins over 35 Year
career
And whereas through his
mentorship, he has helped 42
student athletes go on to play
college basketball. And whereas
he has coached at 80 C Academy
for Technology and the classics,
Pecos High School, Milwaukee
Valley High School Espanola
Valley High School, ST Michael's
High School, Santa Fe High
School and Immaculate High
School in New Jersey.
And whereas in 2019 coach Drake
led the Pecos Lady Panthers to
the state championships, where
they defeated the Mescalero
Apache chiefs to win the
division two way girls state
basketball championship.
And whereas in 29 of his 35
years coaching, he and his teams
have qualified for state
competitions where he has won 25
district championships earned
district Coach of the year for
21 years named his New Mexico
coach of the year for 1998 and
2021 and became the 2021
National coach, coach of the
Year finalist.
And whereas other than
basketball he has coached
football, baseball, softball,
tennis and swimming. And whereas
Coach Drake has spent his
lifetime devoted to community
and school involvement and
sharing his philosophy and
passion and mentoring high
school student athletes
And whereas he proudly served
his country in the United States
Navy during the Vietnam War.
And whereas Coach Drake has used
sports to teach life lessons to
play his players such as showing
up on time being a good team
player showing manners and
keeping focused on studies now,
therefore be it resolved by the
House of Representatives of the
state of New Mexico that
recognition be extended to coach
Ron Drake for his dedication to
schools, teams and the players
he has mentored through the
year.
Mr Speaker, just he's a legend
in Northern New Mexico is a
legend. And now remember, as a
kid, always hearing again
hearing about coach Flanagan and
Albuquerque and
Now we've got our own coach from
the north with the record, so
I guess I'd ask for a round of
applause for for coach. He's a
legend. Mr. Speaker. Welcome to
the house. Thank you.
Gentlemen, Can we recruit Coach
Drake as our permanent housing
Aggie coach for the basketball
games, Mr Speaker. Let's see if
we can get him on board for next
year and I'll play if he takes
it on.
Challenge accepted. He gave you
thumbs up. It is a deal.
Let's go to the gentle lady from
Job is Curry in Roosevelt
representative Rib. Thank you,
Mr Speaker. I just have a couple
announcements. Um
First I want to acknowledge. I
don't think people realize how
often as as members of the
Legislature, miss very important
things in our families and loved
ones lives when we're up here,
serving and I'm fat got to miss
a very big day in my son David,
whose 18 year old 18 years old
life on Saturday when he was
swimming in his, uh
District's swim meet. And if you
know me at all, I'm a swim on my
been a swim Mom for 17 years, I
have two daughters that swam
competitively and this is my
last one, and he actually
achieved accomplishing 12 State
times, which is every time you
can get to qualify for state
swimming, and he captured the
district championship in 100
Butterfly and the closed high
school swim team one district
and so I want to give him
A shout out. First of all, I was
kind of sad to miss that sat
down a little tear in my eye.
Like, how could I have missed
this thing that he's worked on
for?
So long been swimming five
years, but so first a shout out
to my son David for his
accomplishments on Saturday,
which I could have been there,
but I'm super super proud of him
and Mr Speaker leads me kind of
into the next thing because I
I am a swim. Mom and I did have
two daughters. I have one.
That's now 24 and 21 and
thereafter at school at Texas
Tech, but they were swimmers,
too, and very good swimmers, and
they would often come up to me
when they would be swimming with
their little brother. The one I
just talked about who's 15 at
the time, and they're very
accomplished swimmers and they
would be 1718 years old and they
would be like Mom. Why is David
beating us in a sprint?
And I would be like, Well, you
know there. I'm just gonna tell
you He's a boy and you guys are
girls and you're biologically
different when it comes to
sports, and so gave me a very
big interest in competitive
swimming and competitive sports
of the difference between the
biological man and the
biological female.
And so I wanted to say that
tomorrow I'm excited to announce
that I'm Riley Gains who is a
state swimming champion will be
here tomorrow at the roundhouse
at 10 o'clock, talking about her
experiences as a swimmer and
competing against, um biological
man and swimming and I would
encourage everybody to come out
and listen to her and the things
that she has to say about
What she she dealt with going
through that and I think she's a
neat person to listen to and
about all our experiences. I
also did drop a bill Bill, two
of five women's rights bill that
basically just discusses the
differences of competing fairly
in sports for women and men, and
she's fighting these issues and
Also become important speaker on
these issues, and that's why
it's important for me, also as
the mother of daughters who are
athletes and also a son, who is
an athlete, so again tomorrow at
10 o'clock, I would ask you to
go outside and meet Riley gains
and listen to her talk at the
Capitol about these issues. And
thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, General Lady.
Gentlemen from Colfax. Moral
really was getting towels. I
failed to introduce guests of
yours as well, who are here?
Um, in honor of Coach Drake.
These are folks up in the
gallery who have been coaching
in New Mexico, both girls and
boys teams for many, many years,
including Tom Manning, Josh
Grind. Richard Trujillo Judge
Eddie Trujillo, David Rebel and
Lynch will be hell.
Thank you all for all your work,
some of them. I think work here
for us as well. Big round of
applause for those folks as
well.
Generated from while we're on
the topic of the gentleman from
Colfax, morada, moral, legal and
towels generally from Bern, Leo
has an announcement for the
body. Thank you, Mr Speaker for
recognizing me, Um,
Representative Marengo case.
Some of you guys forgot
Um, So you know, we're
navigating through all of these
bills, Mr Speaker and sometimes,
as Stevie Nicks says, sometimes
it's weeds. And sometimes it's
roses. Um and I'm happy to
mention two to the body today
that we have some roses. Um we
have one little rose, Who's
coming?
I think in July I'm not sure of
this, Mr Speaker, but, um if I
could ask representative
Sanchez to rise as well.
Um, as you know, um, and some of
you may not know, but I think
most of you know by now because
I've been running around trying
to talk to all of you, Um
You know, one of our very own is
expecting. I believe a little
rose or
I hope it's a rose. Uh, it may
not be. It may be a boy. We
don't know yet. And
representative Sanchez and his
wife, Veronica, I believe are
expecting their first child.
And I'm really happy to honor my
brother. Um oh.
I just actually met like two
years ago, but he's become part
of my family.
Um, Mr Speaker. We have, uh, I
was able to buy a card and I
think most everyone in the
chambers signed the card and
thank you for that. We do have
some cake in the legislative
lobby room or break room. And,
uh, I think Mr Speaker, you
might have something to say
about this as well and
I want to thank everyone for
participating in this bit of
levity as we navigate all of our
all of our weeds. Um, and the
details that are so important to
the state of New Mexico, But I
think I would ask you to join me
and congratulating
representative Sanchez. Big
round of applause for
represented Sanchez and Mrs
Sanchez.
And then maybe I can make a
prediction here. But I think
generated from earlier you might
become like the mother Arena,
the of the body because I walked
into the lounge this morning,
and there's a whole party set up
in there with cake.
Balloons. Um, several packages
of diapers so
Happy diaper changing at two in
the morning.
As you as you let your wife rest
and you put in the work of
changing those diapers. It's
it's a whole lot of fun.
But in all in all seriousness,
congratulations on the addition
to your family. We welcome them
with open arms. Congratulations,
representative.
Gentlemen from
Lee, representative Pettigrew.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would
be remiss if
I didn't pull up the information
on today's calendar with respect
to our 16th President Abraham
Lincoln.
Today we celebrate his birthday.
Many people define him as a man
of velvet still
And, uh,
And I think there's a quote that
Mr Speaker that
He said, at one point in time
that defines that there are
times to put up the Dukes.
And there are times to relax the
fist and extend the hand of
friendship.
Mr Speaker, and, um, body. I
would say that
Um, several times during this
session. We've done both.
And I think it's been very
Well balanced with respect to
that.
And putting out the hand of
friendship. While we may
disagree. Putting out the hand
of friendship is always
important, and I appreciate
that.
Mr Speaker with respect to your
leadership with respect to the
leadership from
The majority party.
And the minority party and I do
appreciate that Mr Speaker.
I want to leave the body with a
quote.
From Abraham Lincoln said, Sir,
My concern is not whether God is
on our side.
My great concern is whether we
are on God's side.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and body
for the chance to talk.
Thank you, gentlemen. For that
sentiment very much shared and
appreciated as well.
Gentle lady from Berlioz's
Sandoval, representative Kids.
Thank you very much. Mr Speaker.
I rise for personal privilege.
State your point tonight at 530,
the city of Rio Rancho Public
Library Board will meet and it
has been announced that a hate
group will be there to demand
the removal of books from its
shelves of the public library.
This is approximately the 10th
time. This group has shown up to
the governing body meetings in
the public library board
meetings.
Not to file paperwork to follow
the book review process but to
threaten government officials
are loved ones in the L G B T Q.
I A plus community and in one
meeting, I personally witnessed
threats to our librarians.
I am very proud of the city of
rear ranches, mayor governing
body and city manager who has
respectfully communicated and
provided training on book review
process as well as the
government bodies signing
resolution that they will not
allow groups to circumvent the
book review process.
I rise today to ask this body to
contact constituents.
In your hometown and asked them
to protect their librarians.
Public servants are parents
volunteers in our food Banks
Rotarians church members, and
they are quiet protectors of our
democracy through our free
public libraries. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, gentle lady.
Gentlemen from Sandoval
announcements. Nope.
Ride members were going to do a
little bit of represent, but a
Honda
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I
apologize. I do now have guests
in the gallery for public Health
Day. Would you please recognize
them?
Absolutely. We've got Janet
Johnson from the New Mexico
Department of Health. She is a
tribally A zon. We've got
Miranda Duran from NMD O H.
Uh, loud up at a home, Deputy
Cabinet secretary of D O H and
your mother, You're very proud
Mother.
Jeff Lata, interim division
director of Public Health, Tracy
Gordon, Syringe services
coordinator and other Department
of Health employees and staff.
Welcome to house and
congratulations on public
healthy.
Right. Anything else? Mints
Gentleman from Dona Ana. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Briefly, Mr.
Speaker first, I wanna thank you
for the moment of silence You
offered for officer and
Hernandez, Mr Speaker, as we all
know our first responders and
law enforcement officers leave
for each and every shift. They
know they may not come home
Their families deal with this
from the time they go through
the academy through the entirety
of their service.
And it's a truly sad day in Las
Cruces and for state and I want
to thank you and thank you for
sending our love and prayers to
This state, especially officer
in Hernandez's family at this
time, Mr Speaker. I also want to
Ah, on a different note, there's
a few guests that you have
there that are in the rostrum
today, including my father. Ah,
who was here visiting and I
wondered if you might read those
briefly, Mr Speaker, gentlemen,
and they rush up in the gallery.
guests of Representative Smalls.
We've got his father, Martin
Weil in the house.
Stepmother, but Patricia Tyler
Mary Alice Tyler and and Tyler
and Rob Oleson. Welcome to the
House.
They are directly above you,
gentlemen. If you look up
Welcome to the House.
The announcements. The gentleman
from
Berna, Leo.
Mr Speaker. I rise for a point
of personal privilege. State
your point. Mr Speaker. I wanted
to give the body a little bit of
an update about what's cruises.
Um, Officer Hernandez was a two
year veteran. He responded to
trespassing call.
He was the he confronted the
trespasser.
The trespassers stabbed him in
the throat.
A civilian shot the offender.
Um
Officer. Hernandez died as a
result of that stab
And he has behind a 10 year old
son.
And a two year old son.
I think it's important for us to
recognize that if you look at
the FBI stats
The most used weapon.
In murders.
Is not guns but sharp edged
weapons.
And Mr Speaker, I would ask for
a moment of silence in his
honor.
Members. Please rise as we honor
Officer Hernandez here on this
floor. Thank you members and
thank you, gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
members And as I received more
information all update you
Generally from Berlin. Mr
Speaker. I, um, wanted to let
you know I am so glad Lincoln's
birthday was brought to our
attention today. It's also the
21st birthday of one of our
grandchildren, Nikki Norville.
So, um, please wish Nicaea.
Happy birthday. I don't require
any singing by the gentleman
from Chavez. I want lost money.
Anita's If if we have We have
somebody up here Who can do
that? Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you. Happy birthday to
Nikki today on her birthday.
Alright members. We're gonna do
a little bit of housekeeping now
and then going to third reading
the list of bills has been
Distributed. Um so we'll get to
that here shortly, but we're
first going to do some
housekeeping generated from
early. Oh,
Mr Speaker. I move we go to that
order of business messages.
Objection so ordered.
Message from the Senate. Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the house that the Senate has
passed. House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill 129, as amended by the
House and further amended by the
Senate and request the
concurrence of the House to the
Senate amendments Respectfully
submitted. Sherry D. Luhan,
Senate chief clerk.
Message will be entered message
from the Senate. Mr. Speaker,
I'm directed to inform the house
that the duly enrolled in and
gross copy of Senate Bill 153
has been read in full and signed
by the officers of the Senate
and open session and requests
The signatures of the officers
of the House Respectfully
submitted. Sherry D. Luhan,
Senate chief clerk.
Message reenters.
Message from the Senate. Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the house that the Senate has
passed Senate Bill 165 and
requests the concurrence of the
House respectfully submitted.
Sherry D. Luhan, Senate chief
clerk.
Message will be entered
message from the Senate. Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the House that the Senate has
passed Senate Bill 216 as
amended Senate Bill 217 as
amended and request the
concurrence of the House
respectfully submitted. Sherry
D. Luhan, Senate chief clerk
message will be entered.
Generated from Bern, Leo.
Representative J. C.
Mr Speaker. I move. We go to
that order of business Committee
reports. Objection. It is
ordered.
Mr Speaker. Your Taxation and
Revenue Committee to him has
been referred Senate Tax,
Business and Transportation
Committee Substitute for Senate
Bill 88 has had it under
consideration, reports with
recommendations that do pass
respectfully submitted Derek
Lengthy chair, Mr Speaker. Move,
Adoption adoption of a favorable
committee report on Senate tax,
Business and Transportation
Committee substitute for
Centerville 88. All those in
favor signify by saying, Aye.
All those opposed nay, the
committee report adopted
Mr Speaker. Your Taxation and
Revenue Committee tomb has been
referred. Senate Finance
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 148 has had it under
consideration, reports with
recommendations that do pass
respectfully submitted Derek
Lengthy chair. Mr Speaker. Moved
OPTION, please adoption of a
favorite committee report on
Senate Finance Committee.
substitute for Senate Bill 148.
All those in favor signify by
saying, Aye.
All those opposed Nay, the ice,
A bit committee reported opted
Mr Speaker. Your Taxation and
Revenue Committee tomb has been
referred. Senate Bill 236 has
had it under consideration,
reports saying with
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted the
chair adoption adoption of a
favorable committee report on
Senate Bill 236. All those in
favor of I was in I
I was suppose name
The eyes have a committee report
adopted.
Mr Speaker. Your Education
Committee to miss been referred
House Memorial 32 has had it
under consideration. Reports
with recommendations Do not
pass, but that House Education
Committee substitute for House
Memorial 30 to do pass
respectfully submitted sundress
from your chair. Mr Speaker. I
move adoption of the committee
report.
We're on adoption of an
unfavorable committee report on
House Memorial 32, but a
favorable community ports on
House Education Committee
substitute for House Memorial
32.
That's a lot of work for
Memorial probably seen I
Suppose Naomi the eyes have it
coming report adopted.
Mr Speaker. Your Education
committee tomb has been
referred. Senate Bill 239 has
had it under consideration
Reports with recommendations
that do pass as amended.
Respect. Listen, Energy Andress
from Aero Chair Speaker. I move
Adoption of the committee report
were an adoption of a favorable
committee report on Centerville
to 39.
All those in favor signify by
saying Aye, those opposed nay.
The Air's out of committee
reported often, Mr Speaker,
you're enrolling and engrossing
committee tomb has been referred
House Memorial 57 has had it
under consideration, reports,
The same has been duly enrolled
in grows purgatory, designing by
the office of the House.
Respectfully submitted Eleanor
Chavez chair.
We're in adoption of a favorable
committee report on House
Memorial 57. Although they've
ever seen. I'm sorry. You need
to move it first. Go ahead.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I move
adoption adoption of a favorite
committee report and has
memorial 57 all those have ever
seen in person. I was supposed a
committee reported updated that
the record reflect that the duly
enrolled any gross copies of
house tomorrow 57 were signed by
the officers of the House in
Open session.
Gentle lady from
Leo.
Mr Speaker.
Now being 1159 am I move?
The House adjourned.
What? Until 1201 PM
How does it come to order?
Mr Speaker, I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended and that the records
at the Journal show that all
those present in the morning
session or president this in the
afternoon this afternoon session
If there is an objection to just
ordered Mr Speaker, I ask
unanimous consent that the rules
be suspended, and the records
show that the journalist been
read in full and approved
subject to revision and approval
of the rules in order of
Business Committee if there's no
objection is disordered.
Generally from Bern, Leo.
Represented Casey.
Mr Speaker. I move to go to that
order of business. Third reading
of legislation.
You know? Objection. It is so
ordered.
Members. We have a list of bills
that I believe you'll probably
have already we're going to
start
Um with items.
22. Are you ready on that item,
gentlemen, from all those
counties you get to that point
at the record reflect that
election necessary for placing
House Bill when 86 on final
passage has been taken, and it
is not subject to debate
amendment or substitution. The
gentleman to explain the bill,
Mr Speaker. Current law requires
the driver of a vehicle involved
in an accident involving more
than $500 in property damage to
file a report to the N M D O T.
Hospital, 186 would have raised
that amount to $1000 to $500
threshold was set in 1991 when
it was raised from 250 the
federal model minimum uniform
crash criteria recommends
$1000 or more, Mr Speaker.
We did have some suggestions
Teresa to 1500, but the D O T
did do some analysis where it
showed that that wouldn't truly
impact the amount of reports.
And with that, Mr Speaker, I
stand for questions. There is
debate the gentleman from Lee
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Does a
gentleman yield Mr Speaker I
yield to the gentleman.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I just
stand in support of your your
legislation and in honor of the
celebration we're having today I
will reduce this not to three
hours.
God bless, and I am looking
forward to seeing the new
Sanchez.
The new and improved Sanchez.
Gentlemen, Gentle lady from
Eddie and LeAnn Pacific Brown.
Thank you very much. Mr.
Speaker. Will the gentleman
please yield? Mr Speaker, I
yield to the General lady.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, So I
have a little quiz for you. And
it's a real easy one.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, Would you
explain to us when someone is
involved in an auto accident and
there appears to be damaged,
too.
One or more vehicles.
To whom must the driver report
that accident? Mr. Speaker and
gentlemen, Mr Speaker. They're
supposed to General Lady.
They're supposed to report that
to Dottie. I know the secretary
mentioned they're gonna do a
initiative to start educating
people on this requirement, so
he's going to be working on that
Mr Speaker, General Lady.
Yes. And that isn't that is a
personally correct answer. Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, so we all
kind of know that you report to
the police report to your
insurance company. But there's
also requirement in statute, and
that requirement has been there
awhile that we must also report
to the New Mexico Department of
Transportation and Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, I think most drivers
don't know that they're supposed
to report to an M D O T.
So we do need to educate people
about that. And Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, do you know if that
particular requirement is
discussed during driver's ed
training, Mr Speaker?
Mr Speaker, General lady, uh, we
believe it is.
Hmm. Okay.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, So
I've talked to a few young
people and they're not aware of
this requirement, so I think we
do need to do more on that and
then final question. I guess, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen.
How does one know that that
damage to the vehicle is at the
threshold that this bill would,
um, would specify how do we know
that just by looking at the
vehicle, Mr Speaker, gentlemen,
Mr. Speaker, General Lady, I
think someone has to make their
best assumption. I know Just
getting a little fender Bender
can get you close to $1000.
That's why the threshold was
raised.
But anything greater than that
is definitely going to be over
the $1000 to right now. It's up
to the person to
Make an educated guess on that
assumption. Mr Speaker, General
Lady.
Yes. Thank you so much,
gentlemen and Mr Speaker. I
I'm always surprised when I hear
what the cost is a repairing a
vehicle. It's always more than
we imagine it would be, I think,
And so I think raising this
limit is is a good thing. But I
am also of the opinion, Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen, that, um
It's a bit of guesswork, and,
um, I would not want to see
someone penalized for not
getting that estimate right when
they need to know it, So I think
it's It's hard for people to
To figure that out. So anyway, I
support the bill. And I thank
you for bringing it. Thank you,
Mr Speaker. There's further
debate. The deleted from
McKinley Representative
Lindstrom. Thank you. Mr
Speaker. Will the gentleman
yield Mr Speaker I yield to the
general lady.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Just a very
simple question. Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, what year?
Will your baby be when he or she
is old enough to drive?
Mr Speaker depends on if she
takes the
The course work together License
or his license early, so
Ah, I don't know right now.
Well, I think Mr Speaker
gentlemen, that might be, um
Step one is to figure out what
age your baby will be at the
time when she's old enough, or
he's old enough to drive. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Thank you.
Thank you, gentle lady.
Signal further back, Gentlemen,
Close Mr Speaker. I move that
house Bill 186 do not pass. We
are on final passage of house
Bill 186.
Remember 32nd vote clock.
The vote.
What about clothes?
Just to make sure everybody's
vote button worked.
I don't see any hands and I
don't see anyone jumping up and
down, so we'll assume the vote
button is are working.
Enclose the vote.
By a vote of 16, the affirmative
zero in the negative house. Bill
186 has the leap has his house
gentlemen from Curry debacle.
Guadalupe Roosevelt's and
Miguel, Are you ready? An item
23.
I am Mr Speaker. You get me to
that point that the record
reflect that all action
necessary, replacing House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Consumer Public
Affairs Committee. Substitute
for House Bill 239 on final
passage has been taken and it is
not subject to debate amendment
or substitution, the gentleman
to explain the bill.
Mr Speaker House Bill 239
relating to corrections,
including cannabis and the
definition of contraband
prohibiting cannabis in places
of imprisonment.
Or detention, providing
exceptions. Mr Speaker with that
will stand for questions,
Gentlemen, close
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I now
move.
That House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Consumer
and Public affairs Committee
Substitute for house Bill 2 39 9
do now pass on final passage of
House Judiciary Committee sub
two for House Consumer Public
Affairs Committee. Substitute
What about the close vote is not
closed by a vote of 57 in the
affirmative for in the negative
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Consumer
Public Affairs committees
substitute for house Bill 239
Generated from Burnley or
Representative Thompson. Are you
ready on item? 14. Mr. Speaker?
I am. Will you get me to that
point, the record effect that
election necessary, replacing
House B 181 on final passage has
been taken and it is not subject
to debate amendment or
substitution to generated to
explain the bill. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. HB 181 amends New
Mexico's life and health
Insurance Guarantee Association
Act.
Based on the current version of
a Model act, developed by the
National Association of
Insurance Commissioners.
41 States have already adopted
these changes. HB 181 adds
additional consumer protections
by expanding guarantee
Association membership.
To include HMOs and provide
coverage to their subscribers
and providers valuable coverage
that will protect them from Los
if they're H M O becomes
insolvent.
There is debate gentlemen from
Chavez Edion Otero,
Representative Tencent. Thank
you, Mr Speaker of the General
Lady. Yield. Mr Speaker I yield
generated. Can you explain to me
what this bill does? I mean,
I know you read the intro, but
tell me what it does. Mr.
Speaker and gentlemen,
essentially what it does it adds
HMOs into the insurance
guaranteed. So there's a group
of folks that that
When when an insurance company
goes insolvent that they kind of
helped pick up the pieces and
make sure that the customers who
have been left high and dry are
taken care of.
Miss Mr Speaker in general Lady.
Is that a problem that New
Mexico deals with?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, My my
expert is not here. But I If I
remember correctly, it has
happened. 10 Times in New
Mexico.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, that
my expert who is Mike Batt with
his the administrator for the
New Mexico Life Insurance
Guarantee Association. It has it
is not a major problem, but
we're just trying to keep ahead
of it.
Okay?
Mr Speaker in General ladies.
This doesn't require an
appropriation, does it?
No, Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
the actually the members of the
guarantee Association are the
ones who figure out how to how
to make things whole.
Thank you gentle lady. That was
my point. Mr. Speaker. Thank
you.
There is debate the gentleman
from Lee, Representative Scott.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Will the
generator Berlin. Hell, Mr
Speaker, I yield
General ADM. In Section two.
Looking at the provisions with
regard to factor.
Factored.
Gentlemen. Tonight Settlement
transaction interrupt you and
hold on. Let's not start
interrupting. I'm sorry. I was
distracted and interruptions are
very sensitive to me. I just
need a page number in line.
That's fine. Gentlemen, can you
provide a page number?
Just one second page 13.
Okay, I'm there.
Okay. And the they underlined
Language is a
Is stealing with a person who
acquires rights to receive
payments.
Through a structured settlement.
Factoring transaction.
What is that?
And how does this
Legislation impact what's in
current law, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, we're looking for the
definitions of you could give us
a second time, gentle lady.
On Page 10 line four.
Hmm. Mr Speaker. It says
structured settlement factoring
transaction means a transfer of
structured settlement payment
rights, including portions of
structured settlement payments
made for consideration by means
of sale assignment pledge or
other form of encumbrance or
alienation. Okay, so Miss
Speaker generally.
Or those now covered under these
changes. So Mr Speaker and
gentlemen that the factoring
transactions are covered under
current law, but they would not
be covered under this amendment,
okay?
Mr Speaker, General Lady, Could
you give me an example of how
So, Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
sorry for that, But I think I
have it now. So sometimes you
get this is definitely not my
area of expertise you get like a
worker's comp settlement, and
then you see the commercials on
TV where they say will buy out
your You know your settlement or
your whatever. And so what? The
intent of this is to protect the
individual but not the secondary
person who buys out that.
Contract essentially Okay, Mr
Speaker, gentle lady that
actually makes sense.
The person purchasing
At some discount this structured
settlement.
Hmm.
I organization providing that
structural settlement.
Now it goes bankrupt.
The person that bought that
settlement payment.
For some discount is not
covered.
Is that accurate? Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, that's perfect.
Okay. Thank you very much. Mr.
Speaker Generating
There is a debate the gentle
lady from Dona Ana Hidalgo and
Luna representative Jones.
Thank you. Mr Speaker does the
generally the yield Mr Speaker I
yield to the general lady?
Thank you. I know we saw this in
health. It seems like a long
time ago. But there is one
question. I know we voted
unanimously to pass it, but I
would like to clarify
Um on pages, 46 and 47.
Um, it has to do with long term
care insurance, long term care
facilities.
There is new
Added language here that talks
about those that the long term
care entities What do these new
provisions for insolvent long
term care insurance attempt to
do? Could you explain that for
me, gentle lady?
Mr Speaker.
So Mr Speaker and General Idiot
actually splits how they
determine the costs, so it half
of it is long. Half of it will
be the responsibility of the
long term care insurance and
half of it will be the health
insurance. It's just a matter of
how they how they come up with
If someone goes insolvent who
has to pay what
I see. I think that answers my
question. Thank you. Thank you,
Mr Speaker.
See no further debate. The
generator close Mr Speaker. I
move that house Bill 181 do now
pass.
We are on final passage of house
What about the clothes?
The vote is not closed by one of
61 in the affirmative one in the
negative house. Bill 181 has
really passed this house.
Gentle lady from Berna, Leo
representative.
Garrett, are you ready on item?
15? Yes, Mr. Speaker. Can you
get me to that point the record
reflect that all action
necessary for placing House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House transportation. Public
works in Capital Improvements
Committee substitute for House
Bill 190.
On final passage has been taken
and it is not subject to debate
amendment or substitution, the
gentle lady to explain the bill,
Mr Speaker, I'm going to explain
and then I'm going to have my co
sponsors, representative
Lundstrom and representative
Brown say few brief remarks.
House Judiciary Committee sub
for House transportation.
Uh,
And all those substitution house
Bill 190 is public private
partnership agreements. It
establishes a framework for
establishing public private
partnership agreements or
abbreviated p threes. I want to
thank all the 10 years of reps
who worked on this bill. This
bill requires the state Board of
Finance to promulgate rules for
P three agreements.
Uh huh. And then to receive and
review the requests and finally
to receive and approved the
final P three agreements prior
to the performance. It also
amends and an ax to sections of
the procurement code. The Board
of Finance Division provides
staffing for the Board of
Finance, and there's money in
the budget to support any
additional staffing and
contractual services they need.
My expert witnesses today
include Ashley Leached, the
division director for the Board
of Finance. Marcos. True Hell,
the deputy director, and Paul
Kipper from the municipal
league. And with that Mr
Speaker, I'd like to turn it
over to representative Petty
Lindstrom from McKinley. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. And thank you,
General Lady, Mr Speaker and
members. The general lady did a
great job in providing an over.
View of the bill. This is a
major infrastructure development
tool. We're not doing a stand
alone, Bill. We're changing the
procurement code to make this
work and I just want to thank
the lady and the other co
sponsor for their continued work
on this. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, gentle lady. Let's go
to the other corresponds to the
generated from Eddy and Lea,
Representative Brown.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Um
And and General Lady, Will you
please yield for just a minute?
Yes, Mr Speaker. I yield to the
gentle lady from Lea and Eddy
counties.
Thank you, Mr Speaker in General
80 For how long have you been
working on the public Private
partnership concept for a bill.
Mr Speaker, Mr Speaker and
gentle lady for the six years
that I've been here.
Yes. And I Mr Speaker.
Generally, I thank you and the
representative from McKinley for
all the effort that has gone
into this
This bill. I think Mr Speaker
and members that we're having
For your consideration today, a
much improved bill over where it
was before. I think we've
simplified it.
I think we have made it more
accessible to especially local
governments to do infrastructure
projects, many of which
Mr Speaker, Um
Have gone undone because the
inability of the local
governments to raise the funding
to do things, but this would
enable them to enter into some
partnerships. And and, of
course, with all the guardrails
and rules that will be
established for that.
So, Mr Speaker in General Lady
and the lady from McKinley. I
just want
To say thank you for persisting
on this.
I believe this is going to be a
game changer for a lot of our
local government. So appreciate
all the effort, and it's been a
privilege to be a collaborating
with you on this legislation.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Lady back
to the sponsor.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. I do have
a house floor amendment. Um, it
is too short points. I believe
it's been passed out. Would you
like me to explain it?
One sec. Willie gets passed out
and
Uh, we have you brought your
amendment down.
Yes, Mr Speaker. I gave it to
the clerk's office. Who is the
amendment signed by it is signed
by Joy Garrett. Okay, we're
gonna have to stand by and find
it up here before we can
continue so stand by.
We have located Set amendment
and it is being passed out
shortly.
And apparently there's a second
Okay. The amendment has been
passed out.
Ah, gentle lady from Berna Leo
to explain the amendment and
give us the 2 to 8 number at the
bottom.
Uh, I'm sorry, Mr Speaker. Can
you repeat the amendment but
begin with the 2 to 8 number?
Uh, the number is
Hold on.
228166.1. That's what's been
passed out Your lady to explain
the amendment. Yeah, the
committee subs left some
ambiguity about whether a P
three could be used for
operations and maintenance of
broadband and electric vehicle
charging stations. So we removed
the words construction of in the
definition of broadband and
electric vehicles charging
public projects on page three
lines eight and 10.
So the bill is now clear that a
P three in those areas allows
for agreements providing for
design, build finance operations
Operations and maintenance can
be part of broadband and TV
charging agreements.
Operations and maintenance can't
be used for transportation P
three So this is consistent with
the definition of transportation
Public projects on page three
lines 5 to 7 that's already in
the House Judiciary Committee
sub
And with that, I I moved the
adoption think there might be
some debate on the amendments
will go to debate and then we'll
come back. Um
After that gentleman from,
Chavez said in Otero,
representative Townsend. Thank
you, Mr Speaker is generally a
general lady Yield.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yes, I
yield to the gentleman from
Eddie and Lino.
Eddie Otero and Chavez County.
But sorry counties, um
General lady, If you would, um,
I
You know, the the idea of P
three, says Always.
Yeah, I think it's a good thing.
I'm not knocking that. I think
if my memory is right
representative Larranaga started
this years ago.
And representative Lundstrom, I
believe, has carried it or
joined in carrying it in the
past, and now here it comes
again. But
Um
Tell me, uh
And I've tried to add this in
the past, and I don't really
understand why we don't do it.
But
Why is there a prohibition on
Using P three money.
For transportation
infrastructures, including toll
roads.
Mr Speaker and kind gentlemen
From the time of Larry
Larranaga. We have not included
toll roads.
Um and perhaps Michael sponsor.
Representative Lindstrom.
Who worked on that can elaborate
if I can have a representative
Lindstrom answer that question,
Mr Speaker generated from
Achille. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, Would you please
repeat the question?
Yes.
Very simply, Why not tell roads
being included in the P three
definition, Mr Speaker? Because
when thank you for that
question, and that's typically
how these things are paid for.
But when we had an analysis done
through the New Mexico
Department of Transportation, it
was found that we would not
generate enough funding for the
two sides that were originally
identified. One was in
Albuquerque and the other one
was down in Dona Ana County.
That we felt it would not be
a valuable way to implement P
three.
And general lady. I wouldn't
argue that on the two original
identified places.
But I think our world has
changed them in the last 10
years, and there are short
segments of road across New
Mexico.
That I think might
And I believe that we're missing
an opportunity.
Ah, to have private money. Help
us with our infrastructure
issues across New Mexico.
Um and I think broadly
eliminating that probably the
prohibition broadly.
Uh, probably should be stricken.
today. I I I would agree with
what was looked at historically.
But I think for this body to
include electric vehicle
charging stations, for example.
And and not allow private money.
To build a road or bridge. Um
May not be in our best interest,
and I would wonder if you would
agree with that in today's
world, Mr Speaker, Gentlemen of
the whole idea behind P three is
about transportation
infrastructure.
So it is correct that we would
be looking at road and bridge
development.
There was some additional things
added that it was actually
narrowed down. Originally, when
this bill was discussed at the
New Mexico Finance Authority,
meeting their final meeting of
the interim
We talked about
P three applying to everything
that the New Mexico Finance
Authority could fan through
their public project revolving
program. After lots of work and
lots of input. It was that then
revamped where it be very
specialized, and transportation
is always been the driver for
this, Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
I did want to mention another
thing about the toll road that I
didn't have forgotten. Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen, I think our
group decided we didn't want to
have any type of attacks.
When you think about toll road
that's a fee.
And I think when we're starting
out, we wanted to make sure that
we get the program off the
ground first, and if there were
any additional opportunities
that you're suggesting, let us
look at him after the fact.
Let's see if there really is a
kind of transportation of usage
on some of those roads, but
generally I think the three of
us were against any type of tax
or increase. Mr Speaker and
General Lady. I appreciate that
very much. I
General lady, I I cannot support
Ah Ah ah, and it kind of
It bothers me to say that in one
regard because of my dear friend
of the late Larry Larrinaga, but
I would tell you that
I think if Larry was standing
here today, even though he was
secretary of transportation at
one time, and it was very
protective of that group, I
think the world has changed
around us.
And picking and choosing again.
I have I have no problems with
electric vehicle charging
stations being included,
although
I think it's uh
It might might might consider it
disingenuous to the P three
process.
Just start picking winners and
losers. And I think when you let
those projects come
And be vetted based on their own
merit.
Um, we might find things in
across the state that would be
Would be supportive, so
Um, the broad brand
telecommunications. Absolutely.
I don't have a problem with
that.
But we should not pick winners
and losers. There's a lot of
people out there and the in the
world around us.
That can figure out good ways
just to
Deploy capital and I think
limiting those is not in our
best interests.
Um, General Ladies, thank you
very much on the amendment.
There is further debate. The
gentleman from Lee
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Does the
General lady yield? Yes, Mr
Speaker, I yield to the
gentleman.
Mr Speaker and General Lady.
Uh, we have a few items that
were amended here and I had to
step out for a sec.
Um
Would you please?
Um
Explain to me again.
What we're taking out and what
we're putting back in.
Mr Speaker and Kind gentleman on
Page three, where restating
public project means that
construction of colon number one
public transfer station
facilities or public
transportation are or
infrastructure other than a toll
road.
And for number two and three on
Page three, section J. We're
taking out the words. Public
construction of just putting
number two broadband
telecommunications network
facilities or three electric
vehicle charging stations.
And then on page
Nine. We're adding
Um after number after line seven
that public transportation
facilities and public
transportation infrastructure
shall be operated and maintained
by the public partner, and
that's it.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General Lady.
So, um
We're adding now into
What was if I get the name
right?
From a bill that I've seen for
the four years that I've been
here.
Focused on transportation.
Now to include
Ah electric charging facilities
and broadband. Would that be
correct? Mr Speaker Kind
gentlemen. No. The bill for the
last three years has always
included the transportation
facilities and broadband. We are
adding E V to this version of
the bill.
Thank you, Mr Speaker in general
ladies have for the last several
years. It's included broadband,
but we had to add that into an
amendment this year. Did we miss
something?
No, Mr Speaker. We just We just
put
Broadband telecommunications
wouldn't necessarily have to be
operated by the public partner.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General Lady.
I think everybody that sat on
that committee with me for the
last several years understands
that I feel very strongly that
our public private partnership
should be run and maintained by
the D O T.
And Mr Speaker and in general
Lady and body. We've been
unsuccessful with getting that
through.
With that said.
I chose not to oppose this and
committee because I wanted to
see it. Get
To the floor.
On the other side of that, Mr
Speaker and General Lady.
I think probably one of the
worst places we could put. This
is the D F a
And this should be Mr Speaker
and General Lady.
Handled through the Department
of Transportation and
Mr Speaker and General Lady, Can
you tell me how much we funded?
Through this body over the last
four years for broadband and
telecommunications, and then
Recently within the last two
years with respect to electric
vehicle charging stations.
Mr Speaker. Candle. Um and I
don't have that information.
Mr Speaker and General Lady, I
can say it's a significant
amount of money with respect to
broadband, and we're getting
there very quickly with respect
to the electric vehicle charging
stations.
I am in complete support of P
three projects. I am not in
complete support of the dead
Fabian in charge of that, and I
am definitely not support of
Adding the Ottomans that were
added in this amendment. I
cannot support your amendment.
Thank you.
Any other debate on the
amendment.
Gentlemen from Santa Valley in
Santa Fe, Representative
McQueen. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Mr. Speaker. General Lady does
the general lady yield
Mr Speaker, I yield to the count
gentleman.
Mr Speaker, General Lady looking
at your amendment and looking at
the bill. Um
It looks like we're taking out
the word public.
In supports two and three.
And Mr Speaker, General lady. So
so we have on your amendment J
public project means
One.
Public transportation facilities
or public transportation
infrastructure.
And then two. We have broadband
and three we have electric
vehicle charging facilities. Mr
Speaker, General Lady who would
own the broadband, um,
telecommunications network
facilities and the electric
vehicle charging facilities
speaker and kind gentleman that
would be according to the Public
Private Partnership Agreement.
Mr Speaker, General Lady can a
public partner put public money
into an electric vehicle
Mr Speaker and kind, gentlemen,
the rules would be decided by
the Board of Finance and so that
would be evaluated in the rules
that they promulgate. And I have
in case people didn't hear. I
have
The division director of the
State Board of Finance Division.
And the deputy director here, as
well as the municipally
representative.
Mr Speaker, General Lady, um
So you know, I'm hearing is that
it's going to be worked out. Mr
Speaker. Generally, I would
suggest the rules are in our
constitution.
And that that cannot be allowed.
Percent to the anti donation
clause. You cannot take public
money and bio facility for
private partner.
Mr Speaker, General lady. I'm
very concerned that the
amendment
Allows for the opposite
conclusion.
Mr Speaker and councilman.
Generally, that's true, but
exactly how the agreement would
be worked out, would be under
the state Board of Finance.
In respect to the procurement
cord and the real estate
promulgate to actually do this.
Mr Speaker. Generally the
Appreciate your work on this
bill. I think the bill needs
more work. I think the amendment
needs more work.
I'll have some additional
comments on the bill in a few
minutes. Thank you, Mr Speaker,
Right? Is there further debate
on the amendment right Members?
We are on a motion to adopt
House floor Amendment number one
to House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House
transportation. Public works in
Capital Improvements Committee
substitute
Okay?
All those opposed nay.
Let's try this again, all those
in favor of favorites in focus
in I
Back on the bill. General Lady,
Are you ready for debate? Yes,
Mr Speaker. I'm ready. There is
debate.
Groundhog Day. The General the
gentleman from Central and Santa
Fe represent McQueen.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr
Speaker. Gentle lady does the
generally the yield
Yes, Mr Speaker and kind
gentleman I yield.
Mr Speaker. Generally, we've
talked about this bill quite a
bit both in the past Porting
Committee and on the floor. You
know my concerns about this
bill.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, Let me
ask you a question.
If your bill passes and is
signed into law
With it, create a conflict.
With any other statute.
Already in law.
Mr Speaker and kind, gentlemen,
No.
Mr Speaker, generally on Page
seven.
Line two, it says
notwithstanding any other
provision of law.
Mr Speaker, General Lady. Do you
know what that notwithstanding?
Provisions is referring to
Mr Speaker and kind, Gentlemen,
please inform me.
So, Mr Speaker, generally first
of all
There is a conflict in we sort
of gloss over that conflict with
this the magic words
notwithstanding any other
provision of law.
So that's whoever drafted this
figured out. There was a
conflict in essentially
Overrides the other provisions
of law.
With that language, Mr. Speaker.
Generally, I do not think, um
This bill can pass the Senate
with this language.
It might depend on what
committees goes to, but I think
it's a problem.
Mr Speaker, General Lady. I told
you about my my experience doing
procurement for the saving New
Mexico.
And when I did procurement
We were very careful.
Never to talk to the offer Oars.
That if we want a particular
service, we issued an RFP.
Sometimes there was an in person
meeting with all the potential
bidders.
And sometimes there wasn't and
bidders could submit written
comments.
And when they submitted written
comments, we provided written
answers and put them on the
website.
So all the bidders had all the
same information and you didn't
have, um
A bitter, getting an advantage
by became the phone. They're
sending an email or getting
additional information.
And Mr Speaker. Generally, I'll
tell you after this this bill
with this notwithstanding,
language came through house
judiciary.
I looked for that provision in
the procurement code.
And I couldn't find it.
And Mr Speaker, gentle lady, So
I asked the council service to
see if they could find it.
And they can't find it.
And the council service asked
the librarian if they could find
it.
And still they can find it. And
then Mr Speaker, General Lady to
borrow a phrase that the speaker
enjoys. I phoned a friend.
And ask someone who does
procurement. I said This is my
recollection. Do you know where
that is?
And she said yes.
It's not in the procurement
code. It's in the Governmental
conduct Act.
So we were looking in the wrong
place. Mr. Speaker generally.
So, Mr Speaker, General Lady,
it's section $10.16. That's 13.
Prohibited bidding in the
government Conduct Act.
If I may. I'd like to just read
that for you is fairly short.
It, says no state agency or
local government agency shall
accept a bid or proposal from a
person.
Who directly participated in the
preparation.
Of the specifications
qualifications or evaluation
criteria on which the specific
competitive bid or proposal was
based.
A person accepting a bid or
proposal on behalf of the state
Agency or local government
agency shall exercise due
diligence to ensure compliance
with this section.
So it puts the duty of
compliance on the government
officer.
But it says very clearly that
you're not to communicate with
the bidder.
Mr Speaker, General Lady, Do you
think that's what they're
referring to? In the
notwithstanding clause?
Mr Speaker Kind, gentlemen. Yes.
Okay, Mr Speaker, General Lady,
I think, um
The language year bill goes
against
Tried and true procurement
rules.
That protect the
Integrity of the procurement
process. And because of that, I
haven't had an amendment oppose
amendment for your bill, which
has already been passed out.
Mr Speaker. I would like to
move. House Floor Amendment
number two.
The House Bill 190.
Right. I believe this has been
passed out.
Nobody should have this on their
desk. Can you please read the 2
to 8 number?
Mr Speaker. It's 228147.1. I
have, and I don't see anyone
jumping up and down so I would
assume that you all have the
same one as well.
Gentlemen to explain the
amendment.
Mr Speaker with a minute Does it
strike Section three of the bid
of the bill?
Which deals with unsolicited
proposals.
And Mr Speaker. Generally any
I really don't think you need
this in the bill.
You know the idea of someone
preparing
A detailed proposal with with
drawings with figures with specs
and submitting it to a public
partner is troubling and I don't
think it's necessary because I
think if there's an
infrastructure project that's
needed
It's pretty easy to go to a
public partner and say, Hey, we
need this road stretch of road
or Hey, we need this. Ah, you
know, link in the broadband or
even Hey, we need an E V
charger. You know, in this
Yes, secluded highway because
it's it's too far from point A
to point B.
And none of those things would
run run afoul of the existing
Procurement or government
conduct language.
And you could you could convince
the public partner a public
agency to issue an RFP.
So I just don't think you need
the unsolicited proposal
language and I would encourage
you to accept this amendment and
strike that provision.
Your lady? Is this a friendly
amendment?
Mr Speaker Kind, gentlemen. And
I'm sorry I couldn't consult
with my co sponsors, but it's a
friendly amendment.
Friendly amendment.
Is there objection to adopting
the amendment.
But there is objection, okay?
Speaker. I look forward to a
robust debate. At this point.
We're gonna have one gentleman
from Chavez. Thank you. Mr
Speaker. Will the gentleman
yield
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, I you
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, I just want to
understand.
Uh, why you want to strike this?
section three, and I think I do,
but I want to make sure
Ah!
Is it because you feel that if
an unsolicited proposal is
brought to the public partner by
a private partner?
And then an RFP is put out that
that
Uh, that private partner would
already have sort of a unfair
advantage as to what the
You know the cost. The scope of
everything would be. Is that
correct? Mr Speaker, gentlemen.
Yes. I think it goes a little
further than that. Not only
would they would they have, you
know detailed knowledge about
the project. Also, they can
write the specs.
In a way that benefits them. You
know, that's something they do.
Maybe other companies don't do
It's it's um
You know it can change the way
the procurement proceeds.
And so that's a concern and
condition. I would say it would
discourage other parties from
actually bidding, like if one
party if one private partner is
already written this proposal
and submitted it, and that's
what the RFP comes out on. You
know, a lot of other companies
are going to say, I guess it's
already there is they, you know,
they've got this wired.
Thank you, gentlemen. And thank
you, Mr Speaker.
There is free to to meet on the
amendment that generated from
Eddy and Lea, representative
Brown.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Will the
gentleman yield
Mr Speaker, gentle lady. I yield
Thank you very much, Mr Speaker
and gentlemen.
So I I see. I see Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, some pros and cons of
keeping this in or taking it out
of the bill.
I think as a general
proposition, I think that good
ideas can come from a lot of
different people. A lot of
different places a lot of
different perspectives and local
governments.
The people who work in those
governments don't always have
Knowledge of all the ideas or
projects that could happen.
So I think one of the nice
pieces about about this bill is
the unsolicited proposal portion
of it and, um
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, just to
point out there are some
protections in here. Um, it the
bottom line is it has to be
whatever the idea is in the
interests of the public partner,
meaning of course, in the for
the benefit of the citizens.
So I would just encourage, um
members of the body to take a
look at the bill. This section
that's proposed for elimination.
Um, I think there's some
monetary limits there that would
trigger certain procedures and
so forth. But in some ways
I think this just means all
comers are welcome to bring
forth ideas and Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, I just want to quote
a little bit from our state
constitution. And this gets to a
question that was asked just
recently. I just want to take
the opportunity now. It's um
Mr Speaker. The New Mexico
Constitution Article nine
section 14. This is what we
refer to as the anti donation
clause.
And it says nothing in this
section of the constitution
prohibits the state or a county
or municipality.
From creating new job
opportunities by providing land
buildings or infrastructure.
Force a bill for facilities to
support newer, expanding
businesses.
If this assistance is granted
pursuant to general implementing
Legislation that is approved by
a majority vote of those elected
to each house of the
legislature.
And it goes on to say, Mr
Speaker. The implementing
legislation shall include
adequate safeguards to protect
public money.
Or other resources used for the
purposes authorized in this
subsection So, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, I just offer that for
context.
Um, the anti donation clause.
Does have some exceptions in it,
and this is one of them. So, um,
um, Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I
I think the bill could really go
either way, but I do think the
unsolicited proposal component
is actually helpful Part of the
legislation. Thank you. Mr
Speaker. There is further debate
on the amendments. Lady from
McKinley Representative
Lindstrom. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Will the gentleman
yield
Mr Speaker, General Lady, I
yield. Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, I did have a couple
of questions that were in
relation ship to your amendment.
The first is how many, Um
broadband telecommunication
networks.
Are
Round by the public sector.
Mr Speaker. Gentle lady. I don't
know.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen, and that
is a good example for me. I have
been listening to
The discussion around broadband
telecommunication networks for a
long time.
And the need for them, and one
of the issues is that they're
primarily
Privately run.
So when you have a problem with
that network, or you want to
expand, it would make sense to
me.
That we could accept unsolicited
proposals.
For upgrade.
I'd ask the same question, Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen, when it
comes to electric vehicle
charging facilities
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen, in
Gallup. We have two that I'm
aware of their both privately.
Run. Do you know Mr Speaker?
Gentlemen? How many are run in
the state of New Mexico?
Mr Speaker, General Lady again.
I don't know. I think the answer
is not zero.
Yeah, I'm not sure either. Mr.
Speaker, I was trying to
honestly find out if you had a
sense of that I would suspect
that many of them that are up
and running now are private
privately run.
Which remains that when you have
a situation of upgrade or
rebuild, or what are whatever
happens with those kinds of
facilities is going to be an
unsolicited proposal.
Because this is the group that's
going to understand what needs
to be fixed what needs to be
upgraded.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
Um do you have a sense of how
Long it takes the New Mexico
Department of Transportation to
get a road built in this state.
Um, Mr Speaker, General Lady I
heard forever back here. That's
probably a fair assessment. Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen, whoever was
your lifeline is correct. It is
forever and it's primarily
because it is a
5 to 6 year planning and
development process before
construction money comes
forward.
So what ends up happening is the
new Mexico dot is kind of locked
into an annual work program that
they can't deviate from. So when
we have emergency projects that
come up
Regarding public transportation.
It would seem to me that we
should be able to take
unsolicited proposals because
it's a need that happened and
wasn't neatly in some planning
process.
So I wish I would have had a
little more time Mr Speaker to
discuss this with
My, um, co sponsor on this bill,
but I, along with representative
from Carlsbad Field.
The argument could go either
way, and I will give you that,
Mr Speaker, gentlemen, but I do
feel that we are handicapping
this bill.
If we can't take unsolicited
proposals. Thank you.
There's a debate on the
amendment. The gentleman from
Colfax, Curry, Harding, Quay,
San Miguel and Union
representative Chatfield
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr
Speaker. The broadband in my
area is provided by a private
Group.
And, uh, I am fairly familiar
with the
RFP process very familiar. In
fact, Mr Speaker, gentlemen,
that yield
Oh, I forgot. That was my bad.
Sorry. Heels. Sorry. That was my
fault.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
Thank you for yielding.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen. The
broadband in my area is supplied
by a private entity.
Ah!
Which which is a little
different than than most. What,
what I first think of it when I
think of a private public
project, but one of the
impediment
Has been trying to get right
away down the highways.
To to put that.
Broadband down the highway in
the cost of going across state
land.
And anything that would help.
That process of negotiation.
Move forward. I'm in support of
And Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
Any public entity that issues in
RFP.
Has the right at any time to
reject all proposals.
And rebuild the project.
So just because there was an
unsolicited
Proposals, not a bit better
proposal are very different.
Does not mean
That that entity is required to
accept it. They they can do
whatever they think is in the
best interests of the state and
any time prior to the signing of
the contract, they can reject
all proposals and rebuild the
project.
What Say you, Mr Speaker?
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. Thank you
for the chance to respond. I
think we're
The debate here. We're kind of
mixing some topics.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. So we
heard previously about the anti
donation clause. I raised that
concern on the prior amendment.
The amendment was adopted.
That's not an issue in this
amendment.
Um, Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I
understand your point that
Um, public partner doesn't have
to go through with the bidding
process and actually says that
in this language
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen. That
concern is that if we're
accepting private proposals, um
from unsolicited proposals
Uh, that that bitter
When they do do the RFP process
has the inside track.
So, Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I
think you know if there's an
emergency situation if you're
doing broadband, if you have any
sort of these public needs, it's
pretty easy to to go to the
public partner the You know the
public entity and say we need
this.
Won't you do an RFP? I don't
think he need to reduce all of
that and do all the work it
takes to put in into a proposal.
I mean, I think that's
The reason you would do that. I
believe
Is because
You would want to do that
project yourself and I I'm
concerned that accepting
unsolicited proposals with this
notwithstanding, language would
in fact give those bidders and
unfair advantage.
So, Mr Speaker, gentlemen, one
final point.
That an RFP
Is not
Given or
Not given on the basis.
Of specs it is given or not
given on the bit on the best
qualified
Entity building, so the whoever
has the best highest and best
qualifications that is to whom
it should be awarded, which is a
little different from a bid
Where if they wrote the specs,
they wouldn't necessarily have a
Much greater.
Advantage. I think so, since it
does not involved, uh
The specs. It involves the
qualifications. I think that
would make it a little more.
A little more fair to you. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, So I
agree. It's not awarded on the
basis of specs. But the RFP
itself contains certain
specification. You're looking
for services. You're looking for
construction that meets these
criteria and being able to to
draft that criteria yourself if
you want to be a bitter
That's the concern, so I agree.
The award is based on
qualifications. But if you're if
you're drafting the RFP, your
including what the criteria are
in one of the bidders has
drafted that criteria.
That's a concern. Thank you, Mr
Speaker.
There is further debate on the
amendment back to the bill's
sponsor generator from early Oh,
thank you, Mr Speaker. Will the
gentleman yield
Mr Speaker, gentle lady. I yield
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, as several people
have said it could go either
way, But I think in light of
broadband electric charging
stations, it's vital to include
this and I want to point out to
the body that pages 56 through
seven spell out and this is
something we worked with our
drafters with the New Mexico
Finance Authority within
municipal League
Um, to put in lots and lots of
guard Whale guard rails. So on
Page five, a public partner
Has to notify the board of
finance if and when they receive
an and solicited proposals, so
from right at the start your
notifying the board
And then within 90 days of
receiving that proposal.
If the public partner elects to
consider further action, at
which point the public partner
shall provide public notice of
the proposal. So from the very
start if they think it's
something to consider, there has
to be public notice in the rules
of public notice, or in the
procurement quote itself.
Um And then on number one line
22. They have to provide
information regarding the
proposed nature, timing and
scope of the unsolicited
proposal except trade secrets.
You go on to Page six.
Number two line three. You have
to provide for a notice period
on the homepage of the Public
Partners website clearly
identifying that the proposal
was unsolicited.
And requesting comments from the
public or other potential offer
Earth for the submission and
then line eight. It gives the
length of time you have to
publicize it and solicited
proposals. We love 5,000,030
days.
5 million
To 25,000,060 days, three months
if they're valued more than 25
million.
And then, um, as you amended in
judiciary if the public partner
determines that it's in the best
interests
Of the public partner to
implement some or all of the
concepts contained within the
unsolicited proposal.
Or competing proposals received
by it. The public partner shall
begin an open competitive
procurement process, using a
request for competitive sealed
pros, proposals and so forth if
a C number line seven on Page
seven, and unsolicited proposal
shall be deemed rejected, if no
written responses received from
the public partner within 90
days.
So I feel in light of what some
of the comments have been. We
put guardrails in to protect
what you're talking about, and
what the purpose of the
amendment it so I just wanted to
make those comments. So is it
still friendly?
That didn't sound very friendly
to me. But okay, can I change
the degree of friendliness? Mr
Speaker? Sounds like it's a
little bit friendly, but not
friendly enough. Is there more
debate on the amendment?
Gentlemen from Lee represented
Scott you Mr Speaker. Will the
gentleman from Santa Fe Yield
please, Mr Speaker. Gentlemen. I
yield
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I find
myself sharing some of the
concerns that you have
expressed.
What's this process?
Of with respect to an RFP.
That would generally be
initiated by the public body.
With a common set of
Of course, objectives and
specifications for that project.
That would be
Would have to be adhered to.
By all.
Competitive eaters.
Hmm. On that request is that
accurate? Uh, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, that's that's my
recollection it it has been a
while. Um, for example, you
could you could do in the RFP
for office space, and you could
say we need
10,000 square feet of office
space within three miles of the
city center. And if you get a
bid that's you know, 8000 square
feet of office space, or it's
five miles from the city Center
center. The net bid is non
responsive, so that's that's a
really simple example. Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen of like this
is what you want. This is what
you need.
And then you solicit bids that
fill that need.
And Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
with an unsolicited offer those,
uh
Parameters could have been
developed.
By the
Initiator of the project.
Over a period of weeks or
months.
Giving any circumstance.
Of that nature, giving that
Entity that made this so Listen
station a significant advantage
over anything coming behind that
Is that accurate? Mr Speaker?
Gentlemen, that's accurate, and
that's why I believe we already
have in law Prohibition on
letting that happen.
Okay, Mr Speaker in general.
Specifically with request.
To an army solicited offer, can
we
Generate a for example, as to
how this might operate.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen, as as to
how it might operate.
Ah, in a manner that would
concern us or are you looking,
for example about where this
where the guardrails
Might not be sufficient, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, That was
exactly my question.
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Um, you
know, you could do a proposal.
For, um, you know, say a
railroad crossing, um on, you
know, from point A to point B,
using public right away in
private right away where the
private right away was held by
The person making the proposal.
You know so like only they could
submit a bid that, um, that met
the requirements. Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, I can see I can see
that.
I also see the even with the
guardrails guardrails
notwithstanding, I can see the
opportunities here for if you
will political mischief. Would
you agree with that?
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. Yes. And
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, with
respect to transparency.
Of the of an unsolicited
proposal.
Do you agree with me that that
Good.
Be a bit less transparent to the
public that it might otherwise
be with an RFP.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I would
say I could agree with you.
There would be a bit less
transparent. I would say that
they do have, uh, protections
built in about publishing
publicizing it and and think
things like that. But I go back
to my other concern about
If if there if they've got the
project already set up that it's
not will not be a fair and open
process, and it will discourage
that language in the bill says,
Um,
Other potential offer orders or
any competing proposals.
I think those would be
discouraged if the proposal
itself comes from Wanda known
bidders.
And must speaker and gentlemen,
I certainly
See both sides of this argument
of her.
Support and opposition on both
sides of the aisle. I certainly
think
This amendment deserves a roll
call. Vote. Mr Speaker. I would
like that this time request that
Very good. There's a roll call
vote made my life a lot easier
by asking one. Thank you very
much, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. And thank you,
gentlemen, for your answers.
Keyser.
Further debate on the amendment,
Mr Speaker
Generated from burning. Thank
you, Mr Speaker.
Um, well, my
From Santa Fe County Yield
Mr Speaker, General Lady I yield
Um, Mr Speaker, um, and to also
the proposals.
The people who proposed this
rather
Um, probably one of the few
people who has been on both
sides there I say of the aisle
on this. I worked as a city
planner and did many or FPs.
Um and
Helped along many public private
partnerships, and I also worked
on the other side when I was in
small business and started my
company, um, actually working
with, um, telecommunications
and, um
And ensuring that
telecommunications facilities
were built. Um so I've worked on
both sides, Mr. Chair, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen and
One of the things that I would
say Mr Speaker and gentlemen, is
that, um
The devil is in the detail.
And when I say that I mean that
the RFP and the way that it is
written
Um, it it really highly
I would have to say that it that
Whether it's solicited or
unsolicited. The RFP is still
written within the government
agency and the government
agency. Whatever is put into
that that RFP Um those are the
details that are being
Solicited.
Basically those those, uh
Professional.
Sometimes teams, not always one
in one
Company. Sometimes it's a team
of companies that are being
solicited to respond to that.
RFP.
And in the process of applying
for the RFP, there's usually a
small team of bureaucrats from
different agencies that are
being set up to review. Those
are FPs and sometimes those are
FPs Take a couple of days to
review because there
They're pretty thick and they're
very detailed and in their
response, so whether the project
is solicited or unsolicited,
It's usually, um, you know, a
team of experts that are looking
for specific requirements to
meet the details of the RFP.
Um, the second part of that Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, is when
the RFP is selected. It's not
Oh, it's usually selected on a
point scale and that point
scale is determined based on
You know really what the
requirements are of that RFP.
Sometimes it's um whether or not
there. It's a company within the
state or whether it's a, uh, a
company that could provide
certain pieces to that RFP.
The next part of that would be
when the actual development
agreement is drafted and that
that development agreement takes
into account the anti donation
clause. Um and you know they're
a group of attorneys, usually
from within government that
review that
Along with the group of
attorneys from the private
sector that
Come to agreement on
You know, negotiation for the
development agreement of how
that project will be
constructed.
And I say that Mr Chair, um and
and, uh, representatives,
gentlemen, because I've been on
both sides of this issue and and
and
Number one the details of the
RFP.
Number two the development
agreement.
And then number three. What the
needs of the community are
And so I bring that up because
I've been on both sides of that
issue.
Mr Chairman and Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, and I think that
You know?
We're while we're discussing
what is solicited? What is
unsolicited, It's usually the
needs of what the community has
determined through some
governmental process that here
is a need.
Four.
Um, in this case, for example,
um, in the proposal.
Telecommunications electric
vehicle charging facilities, um
or a public housing project.
So I just wanted to share that
information, Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, because I think that
sometimes we're arguing apples
and oranges when in fact, we're
actually arguing some of the
details of the RFP itself.
Thank you, dear lady, All right.
We are on a motion to adopt
House floor minimum number two.
To House Judiciary Committee
substitute for health,
transportation, public works in
Capital Improvements Committee
substitute for Algeria 190 as
amended
There is a roll call vote vote
of Yes, we would have adopted
the amendment of No. We're back
on the amendment.
30 seconds o clock.
The vote.
The vote.
Kicking. We reopened the clock
for five more seconds. The voice
is not closed by a vote of 16 in
the affirmative.
47 in the negative.
House floor Amendment number two
to House Judiciary Committee sub
Super has transportation public
works in Capital Improvements
Committee substitute for House
Bill 90 as amended has failed to
be adopted. We are back on the
amendment, Mr Speaker do we need
to table the amendment, or
should I withdraw the amendment?
We could do it. Either way, Mr
Speaker. I'd be happy to
withdraw the amendment at this
time, given the failed to pass
failed, but we're certainly
meant
Understood. That was
I have another amendment.
Mhm.
So you can withdraw that
amendment. It's failed. But Mr
Speaker, I withdraw House
Amendment number two to House
Bill 191 Objection It's ordered.
We're back on the bill. You
still have the floor. Mr
Speaker. The Second Amendment. I
have deals with the political
mischief that gentleman from Lee
mentioned.
This amendment was offered to
this bill last year and was
accepted as a friendly amendment
essentially provides that
Any officer of a public body who
has received a campaign
contribution from a private
partner cannot participate.
In the selection of, um, private
partner for a public private
partnership.
Okay. The amendment's gonna get
passed out. We'll come back to
you to read the 2 to 8 number
You're right. I think the
amendment has been passed out.
Don't boast.
Okay, gentlemen, What's the 2 to
8 number? Mr Speaker. The 2 to 8
number is 2 to 8 to 82.1.
Okay. You already explained it.
But do you want to say anything
else before we go to the gentle
lady, Mr Speaker just to
reiterate this. This amendment
prohibits elected official who
has received a campaign
contribution from participating
in the selection and further
prohibits the elected officials
from accepting a campaign
contribution.
While the public private
Partnership Agreement is in
effect, and Mr Speaker General
Lady this amendment was offered
last year was accepted as a
friendly amendment on the floor
and in this year's version of
Who uses a friendly amendment.
Mr Speaker. It's a friendly
amendment. We accepted it last
year is a friendly amendment.
There is debate on the
amendment, the German from
Chavez, Eddie and Otero, Percent
of Townsend.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Will the
gentleman yield
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I yield
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, we
find ourselves in very different
places.
You and I supporting
legislation. Uh, it's not the
same legislation is not common,
but I do appreciate this. And
I think your amendment.
Which is almost identical to
last year.
Is a good good public policy.
I think it deserves a little
more definition. Can you give
the body a specific? Um
Example of what you see as that
you're trying to address
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
I would struggle to find this
specific example.
What
The shorthand I believe is pay
to play.
So someone wants to build a
project.
Uh, you know, and they write it.
They make a campaign
contribution to a public
officials is, you know, let's
build this project and it
doesn't feel right to me, Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I
agree with you, Uh,
I without regard to political
party rights, right and wrong is
wrong. And I think if you have a
business that
Could work for a project and you
support the project. So you have
All.
Have
Maybe suspected these kinds of
problems historically, and I
think it's time to body can
together and do so. Mr. Speaker
and gentlemen supports him and
there is for debate on the
amendment before we go to the
general from Bern, Leo folks who
need to remove their coats may
do so from early Oh present
agreement.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Will the
gentleman yield Mr Speaker?
Gentlemen, I yield
Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
without naming anyone, Is there
anyone in the current
legislature who this would
affect
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
I don't know.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I kind
of find it. Ironic. Um, you
know, I'm not in this area, you
know, wouldn't affect me, but I
kind of find it ironic that
Ah, attorneys can go ahead and
work on both sides if you will,
and we're going to exclude one
group, but I'm going to support
your amendment. I think it needs
to go a little further as well.
Thank you.
Right?
We are
On the motion.
To adopt House Floor Amendment
number three.
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House transportation
networks in capital
improvements committees
substitute for House Bill 190 as
amended.
Objection to adopting that
amendment.
See none.
The amendment is adopted.
Gentlemen from Santa Fe,
Sandoval. You still have the
floor? Mr Speaker. I do not have
a Third Amendment.
Mr Speaker. Thank you very much.
General lady. Thank you.
Okay. There is further debate
back on the bill. Gentlemen from
Lee representative Scott
Thank you. Mr Speaker will it
generated from Burnley will
yield Yes, Mr Speaker. I yield
to the gentleman. Mr. Speaker,
General Lady. I'm curious as to
how they
Construction of a transportation
facility would work in a public
private scenario.
Transportation facility. Road
Highway. Anything of that
nature.
Would necessarily have to be.
Something that generated
revenue.
For that private party.
Hmm.
And I believe we ruled out toll
road. So could you explain to
the body what might be left?
Yes, Mr Speaker. I would like to
yield to my co sponsor,
representative Lundstrom for
that generally from McKinley.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. For the
question, it's primarily the
opportunity cost. Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, if you take a company
like BNSF as an example that
needs to have a roadway.
Corrected in order to correct
their say, bridge crossing or
one of their rail alignments.
He had unless that road is fixed
that connects to that that rail
crossing as an example.
It could create all kinds of
delays for that train.
So what? What? Where? When we're
looking at this. We're looking
at an opportunity cost loss if
the infrastructure isn't
corrected, Mr Speaker and
General Lady, this would be
Uh, public highway that would
need to be
We're located. Is that accurate?
Mr Speaker, gentlemen, what it
would be as a public roadway
that
Is you that I as an example a
rail crossing is on.
And there's tons of rail
crossings down in the southeast
corner of the state. You've got
a couple of railroads down
there.
Roads need to be repaired. Um,
and because transportation Mr
Speaker, as you know, is one
system roads are connected. The
rail system is part of that
unless everything is upgraded at
the same time, you can create
some major delays.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker. And
thank you gentle lady for that
answer. Let me move if I could,
too.
Construction of electric
vehicle.
Charging facilities.
Could someone demonstrate how
that process might move forward?
With this legislation.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Um
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen in my area
of the state.
Electricity is at a premium.
And one of the reasons I've
consistently had little heart
burned with.
These charging stations is
because in many places in my
district
Some of my constituents don't
even have electricity in their
homes.
So when we think about charging
stations versus electricity in
the home, of course I want
electricity in the home, so I
also him concerned. Uh, when I
talk about these things, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen.
That because government would be
responsible for rolling these
things out, it would be much
quicker and much faster if it
was private sector rolled out.
Ah, when it comes to the
electric charging stations, and
I would support that, Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, particularly
for hard to serve areas like
McKinley County.
When you think about, um
Even along I 40 the state roads
like old 66 and 602, which is
the southern route, uh, from
Gallup, or 491, which is the
northern route. Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, from Gallup up into
the ship Rock area.
I think if we had
Private sector activity for
build out it would be much
quicker than relying on state or
federal government.
Mr Speaker, General Lady, I
completely agree with you that
we are already all
Ready should be worrying about
electricity and two homes first
long before Georgie stations. I
guess the question would be what
would be the government's role.
In selecting these locations or
facilitating locations, given
that the private partner would
be doing this, obviously with a
private
Investment motive and return on
investment. So what would be the
government's role in this
process? Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you. Gentlemen. I think
the government has a big role
when it comes to ride away
acquisition when you think
about, you know, we're trying to
service electric vehicles. I
think, Mr Speaker, gentlemen,
not only right of way but also
Easements for utility
installation. I think we need to
have those power lines put, uh
along the corridors. Also, I
think Mr Speaker, making sure
that there is consistent
regulation, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, In my neck of the
woods, we have multiple
jurisdictions. Multiple
landowners, which means there's
multiple, um
Regulatory bodies that have to
happen. I think government has a
role in streamlining that.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I think
government also has a role with
help helping to market and
educate people. Um, I think they
have a big role.
And speaker generating none of
those would involve direct
financial contributions to the
process. That would all be the
purview.
Of the private partner. Is that
accurate, Mr Speaker, Gentlemen.
Currently the
Private.
Partner has to pay for use of
right aways with the New Mexico
Highway Department.
So there is a value there. For
what? That right away. Cost is
for utilities.
That would be a cost. So to
speak, Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I
don't know what it runs now.
Linear foot.
To put utilities along our state
highways, but there is a cost
associated with that.
And Mr Speaker, General Lady.
In the vision is that that cost
would be born.
By the taxpayer.
Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I think
it is a total cost for the
project. So once the agreement
is designed and developed, I
think all the costs are put into
this project agreement. Mr
Speaker, gentlemen, and that
peace should be in there unless
The Department of Highways
decides that they're going to
start allowing that for free.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, Gentle lady. Welcome.
There is further debate on the
bill. The gentleman from Chavez,
representative Henry
Thank you, Mr Speaker with a
gentle lady. Yield. Yes, Mr
Speaker. I yield to the
gentleman.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, General
Lady, uh,
What
If you could sort of address the
thought process of including
public benefit corporations and
non profit entities as sort of
private partners, I would
greatly greatly appreciate that.
Mr. Speaker. Can you clarify
your question? What you're
looking at?
Yes, Mr Speaker General Lady on
Page two beginning online nine
subsection e private partner
means and then down Online's 12
and 13 public benefit
corporations and nonprofit
entities.
Mr Speaker and counselor
minutes. It's the broad spectrum
of public private partnership
partners that have been used
actually in 39 states. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Uh, General
Lady on Page three,
and now it's been amended. So I
forget exactly what
Lines, but
We amended public project the
definition of public project, I
think, beginning online for
Um, is there reason
Why we are limiting this to just
these three types of projects.
Mr Speaker and count. Gentlemen,
This is a starting point. We
want to limit it to the areas
that are most needed in New
Mexico. There was one proposal
to expand it to anything and we
felt
Um, that wasn't appropriate at
this time. We have to start with
what we really need and what's
been recognized actually, for
the last 10 years with adding E
V charging stations, and so
that's why we limited it
specifically to these three
areas. Thank you and Mr Speaker,
General Lady. I mean, I think I
just heard
Ah, in the debate prior that,
actually, you know, getting
electricity to homes is a is a
great priority. So why? Why
wouldn't that be included in
this?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, we
limited it to these three areas.
Thank you, General Lady, Mr
Speaker, General Lady, um
Um
I think I
That is all that I had. Oh, no,
it is not. I'm sorry. I had one
last question on Page seven.
Lines 22 through 24.
Um, we're allowing
The private partner to employ
public employees. Is that
correct?
Mr Speaker.
And gentlemen. Yes.
Uh, thank you, Mr Speaker and
gentle lady. Why are we allowing
private partners to employ
public employees?
Mr Speaker.
And kind, gentlemen.
It says We shall employ public
employees when possible for the
private partners performance of
the agreement.
Ah, General lady. Thank you. Mr
Speaker. General Lady. Yes. And
and I'm
Curious as to why we are
allowing that to happen.
Mr Speaker and kind, gentlemen.
One reason is our roads are
maintained by public employees.
But, uh, thank you. And and Mr
Speaker, gentle lady, I I
understand that. But this sounds
like
The private partner will be
hiring.
Public employees. Is that the
case Mr Speaker and kind,
gentlemen, when possible for the
private partners performance of
the agreement, and the agreement
has to go through the Board of
Finance.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. General
Lady. I understand. I just
I guess what I
I don't understand is
Um, how this affects
Um
Or the public employees and, uh,
our risk management if they are
working for a private entity.
Mr Speaker, and calendula and
expert says it comes down to the
contraction.
Contractual agreement. That's
you know, central part of a P
three. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
General Lady. So your site. What
would I
I think I'm hearing is that
How
Ah, the state's risk management
is affected will be addressed in
the the the public Private
Partnership Agreement. Mr
Speaker Councilman, Yes.
Okay. Thank you very much.
Gentle lady. Thank you, Mr
Speaker.
There is for the debate the
gentleman from Chavez Arian
Otero, representative Townsend.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. General
Lady, where you yield, Mr
Speaker. I yield to the
councilman from the three
counties.
A couple of questions that came
to mind listening to the debate
on the question of right away.
Are those land values and
associated with the right aways
Are they market based or tax
base values?
Mr Speaker, Councilman. I don't
know.
Okay, let me try this way.
Um
Mr Speaker in general Lady.
Within the P three processes
imminent domain used
Mr Speaker. Kind Gentleman.
It could be, but that would be
completely
Related to an individual
agreement.
So, Mr Speaker in General lady,
But if I'm understanding this
right, a private property owner
who owns property
Could be condemned by the state.
In order to obtain right away.
For the construction of a
Some infrastructure.
Mr Speaker and kind gentleman
that can be done.
Currently
Beyond any p three agreements.
I'm quite aware of the imminent
domain gloves. I was just
Um
Thinking about it through the P
three lands. Let me ask you
another question.
Um
Within this legislation.
There is a specificity toward
The
Bacon, Davis sack. Can you talk
to that a little bit, Mr.
Speaker can gentleman What page
are you on?
Mr Speaker and Kind gentleman. I
think I found it. Page nine C.
This section has been part of
all the P three agreements we've
presented.
Uh, in legislation for the last
10 years.
And I agree with you. That's the
way it's been in there.
Um
I'm not agreeing that it should
be. I'm just agreeing that it's
been in there historically, and
its impact to project cost
doesn't go without notice is is.
I think you can agree. Um, can
you tell the body and the public
watching today?
What kind of values that adds to
a project and cost.
But Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I
couldn't answer that question.
Almost speaker and general Lady,
um
Let's go about this way.
Um
Within the bacon, David speaking
act.
There are
Prescribed wages.
Are those market based or
bargaining unit based
Mr Speaker and kind, gentlemen,
it would depend on those people
that were employed if it was
Bargaining or market rate. And
again, this is all focused on
the agreement made between the
public entity in the private
entity to your co sponsor. She's
raising her microphone mutilated
for McKinley. Thank you, Mr
Speaker, Mr Speaker, Gentlemen,
The Davis Bacon Act is a federal
law.
So, Mr Speaker, um
Gentlemen, there's very little
that we would be able to do with
our
Our work here in the New Mexico
Legislature to change that.
Mr Speaker in General lady. I
couldn't agree more doesn't make
it right. Um
But I'll agree with you.
Ah, General Lady the, um
The idea that eminent domain
Could be used in concert with
the public Private Partnership
project.
Um
And not knowing whether those
Land values were market based.
Or
Tax valued base causes me a
little concerned but are
continue to listen to
I guess I'll listen to your
clothes. There's no one else.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. General
Lady Debate and leader to close
Thank you. Mr Speaker as the mm
fake, commented in their
analysis to Mexico legs behind
other states in establishing P
three frameworks is often
overlooked by private sector
investors able to implement
public projects efficiently,
well, sharing the risk.
So this is a tool in our
economic
Toolbox and I now move a do pass
for the House Judiciary
Committee sub for House
transportation, Public works.
Capital Improvements Committee
sub for House Bill 190 as
amended, right we are on final
Passage of House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
transportation. Public works in
capital Improvements. Committees
substitute for House Bill 190 as
twice amended
The vote.
Is now.
Boat is about to close.
Did all the buttons work?
The board is now closed by a
vote of 56 in the affirmative.
Nine in the negative.
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House
transportation. Public works in
Capital Improvements Committee
Substitute for House Bill 190 is
twice amended has duly passed
this house.
Your lady from Catherine said as
quoted Valencia. You're ready an
item. 31. Yes, Mr. Speaker,
Would you get me to that that
the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing has
been 165, as amended on final
passage has been taken and it is
not subject to debate amendments
or substitution the generator to
explain the bill. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. House Bill 165 as twice
amended
Requires Medicaid managed care
organizations to reimburse
independent and local pharmacies
at the rate equal to the
corporate pharmacies. And, uh,
with that I stand for questions
There is debate generated from
Chavez representative as well.
Mr Speaker. Thank you very much.
Well, the general lady from
Catherine's Here's, according
Valencia Yield, please. Yes, Mr
Speaker. I yield to thee kind
Lady.
Mr Speaker and reading your
bill. I noticed that this is not
a reimbursable to the big bucks
pharmacies in my understanding
that correctly, so it would be
like Walgreens. WalMart.
CVS. There's some Albertsons
that do have pharmacies. Am I
understanding that correctly, Mr
Speaker Kind gentleman This is
to bring independent pharmacies
equal to those reimbursements of
the big box. So they also get
reimbursed. This is just making
it equal reimbursement. Well, Mr
Speaker, General Lady, That's
what
There was a problem that was
created so many years ago about
five years ago, six years ago,
I've lost track of time.
In our particular area. There
are no longer any privately held
pharmacies, mainly because the
Department of Health was so slow
and getting reimbursements out
to these
Mom and pop small business type
pharmacies, and they literally
had to go out of business. I
know that the local pharmacy and
Roswell and this gentleman also
did compounding was owed over
$700,000 by the state that was
not paid. He could not pay his
bill. The same holds true for
some pharmacies in our Tisha and
Carl's bed and Hobbes. I can't
remember about rid. Oh, so
But it was all in that
particular area and madam chair.
That's a disgrace whenever the
state is the one that's
responsible for putting these
small pharmacies out of
business, So I was just
wondering if there was any
recourse in here as far as what
the reimbursement timeframe
would be, Uh, Mr Speaker, Kind
lady. And no, ma'am, not at this
time.
But maybe we could run a bill
next year.
Well, Mr Speaker, maybe running
the bill next year. It would be
a good idea if these pharmacies
can continue to stay open with
the snail pace speed that the
state does reimburse.
Mr Speaker. Thank you very much.
There is for you to be Did your
lady from Dona Ana Sierra
Socorro, representative
Borromeo.
Mr Speaker Does the general lady
from all those counties you,
including our home county of
Socorro Yield
Yes, Mr Speaker. I kindly yield.
Mr Speaker in General lady.
Thank you for bringing this
forward. We know personally that
are small, Small rural pharmacy
had to close largely because of
reimbursements. So, um, and this
has been detrimental for our
community. I thank you for
bringing this forward and for
your
Bipartisan support of this and
for moving it forward. Thank
you, Mr Speaker, General Lady.
There is fitted to be gentlemen
from Lincoln and Otero,
representative Vincent
Thank you, Mr Speaker to the
general lady from Catherine's.
Here's the Koran, Valencia yield
to the gentleman from Lincoln
and Otero.
Well, that there's people that
still look out after the small
pharmacies.
And Mr Speaker and General Lady.
Um, in my area in my district. I
have a local pharmacy and
through some of the testimony
that I heard in committee
These local these local
pharmacies are not even looking
for a good deal. They're looking
for a fair deal.
And they're not even getting a
fairly well. Fair deal. Mr
Speaker in general Lady.
I heard some of them say they
want to break even.
If they could just break even.
They would be fine with that.
And Mr Speaker, General Lady.
Last time I
Checked.
I'm not in the business to break
even
I need to make a little bit of
money.
In order to stay afloat.
And Mr Speaker. Gentle lady.
When these pharmacists go to
school, and they spend all that
time in school, and then they
get out, they get out of school
to break even That just doesn't
register with me. And I
appreciate you being a champion
for these small
Uh, the small places, and I know
that the gentleman that I'm
talking about is watching you
right now and thank you very
much. Thank you. Gentlemen. For
debate. Gentlemen from San Juan
Representative Montoya.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Does the
General lady from school yield?
Yes, I yield to the gentleman
from San Juan.
Um
Thank you, Mr Speaker. And
generally I do appreciate you
bringing this forward as well. I
believe we heard in testimony
before appropriations.
That
It was like 1/5, or 1/6 of all
of the
Uh,
Private pharmacists went out of
business in the last year is
that you recall that Mr Speaker
Kind gentleman. There was over
70. Now there's just a few over
50.
So, Mr Speaker, and generally I
not only appreciate this, but I
appreciate the timeliness of it.
Um, I know there was some
question as to whether or not
this would apply to the bigger
box stores, but it was brought
up during testimony that the big
box stores are already able to
have such purchase power.
That to some degree, they're
getting a good price on the on
the drugs on the front end.
So what are small pharmacists
are not able to do is go
negotiate a good price on the
front end, so making sure that
we get a fair distribution on
the back end is is the key. So I
I look forward to supporting
this. My community in San Juan
County, which is a statistical
metropolitan area is down to
one.
Uh, homegrown local pharmacy. So
I appreciate this, Mr Speaker
generally.
Right. So you know for the
debate the gentle lady clothes.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. I now
move that house Bill 165 as
amended.
Ah, now we are on final passage
of house Bill 165 as amended.
Vote is now closed, but I would
have 66 in the affirmative zero
in the negative house Bill 1
65,000 mandate as duly passes
house.
Members will conclude third
reading for this early session.
We're going to go do a little
housekeeping, and then we'll
take a break. Julian from
Berlioz's Mr Speaker, I move to
go to that order of business
messages. Objection, disordered.
To read.
Message from the Senate. Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the house that the Senate has
passed House Bill one beneath
three as amended by the House
and return. Same here with
respectfully submitted. Sherry
D. Luhan, Senate chief clerk
will be entered.
Message from the Senate. Mr.
Speaker, I'm directed to inform
the house that the Senate has
passed House appropriations and
finance committees substitute
for house bills two and three as
amended by the House and further
amended by the Senate.
And requests the concurrence of
the house to the Senate
amendments respectfully
submitted Sherry Wuhan Senate
chief clerk message will be
entered.
Generally from Burnley. Oh,
Mr Speaker.
I move. We go to that order of
business introduction of
legislation. Objection. It is
ordered.
House Memorial 60 introduced by
representatives Brown, Scott
Townsend, Mason and Pettigrew
Memorial, congratulating the
United States Department of
Energy's Waste isolation Pilot
Planet Plant.
For 25 Years of Operation House
Memorial 60 introduced by
representatives Brown, Scott
Townsend, Mason and Pettigrew.
How's Memorial 60 haven't been
read twice by titles or not
printed and placed on the
speaker's table.
Senate Bill 165, introduced by
Senators Gonzalez and Brant, an
act relating to legislative
retirement, changing the
calculation of the amount of
pension pursuant to the state
legislator. Remember coverage
plan to making an appropriation
Senate bill 165 introduced by
Senator Gonzalez and Brand 165
How many Retweets by title is
referred to the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
Senate Bill 216, introduced by
Senator Rodriguez, an act
relating to finance amending the
New Mexico Finance Authority Act
to provide financing for
affordable housing projects,
amending the definitions of
public project and qualified
entity, amending the local
government planning fund. Senate
Bill 216, introduced by Senator
Rodriguez
Senate Bill 216, as amended, has
been read twice by total and
referred to the House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
Senate Bill 217, introduced by
Senator Rodriguez an act
relating to severance tax
bonding, providing for a minimum
distribution from the severance
tax bonding fund to the
severance tax permanent fund
every year for 10 years,
limiting the amount of
supplemental severance tax bonds
or notes issued in 2024.
Senate Bill 217, introduced by
Senator Rodrigues Centerville to
17.
As amended have been read to us
by title is referred to the
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee.
Generally from Bern, Leo.
Mr Speaker. I would go to that
order Business Committee report.
An objection so ordered
Mr Speaker. Your Health and
Human Services Committee to has
been referred. House Joint
Memorial three has had it under
consideration reports, Same with
recommendation that it do pass
respectfully submitted.
Elizabeth Thompson chair.
Mr Speaker, Move, Adoption
Committee report and how's your
memorial? Three others have ever
seen if I was in I
Whose name Ecevit Committee
report adopted.
Mr Speaker. Your Health and
Human Services Committee to him
has been referred. Senate Bill
three, as amended has had it
under consideration, reports
with recommendations that do
pass respectfully submitted.
Elizabeth Thompson share move
ADOPTION Adoption of Federal
Committee Report on Senate Bill
three as amended, all those in
favor signify by saying, Aye.
His name.
Yeah, the eyes have it.
Committee report adopted.
Mr Speaker, your Health and
Human Services Committee to has
been referred. Senate Health and
Public Affairs Committee
Substitute for Senate Bill 135,
as amended has had it under
consideration, reports with
recommendations that do pass
respectfully submitted.
Elizabeth Thompson chair Mr
Speaker Move Adoption Adoption
of Committee Report on Senate
Health Public Affairs Committee
substitute presentable 135 as
amended all those involved
Supposed name.
The committee report adopted
Mr Speaker. Your Health and
Human Services Committee to him
has been referred. Senate
Finance Committee substitute for
Senate Bill 161 has had it under
consideration reports with
recommendations that it do pass
as amended and then referred to
the Appropriations and Finance
Committee. Respectfully Submit
Elizabeth Thompson chair move
adoption, adoption of Federal
Committee Report and Senate
Finance Committee substitute
percent about 161. All those in
favor signify by saying, Aye.
Supposed to say the committee
report adopted
Lady from Burnley.
Mr Speaker. I move to go to that
order of business announcements
of miscellaneous business
section of disorder. Their
announcements lady from Dona
Ana. Thank you. Mr Speaker. Your
house Commerce will meet today.
15 minutes after the floor
session.
Members. Take note. The
gentleman from son Juan
represented Duncan.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Point of
personal privilege. What is the
purpose of your point? Mr
Speaker? I am disappointed that
Senate Bill three did not come
to the commerce.
Um, I've talked to over 100
businesses in the interim.
About this bill, ranging from
One employee all the way to 2500
employees about this bill and
what it would do and I think
that setting it Where where you
sent it was inappropriate. And
maybe that's a strong word, but
I don't think it was the right
committee to send it to, Sir.
Thank you. Thank you, sir.
Gentlemen from Sandoval,
representative Martinez. Mr.
Speaker. I also rise on a point
of personal privilege. What is
the purpose of your point? Mr
Speaker? I also rise as a member
of your Commerce committee.
Um
To say that I've heard from
businesses not only during the
interim, but I have heard from
them during, uh, this weekend.
Wondering why this bill was not
Sent to your Commerce committee
Since historically, these bills
have been sent there.
Um and I have told them that I
would rise and make their voices
heard on the House floor.
Um So I thank you for your time.
We need to listen to orbit or
small businesses on this. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Thank you,
gentlemen. Gentlelady from
tourism Burnley, Representative
Lord, Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Point of personal privilege is
the purpose of your point. First
of all, I want to thank you very
much for the moment of silence
for our lost Cruces Police
officer that lost his life.
Jonah Hernandez. He leaves
behind two Children aged 10 and
two and absolutely breaks my
heart. Second thing I was in my
seat, Mr. Chair. Mr. Speaker
should have yelled at me. I
didn't vote. I was so engrossed
in reading this journal article.
I just wanted to say I supported
the bill.
Uh, HB 165, but I was so busy
read. I did not hear anything
that happened. Um and also for
this other bill to that I'm
getting bombarded by business
people in my district. They want
more discussion and conversation
on the paid. Leave Bill. So
thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady gentlelady from
Burnley or represented Hawkman.
but he'll thank you. Mr Speaker.
I just want to announce that
your house transportation,
Public Works and Capital
Improvements Committee will be
meeting tomorrow. 9 A.m. room
305.
See you there. Members signal
gentlemen from Dona Ana. Thank
you, Mr Speaker, your House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee will meet at 3 P.m. in
room 307 note generated from
Santa Fe. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Your House Judiciary Committee
will meet 15 minutes after floor
session and tomorrow at 830 in
the morning, So we will be
seeing you. Thanks. Mr Speaker.
Members take note any other
announcements?
Members. We're gonna take a
little break now to go. Do some
committee work, and we'll come
back this evening to take up a
little bit more third reading
and also concurrence.
So there'll be a encouraged
calendar that will be passed out
by the time you all get back to
your desk generally from
Virgilio, Mr. Speaker, I move
the house stand in recess until
530 this afternoon. Lincoln's
birthday, Steve All then Happy
birthday, Abraham Lincoln. The
