development grants.
We will do a call.
Why,
Representative.
Gonzales.
I can hear what's.
You.
to
I can't hear you.
What is?
OK, OK.
And go to go to do roll call.
Wait, still still changing it.
OK, OK, no mics on.
Roll roll call. Thank you.
Yeah, they're they're gonna fix
it.
Represented.
Representative.
Here, here.
Here, here
we have we have forums we have
bills for us today.
We're gonna we're gonna get
started with 3334 let's give it
2 minutes.
Well then they can't get
anything online.
That's what.
OK.
Everyone
So we're gonna go ahead and get
So we're gonna go ahead and get
in the room.
Is that what I would.
Well.
No.
Because.
So when I talk, you can hear
echo
and that.
Uh, this is rural development.
That sounds fine. That's better.
Yes, thank you. Can they hear us
online?
Testing, testing, uh, IT test.
And everyone, uh, so we heard
folks from Zoom, we're not
hearing any echo in the room.
It seems like folks are hearing
us online now. I think we're
ready to proceed.
So good morning everyone. Um, if
you're on Zoom or on the
webcast, you likely saw that we
did a roll call. So we have
quorum, we're going to begin
right now with HB 334 Rural
Electric Coop Wildfire Liability
Act presented by Representatives
Dixon and Gonzalez, uh,
representing uh, you have the
floor.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee.
Um, we're here to present, uh,
House Bill 334.
As we witnessed this summer in
Ruidoso, and the summer before
that in and around Mora,
wildfire risk continues to be a
major concern across the
country. Changing environmental
conditions, overgrown, unhealthy
forests and continued
development of fire-prone areas
have all contributed to higher
wildfire risks.
Along with higher wildfire
risks, the decrease in insurance
coverage, skyrocketing premiums
or even the cancellation of
insurance coverage altogether,
and a feverish increase in
lawsuits bring us to the rural
Electric Cooperative wildfire
Liability Act, which Senate Bill
281 and House Bill 334.
If enacted, this legislation
with number one.
Cat Electric Cooperatives
liability at $2 million per
occurrence, provided that the
cooperatives have complied with
their fire mitigation plans. 2,
require cooperative wildfire
mitigation plans to be
formulated and reviewed by the
Forestry division of the Energy,
Minerals and Natural Resources
Department and approved by the
New Mexico Public Regulation
Commission.
3.
The cooperative shall provide
public notice by providing an
updated report annually on their
website of their wildfire
mitigation plan.
This legislation establishes a
two-year limitation on filing of
claims.
And it relieves cooperatives
from liability for properties.
They are not allowed on to
perform their vegetation
management activities.
I want to be clear.
In no way are the rural electric
cooperatives asking to be exempt
from responsibility. If a
cooperative is negligent in its
operations and vegetation
management programs. It can be
sued, and there is no cap on
liability.
However, it doesn't make sense
to sue a cooperative into a
bankruptcy for fires started
from their equipment because of
an unplanned ignition, such as
an accidental human caused fire,
a fire caused by lightning or a
prescribed fire that is declared
a wildfire by a federal or state
emergency management.
Utility followed.
The industry's best practices
and wildfire mitigation plans
and took all reasonable steps to
protect their equipment.
If they did that, they should be
protected from unlimited
liability lawsuits.
Uh, Madam Chair, I would like to
introduce, uh, we have two
experts this morning, um, in the
room, Vince Martinez, uh, with
the rural Electric Cooperatives
here in New Mexico. And then
also online, uh, we have Curtis
Hartenstein, um, who is
representing tri-state
generation and transmission. Um,
if it's all right, I would like
to ask, uh, Mr. Martinez, uh,
for a couple of brief comments.
Uh, good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. Thank
you, uh, Representative Dixon,
for calling me an expert. I've
never been called that before.
My name is Vince Martinez on the
interim CEO of the New Mexico
Rural Electric Cooperative
Association.
And the senior government
relations advisor for tri-state
Generation of Transmission
Association. Uh, the inception
of the rural electrification Act
in 1936 brought electricity to
rural parts of America.
That for-profit electric
companies would not serve.
Bringing light, heat,
refrigeration, and economic
development of factories and
businesses to areas that have
been that had been exclusively
dependent on agriculture.
Today our New Mexico rural
Electric Cooperatives provide
electricity to about 80% of the
state.
And 20% of our population.
They serve as the cornerstone of
economic stability and rural New
Mexico and are a large part of
New Mexico's grid resiliency.
Co-ops and their employees are
leaders in the community and are
huge supporters of youth and
civic activities.
Their continued strength and
viability are critical to
protecting basic needs and
essential services such as
health, safety, and financial
welfare of the people of rural
New Mexico.
In addition to ensuring the
delivery of reliable and
affordable electricity daily.
The rural Electri cooperatives
exercise their vegetation
management and wildfire
mitigation plans by clearing and
cutting back electric rideaways.
New Mexico co op spend millions
of dollars each year and work
daily on vegetation management
and wildfire mitigation efforts.
We have full-time crews, uh,
both full-time employees as well
as contract crews that that
manage vegetation daily. We are
using and acquiring the latest
equipment such as uh S and Crip
saver and similar equipment that
is a type of uh reclosure that
is a self-powered electronically
controlled single phase vacuum
fault circuited interrupter.
Uh, that quickly that operates
quicker and senses faults
better.
Uh, to turn power off and
targeted areas.
More electric received a large
grant from the grip program.
Um, and, and probably in the
next 5 years, you'll see more
Electric is one of the most
modern.
Co-ops in the country where
they'll be.
They'll be able to have systems
that cut the light when the line
is cut, the power stops before
the line hits the ground.
We're installing wire or
sparkless fuses far retardant
pole covers and coatings.
Uh, replacing uh reclosures with
remote control capabilities.
Uh, some co-ops are even
replacing wood poles with steel
poles.
And using the latest
technologies to satellite
imagery, drones and looking at
new software such as Firescape,
which has been developed by
Sandia scientists, which
identify high risk areas.
Uh
More precisely.
But despite all these efforts,
There are a myriad of things
that can cause a fire that are
that that gets out of control,
such as that, that's out of the
co op's control, such as.
Lines that catch fire and fall
to the ground.
Um, on fire, uh.
Woodhallers that knock trees
into lines, locked gates from a
private property owners or
government officials where we're
not accessible to our.
While, um, to our rightaway
areas.
So as Representative Dixon says
if a co op is sued into
bankruptcy for a fire that
was started that was out of
their control, despite all their
mitigation efforts, who's going
to step in and provide
electricity to that area.
And what will be the effect on
the on New Mexico's grid.
I want to thank you for having
us this morning, and we stand
for questions after Curtis comes
on and Curtis would come on.
Curtis, we've unmuted you.
Hello, good morning. Can you
hear me now?
Yes.
Good. Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee.
My name is Curtis Hartenstein.
I'm here today representing
Tri-State Generation and
Transmission Association in
support of House Bill 334.
I'm sorry that I'm not able to
be with you in person today, uh
but I was able to testify to the
Senate on this bill on Tuesday.
I've been practicing wildfire
mitigation, wildfire recovery
and forest health for nearly 20
years. In the past 1.5 years of
the wildfire mitigation program
manager at Tri-State.
I have a bachelor's degree in
forest ecology and a master's in
environmental science, and I'm
also a volunteer firefighter for
my local fire protection
district.
Through the years of study,
training and practice, I've
learned that it is far better to
prevent a wildfire than it is to
defend against it and suffer
through the long-term recovery.
To that end, its tri-state's
position that House Bill 334
provides guidance and direction
of all your electrical utilities
prevent wildfire and damage to
New Mexican communities.
In New Mexico, 80% of the land
area and 20% of the residents
receive their electricity from a
rural electric cooperative,
which in return receives their
power from Tri-State.
Working together as
cooperatives, we have two main
focus when it comes to
delivering power safely.
Reliability and affordability.
Decline in forest health,
increased load demands, and
variability in weather patterns
have challenged the balance of
safety, reliability and
affordability.
Triate our co op members are all
not for profits in the
cooperative model, costs are
shared equally to all members
for the benefit of the system as
a whole.
Member cops rely on their
consumers at the end of the line
to manage these ever increasing
expenses, making it more
challenged to preserve
affordable electricity.
The ever-increasing cost of
wildfire insurance coupled with
the reduced coverage limits is
putting that cooperative model
at risk.
Last year, Tri-State's wildfire
insurance costs increased from 5
million to $7.5 million while
their coverage was reduced
almost in half.
Furthermore, the ability to
obtain this insurance is
increasingly become difficult.
A Material and present concern
is the possibility that an
electric utility can spend
millions of dollars in
protective and comprehensive
mitigation in areas where the
utility is not the primary
driver of wildfire risk and
consequence.
It still be held liable for
millions in punitive damages.
The worst case scenario results
in a bankrupt utility and the
suffering economic and community
impact that comes from the loss
of a local cooperative.
House Bill 334 helps to protect
New Mexico communities by
requiring all utilities to
develop and receive approval for
a wildfire mitigation plan that
calculates wildfire risk and
focuses robust mitigation
strategies to meet those risks.
This bill ensures that utilities
can make significant investments
in wildfire mitigation, while
maintaining safe, reliable, and
affordable power to rural New
Mexico.
At TriState, we focus
significant resources on
wildfire mitigation to prevent
accidental ignition from
occurring in our service
territory.
Our primary focus is to prevent
a wildfire.
It is where we place the bulk of
our efforts.
For 20 years, we've been working
to mitigate wildfire risk and
have evolved our program over
time, creating our first
wildfire mitigation plan in
2022.
We have approximately 1000 miles
of transmission line in New
Mexico that run through a
variety of terrain and
vegetation.
We initiate our risk reduction
by calculating wildfire risk at
the landscape and local scale.
We coupled this information with
daily weather forecasting and
situational awareness reports.
Armed with this information, we
deploy the appropriate
mitigation tactics to specific
areas, such as reducing fuels,
hardening infrastructure,
managing system we operating
posture and conducting targeted
maintenance to make sure our
equipment is operating
appropriately.
We're doing this not because we
are mandated to do it, but we
know it is the right thing to do
for New Mexico.
We're doing our part to help
prevent wildfire in the first
place, and we will continue to
mature our programs do even more
in an ever changing environment.
Our cooperative reality has
relied on supporting one another
and investing in one another's
success.
And now, Madam Chair and
committee, we need your support.
To maintain reliable, safe, and
affordable electricity in New
Mexico. I ask you to please vote
yes on House Bill 334, and I
stand ready to answer any
questions that you may have.
Thank you.
Um, Madam Chair, we also do have
an amendment that should be
delivered. So if you want to let
me know at what point in time
you'd like for us to talk about
that. Thank you and your, in
your binders, you should have an
amendment. It's uh 0.230966.1.
Is that the correct one?
Can we move for a discussion?
So.
Uh, can you explain your
amendment?
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, the
amendment makes a couple of um
changes based on feedback from
the energy, minerals, Natural
Resources Department, um,
I think the first, um, main one
is, um, adding additional
information on page 4 starting
at line 8,
where we're spelling out, um,
emergency response procedures.
Um
Or sorry, the, um, the
operational procedures. Um, and
so defining those a bit more.
Then on um
Page 5.
Changing from 5 years for the
frequency of plans to 3 years.
And then the other big one,
On page 5, line 22.
After, uh, recommendations.
Inserting during a period
starting November 1 of each year
and ending on February 28th.
That way it's more um in line
with when the agencies would
have time to review plans based
on wildfire season.
And then the last, uh, change is
moving from 60 days or
To, sorry, uh, moving from 45
days to 60 days, uh, for the
review time period.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Is there discussion on the
amendment?
Uh, Representative Mason, I move
for adoption.
We have a motion to adopt the
amendment to House Bill 334. Is
there any objection to this
motion?
Seeing no objection, we haven't
amended, uh, amendment put on
your bill.
Now we're going to move back
with, is that the end of your
presentation? OK, wonderful. I
will move to a public comment at
this time. If you are against
this bill in online, please
raise your hand.
Uh, this is House Bill 334. Is
there anyone against this, uh,
who I'd like to speak in
opposition, I should say, uh, in
the room, please raise your
hand.
I believe we have a Scott
Scanlon.
Scott Scanlon, you are uh
unmuted.
Good morning, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair. My name
is Scott Scanlon, registered
lobbyist for Singleton share and
I, uh, we respectfully oppose
this legislation. I agree with
most of what my friend Vince,
uh, uh, said to the committee a
little back.
story on this bill, uh, the
genesis of this bill is from the
state of California several
years ago, PG&E, a large uh
utility, uh, was found to be
liable for a fire, billions of
dollars' worth of damages and
that large utility company was
facing bankruptcy. The state of
California, the legislature said
we don't want that to happen and
so they created a wildfire fund.
To make sure that utility
companies don't go bankrupt, so,
so the damages are up to their
um insurance caps and then the
wildfire fund would kick in.
California has lots of people,
uh, and, and lots of customers
that can pay into that fund we
took that model and we wanted to
do the same exact thing in the
state of New Mexico for co-ops
because we agree co-ops are
critical for the state of New
Mexico and we want to protect
them.
And uh and so we started
crafting the bill we were
visiting with the co ops, but we
got to the part, the second
part.
About the fund, and that is very
problematic because there's not
enough members in the co ops to,
to, to fund the fund the size
that would need to be uh
enacted, put into place, so, um,
for that reason we, we were in a
pererfuffle with our
legislation, we believe that
this bill is, is half good in
creating the, the, the
mitigation plans and things like
that, but there's
Uh, a $2 million liability in
this in this uh legislation,
victims could potentially not be
made whole, uh, and so for that
reason, uh, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, we
respectfully oppose this
legislation.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Can you read it?
Seeing no other comments online
in opposition, seeing none in
the room, we'll turn to, uh, uh,
if you're in favor of this bill
online, please raise your hand.
And if you're in favor of this
bill in the room, please raise
your hand.
Um, we will keep it to about, I
should have done this before. We
will keep it to around in a
minute. Uh, we're, we're, we're
friendly here, so we'll do a
good deal. The attendant will
hold the microphone.
Oh
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you for the opportunity to
speak. My name is George Dodge
Junior. I am a registered
lobbyist for the New Mexico
Rural Electric Cooperative
Association. I am also um
A lobbyist for tri-state, not
tri-state, I'm sorry, Western
farmers, Electric co op.
Um, and, uh,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I am also um the vice
president of the Pharm's
Electric Co op, we are based in
Clovis, and we cover a lot of
the east side of the state. So
that gives me a little bit of
insight on how these wildfires
can affect our our co op and the
devastating effect that it can
have on our ability to keep the
lights on in uh, in the most
rural parts of the state of New
Mexico. And for those reasons
and for the reasons stated by
our two expert witnesses.
And the sponsor, we stand in
full support.
Of this bill. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Good morning, chair members of
the committee. My name is Alison
Riley, public policy director
with the New Mexico Chamber of
Commerce and we're standing in
proud support of House Bill 334,
20% of New Mexicans rely on
rural electric co ops for
electricity, but unfortunately,
these cops are currently at
risk. The cost of wildfire
insurance has skyrocketed over
previous years, and the coverage
at times is inadequate.
This means one wildfire could
push a cooperative into
bankruptcy. If that happens, the
consequences are severe.
Electricity rates would increase
and essential services like
schools, healthcare, and public
safety would all be disrupted.
Cooperative leaders have worked
with the New Mexico Forestry
division and the PRC to ensure
their wildfire mitigation plans
are approved by experts. The
bill does not remove
accountability, but instead
provides a framework to protect
these cooperatives from
financial ruin, while ensuring
they remain proactive in
wildfire prevention. For these
reasons and the reasons stated
previously by the expert
witnesses, the chamber
respectfully asks for your
support. Thank you.
Madam Chair and committee, my
name's Laura McCarthy. I'm the
state forester and division
director.
Or uh New Mexico State Forestry,
we are very supportive of this
bill.
Since 2019, I have been focused
on preventing future wildfires,
especially those caused by trees
falling on power lines. It's
entirely preventable and this
bill will go a long way toward
achieving that.
I also want to thank the sponsor
for the amendments in response
to the FIR that our department
submitted. Hi. Um,
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members. My name is Rico
Gonzalez. I'm a registered
lobbyist for El Paso Electric,
which is an IOU here in New
Mexico, but that's not the
reason I'm standing up today.
I'm a member of the Socorro
Electric Co op and as a member,
I um stand full, fully
supportive of this, of this
measure in front of you today,
uh, for, for the health of our,
of our co-ops and also for the
health of, of our
um, forests and and wildlife.
Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair. I'm
uh David Spradlin, the CEO of
the Springer Electric Co op. I'm
and CEO since 1990, and I would
just echo the comments from the
previous uh commenters of the,
the risk that the co op has of
bankruptcy and the ability to
actually get wildfire insurance
coverage, um, over the course of
my career, uh, I've seen this
wrist just increase, increase,
and, and we are deeply concerned
about this issue for the co op,
and we're, of course, our
highest priority is the safety
of our members and our and our
employees and so we work
diligently to try and prevent
these situations and we'll
continue to do that and this
bill will be a big help to us to
continue that. Thank you.
We turn online.
Matthew Gonzalez.
Uh, good morning, Madam Chair
and members of the committee. My
name is Matthew Gonzalez and I
am the executive director for
the Consumer Energy Alliance. At
CEA, we advocate for affordable,
reliable, all the above energy
options for working families and
small businesses. Um, but I'm
not just here as the executive
director, CEA. I'm also a rural
New Mexican. I'm a former mayor,
and I've had the, and I have the
privilege right now of living in
my hometown of Siarron. I'm from
a community that relies on r
rural electric cooperatives, and
I know firsthand how critical
they are, not just as power
providers, but as an integral
part of our community. That's
why HB 334 matters.
Because we talk about protecting
rural electric cooperatives. We
aren't talking about some
distant corporation we've never
heard of. We're talking about
our neighbors, our friends, the
people who show up for us every
single day. They're the folks
who keep the lights on, sponsor
our kids' sports teams, offer
scholarships for students and
are the first ones out day and
night in the middle of a
snowstorm to restore power,
because they aren't just serving
customers, they're serving
people they know and care about.
HB 334 strikes the right balance
ensuring co-ops continue
responsible wildfire prevention,
while protecting them from
excessive liability.
That could raise rates and
threaten service reliability for
families and small businesses.
Without these protections, rural
co-ops could face crippling
financial strain, forcing higher
electricity costs on the very
people they are built to serve.
The beauty of co-ops is that
they are owned by their members.
All of us who buy electricity
from them.
Um, that means we all have a
vested interest in seeing them
do the right thing, and we do in
small towns like mine, we, when
something isn't right, people
speak up. Co-ops operate with
the level of accountability and
personal investment that goes
beyond the typical utility
because every time the power
goes out, it's not just about
restoring service for some
faceless account number. It's
about making sure our neighbors,
our families, and our local
businesses can keep going. At
the end of the day, HB 334 is
about protecting more than just
rural electric cooperatives.
It's about protecting our
communities and ensures we keep
affordable.
re li able power while
maintaining the high standards
of service and accountability
that cops are known for. I just
want to thank the committee for
allowing me to offer some
comments on this. I want to
thank the sponsors for hearing
from us and, and, and allowing
us input, um, and I urge the
committee to pass this
legislation. Thank you.
Thank you.
AGM
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Ambrose Castellano. I am
a co op member for the Mora San
Miguel Co op, seeing the
devastation that we went through
with the Hermit peak and Kaf
cannon fires with our co-ops, I
stand in support of this bill
for the reasons stated by the
sponsor and the witness, Madam
Chair.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Uh
Patika.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee.
Thank you for the opportunity to
speak with you this morning.
I'm gonna take a Sanian,
executive director and
registered lobbyist for the New
Mexico exchange carrier Group.
The NMACG is comprised of 10
telephone and broadband
companies providing service to
customers in rural areas in New
Mexico. Many of our member
companies are member
cooperatives. The NMECG strongly
supports House Bill 334 as
amended, and we thank
Representative Dixon for
sponsoring the legislation.
NMECG supports our fellow
cooperatives. We also support
the creation of a comprehensive
framework in the legislation,
which manages wildfire liability
for electric co ops in the
state.
For wildfire claims. We support
the establishment of a
comprehensive plan, the approval
and oversight process, the
mandatory annual recording in
the plan and the damage cap.
House Bill 334 does all of this.
NMECG ask for your support.
Also, Madam Chair and members of
the committee, myself and my
family are members of the
Socorro Electric Cooperative,
and we personally support HB 334
as amended for all.
The reason stated previously by
um supporters, and we ask for
your support. Again, thank you
for your time.
Thank you. Mark Trujillo.
Can you hear me?
Yes, we can hear you.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, uh, my
name is Mark Trujillo. I'm a
business agent at IBEW Local 611
International Brotherhood of
Electrical Workers. I'm also a
member of uh Kit Carson Electric
Co op.
Up in Taos County.
In rural New Mexican, a member
of many of our members.
Uh, work in electric co ops
throughout New Mexico, including
Hemas Mountain Electric Co op,
Kit Carson Electric Co op, Mora
San Miguel Electri co op.
Central New Mexico Electric Coop
continental Divide Electric Co
op, Socorro Electric Co op,
but heaita telephone Coop.
And for all the reasons stated
previously, uh, we stand in
strong support of HB 334.
And we would appreciate your
support as well.
Um
The electric co ops are the
lifeblood of rural New Mexico,
and it is very important that we
keep them viable.
For all the reasons stated.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Seeing no others online, we'll
turn it to the committee. I
always want to make a note, we
had a couple of folks come in,
everyone's presenting bills. Uh,
so we've heard the bill, we've
amended the bill with the
amendment that you do have
inside your binder. Um, we've
heard comments from both sides.
And so we'll turn to the
committee Representative Macy.
My
tried to take my mic away early.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, representatives.
For bringing this bill forward
just a few.
Kind of
Questions to ease my mind this
uh why $2 million? Why did we
determine 2 million was the.
A map for the liability cap.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative.
That was determined on the, on
the basis of that's our basic
coverage for each co op.
Anything beyond that, we have to
get an umbrella.
Coverage, which, which some go
up to 8 million and and others,
but
Over the years since we've seen
big fire many years ago up in
the Haus with the cost uh that
cost payment electric and
tri-state.
A lot of money back then we had
A lot of insurance coverage. We
just can't afford that coverage
now. We prefer to put that money
into fire mitigation and and
vegetation management and into
premiums that
As we've seen in the insurance
companies may not, may not
always pay out, so that, that's
where we got that threshold of
$2 million.
Thank, thank you. Uh.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
Madam chair
Representative
This, uh
We quite had a
there is, there's all, I mean 2
million is not much money.
Anymore, you know.
Two houses you're out of money.
You know, with them, but this
doesn't.
Affect the other avenues that
people have.
For
Compensation for a forest fire,
right? I mean, it's
Strictly
You're part of the, you're part
of the damages.
And hopefully the state and
Usually kick in money for
disaster area fires.
The truth.
Madam Chair, representative, yes
sir, it's uh.
particularly if it's a fire that
that was not caused by our
negligence. We don't, if we're
if we're negligent,
there's no cap,
particularly if it's a fire that
that was not caused by our
negligence. We don't, if we're
if we're negligent, there's no
cape away.
But uh we plan to be diligent
and, and, and, and prudent with,
with, with what we do and how we
manage the forest, our areas of
wild, of uh ride aways. Thank
you, thank you, Madam Chair.
Yes, that was my next question.
And most of these questions just
for the general public doesn't
think that 2 million is the.
You know, all that's anybody's
gonna pay out for a fire that's.
May be caused by by a co op that
uh but not through negligence.
And
As you stated in that, like I
said, my next question, if
you're negligent,
We can burn you to the ground,
is that true?
Madam Chair, represent you, your
words not mine but yours
Oh, thank you, Madam Chair,
representative, uh, basically
this bill or sets the cap, but
it also sets the standards that
y'all have to live by.
be classed as non-negligent. Is
that true?
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
yes.
Yeah, and, and, and it is uh
It is a
You will buy into this, if you,
if you choose to do that for
this liability exception, you
have to follow these rules.
It the.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. No, it sounds
like a good deal. Only one more
question that was
Ask him uh analysis. Do we have
any idea how many fires a year
are caused by?
The failures either by birds or
whatever she was talking about
that caused this fires.
Do we have any figures on that?
Adam Chair and Representative,
uh, could we have our state
forester, could we ask her if
she has an answer?
Thank, thank you.
Madame Charon, Representative,
the forestry division compiled
those numbers last year for a
media inquiry and the number was
surprisingly low, fewer than 5
per year.
We have had 2 somewhat major
fires caused by trees on power
lines, uh, one of them is the
Lost Conscious Fire. The other
is Tres Lagunas and um but it is
a relatively rare occurrence.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair Representative, uh,
I said that was the last one,
but I made another one come to
my mind, Madam Chair
Representative. We're but we're
focusing based basically here on
forest fires, but, uh, you know,
where I come from in my, we have
grass fires.
That can also be caused by
The same things, does this cover
our co-ops in the grass, I mean,
it's all co-ops no matter what.
What type of drain, is that
true?
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative,
yes, each co op would would
develop their fire management
plan.
considering their terrain and
their thank you Representative
Madam. I guess that's what I was
trying to ask, you know, we
don't, uh,
Our co op in in Artesia's PBE
has a whole different
Type of mitigation, but those,
those rules are covered for them
in this also.
I guess what I'm saying? It's
not just all types of terrade,
yes, thank you so thank you,
thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for bringing this forward.
So it sounds like a
Uh, something that we need, we
don't want to.
Burn anybody down.
Thank you. Thank you,
Representative Mason.
Representative Gonzalez.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Um, I apologize,
can't be in three places at
once, but, um, no, um, since I
missed the presentation this
morning, I just again, just
wanted to offer more, more of a
statement as a co-sponsor on
this bill, um, that I
wholeheartedly support it, um,
as a representative of our rural
area, greatly impacted by co-ops
greatly impacted by forest
fires. Um, I think this is an
important step, recognizing the
value and mitigation,
recognizing the responsibility
of the co op to maintain the
land, um, but also, if a co op
was to go bankrupt
it really would only affect our
energy, as we did see with the
fires and it was catastrophic
when we were, were with that
energy, and you're not up and
running, it just is really
detrimental. That's all I wanted
to say. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, speakers.
Representative, uh, ranking
member Lord.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative and expert.
Um, so if I understand this
correctly, we're going through
this to make sure that like in
my area cause I'm on a co op.
And my biggest issue, we have
threefold. One, we have trees
that grow into the lines out
there.
Uh, is that something that would
be addressed, uh,
Madam chair, sorry, I want to
say Mr. Speaker, man, I am just,
I can't wait till we just get to
the floor so I guess too much
going on. I've met him chair,
uh, represented expert. Is that
going to be addressed in this
where the trees are going to be
cut, that are touching the
wires.
Madam Chair Representative,
you're, yes, you're cooperative
does have an active
Vegetation management program,
whether they've gotten to those
trees, some of those trees, and
depending on the type of wire or
type of line, it depends on the
Um
Uh, the distance of the how wide
the the right of way is with the
line.
Um, certainly our one of our
managers might be able to go
more into that David Spraglin,
or?
Uh, but yes, we would, they
would address things like that.
Yeah, thank you, um, Madam
Chair, representative expert,
because I'm trying, I want to
make sure cause in my district,
our electricity goes out for 3
reasons. One,
Branches knock the wire down too
when it gets really cold. It
seems like when it's the coldest
time of the year, that's when
the electricity goes out. It's
like almost guaranteed wind, we
have horrific winds. I don't
know if you're familiar with how
when the wind comes over the
mountain, it swirls on the other
side. We get wind, um, and we
have had one fire. It was very
brief. I think a wire broke, and
then we had the other issue we
had was uh trans.
And mission trans
Transformer blew up and we
didn't have a spare one, so it
took a while to get one. Mr.
Speaker and gentle lady, I, I
support the bill. Uh, what I
would like to see, what I would
love to see in New Mexico as we
start taking our wires
underground.
So we don't have these issues
anymore cause it is so horrible
because here's what I do. Oh
God, it's windy. Please don't
let the electricity go. Oh my
God, it's snowing and the wind's
blowing. Please don't let the
electricity go out. Somebody
crashed into old pole, um, other
than that, I, I completely see
where you're going with this.
You, you're trying to be good
stewards, if I understand this
correctly, trying to be good
stewards and say, OK, uh, we
know these are issues, we need
to make sure that we're
maintaining all the stuff we're
trying to make sure we take
every precaution and um,
The last question I have is, uh,
Madam Chair, representative
expert, what, I know you said
that each couple will develop
their own, but is there going to
be something that's like a
baseline, like here's the base,
you guys have to have this, and
then after that you can develop.
Madam Cha representative, yes,
it it within the bill, they they
the baseline of
Of what each plan should have as
a minimum.
And then of course they could
expanded or or adapt it to their
terrain and.
Their circumstances. And that
makes most sense of the East
Mountains, we have multiple
terrains out there. We have the
mountains and then you go out
towards Edgewood and you don't
have mountains. You've got
flatlands and more winds. Um,
chair, and I think that's all
the questions I had. Thank you.
You, uh, viceress.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I just
want to thank the sponsor for
bringing this bill forward. Uh,
I think this is much needed.
Uh
The cost for a fire insurance
is, is ridiculous. Um,
And the rep Lloyd brought up a,
a question, why can't we do
everything underground, if
you're OK with your coop
doubling your electric bill. I'm
sure they'd be happy to put, put
everything underground, but it's
just a cost thing.
So they got a balance cost
versus uh everything else, but
um, no, I, I, I just wanna.
State my full support for this.
So, so thank you to the sponsor
for
I have a lot more to say, but
I'll, I'll just hold back on
that.
I just want to add on to that,
um, um.
Madam Chair Representative, and
I, I think we have surplus in
the budget that we could afford
to do that. The only thing I
wanted to say, I did want to
say, uh, we lost our homeowners
insurance.
I just wanted to add that I
forgot that we lost our
homeowners insurance. They sent
a drone over our house and they
said we had a weed that was too
high and they wanted to chop
everything on my 2 acres, and
they canceled and they're
canceling fire insurance left
and right and homeowners'
insurance. So I wanted to add
that. So thank you, ma'am.
Appreciate that, you know what,
you see my, my hair rise
seconds.
Um, and one thing, 11 thing
briefly, I, I appreciate this. I
appreciate the explanation of,
you know, where the cops need to
take responsibility and where
that limitation on the liability
happens. I do have one question.
Um, when it comes to, um, uh,
When it is accidentally set and
it does turn into a wildfire.
Does that mean the state and
FEMA to come in on those times.
How does that work?
Madam Chair, uh,
I, I don't.
I would assume all those things
happen, yes, because I
But, but I think the state
forester may be asked that, if
we can hand the microphone again
to the state forester. Thank
you.
Madam Chair,
The state does respond to all
wildfires on state or private
lands, and we do cover the cost
after the 1st 4 hours.
Of any wildfire on our
jurisdiction.
And uh just to continue on that
question, so if I have a home,
it's burning a wildfire. Uh, it
was started accidentally
involving a world co ops uh um
equipment based on this. It was
an accident that when we were
saying that that liability, some
of that would be assumed for the
damage to my house, that would
be assumed by Madam Chair, no,
uh, what I was referring to was
the fire suppression cost.
So the cost of putting out the
fire, the liability questions um
are not my area of expertise. I
can't comment. OK. Thank you.
Did you want to expand upon
that, uh, representative?
Or
Madam Chair, if it's a federal
disaster, of course, it's the
fire turns in that, then that
triggers all kinds of that money
for, for reimbursement for those
types of things. Yeah, so if we,
if we're negligent, of course,
that's our liability. We're not
negligent, of course, all those
other things will kick in. And
there's, uh, I know you, you're
all aware there's a 6 or 78,
wildfire bills that are kind of
all joining they're kind of
starting to weave together on.
guessing most of these issues,
particularly, I, I know there's
a Senate Bill 31 that that will
provide funds, state funds to a
co op like in Maura's case.
Where they had to go borrow $15
million to get back up and
running after the fire because
FEMA was dragging its feet and
but this fund would be set up so
they could borrow that money,
and then as they get reimbursed
by FEMA, that money, that, that
loan gets paid off. That's
always the tricky thing during a
session you have multiple bills
you want to see all go through.
So hopefully we'll see some
action on that. Um, is there,
uh, the desire, the pity,
Representative Gonzalez. Make a
motion to do pass as amended
representative.
Um, Gonzalez moves they do pass
as amended on House Bill 334 is
there second now second.
A second by Representative
Cullen. Um, is there any
opposition to the motion?
Seeing none, please mark
everyone in the room as uh
voting in the affirmative, you
have a due pass as amended on
House Bill 334. Thank you. Thank
you. Thank you, Madam Chair and
members. Uh, we're gonna go
ahead and move on to our next
bill. Uh, I messaged uh
Representative Murphy, uh, on HB
351 storm event zero interest
loan. I do know he's also
presenting another, another
room.
Not seeing,
we'll give it a moment while we
wait for the other sponsor.
Do you want to present it? Uh.
Red Red Mason, if you want to go
and do 351, we can have you do
that one. And then is there an
expert for this?
351.
why you're here.
Oh, yeah, Representative
Vincent.
Great.
So wonderful. So we have
representatives uh Mason and
Vincent, um, presenting HB 351,
Storm event, uh, zero interest
loans.
And these should be in your
reminders, uh, when you're
ready.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So this
bill is kind of mimics the HB
one bill that we had during the
special and um this bill is
actually better than the one
that we put in the special
because this is a 0 interest
loan bill that um Chavis County
can use
For, um, everything that went on
during the floods in my bill
that I had in HB one, and I just
want to really explain this so
if y'all ever run these kind of
bills, my bill did not cover
debris removal.
So they, they started splitting
hairs, and I, I couldn't
understand.
Madam Chair, why we couldn't,
why we couldn't take care of
debris removal because if
there's debris on a bridge, how
do you replace the bridge
without removing the debris.
This bill covers uh
Uh, FEMA category A through G.
And
That's what I know about the
bill, madam Chair. It's a good
one. They need the help.
Madam, Madam Chair, uh,
I have not much to add to it
other than your living down
there, it, well, first of all,
it's a $200 million.
Is what the amount is that we're
asking for to go into this fund
and it is a 0% interest.
Be paid back with FEMA funds as
they become available, which we
all know FEMA slow.
Uh
And the amount of devastation.
It was horrible in that county
and uh.
It's uh
Last us, I mean,
As far as the survey going on
the map, last I heard there's.
It's still an ongoing process.
A fairly sure 200 million will
not fix all the damage.
It was done during this, but uh
It's a good start.
Uh, and with that we'll stand
for questions.
And make them simple.
Thank you, representatives. Uh,
we'll start with those in
opposition. If you're opposed to
this bill, please raise your
hand online. You opposed this
spill in the room, please raise
your hand.
Not seeing any opposition in the
room or online. If you're in
favor of this bill online,
please raise your hand. And if
you're in favor of this bill, a
room, please raise your hand.
Uh, we have one comment online.
Um, Madam Chair, can you hear
me? Yes.
Thank you very much. My name is
Hess Etema. I'm the city
attorney for Rosville, New
Mexico, and I wanted to give
some comments about this if uh
you'll have graciously accept
them, uh, so Roswell, uh,
presently has damaged slightly
over $260 million. That's just
two municipal properties.
The county itself, Chavez is
looking at something closer to
$360 million in damage total,
um, 1500 homes were in
businesses were affected. The
city of Roswell lost its museum,
its convention center, um, a Boy
Scout building that dates back
to the WPA. Its whole IT
department. It lost its whole
parks department building. The
police department flooded one of
the fire stations flooded and
City Hall partially flooded as
well. Um, over the night, we
were able to
Save 30 and I say we, I was
actually stuck at home flooded
in, but our first responders in
the National Guard saved 350
people from the rapids that
night. 2 people lost their
lives, unfortunately.
Uh, so the way this is
structured is Roswell is looking
to, we're not looking for free
money. Um, there's a concurrent
bill that Candy Spences all,
your former colleague and now
senator has put through that
would allow Roswell to raise a
0.25 cent tax that would be used
to pay back any flood bonding
that isn't covered by FEMA. What
we've been working with FEMA
directly and it would and some
money is already coming in, uh,
but it looks like we will be
getting 75%.
back of this amount, um, and
then the city would be able to
cover the rest by taxing itself,
um, so, uh, like I said, we're
really not trying to take money
that 0% would obviously be very
beneficial. Um, and then the
other reason why this money
upfront is so important is that
in order to encumber FEMA funds.
We have to have ready money
encumbered ahead of time. So if
we don't have cash on hand in
the next few months or in the
next 4 to 5 months, we lose our
place in line to California and
FEMA reimbursements would not be
forthcoming, so having this
money.
90 days. I, I think the bill is
the way it's written, it would
take 90 days after passage is
critically important for Roswell
to rebuild itself. Thank you.
Thank you.
Seeing no further public
comment, um, are there, and I
believe uh Representative Murphy
is coming, so when he comes, I'm
gonna allow him to give a brief
statement as well. Um, uh, but
are there any questions on the
from the committee?
Make a motion for a pass.
second, so I, I will, I have one
question. I just want to check
in. Hopefully, it's not too
hard. I am curious, one of the
things I believe is the FIR
which came out a bit later, so
I, if you, you're not familiar,
I understand. um, they note.
The 200, 1 of these noted the
200 million is a bit high for
these recovery costs, um, and
that usually it's in the 100
million uh range. Just kind of
curious why that was the number
you all came up with.
Thank you, Madam Chair. After
going through what we went
through in Ridoso, we were able
to, um, during the special, we
got 100 million, 70 million of
that made it back to uh Ridoso,
Lincoln County, and they've,
they, they went through it like
that. We really need about
another.
200,000. So I think with the
damage that was done, especially
listening to the attorney
talking about their uh
convention center.
This is probably not going to be
enough. I, I've heard.
I've heard numbers that it's
going to be somewhere around
half a billion dollars. So I
think that this is a very
appropriate amount of money for
uh Chavis County.
And um,
200 million sounds like a lot of
money to people like us, but
whenever you're cleaning debris
and replacing infrastructure,
just, you know, we believe that
this should be um repayable
because it's gonna come through
FEMA money that has already been
approved and also so we're not
expecting a lot of defaults
happening. Have we seen any a
lot of defaults happening in
Riodoso, for example.
Repeat that question, Madam
Chair. Just when it comes to a
loan, you know, what if there's
a large number of defaults that
have already happened previously
with these. I don't anticipate
that, but I'm checking with
theoso, you've seen that at all?
Yeah, no, ma'am. So, uh, really
what happens is
Somebody way smarter than me,
decided to use the state.
Or New Mexicans as a bank.
And we're going to borrow money
from the state.
And then
They're gonna hold the loans
until FEMA pays the, the
municipalities back and when
they pay them back, there's a
voucher that they have to sign
that they'll send that money
back to the state and reimburse
the state within 30 days. So,
um, all that has been done. We,
we've already started doing
reimbursements in Rioso to the
state paying the state back. And
so the, the municipalities are
not out the money because, you
know, they've
Thank you for that. Thank you to
the uh City attorney and uh
Roswell, county attorney, city
attorney, um, for explaining
what they anticipate as well.
Again, I just want to note on
the FIR that FEMA stated more
than 24.6 million has been
approved for federal assistance
for Chavez County for
individuals, not political
subdivisions and uh HUD has
allocated $137 million in
disaster recovery funding for
Chavez County and, uh, so again,
just the length of time, I
really hope we all as a
bipartisan body can continue to
encourage our
Our federal delegation to
advocate for speeding those
dollars out, seeing what's
happening. Oftentimes at their
own hands, uh, so we want to
make sure we continue to do that
and uh this sounds wonderful on
that end. We do have a motion on
the table, uh, by Representative
Cullen to pass this to um a do
pass on House Bill 351, seconded
by ranking member Lord. Um, is
there any opposition to this
motion?
Seeing none, please mark
everyone in the affirmative for
this bill, uh, representatives,
you have a due pass on House
Bill 351. Thank you.
He
Wonderful. Now we are on to
state mineral, uh, from
Armstrong and Dow, they're not
in the room, uh, we're peeing
in. Um, I believe we did one of,
uh, Colin, did you want to
present that one?
We
You want, I can try to reach out
to uh
to things.
I
Yes.
Oh
Perfect,
perfect.
And we don't have.
Right, uh, we have
Representative Collin presenting
HB 11 with an expert, uh, so
representative, do you want to
give us a summary of what the
bill does, and then the expert
can. Sorry, they say something
4:11, uh state mineral, um, if
there's any other questions, I
will attend the expert. So
Representative Collin, it's all
in, all in your hands.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
committee members. I'm here to
present House Bill 411 relating
to the state symbols declaring a
state mineral and as you know,
we have, um, you know, state
flowers, state birds, so we are
looking at having a state
mineral with his
Smithsonite. Make sure I say it
right, and I have my expert
witness that can discuss this
and you go ahead and.
3
Thank you, Madam Chair. My name
is Mike Timmons. I'm the
director and stageiologist at
the New Mexico Bureau of Geology
and Mineral Resources. Uh, we
are a research and service
division at New Mexico Tech. Um,
I want to thank the
representative for uh for
helping uh Representative
Armstrong and now with this
presentation, um, I already
heard someone may have questions
about this, and this is what I
think is maybe important. When
we think about state symbols.
Um, hopefully we're thinking
about things that will inspire
New Mexicans to learn more about
our state.
And so it's no different from
this. So if whether you're
interested in our state
dinosaur, which is Seophyces.
Right? Um, what is that? Um, and
it might inspire some young kid
to go out there and learn more
about that dinosaur and why is
it important to New Mexico?
Smithsonite is interesting in
that.
Uh, first of all, here's a
color.
pamphlet we have here. It's a
very beautiful mineral, um,
And one that is.
The type locality, the first
recognized specimen was located
here in New Mexico, um, actually
in the Kelly Mine district
around Magdalena. Why, uh,
Representative Armstrong and Doo
has expressed interest in this
mineral.
Um,
this particular mineral is known
worldwide. You will find it in
Mineral museums worldwide, and
the mineral that they're getting
is the Kelly Mine mineral, this
turquoise blue colored mineral,
uh, in their, in their, um,
In their displays and so uh it's
one of those minerals that is
uniquely New Mexican. It's not
that you don't find Smithsonite
in other places in the world,
but this kind of type specimen
is quite unique to New Mexico.
What is its importance to our
economy?
Uh, Smithsonite is a zinc
carbonate, so it is actually a
zinc ore. It's one of the main
zinc wars out there, spell or
right is the other main zinc
ore. So early in our mining
history in New Mexico,
Um, Smithsonite was an ore
mineral for zinc, and if you're
not familiar with what zinc is
used for, it's made for, it's
used for alloys. So if you want
to take copper and zinc, you get
brass, things like that, a
different combinations, zinc
oxide, all sorts of applications
actually very important as a
nutrient for us, in addition to
other things. So, it is listed
among the critical minerals
within the US.
Uh, so critical minerals are
these minerals absolutely
essential to modern life and
economy, and so here I'm just
kind of giving you some snippets
of why zinc and this particular
ore of zinc is so important to
New Mexico and the world. Um,
maybe with that, maybe that's
enough background and we can get
to some questions and I'm happy
to answer that. Thank you.
You, um, looking online, is
there anyone in opposition to
this bill?
There is no one else in the
room.
Is there anyone in favor of this
bill online?
Mm
No one is in the room. So seeing
no public comment will move to
the committee, um.
uh,
OK, sorry.
Uh
oh.
Mm
Representative Mason.
Basically, uh,
More of a statement than a, than
any questions other than the
only question.
It always comes to my mind when
we talk about rocks is.
that turquoise.
Yes, uh, turquoise you'll see in
the list, it's our actually our
state gym. So it's a gemstone
and uh so it's in the bill. Uh,
this just recognizes it is a
mineral for the state.
My mistake.
Uh, Madam Chair
Represented
Uh, that's my only question.
Ranking member Lord.
Sorry, hold on.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. And
did you give your name out? I
don't know if I heard it, sorry.
Uh yes, madam Chair
Representative, my name is Mike
Timmons. I'm the director and
stageiologist.
Um, so, Madam Chair and
Representative.
Why did I, so I was reading all
about the Kelly Mine. I was
reading all about this and I
also Googled it and that is
quite.
An expensive mineral I saw some
up to $30,000. And I saw pieces
like this big for like 12 to
$14,000. Is it because it's so
rare that that's why it's so
expensive or what's the
reasoning for that?
Yeah, Madam Chair
Representative, um.
The gem, well, I will say gym
quality, but we don't really
consider this a gem, but let's
say mineral quality or mineral
museum quality pieces can, can
fetch a very high price because
they are those specimens are
quite, quite rare. Um, Smith and
I and other minerals of a
similar compositions that are
used as or are not quite as
attractive and
Her our mind in great abundance.
So Smith and I in this
particular variety of
Smithsonite is a museum grade,
uh, mineral, um, and, uh.
That's, that's maybe the pricing
that you're seeing out there.
Thank you, uh, Meir
Representative, our expert, I
think that explains it cause I
saw some pieces that were.
I don't want to be insulting
towards rocks, but not very
pretty at all, and it was those
that were the the ones that were
quite marks uh quite a bit more
expensive based on how it
looked. So is there, I just my
last question is, why did we go
with Smithsonite versus like.
Copper, which is also another
critical mineral.
Yeah, Meam chair, um,
Representative, um, it's a good,
it's a very good question. When
we've posed before too, and then
this is the 2nd time this bill
has been carried. Um, so,
We were trying to find something
that was a bit unique to New
Mexico.
And this was one mineral that
is, you know, really
identifiable to New Mexico. I
also really didn't want to maybe
duplicate what other states have
already done. So for um for
copper, for instance, Arizona,
Utah, and Michigan all have
copper as their state mineral,
uh, for, uh, fluoride, um,
Illinois, silver, Nevada, and
Texas. So some of those common
um economic minerals or precious
minerals.
already kind of have a state
designation. So, uh, we thought
we would think outside of the
box and provide mineral that's
more unique to New Mexico.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative expert. I, I, I
love your enthusiasm and your
knowledge because my my
grandfather came from Mexico and
actually worked in the copper
mines in A, so very familiar
with this one. that's all the
questions I had. Thank you.
Thank you, um, I'm gonna have a
quick, I just want a note in
here already, we have the uh
Roadrunners or official bird,
the yucca flower is our official
flower. The pinon is our
official uh tree, the native Mex
and cutthroat trout, official
fish, black bear is the official
animal, the chili, uh, Spanish
adaptation is the official
vegetable, turquoise, official
gem, blue grama grass is
official grass. The silophys
hysis is the official fossil.
Its Cochitos official cookie.
a hawk wasp is the official.
Insect, red or green is the
official question and red and
green or Christmas is the
official answer. The land,
the land of enchantment is the
official nickname of the state,
Sandia Hairstreak is the
official butterfly. The whiptail
lizard, uh, is the official
reptile. The spadefoot toad is
the official amphibian, the, the
hot air balloon is our official
aircraft. The Cumbras and Toltec
Scenic Railroad is the official
historic railroad. The bolo ties
the official tie, the Native
American squash blossom is
official.
necklace, the aroma of green
chili roasting is adopted as the
official aroma, and now we're
looking to add smithinite as the
official mineral just to for
clarification, uh, for anyone
watching. Uh, one question is,
uh, where would our students be
able to see Smithsonite in our
state. Yeah, Madam Chair, very
good question. So the New Mexico
Mineral Museum in Socorro has
many specimens of this, and uh
we do see upwards of 20,000
visitors a year at that museum.
Uh, so that's, uh, that's one.
place to look for that. Um, it's
also, um,
lesser less than museum quality
pieces are at um museum shows
and other things, uh, even some
museum quality ones you can find
on mineral shows uh that
happened in Albuquerque and
Tucson and other places. So
there are opportunities to see
this, and people might really
enjoy if they're traveling, even
internationally and visiting a
major museum and see a mineral
that's from their home state.
Kind of, kind of fun. Thank you.
Oh, what is the will of the
committee?
Yeah
Do pass furniture. We have a do
pass motion on House Bill 11 by
a ranking member Lord.
411. Why am I missing that 4? On
House Bill 4/11 with a a due
pass motion by ranking member
Lord on House Bill 411 is there
second by Representative
Gonzalez. Is there any
opposition to this motion?
Seeing none, please mark
everyone uh in the room in the
affirmative on this bill. You
have a due pass on House Bill
411. Thank you.
Sorry about that.
We have our last bill up is uh
HB 419 correctional reentry
workforce Program, uh, presented
by Representative Herndit.
Representative, uh, we're ready
for you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, and
before you for a house built 419
and house 419 actually describes
uh an appropriation and working
with, in a way in which we're
going to help individuals who
are trying to reenter the
workforce after being
incarcerated. I want you to know
that I've had the opportunity to
work and interact with several
people, and the biggest issue
that they have after coming out
of incarceration, because nobody
wants to hire them because they
are not trusted, but some of
them uh
All of them, I would say that I
have had come in contact with,
have said, look, my, my life has
been turned around. I really
want to do something else.
Please help me, and there are so
many barriers that are in front
of them. So what will happen is
that this uh 419 working in, in
collaboration with the, with
Goodwill Industries will help
these individuals have access to
work and to get their lives back
on the track that we would like
to see them have and be
productive citizens within our,
within.
our communities. So with that,
Madam Chair, I, I stop and
answer any questions.
Thank you and thank you for
coming up just in time. I
appreciate it. Um, is there
anyone online who is against
this bill, please raise your
hand.
Is there anyone in the room, uh,
uh opposition to this bill,
please raise your hand.
Seeing none online or none in
the room. Is there anyone online
in support of this bill, HB 419.
Is there anybody in support of
this bill in the room for HB
419?
Uh, seeing none, we're gonna
come over to uh for the
committee for questions. I have
ranking member Lord, um, so far.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. Um, I do
have some questions on this.
So we are making an
appropriation, and this is just
To affect the north central New
Mexico economic development
district. It's not the whole
state. It's just that specific
district. Is that correct?
All right, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Representative
Lord, so the idea is to focus on
a specific area, I mean, the
13.5 million, I don't think
would be enough for the whole
state, but I, um, do think that
this would be enough to sort of
get this project moving forward
with a in a large area. Am I
including, are we including your
area representative Lord?
Madam chair ribs and that was
just gonna ask you, are you
talking about?
Albuquerque and then what other
areas would include North
Central all the way up and Tao
up in that area or or what area
would that be considered
Sandoval County, um.
I'm, I'm trying to make sure I'm
remembering the counties of I
pretty,
I'm pretty sure I got a general
idea. I think it's gonna be I
think it includes your Madam
Chair representative. So my
question is, so we have $13
million. Do you have a breakdown
of where this is going and how
it's going to be applicable.
Uh, for this workforce
redevelopment program.
Madam Chair and representative.
So Madam Chair, Representative,
uh, I mean, Madam Chair
Representative Lord, I don't
have a, a complete idea about
how it would go, but let me give
you a general idea of what I've
been able to determine, uh, up
until now. So there have been a
number of employees who
employers rather, who would be
willing to uh take the
opportunity to help train
individuals who are trying to
re-enter. And so when I look at
where they are, there are a
number of car repair.
places that will allow it. There
are places like FedEx that will
allow these individuals to work.
Uh, for them and so these are
places where you don't
necessarily interact with a lot
of individuals, but where you
get to uh service a lot of
individuals. So that's what's
most important. You'll be
helping the community while also
providing
Uh, services that, that benefit
them throughout the way. I mean,
everybody's car, madam chair
members of the committee,
Representative Lord, um, may,
you may need to have your oil
changed or your tires rotated,
for example, and, and these are
uh auto dealer auto, I would say
mechanical areas that have been
able to work, uh, one of the
things that we are gonna have to
work through is something called
a um
Offender rehabilitation Act,
which we have in the state of
New Mexico, which prevents
individuals who have been
incarcerated from getting
professional licenses. The
exception to that, I have seen
so far, Madam Chair
Representative has been in the
area of private investigators
and security guards. So you do
have to have a license there,
but if you've been clean for
about 10 years, you haven't been
involved in any more incidents I
have seen instances where those
individuals who have been
previously incarcerated have
come before, uh, those licensing
boards and been able to utilize
this law for purposes of thank
you, for purposes of uh being
um.
Employed
So, Madam Chairman said, I, I
did find the answer in here. It
is uh Santa Fe, Los Alamos, Ri
Ribo, Taos, Colflex, Morris, and
Miguel and Sandoval. So that was
pretty.
Thank you, madam
probably what we did, OK, so.
Is this building manager
representative then to find
people that will hire people or
is this bill to give them
training or what exactly is it
going to do to get these people
back into the workforce, Madam
Chair. Oh, thank you, Madam
Chair, and I my experts are here
also. So uh thank you for, if I
may introduce them both and have
them to come up so they might be
able to buy it even clearer, um,
information on the bill. So
would you
Please introduce yourself.
Good morning, Madam Chairwoman,
members of the committee. My
name is Nina Chavez and I'm the
director of government relations
for Goodwill Industries of New
Mexico.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Roger Gonzalez. I am a
growth consultant for Goodwill
Industries in Mexico.
So, uh, manager, back to my
question that I had, what I, I'm
trying to figure out because
this is a tremendous amount of
money, and I'm trying to figure
out what that we're doing with
this money.
And how that's going to put
people just were released out of
prison with felonies back into
the workforce.
Yes, ma'am. Uh, Madam Chairwoman
Representative Lord, thank you
for the question. So, um, we've
been working, um, um, with
corrections department and
legislative Finance Committee
over the last 10 months on this
and what we found with the
research from their evaluations
on reentry, um, and, uh, further
discussions is that
approximately 1800 to 2000
individuals are released
annually from our correctional
facilities, um, both public and
private across the state with
the majority um transitioning
into the metro. And so
what we learned from a coalition
of providers who are doing work
between transitional and
emergency housing workforce
development wraparound services,
referrals to social services
within their communities, um, as
well as working with employers
is that um some of the facts
that helped us strive to those
numbers was that a case manager
um would best practice is that a
case manager would need, uh,
would be able to have
approximately 40 clients at any
given time who are needing
immediate support.
And then upon gradual um
timeline, if you will, after
they're gradually getting 12 to
15 months of case management,
they would have uh need less
time with that case manager. And
my point is that the case
manager can then also have
capacity for up to an additional
10 clients.
Then the bill also includes um
staffing support for peer
mentors. Peer mentors are also a
successful
Um, it, we've seen outcomes both
with providers who have case
managers and, um, excuse me, um,
peer mentors and peer mentors,
um, best practice showed from
the providers of the coalition
that they can have a, a client
capacity of about 45
individuals. So in that same
space, so much of the funding
goes towards the staffing of,
um, upscaling up those
nonprofits in the 13.5 million
for the workforce development.
And I'll pass it to Roger in
case I'm missing anything.
Uh, I think to answer your
question, Madam Chair,
Representative Lords is
basically a two-pronged
approach. 11 part of the
equation is intensive case
management to ensure that an
individual is work ready. When I
say work ready, Madam Chair
Representative, we make sure
that they have stable, stable
housing, stable food, there's no
food insecurity and they have a
place to engage transportation,
identification, and other
supports parallel to that, the
case manager identifies that
there's any gaps in their skill
set, build soft skills.
Some situations builds technical
skills, but the appropriation
allows is up to 275 individuals
who actually receive a
scholarship for what we call
intensive credentialing. It's
very similar to a Weow project.
Unfortunately, New Mexico, the
state does not receive enough,
we owe it dollars, which is the
workforce Innovation Opportunity
Act. And so this would be
additional leveraging for the
corrections departments to
utilize accordingly. So you do
have a lot of non for profits
who provide credentialing in
either culinary arts, um, CDL.
Um,
heavy machinery, uh, heavy
machinery certification, so it's
all gonna be dependent on those
respective correction facilities
and what the clients need for
specific technical training.
OK, so Moriset because it, it's
a short film, but it's extremely
complex, Bill. So what you're
saying is Mount Cherps some
experts that the big chunk of
that is going to be the case
management, the people that are
going to oversee them. And then
some of that is gonna go, I'm
sorry, I got lost that part. Uh,
the second part is for the
scholarship program or or the
pure mentorship or what is that
second part? I'm sorry, I didn't
catch that.
So Madam Chair Representative,
um,
275 um scholarships around
800,000 of that is the direct
scholarships I spoke to, the
remainder is intensive case
management, which also includes
peer mentorship. So remember,
peer mentorship and case
management are, are one within
the same. Your case managers are
gonna be tech um credentialed
individuals who understand um
the stigma of behavioral mental
health, but then peer mentors
are individuals who have, have
succeeded upon leaving and will
be a peer with the client and
the case manager. So they're not
one, they're not.
Except for their collective
together.
Madam Chairwoman Representative
Lord, if I can add one more line
item in the proposed budget that
was reviewed over the last 10
months and presented at CCJ as
well as um the legislative
Health and Human Services
Interim committees. Um, the
fourth line item I would say is
also the wraparound services
that is also another best
practice that many of the um
providers in the coalition
utilize, which is if there is a
need for support with um
transportation, there are other
barriers like we, we call it
fresh home when you just need a
few items when you're
transitioning into a home.
Once you're released to have
hygiene products, if you are
going, if you're, once you're
getting job placement, if you
need critical professional wear
such as um uh boots or gloves or
things like that that the
provider has a small, um, uh
budget as well to also support
that, that person in order to
sustain that job placement. So
those, I would say are the four
largest line items in that
proposal.
OK, so, Madam Chair,
Representative experts, um,
How, so when it's going to this
case management person. What
data are they going to get? Are
they going to get data from the
prison system that says this is
everything about this person
including um.
Any type of behavioral or anger
issues or this person did OK at
this job for a while and then
always blew up and they have a
consistency of not being able to
complete tasks due to other
extraneous situations. Correct,
Madam Chair, Representative
Lord, thank you for the
question. Actually, the answer
is yes. So, in order to be a
practitioner with this fund, you
must be already approved in the
domestic Corrections department,
and part of that approval allows
the sharing of certain data on
the pre-release of an
individual.
We typically work with an
individual 90 days before
release. And then, of course,
there's intensive case
management for 12 to 16 months
post release. And so we want to
make sure that all those
elements that could potentially
be a barrier to their success is
identified, so although this
funding does not provide
behavioral or mental health
support technically the job of
the case manager is to connect
and ensure the successful
referral of certain benefits
that the state currently
provides as well as local
providers within respective
ecosystems where they choose to
Re-enter too.
Chairwoman Representative Lord,
if I could just add on to that
as well, um, so the providers
are working extensively with a
variety of state agencies such
as Department of Health,
Healthcare Authority, um, and
when we take an individual um
and and intake them or enroll
them in a program, for example,
at Goodwill, we ask a series of
questions upon that enrollment
process to identify again what
barriers are most immediately
needed to address, so we can
either address it within our
mission at Goodwill or within
any other provider that the
individual is um enrolling into
their program and identifying
what local, regional providers
might be able to support them
and then also to direct them
again to state agency services
and benefits they might need,
such as SNAP or other.
Uh, Madam chair rooms and I was
looking at, um, and what the
analysis and, and.
It says the bill does not
Include specific performance
measures or reporting
requirements to evaluate the
program's effectiveness.
There don't seem to be any
metrics. Can you explain to me
why? because like again, it's a
very brief bill that is very
complex, but where are the
metrics in this to
So,
upon successful appropriation by
uh this body and passes or sign
signs by the governor will work
very closely with the Department
of Workforce Solutions. They
currently have a matrix that
they use for weowa dollars. This
is basically almost an expansion
of the with with state resources
because we've exhausted it, so
we'll be using the indicators um
that we use for weola.
which is pretty complex and we
make sure that, so that there's,
there's, I think around 20
elements, Madam Chair
Representative Lord, that we can
share with you and the committee
if you want to get really
technical in the evaluation
piece, but we said until, until
we know the scope and scale of
the preparation, that's how
we'll build the intensity of the
evaluation tool.
Uh, Meor Representative, so
there's 13.5.
Million is million writers. OK.
Sorry, I just get confused
because I know there's a health
bill coming up that's billion
billion dollar. Um, so.
Is this
Just to set up the program and
then you'd be coming back and
asking for money every year for
this program. It's one time or
how, where would you get the
funding?
Or how do you anticipate this
funding to be used.
We believe Madam Chair
Representative Lord, um, based
on the information provided to
us from the corrections
department. This would fully
fund all individuals currently
released from
The 10 to 12 facilities managed
by the department itself. This
is not, this is not taken into
consideration any of those
individuals released from county
or city facilities. Um, what
we're asking the legislature and
the and the coalition's approach
generally has been, we have to
generally take steps, so all the
coalition has self-funded this
work in smaller pilot projects.
This would be the step 2 to do
all correctional facilities, and
if it worked, we could
potentially come back to this
body or look at those larger
pots of
money if you want to go into the
city and county run facilities,
but this is purely the 180
individuals that are released
annually by the corrections
department.
And Madam Chair, one woman and
Representative Florida also like
to add a little bit to both of
those questions because they're
wonderful questions. Um, so the
first thing I would say, and I
I'm speaking on behalf of
Goodwill, but again, this is a
coalition of providers, um, so
first, I can see that Goodwill's
program called Next Steps are
outcomes that we presented both
at LHHS and CCJ this summer
showed that, um, in our first
cohort, 5 out of 6 individuals
that participated in our program
did not reoffend, approximately
69% of them found job placement
across the state, um.
fields that they wanted to be in
and approximately 60% of those
maintained and retained that,
um, that employment, 6 months
out. So the providers are
looking to respond to having
strong metrics we're, we're
watching the report cards LFC
also produces and has those
standards for corrections
department also, so we're also
trying to be very aware of um
the ecosystem to prove those
outcomes and again respond to
the needs and fluctuations and
then going back to your second
question, I would also say,
Madam Chairwoman and
Representative Lord. We do have
Bernolio County's flame.
program in the coalition and so
they're our first county um
provider, if you will, in the
space um that is exploring how
programs like theirs in the
county level can also expand and
grow and serve individuals
again, to get job placement, job
training, technical and soft
skills, and then retain
employment.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative. It's, it's
always an expert. It's always
frustrating when we get a bill
that's this big, but it's this
big.
And
Unfortunately, I don't know
enough about all the steps and
everything goes through it cause
I, I truly believe in the bill
because recidivism is important
to put people to work. I get
that, to keep them off drugs,
to, to have, to give them all
the support, but when it comes
to 13 million, that's the part
where I start to balk a little
bit at the amount just because I
don't know how this whole
process works.
Um, so I think for me would
have, would have been easier is
like a flow chart because again,
these bills, like sometimes one
sentence makes a bill this big
and this is one of the bills
that is now.
This big, um, so I would have
really appreciated flow chart to
show me where everything is
going and how it works because
one thing unlocks like 20 other
doors. And while I really
believe in it, I got to think
about this a little bit, just
mostly because of the price and
mostly because
I would just for me personally
would have rather seen a smaller
amount, smaller chunk.
Look at what we did. Look at
what we did with these people,
you guys come back and say, look
at, we have all these great
metrics, we did all this. These
people did not, you know, the
recidivism rate was like 2%. It
was so high, it was amazing. Now
we want to proceed forward. I
probably could be able to fit in
that easier because I completely
believe in that, but to take a
big apple, I've been burned on
other bills before and take a
big bite of the apple, I get
burned when I find out it went
off into other things that I was
unaware of, so that's all I want
to say. Thank you, but I, I do
like the bill, but I'm having
issues. Thank you, Madam.
Ranking member Representative
Layson.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you.
Uh, represented
For bringing this bill forward,
stated, you know, everybody
wants
These are
Release these from these
facilities to succeed and.
Have good lives like the rest of
us, but I do have some problems
with the bill. One thing, $13.5
million and you said this will
serve the release these from you
is, do you have a number? How
many?
How many people will this
service, $13.5 million.
Madam Chairwoman Representative
Mason, um, so the math that we
did on the budget was based on
the information that we received
from New Mexico Corrections
Department and Legislative
Finance Committee this summer,
which is 1800 to 2000
individuals are released every
year. So we focused on the 1800
number, 1800 individuals are
released from a cross
correctional facilities every
year.
OK, so Madam chair represented
1800.
Uh
But
In the $13.500,000. How much is
that spending per individual.
I'm not that good at math in my
head, Madam Chair
Representative, would you like
the direct ratio or the indirect
cause you have, you have to
remember that some of the money
is gonna be direct supports to
the client and some indirect
support by case management, but
to do the simple math, simple
math, it's around $7500 per
client, which is is less than
what we spend in we owe dollars
right now federally.
Thank you.
It, uh
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
uh,
The bill
13,500,000 is appropriated from
the general fund.
The local government division of
the Department of Finance and
it's
Administration for the
expenditure.
For one year, physical year 2026
for disbursement to the North
Central New Mexico Economic
Development District.
It, uh
As the north central New Mexico
economic development district,
ever seen anything overseen any
project like this? Do they have
a track record or?
Uh, Madam Chair, representative,
as a matter of fact, the North
Central Economic Development
District has a pretty strong
record. The most recently were
awarded the win grant from the
Economic Development
Administration to look at
workforce skilled skills
development around the trades
and 7 of the 10 counties you
oversee and um two of the non
for profits who are doing this
work currently with the
corrections department fall
within the economic development
district's um boundaries. Um, I
believe there, there's gonna be
a friendly amendment to amend
the actual.
fi s cal agent. Um, we did hear
a lot of concern from rural
legislators specifically, they
want to make sure that their
council of governments is going
to be um service, so what's
gonna happen is the, the new
fiscal sponsor is gonna be the
New Mexico Association of
Regional Cogs, and then based
on, on where those people are
deployed at by the correction
department that cog will get
their allocation of the
appropriation.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. Uh, I had
Madam Chair Representative, why
isn't that amendment in this
bill. We're gonna pass one that
it goes to one and then it's
gonna change to go to something
else after it leaves here.
Unfortunately, Madam Chair
Representative, um, as we're
navigating the, the
appropriation process, we're
trying to figure out where
exactly this, this appropriation
would fall, whether it's gonna
fall within House Bill 2,
whether it be a potentially
statewide grow project, so I, I
believe that some of those
amendments were going to be
saved for the appropriation
community goes to next. That was
my understanding as of
yesterday, but I, I'll, I'll
defer to this
yes, and, uh, Madam Chair
Representative, the core of the,
of the
itself was not going to change.
It was gonna be one item, just
who was gonna be the recipient.
And so we, we're running short
of time and we wanted to make
sure that we could explain the
core uh operations of the bill,
but with that one instance, with
that change, we promised that
that's gonna be made. Uh we hope
that we can, uh, successfully
lead this committee and move
forward.
Thank you, Representative. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Uh, and I, I
appreciate that, but uh.
So, you're asking me to vote on
13.5 million to go to this
division.
I mean we just have.
I'm, I'm one, I'm Stephanie, I
would do a lot better if this
bill wasn't this vague.
I won't
This money is going to this this
division, this money, you know,
we talk about it.
But uh when it's, but I like, I
like black and white. It's just,
it's an awful vague bill and
asking me to do something that
might change.
It, you know, you don't know
whether they'll pass the
amendment in the next committee
either. I mean, it's, it's, I
mean, more than likely, yes, I a
great representative, but still,
I'm a
It, uh
It's just awfully vague to me
and it's uh
You know, 13.5.
13,500 for an eight county.
You know, I did a little math if
we did this for the state that's
$54 million.
You know, with the, this bill
doesn't affect like my district.
You know, we're getting
It's no benefit from this piece
of legislation, not that we
can't bring one that'll affect
us. I mean, I know that and
But this is 1/4 of the state.
The 13.5 million
will be affected. Think of all
the people who are coming out of
prison, who are going to be
working, and they're gonna be
contributing to the wonderful
state of New Mexico. So whether
it's gonna be directly or
indirectly, you will benefit
from it.
And
Uh, Madam Chair, I do, uh, back
off on that. I will be, but we
have people in prison in
Southeastern New Mexico too.
It won't get the benefits of
this program.
Well, that, you know, no, it's
all good. We want all these
people to do good, but uh it's
just a little too vague for me
today, but I thank you for your
presentation representative,
your cog will receive the
appropriated dollars for your
region, Mr. Just a reminder that
we respond to questions in this
particular committee, um, and
you're always welcome to respond
to a previous comment, um, in,
in your questions. Um,
Representative Mason.
Cullen
sorry I got through.
Thank you, Madam Chair. um,
Representative and so I do like
the bill. I'll just say that. I
mean on now this has been talked
about for years that.
We get them help when they come
out, the less likely to raise
their family. And I am one for
that.
I have a hard time with that so
many of them say have felonies
and then they're back to crying.
Um, so I do really like this. It
is very vague, um, and I think
that Representative Lord had
said is a flow chart.
Or anything like that, probably
would have been very beneficial
to where we can really see where
it's gonna go, how it's gonna be
managed.
for a lot of money. Um, so, but
my question was, um, within
Bernalillo County then I there
you had mentioned there's a
program in Bernna Leo County.
Madam Chairwoman, I'm
Representative, so there are a
vast number of providers that
are providing services, for
example, Goodwill is already
providing their program
statewide in in 5 or 6 different
facilities, not just in the
metro, um, I believe that does
include the Southeast and Las
Cruces, for example, um, but
The vast majority of the
coalition is providing services
in prisons through the
corrections department and one
coalition member is the Bernalo
County's Flame program, which is
about one year old.
And um the last thing I would
say about that is that their
program is only serving MDC.
But we have when, um, Madam
Chairwoman, if the committee
would like, we will be more than
happy to provide all the
materials we presented during
LHHS and CCJ in September and
October where we have a logic
model, a budget with line items
and everything broken down. Um,
we also have a breakdown of the
proportions of um behavioral
health workforce, housing needs,
identifying different barriers
to show that the the population
that this money, that this
appropriation would serve, um,
has a collective need of of
needs.
Not just workforce. Many often
have 12 to 4 barriers they're
facing simultaneously, um, so
we're hoping that this will be
in alignment with other funds
that the state is already
prioritizing, such as behavior
health. But yes, many providers
are specializing amongst the
population in different levels
of prison and jail.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I, yeah,
I think that's just gonna be the
issue with some of us is that
the lack of information that's
tangible for us to be able to to
look at, um, though I'm very
supportive of this, and if I end
up um voting to pass that, I
would like to have the
information so that when it goes
to a floor vote, um, it may
change if I don't see where it
is, but that I believe in the
programs. I believe in that we
need to be doing something. I
think this will really help our
state and our communities, but
my thank you.
Lester Sanchez.
Uh, Madam Chair, I was just
gonna recommend possibly to the
sponsor, maybe uh just rolling
it until you get the amendments
cause I don't think it doesn't
look like you're gonna get the
support to pass, but uh I
recommend that. I, I'm
supportive, but uh
Just gauging the comments
that's, that's what you might
want to look at. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you, Vice
Chair. Um, would you be amenable
to rolling till Tuesday? We, we
would be amenable. May I ask the
committee something else that
they would be considerable, uh,
considering the, if they would
consider um
I, uh, no recommendation passed,
I, we will promise to give you
all the information because
there was a, a, an incredible
amount of information that was
presented during the summer
during the interim and to show
uh how this these funds are
being utilized and even before
the next hearing occurs, but we
will assure you that you'll have
the information in your hands.
I think that folks still want to
see this all come together. I, I
too was reached out by the North
Central um executive director
with concerns. And it seems like
you have an amendment.
That will address that. At this
time, we still have a 24 hour
rule in our committee, um, that
we stick by unless it's, you
know, very minor changes. Um, we
try to keep by that until, until
we won't, but I will make that
announcement to the committee,
so everyone's aware. Um, we are
still hearing first pills in
this committee next week. So,
um, it's definitely not behind
in today's last day of bill
introduction, just a reminder to
everybody. Um, so get your bills
in and but also, uh, there are
still new bills. So we
appreciate the presentation. Um,
I think if it works, we're gonna
go ahead and enroll this, you'll
be first up on Tuesday. We move
forward, but I appreciate the
presentation.
Thank you everyone. Thank you
very much, Madam Chair, members
of the committee that we'll go
ahead and end our meeting today.
Um, thank you, everyone who
attended the dinner last night.
Uh, we are very lucky and loved
committee that we do have
another one next week. Uh, so
you will be getting that invite
as well. But otherwise, we'll
see you on the floor. Have a
great weekend everyone.
Meeting adjourned.
