Senator are yes here.
Representative Rehm present.
Representative Zamora your.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Gallegos.
Madam vice chair Johnson.
Madam chair.
You madam chair with that we
have six members present.
Right thank you so we have a
quorum and we will move first to
House Bill.
Forty.
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair Mike
Copeland co sponsor
Representative Ely is is here
and we have to experts Care
press groups and the secretary
of state's office and Jeremy
Ferris from the.
Ethics commission.
And this bill.
I hate to miss characterize it
but I think it's somewhat of a
cleanup bill it clarifies the
relationship between the
secretary of state's office and
the ethics commission and
clarify some points that may be
were not so clear and it's a
result of one year of maybe
working together and the the two
offices have come together to
try to clarify some things that
they thought needed clarified
Madam chair I might the ad that
I was concerned with with their
first their first drafted out of
but I get my heels so what this
bill does from my perspective.
Is.
With respect to.
What I consider.
Technical violations violations
of the campaign finance act of I
wanted to make sure that the
secretary of state's office
or continue to have.
Authority to deal with.
Candidates and seek voluntary
compliance.
And.
Originally the this form of the
bill originally the ethics
commission have jurisdiction
from day one and so what we what
we try to do is make sure it's
clear that the secretary of
state's office as the ability to
secure a voluntary compliance
for those types of violations of
the campaign finance laws and
give candidates an opportunity
get those things cleared up
without going through the formal
ethics process.
in this bill we have.
We have a.
A period of time that the
secretary of state's office I
believe that's what twenty days
or so very
that we can the secretary of
state's office and state
voluntary compliance involuntary
compliance cannot be secured
timely then the matter.
Gets removed to the state thanks
commission who has an
investigation arm and has the
ability to further that
investigation and commence the
prosecution if necessary
although all lab with the ethics
commission is also
are authorized to use secure
voluntary compliance
so for me that's what this bill
really does it touches out of
some some of the relationship or
defines the relationship between
the two of the secretary of
state the secretary state bills
that.
If the issue that that office
cannot handle the secretary of
state can refer that matter to
the ethics commission or even to
the Attorney General or others
for a further investigation and
potential prosecution
for the minor things I I think
we've we've dealt with that and
I and I early of their fashions
M. that's what the bill does to
me what the bill doesn't do and
some people have and in
particularly on my side of the
aisle does it address the
concerns that we've had from the
beginning
with respect to weaponizing the
ethics commission through the
complaint process this bill does
not do that served all don't
there's nothing in here that
deals with
That issue at all and so so
don't think that in the.
Does anything to
For deal with the may be
Complaints that are filed in bad
faith or without justification
so that would be my
general overview of the
legislation Representative Ely
are probably as long.
Our view of it and and then
we'll turn it over to our
experts and and the ask your
question.
Madam chair I'll be very brief
on and I've asked the experts to
be brief I don't have anything
to add on the technical aspects
is just two things I want to say
one this is not like a mistake
was made and we're clearing it
up it was the anticipated when
we first passed the ethics
legislation this exact thing
what happened that as things
move forward there would be
arrangements worked out between
but in fact we talked about this
when the ethics bill was passed
the secretary of state's office
in the ethics commission this
will continue to happen that's
number one number two very
important to me that are
particularly on the ethics
commission that these bills as
we're learning from experience
how to do it that these be
handled in a bipartisan way I
don't think any one of these
bills should ever be carried by
either just a Democrat or
Republican it has to be both
sides and I agree with
Representative bipartisan
perfect but we're working our
way through the process so with
that I think
madam chair could make sense
that we would go to Mr perish
first with the ethics commission
executive director and then of
Kerry wanted away and from the
secretary of state's office we
can go to her that makes sense
everybody.
Right all right go to Mr Ferris
thank you madam chair.
Thank you good morning madam
chair and in committee members
and Jeremy Ferris and the any of
the state ethics commission the
the ethics commission the
secretary of state share
responsibilities for for
statutes the campaign reporting
act the voter action act the
lobbyist regulation Act in the
financial disclosure Act the
twenty nineteen the legislature
required both agencies to
present to this session of the
legislature recommendations for
necessary changes to make
the Enforcement Administration
of those statutes or efficient
And this this bill really
presents those recommended
changes after working with with
several ideas with the sponsors
for making the administration
and enforcement of those
statutes more efficient and so
it really has three purposes the
first is to to separate and
delineate the roles between
administration on the one hand
and enforcement on the other
education and enforcement on the
other so in the bill the
secretary of state's office has
all of the duties that they're
best suited to to carry out with
respect to administration the
logistics of filing and fall and
handling late in on time the.
The state ethics commission has
as the duties that it's best
suited to handle regarding
investigations of of matters of
fact and and perhaps more
serious violations than just
untimely filings second
throughout the bill preserves
opportunities for voluntary
compliance on behalf of
reporting entities across the
various bills and in third the
and and in many ways the the act
makes the the work of both
agencies more efficient and
important parts of this act are
also specific to each each
particular agency so with
respect to the state ethics
commission one aspect of this
bill that the state ethics
commissioners
believe that because state
ultimately adjudicated
violations of the financial
disclosure Act that they also
should be subject to the
provisions of the financial
disclosure Act so this bill this
bill does that in addition and
with that I'd I'm happy to turn
it over to my co sponsor to to
discuss any any aspects of the
bill does specific to the
secretary of state's office
thank you madam chair.
Good morning thank you madam
chair and and members of the
committee thank you sponsors for
working so collaboratively on
this this important bill I think
the both Sanchez and Mr Ferris
did an excellent job providing
some some background on what the
intention of the of the bill
really is
which is to streamline and make
uniform the the efforts of
administration and enforcement.
in all of the acts described.
And I don't want to
To be duplicated here I'd like
to be brief so I will touch on a
couple of of points that haven't
necessarily been exactly
articulated so far and those are
more in line with the added
administrative provisions of the
campaign reporting act areas
that the secretary of state
really being believes well help
with the administrative and and
education efforts that will
remain in in our office.
So I'm one of the important
changes is the requirement for
political committee treasurers
to sign eight and knowledge mint
document that will clearly
articulate their liabilities
under the act just to help them
understand if your choosing to
be a treasure to a political
committee there are
there are compliance issues
there are responsibilities as a
treasure that thank you must
adhere to.
We think that'll help with
compliance another area of the
of the bill that we think will
help is basically adjusting the
reporting fine schedule in a way
that's meant to provide.
I guess you could say the right
size of stick depending on the
like we fund raising capability
of a particular and
political committee so for
example a statewide candidate
who most likely has a larger
base has access to fund raise
larger amounts of money the
statewide candidates will
typically have professional
compliance officers on their
staff so we're holding them to a
higher fine cap
in comparison to ace of a small
county candid it
who is likely raising
substantially less money many of
these candidates even only use
personal funds for their
campaigns they are doing their
own.
Report Filene's and they're
navigating the complexities of
the campaign reporting act on
their own those type of can it
it campaign committees what have
eighty S. R. smaller cap so
we've we've created phases on
the fine caps for failure to
report.
and alcohol kicks in after a
voluntary compliance period and
what we're hoping is that will
solve an issue that our office
fees right now where
Some of the some of the smaller
funded committees end up
Racking up thousands of dollars
of fines way above what they've
even fund raised to receive so
we're hoping to a kind of a line
that.
That fine structure accordingly.
And with that
I'll go ahead and turn it back
over to the Sanchez and and just
feel free to ask any any
technical questions of
procedural questions regarding
how we work through
administrative efforts on any of
these acts in our office thank
you very much.
Madam chair of the experts
service certainly at a much
broader grant that I gave in the
overview and I appreciate their
work on this bill and
I had big like to decide that
the this did bring me ethics
commission are under the
campaign or the financial
disclosure.
Asians and I appreciate Germany
for bringing that up with that
will stand for questions.
Right thank you representatives
and experts let's go ahead and
take a poll of the audience.
so you can now vote on house
bill two forty four for or
against keep it open for about
ten more seconds.
Okay great we will close it and
we have thirteen in favor and
zero against so if you would
like to speak in favor please
raise your hand.
Sydney talents your now emitted.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Sydney TS and I am the
associate director with common
cause New Mexico we would like
to thank the secretary of
state's office and the state
ethics commission for their
joint efforts and crafting house
bill two forty four and for the
bill's sponsors in their support
in bringing this legislation
forward this morning as of both
of the agencies and the Sanchez
mentioned at this bill preserves
the concept of voluntary
compliance while also making
administration of the various
statutes easier for both
agencies to govern this
legislation helps with the
enforceability of reporting and
disclosure requirements under
the various statutes and makes
the process in the
administration of the complete
process around violations of the
statute more efficient we have
seen proof recently that
entities and organizations
spending in our state elections
have been compelled to register
and disclose properly to follow
our statutes but this is been
done with not without great
hesitation at times it seems
that failure to comply with our
governing statutes has been seen
as a cost of doing business for
groups and organizations wanting
to play political football in
our state and not as a
transparent effort to keep
public confidence the public
always wants to know as much
information as they can who is
spending money to enforce
influence their opinion and who
is spending money to influence
their vote the financial
disclosures of the state ethics
commissioner that is.
John how's your now and it.
Good morning madam chair person
and thanks committee members
Should just gave a very detailed
explanation of what this bill
does so I won't repeat that a
need I would add that it will
provide
more equality in uniformity in
terms of the justice of being
handled by mostly by the ethics
commission of rather than by
different agencies with
different powers and procedures
so it also has that that
advantage to of your this is one
of those bills is not very
exciting but very important to
not only to make the the
administration of the the
regulations and enforcement of
the regulations regulations more
efficient.
but also to make it more yes so
I am the president of
Representative us to Mexico and
we very much support to spell
thank you.
Thank you is there anyone that
would like to speak in
opposition.
Okay are going back to the
committee.
Madam chair representative and I
Byrd I think Representative
Nibert has some questions on
this bill madam chair.
What.
Committee members.
What is the pleasure of the
committee.
Matter on that I make it to pass
motion.
Okay madam chair I second that.
gentleman would do pass.
Thank you what does it do passed
from Representative Zamora and I
think it.
Is there any objection to the
day past medication.
Hey seeing none I you have a do
pass showing all members present
voting in the affirmative thank
you representatives thank you
madam chair by the the experts
we're going to and that's.
Thank you good morning.
Thank you.
Next we have the house bill one
forty seven.
I don't see Representative bash
if you're on please raise your
hand.
Let's move to our Representative
Johnson are you ready on house
bill one.
Seventy eight.
Good morning madam chair good
morning colleagues yes I can
present house bill seventy
eight.
Right.
Then when you're ready thank
you.
House bill seventy eight are is
a bill that will help
standardize addiction education
language to reflect the titles
of the current degrees to be
approved for licensure and then
behavioral health field
specifically in the case for L.
S. A.'s license substance abuse
as well as associate associate
credentials so this bill this
issue was brought to me by the
students in my came out in my
community who are involved in
acquiring an education and
training.
At Gallup UNM branch and they
had a hard time completing their
associate's degrees and so I
introduce this bill in twenty
nineteen back then it was house
bill two thirty I can't the
counseling and therapy at
definitions so back then it
passed all the committees
before and it made it to the
Senate we just simply ran out of
time so here we are again at the
table and I have
Witnesses expert witnesses that
I would like to be promoted over
and have them introduce
themselves and give an opening
remark.
Sylvia Andrew drive still be
Andrew and Bob Phillips.
Are they in the.
You.
Yes we also have Jennifer Katie
yes yes please thank you okay.
But no Bob so we could have them
speak briefly that would be
great okay Jennifer and at Dr
Andrew.
Please.
Yes yes.
Okay well good good morning sure
Lewis vice chair Johnson and
members of the committee my name
is Sylvia Andrew on the
professor emeritus at the
university of New Mexico Gallup
and was responsible for the
Human Services program for the
past few years I have worked
with my colleagues that offer
the associate of arts degree in
Human Services at eastern New
Mexico you powerhouse and C. N.
M. an Albuquerque to amend the
language in the New Mexico
counseling and therapy and and
Liz Human Services as a
qualifying degree for licensure
as an alcohol and drug abuse
council license a counselor of
the current language lists human
studies we are not aware of any
institution of higher education
in New Mexico that offers a
degree in human studies this
bill would include Human
Services as a qualifying degree.
For a over a dozen years maybe
beginning in twenty sixteen The
New Mexico counseling and
therapy practice board would we
routinely accept Human Services
as a qualifying degree but over
time we began to see that
students were denied licensure
simply because Human Services is
not among those degrees that are
defined as counseling related.
Applicants that were denied
licensure
could appeal their decision and
ultimately I work with one
student they ultimately
prevailed however at this
process for appealing has been
onerous for our students it
consumes and inordinate amount
of board time and resources and
delays the entry of qualified
profit providers that are sorely
needed in our community to
provide alcohol and drug abuse
counseling the LSA eight it's an
entry level counseling license
and it requires continuing
education and supervision.
The LSA once they achieve that
they're eligible to seek
licensure as the neck as a late
deprivations of licensed alcohol
and drug abuse counselor we have
a need in Gallup for these entry
level credential professionals
that want to focus on providing
substance abuse services to our
community we sorely need these
professionals and my students
are from the Gallup area the
Navajo Nation the pueblo of Zuni
they have roots in our community
and I am so grateful that they
want to remain and provide
services in in our local area
and I can tell you that our
students are at least my
students have gone on to.
To get bachelor's degrees and
master's degrees this semester
alone I provided two letters of
recommendations for students to
pursue their bachelor's degrees
and I'm so proud of them because
we need them to come back and
remain in our community these
are jobs and.
This when you have a group of
students that are interested and
committed to making a difference
in our community I'd like to do
everything I can to eliminate
any barriers this is a simple
solution we do not offer a
degree in human studies in our
great state but we do offer
Human Services and by changing
that language it would make it
so much easier for our students
thank you for your
consideration.
This county would you like to
add more I just say that it
would also bring us more
consistent with the states that
are surrounding us and across
the nation almost all the entry
level addiction studies programs
are in Human Services now.
And.
When this when accounting
therapy practice act was written
in nineteen ninety eight.
there were only two such.
Programs in New Mexico right now
all of our community colleges
have some addiction studies
course work it's not an
associate degree.
So from two thousand and eight
up to twenty sixteen the board
in practice accepted this degree
as housing related and I
supplied two sets of equipment
indicating that they did accept
disagree
but they didn't make it out and
move to change the language so
when the new board was seated in
twenty sixteen they.
Went back to denying it and they
will approve Human Services
degrees but they have to go
through the board meeting so
applicants have to wait up to
four months and there's also a
bill
that it has been submitted for
this session that doesn't
require the board to meet more
than once a year which is going
to put a long delay on any of
our applicants trying to get
initial licensure.
Be happy to address any
questions that anyone has.
Great thank you are we ready for
questions Representative
Johnson.
Yes thank you madam chair great
and so before we get to public
comment we will go to the pool
and open it for about fifteen
seconds.
Serving you would like to vote
for or against house bill one
seventy eight.
Okay and we will close the poll
now we have six folks that are
in attendance that support the
bill and zero that are opposing
it if you would like to speak in
support please raise your hand.
Like to speak in opposition
please raise your hand.
Okay seeing none we will go to
the committee.
What is the pleasure of the
committee.
Live in the past.
We have a motion for do passed
by Representative Gallegos and a
second by Representative Nibert
is there
Any further discussion is there
any discussion.
Is there any objection to the
depressed motion.
Okay seeing none are you have a
do passage thank all members
present voting in the
affirmative thank you madam vice
chair thank you madam chair and
thank you colleagues.
And I also got a note that the
committee has asked to roll or
excuse me the sponsor has asked
the committee to roll house bill
one forty seven of so we will
not be hearing that today so we
are moving on to our last bill
for this morning's agenda house
bill sixteen.
And we will get Representative
Montoya here.
And representative if you have
any experts please have them
raise their hands.
And we will move them over as
well.
Good morning madam chair and
members of this wonderful
committee thank you for having
me this morning.
I have some guests I see Matt
procs to.
Pablo Garcia and period Brunner
should be on deck.
They are yeah.
Thank you so much
I'm here to present a very
important.
Comprehensive bill house bill
sixteen the rural opportunities
act.
As an ancestral native of of
this incredible state I have
long been aware of the beauty
the potential.
And this severe disparity
between rural and urban areas.
COVID nineteen has underscored
so vividly those disparities and
in fact the last three weeks my
team and I visited the Navajo
Nation las colonias communities
like more a.
Springer.
To see up close and personal the
tragic disparity there are you
know running water broadband
electricity waste water
treatment infrastructure we all
know serious serious barriers to
the health and wellness on every
level economic development.
And most importantly just those
basic basic needs that I believe
are are are right utility right
and so in short.
As an incoming freshman it was
so clear to me in visiting with
leaders across my own district
which has nine local gobs one
tribal community and four
counties that it was time to act
in a bold.
Visionary way to create a
fourteen member interim
committee short term two years.
With the express focus.
Like a laser to determine what
are those priorities.
How can we attach an action plan
and funding to address whatever
those high level issues are be
it broadband be it water.
I have
I understood that the idea of
yet another interim committee is
a big why we have so many
committees why on earth would we
take the time and treasure of
this body to create yet another
one but in speaking to our
governor in speaking to key
folks that are very important
like the appropriations in the
house
Burciaga David Abbey it's time
for us to consider a visionary
approach that is indeed targeted
and focused so it's looking at a
twelve member for fourteen
member bicameral with
representation from each of the
standing committees.
So I will
Us that my expert witnesses have
a moment to introduce themselves
and their level of expertise in
those areas and we'll move
forward from from there thank
you.
Thank you Representative I don't
know if you have an order.
Hello Garcia's goal here yes
okay great welcome.
Yeah I was the guy was thank you
Paula and then Terry and then
Matt.
Madam chair and members of the
committee thank you so much.
Good morning.
Madam chair and members of the
committee my name is Paula
Garcia and I'm here to speak in
support of house bill sixteen on
a bank Representative Montoya
for bringing this forward I've
worked on rural water issues for
twenty four years with the New
Mexico state association and I'm
also a former county
commissioner for multi county
and former president New Mexico
counties for I had the
opportunity to work on issues
important to rural communities
statewide my areas of focus for
rural infrastructure water and
natural resources tribal issues
in rural ambulance service.
I think that HB sixteen gives us
the opportunity to address rural
issues and systemic matter
particularly supportive of the
effort to address rural
community water systems as a
county commissioner and also as
a as a member of a and D. W.
seeing I understand these issues
first hand account my blessings
that we do have community water
the understand the challenges
that that our community has in
providing that we do like waste
water though I live one on one
side of the river for we do not
have waste water service in the
other side of the river does and
there have just been so many
obstacles to getting that
that I think it's important for
us to come up with some
solutions in a systemic way for
all rural communities so I'm
here to have to provide some
perspective on these issues I
also learned from my
constituents about volunteers
who are responsible for
regulatory compliance
maintenance and operations
billing as well as planning for
the future and scrounging for
for resources to meet basic
needs so not only to our
communities need focused
investment and and and solutions
but
Doing rural capacity building
and technical assistance so I
think this illustrates the need
the complex needs in rural
communities and this is one area
where this committee created
with this bill can make a
meaningful contribution thank
you madam chair.
Madam.
Madam chair I I bring Terry
Bruner a next please.
Thank you madam chair
representative Montoya for
letting me speak on this on this
bill today my name is Terry
Brenner and I am the CEO an
organization called pivotal New
Mexico we help build capacity of
public and nonprofit agencies
around the state and prior to my
time here I was the Obama
administration state director
for rural development US
department of agriculture and
during that time I observed that
our state doesn't do the best
job coordinating our rural
approach to infrastructure and
other issues that are out there
and and I think that a committee
like this will really do a good
job and assessing how we are
doing and in rural New Mexico
and are we accomplishing the
goals we have as a state for
rural New Mexico every once in
awhile it's good to have that
assessment and it's especially
necessary as we look at the post
comment years hopefully and
economic recovery and money is
flowing like crazy from the
federal government we want to
have a very good assessment
needs out there and how we as a
state can meet them and utilize
the resources that are are there
you know a lot of these
communities Representative
Montoya talked about the cloning
us and other communities don't
have this they can't get the
Santa Fe all they have is their
state representative or state
senator and their voice it's
it's often are hard to hear so
an interim committee can give
voice these communities that are
often under represented as well
okay one example that I think is
really pertinent at the moment
I'm how a rural interim
committee can get at issues that
are out there we know we have
across issue in rural New Mexico
we all talk about it right now
at this moment the federal
government is about to put out a
billion dollars for tribal
brought every tribe will get one
application it's a.
A hundred percent grant funding
for tribal project
there will be ninety days from
the date the application opens
to one awards are made and we as
a state audit be shouting from
the mountaintops about this
opportunity and organizing
around it and making sure each
one of our tribes gets this
money but we are it's just not
happening and again it's it
makes you wanna cry that we are
more coordinated and serious
about the secretary in our rural
communities Representative
Montoya is bill gives a voice to
these efforts that are out there
and helps us to the self
examination needed about where
we stand with rural communities
and how to do right by them
state thank you for your time
today Madam chair of the
committee.
Thank you so much Terry madam
chair members of the committee
and like to but my last expert
witness Mr Matthew Probst.
Madam chair members of the
committee Representative Montoya
thank you so much.
My my name is Matthew Probst I
am the medical director and
chief quality officer for
central family health a
federally qualified health
center that serves seven
counties in rural northeast New
Mexico service area the size of
West Virginia eight I have the
pleasure of continue to be able
to provide care for patients as
well
and so serve as a rural health
care provider
The big issues that we're
dealing with are not about just
access to health care itself but
the foundation and and the
access to those social
determinants of health and so in
twenty eighteen you may
recognize me from a from a film
the providers documentary that
really shone a light on on the
issue that we're all health care
crisis in America and so I gave
twenty nineteen to America
seeking those resources that
Terry just spoke up to say this
is a crisis this is an epidemic
of epic proportion that we're
facing in rural America in
twenty twenty I did what Terry
said as well which is a to be a
voice for my own people you're
at home to say now that I've
spoken to the country I want to
share this message in New Mexico
and bring resources little did I
know that the pandemic was going
to hit and what that pandemic
has done is really pulled the
veil back off of these issues in
health care and so as a
clinician but as a you all can
speak to as well we know it's
one thing to say okay I need you
to wash your hands more
frequently but it's another
thing for a patient to say but I
don't have water
to see the that I can get you a
telehealth visit but I don't
have a computer will use your
phone while I I don't have a
phone I don't even have
electricity
to say that you know I eight
lack access of transportation to
a hospital when I'm having the
symptoms that I think I may need
hospitalization with my COVID
symptoms all of these basic
needs so that's something we've
been working on here locally is
to work together through an
effort called one hundred
percent New Mexico to we've
access and local communities
providing access to ten vital
services and I believe this
committee can soak serve a vital
role of collaboration at the
state level to link those
efforts together thank you very
much.
Thank you so much Terry madam
madam chair members of the
committee
Before we go on to two questions
in the poll.
My team and I created a short
video a mini doc.
That really brings forward the
voices from these very
communities those leaders
speaking on their own turf.
We sent it to each of you and I
hope that if you haven't seen it
yet it's it's about three
minutes long please do.
My intention in using these
videos is to really demonstrate
the impact you know we're
sitting in the roundhouse
someone virtually now and the
disconnection between the people
that we serve and those critical
needs there is a there's a
missing link there in some so
please take the time if you can
Thank you I will stop there for
the moment.
Great thank you Representative
and experts we will now go to
the audience if you would like
to show support.
Of four house bill sixteen the
poll is now open you can also
vote against it as well.
So we'll keep it open for
another couple of minutes
seconds rather.
Okay we have closed the call and
we have thirteen individuals and
support and zero against we
would like to speak in support
please raise your hand I'll give
send you are muted.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members and I
especially want to thank
Representative Montoya for
introducing this important
legislation my name is Paul
Gibson co retake our democracy
an all volunteer organization
with twenty five hundred members
statewide HB sixteen is one of
our twenty twenty
transformational bills that we
take is supporting twenty twenty
one.
Well about a half a dozen bills
that focus on rural and tribal
eight over the past year we have
all experienced the importance
of the role of government in our
lives we've experienced the
devastating deadly consequences
resulting from a government that
abdicates its responsibilities
and we've seen states compete
with each other four PP COVID
tests and now Maxine's we've
seen what happens when our lives
are left to the decisions made
by big businesses and by the
market in H. B. sixteen we have
a chip opportunity to assemble
experts from throughout the
state from different committees
from different silos to develop
an integrated read up a plan for
addressing that desperate needs
of rural New Mexico you just
heard how important that this
could be this kind of framework
could be for a developing the
requests for the tribal
communities on internet and as a
federal grant writer for twenty
five years I can only say that
the state with the planned like
what Montoya is suggesting is a
grant writers during please
support HB sixteen.
Thank you and currently you are
now unmuted.
And you have to and then on your
end.
Hello madam chair.
Yes.
Thank you madam chair and the
committee thank you very much
for allowing this opportunity
for public comment.
I am a member and board member
of three fifty New Mexico at
that organization addressing
climate change.
And I believe a committee like
this is especially needed to
assess the needs of rural
communities for health care
water issues broadband
agriculture.
And it is important that these
issues are known and addressed
in a coordinated approach as
would be the opportunity that
this committee would provide so
I'm asking you all to support
this very important legislation
thank you.
Main Solomon you are now
unmuted.
Thank you very much madam chair
person and committee chairs
committee members I am delighted
to be in support of this bill I
we suffer in New Mexico and
across the nation from the
potential that we admire
problems by talking about them
and talking about them and not
moving to action and I see this
interim committee as a chance to
put that laser focus as
Representative Montoya said on
this issue so that we don't stop
with just the talking we have a
tragic divide in our state
between urban and rural when in
fact we are interdependent and
we so we need to be
interdependent this is a time to
focus on urgent rural needs and
the longer term beyond the
pandemic the longer term lifting
up of the potential in our rural
communities I also support
public banking that could help
us in the longer term when the
federal government dollars are
no longer available the public
banking work could help us to
continue to fund the urgent and
the wonderful potential of our
rural communities thank you.
Thank you Karen what look you
are now and it.
Madam chair members of the
committee this is Karen with
Bach with the national
association of social workers
New Mexico Jack and we want to
thank the sponsor for bringing
this very important L. I I'm
any better than the experts we
support all of the above
approach to highlight and
address the issues faced by
rural Canadian communities as
the Grant County resident I see
it they see dishes firsthand
this is an excellent tool to
begin to resolve the issue.
national association of social
workers New Mexico chapter would
like to be an active citizen
part of this interim committee
thank you very much and have a
great day.
Thank you.
Is there anyone that would like
to speak in opposition.
Okay seeing then we will go back
to the committee.
Representative Ortez.
Madam chair Representative
Montoya thank you so much for
presenting this bill I'm from a
rural community Representative a
rural community I'm a parent of
two children in school and so I
know exactly what other parents
are are facing right now in
rural communities with the lack
of broadband infrastructure I
get calls all the time you know
from constituents in my
community about our health care
system and the needs that we
have here the needs are are deep
on their acute and we we must
address that right now and I
love that this is doing this in
a comprehensive way on it and
that includes using blueprints
like hundred percent community
which I think is really really
important for folks understand
if you haven't read that book I
I urge all of you to do to do so
we we knew we need to come up
with comprehensive solutions to
deep systemic problems in rural
New Mexico so so thank you
that's that's really just wanted
to make a comment how important
it is for communities to to have
something like this so thank
you.
Representative Representative
Nibert.
Thank you madam chair
well the question is.
Are you seeking to get some
geographic.
Representation from the various
corners of the state because as
pointed out northeast New Mexico
is a little bit different than
in southeast New Mexico which is
a little different than
southwest New Mexico which is a
little different the northwest
New Mexico and even within my
own legislative district of the
rural issues faced by corona are
much different than rural issues
faced by
our way Carter so
I just I read it with interest
to see if there was any effort
to to make sure that there were
people from all corners of the
State participating and I didn't
see that.
Madam chair and Representative
Nibert thank you for the
excellent question absolutely
yes I am new to this.
Policy making this is my first
freshman enrollment but I am a
community organizer at heart.
Every project I've developed for
the last three decades the
founding of the charter school
on tribal can community the
first ever homeless shelter food
insecurity issues an award
winning internationally
acclaimed after care program
called moving arts Espanola the
recipe for that was inclusivity
every corner of the state across
party lines this is the bill
this is the construct to unite
and focus like a laser on the
severity the it cute problems
and.
Inequities that we face.
Part of my district moves into
north eastern New Mexico I have
visited intently those
communities from Cimarron and
Springer and dropped on any it
is dismal it is you know just
the calls on the COVID vaccine
access alone.
Breaks my heart so unequivocally
the answer is yes I will
admittedly say that I do not
know this process yet.
But trust me I'm a champion and
if I have any part in helping to
move this collaborative forward
you have my deepest and
heartfelt commitment to follow
through until we succeed I hope
I answered your questions.
Madam chair representative the.
The tensions that we have
Often times get forgotten and we
can have the best of intentions
but what remains is the words on
the paper and in this instance
so.
This is the bill.
The it's not a memorial it's not
a
resolution is not a an
expression of intent this become
statute and and so we're left
with the words that are going to
end up in the in the statute
books and people reading that.
Are not going to know our well
intentioned intent they're going
to follow the words on the paper
and and so I I appreciate your I
just don't see the words on the
paper that would
Require or encourage geographic
representation I I see we we
pick on various committees
Senator Representative but I
didn't see anything on the
geographic representation I.
I'm not going to propose an
amendment I support your bill so
don't worry about that I'm just
raising the issue if that's
important to you you might think
about the how to interject that
intent into the language of your
bill.
That that's all I have madam
chair.
Madam chair and representative
Nibert your advice is so well
taken I think you were right on
point.
And if this becomes a committee
I think that is one of the most
critical issues because how do
we define that in real time it's
one thing to create an idea but
to solve something so complex
it's going to take that so in
short I you know my humbleness I
I am honored and thankful for
your contribution and
suggestion.
Madam chair thank you
Representative I don't see
anyone else I'm just curious.
About the if you looked at the
FIR and talking about temporary
committees are generally created
through joint memorials with
directives to the Legislative
Council which could probably
then include those intents
also that notification about
having to have the the
governor's signature I don't
know if you were able to look at
that with the other committees
but then it just brings in the
governor I think when we don't
need to tell did you review the
FIR do you do you.
What's the reason for the bell
instead of you know and what
seems to be the easier route.
You know in all honesty as I
said earlier this is my sort of
debut.
I've consulted as many
professionals as possible really
understand in fact in about an
hour and a half I hope I can fit
in to have a conversation with
Raul Burciaga about the
constructs how do you actually
take this from an idea to
reality in such a short time
because there is an emergency to
get this done I spoke to our
governor and she questions she
said Roger I'm I'm wondering.
Is it in is it important for you
to go this route.
Rather than just go to the
speaker inform the committee on
your own and and I'm just going
to say before all of you I am
I'm new to this on learning and
I need guidance that's part and
parcel of Wyoming for review to
get this done what I do know in
my heart of hearts is that it is
vitally important that we look
critically in this way at this
issue
As far as funding which you did
just that but if there's junior
money.
And I here there may be I am
willing more than willing to
offer a portion or all of my.
Occasion to giving a little bit
of a traction for this because I
know it's going to take some
money right now there's no money
attached.
I have a conversation with David
Abbey I've spoken with
chairwoman Lundstrom very
pointedly she went ahead and
although it's not this visit the
specifically for this.
Issue only she's set aside a
hundred fifty thousand dollars
to do a rural study that will
look at infrastructure needs and
I think that's a critical data
point that we're gonna know when
that money comes down from the
federal government and I'm sure
it will just spoke with the
governor yesterday she we need
to be shovel ready we need to be
prioritize and focus like a
laser on helping or New Mexicans
that are in despair.
I hope I answered your question
thank you Representative
yeah I I just think you should
be consulting with Legislative
Council because I think you
might have issues with the L.
Because you know I think you'll
have to go a different route but
we can't do that on our own so I
would just caution that you you
know work with Legislative
Council the director of your
bill and and get this going so I
don't know what the will of the
committee is at this point
because that was something that
was raised in the F. I. R. A.
you know wished you had dealt
with that prior to getting to
this committee because then you
might have been able to fix some
of that.
Representative Nibert.
Madam chair you bring up but at
four point and.
Putting this
in the statute were basically
tell making a law that tells
ourselves.
That we have to form his
committee and and I think the
chairman of rules might might
say that you know we we create
our own rules and and so this is
really an expression of intent
as I see it M. and maybe the
Representative ought to consider
talking to the rules committee
chair and also talking to the
speaker and converting this from
a bill or statute into a
memorial or resolution that
appears to be
consistent with our way of
operating and.
Representative as a a resolution
or at a memorial and I I
wholeheartedly support the the
idea of the putting this on the
statute books telling the house
of representatives and the
Senate that thou shall have this
interim committee budget that
can be done without the of a
statute it can be done
internally on and so it might be
it might be worthwhile to have
those conversations and maybe
not take any action on this
today but see if there's a way
to convert it to a memorial
resolution to bring it back in
that format.
Thank you representative
Representative Gallegos thank
you madam chair and I was gonna
suggest some of the same things
that Representative Nibert did I
did talk to the representative
yesterday about this bill I
think it's really important that
she speaks to David Abbey that
he speaks to enroll once once
that he understands the process
that he needs to go through I
think that that would help
clarify where how how to to
proceed on this bill so I would
recommend rolling it till he has
those conversations if he's
amenable to that.
Madam chair representative
Gallegos thank you so much I I
think that your device is well
taken.
I'm a man of action and in fact
I've already set appointments
with David Abbey and Burciaga
and we only spoke I believe a
nine hours ago your advice is is
on point and I so appreciate the
mentorship at this point thank
you are you back to the chair.
Thank you so again I I I think
we should roll this bill and
have those Kinks worked out I
think you're probably especially
right now with the house bill
going over to the Senate you
know it just going that easier
route to because I I do
understand your intentions and I
think you know it would be a
good committee so if you would
just take those steps to
do the retain and an easier
route that would be great.
Madam chair members of this
incredible Canadian thank you
it's been an honor I I'm not
sure if we're closed for the day
is there a process that we need
to move to to roll it or did you
just roll it if if you're
agreeable to rolling out will
just roll it that way we can
Work with you if you just
communicate with the committee
as far as what you're going to
do
if you're changing it to
something else than just let us
know and and work with the
speaker's office to do that as
well.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you I agree and
I say we move forward in that
that thank you thank you
Representative and thank you the
experts to with that that
concludes our agenda for today
so thanks to the public for
joining us and also thanks to
our committee members.
Have a great weekend.
