Here to.
Thank you.
Representative Christina Ortez
here.
Representative Williams
Representative.
Here ma'am thank you.
Representative Martin some of.
Yes Representative Gail Chasey.
Representative
goes.
Representative Martin some up.
Vice chair Johnson.
Vice chair Johnson.
Chair FOR D. Lewis.
Thank you.
Madam chair.
We have four president of seven.
Okay thank you sure yes I think
folks are looking for the same
link I received a text message
from Representative Chasey so
And also Representative guy a
ghosts.
So hopefully they will find
those but
Let me say I I present actually.
Okay.
I am just going to.
Let's let me go ahead and take
like a one minute break right
now and make sure folks have
that link.
So excuse me for one minute.
Hey bill did you talk to
brought about whose ranking
member on here.
I was talking to Townsend
yesterday and and
Not sure that still in the
works.
Okay so.
If you want.
If they are more you ride.
So you can take the lead you
were there last year so.
Why don't need to take the lead
on two committees I can assure
you up but I'll be happy to
happy to do it.
And.
For your information last year
what I did is I just chatted
with both of you so I'm happy to
do that again.
We'll talk to both of us.
Yes that I get I get kicked by
one of you.
Representative night birds I.
Did not have any idea what
you're speaking of.
You speak with forked tongue.
Service for on video and
recording for the public
everyone.
So I'm we have just sent the
thanks to Representative Chasey
and thank those so I hope they
will be getting on shortly.
And madam chair once once we
figure out who the ranking
member will be you all have to
talk about that this work will
will let you know which one will
be the primary contact okay.
Thank you.
Well.
And I think I'm committee
members probably isn't for you
but
please let sure Reese no which
email if you prefer to send it
to
your siblings that way she'll
have a I know she sent a couple
of days ago and then she also
Sanchez I believe this morning
so
you know that way we can get
everyone going.
Welcome Representative Chasey.
Hello and thank thank you madam
chair.
Okay and Johnson so now I
believe that everyone so we
started to and I just briefly
set that
we're gonna start with roll call
introduction of legislators and
then and staff and then talk
about how the meeting will go so
now the everyone's on board we
did do the roll call and let's
go ahead and began with
introduction of legislators and
I'm gonna go by also that but
everyone's last name except for
vice chair and myself local last
so Representative Chasey.
I'm president madam chair do you
want me to say something now or
you're doing okay.
Well include US president and
everyone else I'm yes ma'am
president thank you very much
I'm I'm happy to be with you in
these strange times and I miss
being in the same row all of
you.
And look forward to serving with
our new members and
I think we do have a few on here
so looking forward to meeting
everyone thank you very much
madam chair.
Representative Representative
Eli.
I thank you madam chair I so
this gives me an opportunity to
again announce that we have a
rules committee at twelve
o'clock today instead of eleven
people were confused some having
Gabby sent out the zoom again so
I'm a representative from
Corvallis in Albuquerque and I'm
like are a chair Chasey
it is nice to welcome the new
members and the staff
this is going to be weird but
we'll get through it and I'm
looking forward to working with
all of you thanks.
Thank you representative
Representative Gaydos.
Thank you madam chair I'm during
a goes I am from district fifty
two down and the the southern
part of the state I am new to
this committee I'm actually very
excited to be on this committee
I seen all the the fund and
wonderful and representatives
that serve on this committee I
just couldn't help myself so I
requested to be on this
committee and I look forward to
working with all of you.
And I apologize for the the
glitches Warnick kept I can see
you all but you I could turn on
the camera or might audio so I
had to get out and get back in
so I apologize for that.
Thank you representative
Representative neighbor.
I am Greg Nibert by
Representative district fifty
nine and I could show you all of
my district out my window.
Thank you can you can see most
of my district from from my
office it goes about two hundred
miles but the because of the
biography we can see most of it
the
This will be my second term on
on this committee have and I
certainly appreciate that share
and and most of time the vice
chair for keeping me on line
I'm probably that their problem
child over committee so our I
wear that as a badge of honor by
the way.
We'll get a certificate right
out to you Representative have a
Purple Heart.
Representative Ortiz.
A good morning madam chair of my
name is Christina or taz I am
the newly elected representative
for house district forty two
which is most of House County
I'm really looking forward to
working with all of you and
thanks.
Thank you and sorry about the
pronunciation we pronounce a
different sometimes and so it's
our test.
Okay great and welcome we we
love that your are only spent
and happy to have you it's not
but not the newest one on this
committee madam chair.
Representative right.
I thank you madam chair I'm bill
ream I represent the northeast
heights of Albuquerque New.
In on this committee a couple
years so I'm looking forward to
it again and.
And as as we call this this is a
the minor Judiciary Committee as
many of the members here or on
Judiciary.
Thank you.
That's right thank you
representative.
Representative Zamora.
judging our madam chair.
Martin has had some health
issues and I think you still
recovering so it doesn't
surprise me that he's not here
today but Representative Zamora
is from Clovis I forget the
district that he represents for
this district goes from
basically Clovis our to our
Santa Rosa and
he's
in his second term.
Great thank you representative
yes this time we hope to see him
soon and that he has a speedy
recovery.
Madam vice chair.
Good morning everyone good
morning madam chair and
colleagues.
I
I represent house district I we
can the San Juan counties I
represent
a land based south of Farmington
west of four ninety one parallel
to east of three seventy one and
north of at Gallup I have east
Gallup and about nineteen
chapters so I I miss being in
the committee room with all of
you I specially miss sitting by
Representative nine very.
And that I look forward to
serving on this committee again
this is the beginning of my
fourth term and that thank you
for all the work that you do
thank you madam chair.
Thank you madam vice chair
I'm judging Lewis I the
representative for house
district twenty six and I just
started my fifty term here in
the legislature
let me say I'm from the public
Act amount so I.
Love sharing my stories about
growing up on the reservation
but this is such a great
committee.
everyone gets along so well and
I'm so proud that we're able to
openly discuss and debate the
issues that come before the
committee
so I'm happy to have everyone
and next we are going to our
committee staffs
we'll start with
our committee assistant Siri's.
Thank you madam chair my name
assurance Kisah and the
committee assistant for chair Dr
Jean Louis.
Please feel free to reach out to
me if you need anything.
Thank you sure ace and is Kevin
are on today.
Can it was reset the links are
working with him to get him on
okay great so Kevin Humphrey is
the other committee assistant
Marianne.
Good morning chair Lewis my name
is maryann Hendrickson this is
my fourth term here on this
committee second as committee
analyst
I resigned from North Carolina
I'm a military veteran retired
navy and I live in Los crucis
thanks and I'm happy to be back
with everybody here.
Thank you merry and
Morning everyone I'm Maria de
and I and I and
With this come I was with this
committee last year and happy to
be back this year and I've
worked with other committees in
the past.
Thank you Patricia.
Morning my name is Patricia
Vitali on the major analyst
that's my first year on this
committee my first year on the
committee.
Happy to be here thanks great
thank you.
Howard.
Is Howard on.
Okay I don't think that he's on
I don't.
so did I miss any anyone staff
members.
If so please speak up.
Okay great I thought I had to
come a complete list and we also
have folks on so for technical
support right now so that's
really helpful.
And I'm just not sure how
often will have that but we'll
do our best to ensure that the
committee is running smoothly.
So if I may um speak on that for
a moment madam chair and members
of the committee of for the
first two weeks we're gonna have
dedicated IT staff we're putting
together a schedule this weekend
so you will actually have the
same I. T. staff for each
meeting to the best of our
abilities to kind of build that
relationship will make sure that
the phone number for that I. T.
member is shared and then
depending on are availability
myself or data from are Allison
Jones will be available Allison
is our awesome Committee floater
she's helping out on all of the
committees and none of the
committees often times so will
be available for more the zoom
aspect but if you're having more
of a hard line technical issue
that we can't address that's
what R. T. I. T. team is going
to be around to help with so and
one we have that schedule
finalized next week will make
sure that all of the committees
our sense the contact info for
who they are I. T. people are
going to be so thank you.
Thank you Gabby thanks for all
your assistance so far I know
it's been pretty hectic.
so thanks again.
To everyone for joining us today
we are a Monday Wednesday and
Friday committee and we will
start meetings at eight thirty
we used to be a Tuesday Thursday
committing but because of the
large amount of bills for her
for terror Committee we will be
meeting and keeping late Monday
Wednesday and Friday schedule
again will start at eight thirty
that way it's consistent for
ourselves it's also consistent
for the public will really do
everything that we can to
schedule
out the bills in advance today
we should be finalizing the
agenda for the first committee
meeting again beginning at eight
thirty are
Analysts are working with me and
sure race and Kevin to be able
to
At least try to forecast what
bills might be coming up that
way they can get a good sense of
how much time they have to
prepare for bills and then
And time reviewing the bills as
well so that they can provide
those analysis for us
really what we've done in the
past and what seems to be
working is that we will schedule
bills
Mostly as they come in but also
in groups this was done because
it when when bills were by topic
let's say you know voting issues
then we would have those same
members coming to testify in
committee
so I think we will just kind of
stay with that that way we can
have the same people in the zoom
meetings again maybe just having
that dedicated time where people
can generally try to schedule
around and not having to jump
from so meetings to their
meetings we're trying to make it
as easy as possible to the
extent we can with this new
technology so please bear with
us but if you do you have any
recommendations once things
start moving along faced let me
know so that we can try and
figure out what works best
what we ask of legislators when
they are presenting bills to us
is if they have amendments
Committee substitutes please get
them to us to twenty four hours
in advance again that so the
analysts have time to review the
bills and then provide that
information back to the
legislators for minor stuff
that's not necessary when we do
minor amendments that aren't
substantive in committee that's
not a big deal but definitely
especially committee substitutes
than will want those in advance
of if.
Our analysts don't have time to
review them and provide written
information to us will likely
reschedule a bell if that's not
provide it to us in advance.
Again as we get closer towards
the end of the session will
allow some leeway but we're just
asking everyone to work together
at this point we'll get that
message out to legislators as
they come before us and
let me say as far as public
comment we do
want to continue public comment
I think that will be so much
easier once people figure out
the the zoom links and
other technical issues as far as
working resume so I know there
was a suggestion also of raising
the hand and using the hand
function we will look into that
and see how we can get the
public whether or not they
oppose or support a bill maybe
be being able to raise the hand
function in the event that they
do not want to speak but in the
event that people do want to
speak we are going to look at
trying to keep that.
To having them introduce
themselves by name any
organizations that they belong
to and really providing the
public comment so that it is
concise
Always we ask folks not to be
repetitive or if they want to
just say we support he had the
positions and the statements
that have already been already
been set that also works well
too so
We will really work to ensure
that everyone that wants to
speak on public comment will
have that opportunity to do so
and I know will be counting on
the tech support Gabby in that
regard as far as muting and I'm
getting one another I talked
with vice chair of.
Small and he says he has the
You know responsibility of
meeting and and meeting people
so
that something we can have a
vice chair Johnson do and I
think she might slip a little
bit with Representative night
Burke that will figure out that
technicality to as well.
One thing that with the public
comment that may be a feature
available for the committees
were working on it right now
great for public commenters who
don't want to speak up but still
on their position to be heard we
are going to be trying to
implement the polling function
for members of the public as
well we're working on putting
together training to train staff
on how that would work it's a
little more work on the back and
so it may not be live for the
first you know full week of
committee hearings next week but
we're hoping that by the week
following will have the polling
function available thank you
that would be great thank you
and sure races really savvy at
figuring out technology to and I
know she's been watching some
links on just what happens what
what opportunities are available
so that's all going to be great
and I'm looking forward to using
as much technology now that
we're forced to do it
to the extent that it's
available to us so thank you
Gabby.
Are there any questions
committee members staff.
The
gal has a question.
Representative Chasey thank you
I raise my hand and not on the
list but you have to be looking
at it to now I'm I wondered also
Gabby when
we're talking about the public
comment one of the things that I
thought might be helpful and I'm
not exactly sure how to
accomplish it but then I'm a
techno peasant so
it seems to me that some people
who want to provide public
comment might like to do it in a
written way.
In a written brief way where we
could access that if there could
be a function.
Where we could
Where folks could submit that
and we could.
Crucis as we are considering the
bills so so we're still looking
at how we might do that I know
that most of the chairs have
talked about wanting the chat
function to be turned off just
because it is so uncontrollable
in terms of getting negative or
inappropriate messaging from
attendees that may have you know
not positive comments to add or
even just appropriate comments
to add so we're Debra M. and I
are going to be working on
trying to figure out the best
way for that it may be that they
submit those comments to the
committee assistance in the
committee assistance make that
available to the committee on
that kind of seems to be our our
best ideas thus far there was an
incident incident in a committee
hearing earlier this week where
the tap function was taken
advantage of by some
not so savory members of the
public so we're gonna try to
find a workaround for that so
the only you know valid concerns
and comments and public comment
our art got received by you guys
so.
Thank you Gabby and
Representative Chasey I I like
that idea to and Gabby you can
help but I think it would answer
my question I don't know how
much information were allowed to
put on the golden rods.
So with the zoom link maybe if
we can put in there that we
accept public comment B. as
juries and cabin and include
their email address in there and
that this subject line must be
specific about you know public
comment HB whatever and then we
can have them right at during
committee that might require
less well that that's something
that I can definitely talk about
over with government at you know
we're already putting on the
goldenrod.
To submit hand outs and
amendments and things like that
to the committee assistance and
so it probably not very hard to
to say you know submit your
public comment here as well so
we'll definitely
Bring that up when we talk about
this again and maybe because the
public comment right in for you
know those are the folks that
don't want to speak and don't
want to be longer and perhaps a
story or experience if it might
be possible even to provide like
a link to a form where it
requires human donor email House
Bill to fill it out to some
extent that way it's controlled
and like any affiliated
organizations
communities what have you are
also included in there and then
ensure that that comment boxes
is small
you know that way we don't have
the committee assistance rating
a long thing trying to figure
out what they want to say so if
we could somehow get a form
together that might be another
way to manage that okay
definitely we want a deadline to
submit public comment on those
forms so that you know we cut it
off and that way our committee
assistance have that information
and they're not constantly
checking especially once
committee has started.
Yes okay right those are all
really good ideas and I look
forward to sharing that whatever
and seeing what we can do in
terms of making that link
available on the Canadian
website at and let us talk of.
Right thank you and I'm going
through everyone now I couldn't
get my Bluetooth.
parts to sync with my laptop so
I'm using my phone so I don't
see anyone's hands up but if
anyone else has any questions
please speak up
your other committee assistant
it also hop on so Kevin has a
chance to introduce himself.
So great hi Kevin.
I.
Sorry about that can.
Yes my name's Kevin I'm on the
committees with juries.
I'm originally from DC Virginia
but I have roots and family in
New Mexico Albuquerque
specifically and yeah.
But to be part of the team.
Roy welcome.
Anyone else.
But I can't figure out how to
raise my hand electronically
but can I assume that the same
to quorum are.
Requirements would be expected
of people commenting through
written word or through
electronic means as you would
expect them in person and that
you as chair could
This agency those things that
are inappropriate or not the not
in line with the.
Your expectations for the quorum
and very regularly.
Thank you for bringing that up
Representative neighbors that's
a really important point I'm yes
for a public comment that will
remain the same where anything
that contains
vulgar language language or
any kind of this respects.
Towards.
People races whatever.
Is out there
those will be disregarded if
they are in written format and
also if things start occurring
during public comment the as
soon whether that's by voice or
video those will be silenced so.
I.
Thank you thank you anyone else.
Great it doesn't look like
anyone else.
Is.
Wanting to speak so again thanks
to everyone for joining I am.
Very happy that we have such a
group a group here that's like
great and motivated and ready to
do the people's work and I look
forward to a very productive
session especially with our
committee and our committee
members and our great staff so
thank you everyone and I look
forward to seeing you again on
Monday morning.
Have a great weekend.
Thank you madam chair will say
yes C. N. rules and Judiciary.
That's true.
Thanks everyone thank you madam
chair but just let everyone know
we're not having Judiciary today
because the rules committee
meeting is expected it all want
to we'll get our organization
meeting on Monday.
Thank you madam chair.
Good bye.
