Madam Flo leader here.
Representative Zamora.
Here, Madam Vice Chair, Madam
Chair.
Here we have a quorum. Thank
you. We have a quorum,
housekeeping.
We are rolling until further
notice.
And we will begin with House
Bill 180.
And uh
Are we ready with online?
And we have an expert witness
for House Bill 180.
Would you come to the
Yes, join us at the table,
please.
OK, thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair. Good
morning, committee members. As
you can see, I am not
Representative Thompson, but I'm
happy to assist her this morning
in putting on House Bill 180,
which is creating a new license
for speech language pathology
assistants pealing the
apprentice in speech and
language lessons and repealing
certain sections of the NMSA and
I will let my two experts
introduce themselves.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
Representatives. My name is
Doctor Adrian Bratcher. I am a
uh department chair for the
Health and Human Services at
Eastern New Mexico University,
and I'm also a speech language
pathologist and the current
president of the New Mexico
Speech Language Hearing
Association.
Good morning, Madam Chair. Um,
my name is Doctor Michael
Kaplan. I'm also a speech
pathologist, and I'm the vice
chair of the speech language
pathology, audiology, and
hearing aid dispensing practices
board.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and we
stand for questions. Thank you.
Let's go ahead and go to the
audience.
In support of the bill.
We have
Anyone in the audience in
support of the bill.
Sorry
OK. Richard Romero, I am a
registered lobbyist representing
the speech and language patology
Association and had been
associated with them for 20
years. We've been trying to pass
this legislation for, I believe,
5 years now, and we know it's a
long haul, but we think we have
it this time and appreciate
your, your support. Thank you.
Thank you. Do we have any
Comments to the opposition in
the audience.
then let's go online.
Anybody here from Zoo hoping to
make any comment?
Go ahead and raise your hand.
Hey, committee members.
Good morning, Madam Chair, and
good morning Representative Aa
Nonu and experts, just shout
out. I, I went to NMU, so.
The Greyhounds.
But Madam Chair Representative,
I guess I'm trying to figure
out.
Just kind of what this does. So
currently there's apprentices.
And this would
Elevate them in some way and,
and how does that change the
current statute to make it
easier for those folks who are
training to be in the
profession, Madam Chair,
representative.
Madam Chair and representative
Locke as other representatives,
yes, so currently what we have
is an apprentice license. The
apprentice license is a
temporary non-permanent license.
It allows individuals to work
under that license for 2 years.
So providing an SLPA license
would create a licenger that is
similar to all of our
surrounding states as well as
most states, honestly, in the
US. Most states have an
assistant license, uh, New
Mexico is currently a little bit
of a unicorn with the
apprentice, um, it really
provides individuals just a
temporary. The SLPA would
provide individuals who obtain a
uh assistance degree.
for another pathway to become an
assistant to have a permanent
position, a permanent job, so
it's not something that would
then go away. Um, so, yes.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
and Representative that, that's
helpful and yeah, I think that's
it's a great analogy for the
state unicorn.
You know, maybe sometimes it's
not as good of analogy as we'd
like, so.
I think that's important. So,
Madam Chair Representative, I
see that there's a cost here
according to the FIR 300,000. Do
we know if that's uh
Considered or contemplated in
the budget in any way to help
absorb that cost, Madam Chair,
and I think that's from RLD I'm
not mistaken.
Uh, Madam Chair and
Representative block, um, RLD,
uh, we've talked about this at
the, at the board at our board
meetings and um uh the SLPA
would pay uh a certain the same
price as the current uh ASL
plays, which is $100 a year and
there's enough money currently
in RLD for our board that would
cover it so that there wouldn't
be a problem with.
with, um, absorbing the
additional cost. Cool. OK, thank
you, Madam Chair Representative
and Doctor, I appreciate that. I
think that's uh that's good. I
don't want them to be out.
300,000 bucks, but I mean, I
know it would take probably
30,000 new.
Folks to pay $100 to get to get
to that. So I think
As long as it's absorbed in the
budget, I want to make sure that
they have the proper resources
cause RLD Madam Chair, they do
everything, you know, they
They do everything from like um
Proving roofs and stuff to
approving licenses. So that's
helpful for me. I think that's
kind of all the questions I had
right now, but thanks, ma'am
Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Lujan.
Madam Chair, thank you, um, for
In here to bring the the bill
forward. I'm sorry that the um
Chairwoman in here cause I have
some.
Some questions and I know that
they could be answered other
than, um, so right now we have a
an apprentice uh speech uh
license, which is just for 2
years, so that those apprentices
usually go on to higher to
become SLPs, I'm sure.
Madam Chan representative, uh,
so occasionally they do,
sometimes it's just when they're
in limbo trying to decide what
they want to do as far as for
career goals, but occasionally
they'll work as in a apprentice
while they're trying to get into
a graduate school.
Oftentimes they honestly work
for the 2 years, maybe they
can't get into a graduate school
and then they're really left
without a career. So at, at this
point, what is happening is
Eastern Mexico University
actually created an SLPA degree,
so that individuals can go back
and get the assistance degree if
they can't get into a graduate
school or even if they want to
not pursue higher education
beyond 2.
4 years, and then they can get
licensed and have that long term
career.
Thank you so this would be
pretty equivalent to what um
And
And, and now let's to the
nurses. Yes, madam chair and
representative, that's correct.
It would be like a a nurse's
assistant, a physical therapy
assistant and occupational
therapy assistant. Currently, we
have all of those.
Uh, yeah, um, I, I, I worked
Madam Chair as a nurse's
assistant a very long time ago,
um.
And OK, so they would be, it
would be a supervisory
oversight.
Um, so they have a supervisor
would be the SLP they report to,
I would assume, or would they
report to any other um
like a nurse or.
Others man.
Madame Chen representative, they
would report to the SLP. Yes,
that is correct. There would be
no other uh supervisor and in
that relationship. Madam Chair,
are we sure and, and do we, you
know, of um SLPs in our state,
we need more.
Madam Chair Representative, um,
yes, there is a tremendous
shortage of speech language
pathologists throughout the
state, especially in the
schools, uh, Albuquerque, Santa
Fe, Roswell, all the larger
school districts in the smaller
school districts.
are searching for speech
language pathologists, uh, to
work in their schools to provide
services, as you know, the
federal IDEA law requires speech
services being offered for
special needs kids and if there
isn't somebody available, those
kids don't get the services with
the the new under the, the
assistance um
Yes, they, they would be out,
they would be licensed, they
would be able to um help and
work in the schools as well and
do.
What, I mean, what would be the
scope of the practice that they
would be able to um.
Do and then report to an SLP
because
There needs to be some
congruency there for me.
Having no, I know the process
and having had to work. Yeah.
Yes, Madame Chair and
Representative, that's correct.
So the continuity factor, and
we've laid it out in the bill
where um there's certain tasks
or duties that the SLPA can do
certain duties that are still
the responsibility of the SLP
themselves, which is.
Similar to what's now in the ASL
component. However, with the
SLPA, they are actually higher
trained than an ASL because they
do have field work experience
prior to
Getting the licener, Madam
Chair, one of my concerns is
that SLPs are diagnosticians.
And so I would just, I would
just be concerned about.
You know
How that the interaction between
the two, Madam Chair, and those,
those responsibilities.
Yes, Madam Chair and
Representative. That's correct.
The SLP would still do the
diagnostic.
Evaluations. That is um actually
something that the SLPA would
not be allowed to do. They would
then the SLP would then dictate
what type of services that SLPA
would do. So the SOPA similar to
a PTA or an OTA they would go in
and do the treatment as
diagnosed by the SLP.
All right, madam chair.
Um, I, I mean, I don't have a
lot of hard.
Heartache over this, but I just,
the way that things run and then
we come back and then change of
scope of practice and then we're
moving things and adjusting
things as well. I hope we don't
come back to that, to be quite
honest with you, but I do
understand the need and just
You know, it's not that much
difference other than, you know,
there will be oversight, but um.
Um, yeah, I do have a, I do have
some questions.
But thank you for answering what
I have today. I appreciate the
time. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Zamora.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you presenters for bringing this
bill forward. So, so when we go
to page 13 section 5.
Uh
It has a bunch of legal stuff up
on top that I don't really
understand, but then on section
A, it says the board shall issue
an expedited license without
examination.
To a speech language
pathologist.
And then you go on down to line
16.
And
An ex expedited license to a
person who's
Prior licensing jurisdiction did
not require examination, the
board may require a person to
pass an examination. So,
How, how are we gonna be?
Giving somebody a license.
Without examination, how, how
does that work and why is that
even in this bill?
Madam Chair and presenters.
Madam Chair and Representative,
yes, so this is under the
expedited licenser component in
an expedited licener component,
individuals who apply for that
are coming from another state
into New Mexico. So they
actually have
Already passed all of those
national and and state licenser
components, um, they're just
coming into our state. So it's
more of a reciprocal between
states type license, but they
have already passed a national
exam. And Madam Chair and
presenter, so
When you go to line 16 and it
says,
To a person whose prior
licensing jurisdiction did not
require examination.
So, did they even require any
schooling or, or they just got a
license because they applied for
one and
Madam Chair and Representative,
yes, they have already gone
through that. What you're
pointing out, however, is in the
existing statute. That is not
something that we're actually
changing.
And, and Madam Chair, I have a
little heartburn with that, that
That we're expediting a license
to a person whose prior
licensing jurisdiction did not
require an examination.
That
That doesn't sell good with me.
I'd
I'll have a hard time supporting
this bill just because of that.
Well, Madam Chair
Representative, I can certainly
understand that heartache, but
as the expert did point out that
particular portion that you have
an issue with already exists,
that's not being added with this
bill, the expedited licenger
procedure is already in statute.
We are not making any changes to
that. So I can understand your
concern about it, but you're not
voting on that portion.
Madam, Madam Chair and
representative, that's in the
bill.
And it, and it, it, and it makes
me wonder if we're gonna get
unqualified people.
To fit in this section.
And get this license, so that's
those are my concerns, and I'll
wait and hear more of the debate
and, and see if I change my
mind, but I just don't like that
in the bill.
Madam Chair.
Representative Mejia.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representatives, uh, I have a
question on page 12, line 7 to
9.
Um
Why does the bill limit?
Um
Where he says for supervision to
know more than 2 full-time or 3
part time speech language
pathology.
Uh, why does the bill limits?
Um
Over the years of two part-time
or 3 part-time.
Madam Chair and Representative,
this component is actually
allowing um the SLP to only have
so many assistants that they
supervise. So that way they're
not a overloaded, and B, they
have enough ability and time to
supervise completely and
accurately.
Thank you, man. And I have one
more question. Can I, um,
Speech language pathology
assistant to everything um.
Speech language pathology can
do.
Madam Chair and Representative,
no, they cannot. They complete
what we call in the bill RMR
repetitive mechanical and repeat
activities. So what they
actually do is dictated by the
speech language pathologist. The
speech language pathologist will
do all the assessments and
evaluation and the diagnosis
components with patients, then
they determine the treatment
plan and the SLPA comes in and
carries out that treatment plan.
Thank you for your answers.
Thank you, seeing no other
questions. I just wanna thank
Representative Thompson for
working on this bill. It's
important to rural communities.
Northwest New Mexico.
We are on the spectrum with
autism. So with that, I will uh
make a motion for to pass.
police call role.
Representative on Nordin.
in a block? Yes, sir.
Yes.
Or was it at Luhan?
represented Mea.
Yes. Madam Flo leader, yes.
Representative Zamora. No.
Madam Vice Chair.
Madam Chair.
Perfect. Oh yeah.
Thank you.
Good luck in your next
committee.
Thank you, expert witnesses and
representative Onanarnu.
OK.
Representative Kates with House
Bill 85.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm, uh,
a representative Kathleen Cates,
and I'm here to present House
Bill 85.
Um, as many of you know, in
January of 2024, the New Mexico
Tech uh released
water plan that we've referred
to as New Mexico Tech water
plan, Interstream commission
water plan, the governor's water
plan.
But it clearly stated
scientifically that we will have
Up to 25% less water in 50
years. So in this session, as in
all the sessions now, we will be
looking at bills that will help
us to repurpose, reuse, and
conserve water.
The bill before you is a very
simple bill.
Allowing the opportunity for our
state to be to lead this way in
these efforts. It is.
Um
It is prohibiting the
installation of non-functional
turf.
Turf is living grass,
non-functional is that it uh
does not carry a purpose, so
this.
Uh, exempts, uh, soccer fields
are exempt, uh, football fields,
if they are living grass are
exempt, um, we have, um,
Uh, the grass that is in all of
our state universities are
exempt because they use reuse,
uh, repurposed recycled water.
Um, this is stating that um in
January 2027, no new additional
nonfunctional turf will be
installed in state-owned or
state.
Funded buildings, so our
government, so that we can lead
the way in our water
conservation. This is grass that
is, uh, strictly for aesthetics
purposes and it will be able to
help us save our potable water.
Um, in the bill, it says on or
after uh 2032, no, uh, we will
also, we will be able to change
those non
functional churches that are
already installed. So it gives
the plenty of leeway time there,
lots of budget seasons there to
be able to move forward and um
and it does not dictate what uh
landscaping to use as long as it
is low water to no water. This
does not include any kind of
natural grasses that don't
require the irrigation or uh
manual watering, and I rest for
questions.
Thank you, Representative.
Do you have an amendment?
I'll go ahead and move to
discuss the amendment. Please
provide your 0.2 number.
At 0.230137.1.
Thank you.
Provide us the information on
your amendment.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, we
just wanted to tripoli clarify
this does not
Um, this does not include our
Lands under our land
commissioner.
As in most of those are not uh
being irrigated anyway, so they
were not the state owned
property does not include the
land that is being managed.
Under the land commission.
Thank you.
Any members, any discussion on
the amendment?
See, do we have any objection,
Representative Lujan? I was just
gonna move the amendment. OK.
So, um, no objection on moving
the amendment.
Seeing Nan, let's go back to the
amended bill.
If you don't have any more
comments, we'll go to.
Public comments.
So now let's go to the audience.
Do we have anyone in support of
The amended bill.
Yes sir. Good morning, Madam
Chair and committee. My name is
Danny Mackey. I'm a registered
lobbyist for the landscape
Architects Association. Uh,
we're in favor of this bill.
However, we have some um uh some
issues with it in Albuquerque,
they uh went through with this,
uh, uh type of action and um
they didn't take care of the
mature trees, so we had a lot of
mature trees, uh, die, uh, from
lack of watering. We know it's
important to make sure we take
care of our water resources, but
it's also twice.
It is important to take care of
our mature trees. So thank you
for the time.
Thank you. Any further comments
in support of the bill, any
opposing comments.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Jared Najar on
behalf of the New Mexico
Municipal League. Uh, we
respectfully oppose this bill.
Uh, we believe this is an
unfunded mandate that would
result in some significant cost
for our municipalities, um,
specifically could result in
turf having to be ripped out or
irrigation systems having DPP
and that a lot of our smaller
municipalities just can't
afford.
Thank you. Let's go to Zoom. Do
we have any?
Anybody hoping to make public
comment, please raise your hand.
We have one.
Jan Longston, can you hear us?
Hello. Hi.
Go ahead, you have one minute.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Jean Logston. I
represent the League of Women
Voters of New Mexico. The league
supports water conservation
efforts to the extent that our,
uh, that is reasonable, and we
definitely support this bill
because it talks about new turf,
uh, we recognize the challenges
for municipalities and believe
that these should be addressed,
but
Uh, because of climate change is
particularly germane at this
time, not to create new water
uses that do not contribute to
uh dealing with climate change.
Thank you very much.
Thank you so much, Jean.
Have any opposing comments
online.
In the opposing comments, please
go ahead and raise your hand.
OK, committee members,
Representative Lujan,
Representative Barrego,
represented a block.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for this bill.
Actually, I think this, this
should have come a long time
ago. I know here in in um Santa
Fe, city of Santa Fe and we have
moved to do a lot of zero
escaping and and a lot of intent
towards water conservation and
through these um through these
methods.
Um,
Wait, this bill would, is, is
the effective date 2032.
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative, the 2032 is when
the current turf that is not
using recycled water needs to be
replaced by, but in 2020.
In 2027 is when we don't want
any more additional turf
installed.
Madam Chair, so this would be a
type of grandfathering in of
what of the of what already
exists there and um for our
local governments, but I, but
I'm trying to understand this.
This is just pertaining to
state.
Um
Land except for the, the state
land commissioner. Thank you,
Madam Chair and thank you,
Representative. It's for all
state-owned land, but it's also
any land that is state funded.
So if we have a town hall in uh
uh a small town that received
either the land was donated to
them by the state or uh
significant portion of their
budget to build the facility,
then this would require that as
well.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
I am
I'm trying to, I'm, I think that
there's time here, the way that
I'm reading this bill for us to
implementation and planning. Is
that what's implied?
Uh, by, by having these dates
and these the the the language
that moves us towards that state
manager. Thank you, Madam Chair
and thank you, Representative.
Yes, well, this is uh uh water
conservation project that will
definitely save um our state um
are drinkable water and be able
to affect the timeline that we
have established in that report
in 2024, but it's also an
opportunity for the state to
lead in this manner. Um, 80.
% of our drinkable water is used
through the agricultural
community and I know I like to
eat and so I, I would like to
bring some other water
conservation efforts from other
resources besides just our
agricultural community. This is
an opportunity for our state to
lead in that way.
You mentioned I do support this,
um, like I said, this is, you
know, we should have been doing
this, and I think we have been
moving towards this, but to set
some parameters and how we get
there is really, uh, is planning
to make a good plan. I wish we
had more planning, to be quite
frank, I think we'd already be
there by now. I think some of
the concern I heard too is the
artificial turf, uh, is that
addressed in this bill, Madam
Chair?
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representative. It's
not addressed in this bill, but
if it's something that is chosen
to replace your living turf with
this bill does not impede or
require that. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Um, and I'm bringing that
up because I was working with
students, uh, just last week and
talking about artificial turf
that set um Highland University
that's been there for a number
of years and maybe and the
concerns because of the, the uh
manufactur
um chemical properties of that
turf, um, but that, that would
be another discussion. But I
just wanted to bring that
attention to the, the sponsor
and to the committee that it
could be um an issue too, but
when we're looking at our shop,
we're looking at
Areas where um communities need
to come together and use
That type of, um, industrial
turf, then.
I'm glad you made that exception
at this point. However, I'm just
letting us know that there's,
there's some other questions
and, uh, I support this bill. I
think that we're going to
ultimately, we're going to save
money because we're going to
conserve water. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Your representative Barrago.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um, and
good morning, Representative
Kates, um, you know, I, I
support this bill.
Partially, I have to say that,
um, I think, um, there's, I have
some questions and I don't think
the bill has gone far enough to
answer those questions. Um,
Who is going to enforce this.
And who is going to do an
assessment of all the state
buildings to determine whether
or not they are in compliance or
not in compliance, um, and these
are my questions, madam Chair,
and if, if I could just go
through this cause I've had a
little bit of experience, um,
with, you know, implementation
for enforcement, um,
Also, is it a requirement that
it becomes artificial turf or
could it be, for example,
eroscape as a replacement
because I also know that
artificial turf brings in a lot
of heat, um, so, um, thank you,
madam. May I answer that
question?
Can I, can I just finish, um, we
have, um.
I mean, there are, there are a
lot of.
Sort of, uh, really nice um.
Landscape plans that could be
done with just uh er scape and
not artificial turf.
Um, so is it, is that a
requirement that they would have
to replace it with artificial
turf or so I, I have a lot of
questions about it.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representative. So,
um, as stated, this does not
require any installation of, of
artificial turf with this
requires is that we no longer
use as a state nonfunctional
turf in our landscaping such as
the patches of grass around this
roundhouse that served no
purpose except take water.
Um, and my first question about.
Who's going to actually?
Be enforcing this.
Cause I don't see anything in
here about.
You know, who would be doing
that, what department, what
agency.
Um, would actually be making
sure that
You know, for example, the state
building in
I don't know more County.
Or somewhere like that, um, or a
small community and hobs or
Um
What what agency would be?
Actually going out and making
sure that by 2032.
This has
They have complied
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representative. I
think that's an excellent
question. So um I believe the
GST would do most of that,
although I do think that there
will be some incidents that
other types of agencies would be
more when the contract out, so,
um, I am open to a friendly
amendment to
Not identify one agency but to
broaden the, the, the
appropriate agency that oversees
the facilities management of
that municipality's land is the
one in which they would be
reported to and then GSD would
actually provide the support in
getting them compliant.
And Madam Chair, I think that
that that would be something
that I would like to see in the
bill. Is it, um, you know,
there's an identifiable agency
that would.
Actually do an assessment of who
all the state buildings and then
um and maybe that's GST and then
Who would actually make sure by
2032 that
Uh, all the state buildings have
complied with this. I, I'm a
little concerned that we don't
have that little piece in there,
and I, it's an important piece
because there would have to be
an assessment of all the state
buildings and then there would
have to be, you know,
Some sort of plan that.
They would comply.
Um, and also, and I, and I don't
know if you would consider this,
um, Representative Cates, but.
Um, I think they may may need to
be an appropriation.
to do that. Maybe in FTE or
couple of FTEs that would
actually do that work. So I, I
just, you know,
This has happened before we did
this in the city of Albuquerque,
um.
several times on different
issues, and I just want to make
it a stronger bill, that's all.
And maybe
Maybe come back to us with that
information or maybe an
amendment to it.
Um, that, and I think it would
be a simple amendment.
But I think that it's important
enough that if you're, you
really wanna do this, that, that
has,
that peace representative
Barrego, um, I'm sorry,
representative block.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
and before I ask my questions on
that, on that point regarding
the amendment. This is the last
committee that this legislation
would be going forward before
the floor and in my opinion, at
least from my experience, it's
easier to amend something in a
committee then on the floor. So
I would, I was wondering if
maybe the representative would
be willing to roll this to
another committee just to make
sure that we get that amendment
in committee so it's easier on
the floor. Thank you,
Representative. I can take care
of that and I can amend the
enforcement.
um, a portion of this bill.
And I'd love to help you on
that, uh, Representative.
OK, and so to be clear, would
that be in this committee, Madam
Chair, or would it be on the
floor that you'd like to do
that. Thank you, Madam Chair. I
am, um, it is a sort of friendly
uh suggestion that I would roll
it currently and provide you
with the amendment for this
committee. I do agree with you.
It is easier in the committee
than on the floor.
OK, so Madam Chair, I, I guess
should I ask questions about
your bill now or should we wait
until it's rolled, Madam chair.
Please go ahead and ask your
questions. OK, got it. Sorry.
Thank you so much Madam Chair.
If I may.
But
What if, what if the
I think we ought to discuss it
after the amendment.
Because we've always run into
that, that we're discussing a
bill that's been amended and
blah, blah blah.
Let's go ahead and ask our
questions and we'll roll the
bill and we'll bring that bill
back as amended. So this
representative block.
Thank you, Madam. OK, thank you,
Madam Chair, and I appreciate
that and so I guess I might have
questions on the amendment,
which I would ask questions on
at that time, but for the bill
now, I just have a few. So Madam
Chair Representative, I see on
page 2 line 7 or 6 and 7, it
says non-functional turf on a
state-owned or state funded
property that is removed shall
be replaced with drought and
climate resilient landscaping.
So state funded property, Madam
Chair, does this include
Any and all project or state
funded project that is
Be funded by the state. So for
example, hospitals, they are
funded by the state. There's
projects in my area. There's a
zoo, we have, we've let a.
Actual grass in the zoo on
medians and things. And so Madam
Chair Representative, I'm
wondering about that. How would
that affect those kinds of
entities, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representative. All
the sites that have either
received uh a portion of their
funding, um, from the state or
that are state owned would be
affected and we're exactly
trying to target those tufts of
grass in the parking median that
are just
Taking water.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative. OK, I feel like
that is super broad in my
opinion, because we've got a lot
of medians in Almogordo. If
you've been to Almogordo, we've
got so many medians and so many
different trees and and fauna
and flora and and grass on the
medians, and I think that would
really
That would really take quite a
bit of effort and money to do.
So, Madam Chair Representative,
is there some kind of
Added appropriation in here to
help alleviate that burden on
the counties, cities, because
some of these medians have been
around since like the early
1900s. I'm sure. Thank you,
Madam Chair, and thank you,
Representative. No, there is no
appropriations in there. This is
why we have um 7678 years to be
able to be in compliance with
it, so 8 different budget cycles
to be compliant with it. There
will also be a savings to all
those municipalities and the
water use.
usage.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative, and I, and I
understand that we're giving
them time, but
I would rather, in my opinion,
with my capital outlay dollars,
the few that I get in the house.
I don't want to have to spend
them on medians.
For for this legislation. I'd
rather be spending this money
on, on things to help my county,
things to help the the fire
department, etc. And so I do
think that even though there is
a 678 year implementation plan
that this, this would truly
affect all of those projects
because I know when it comes to
putting out an RFP, getting a
bid, having this done because in
a smaller city like mine, we
have to do things like that.
It's expensive, especially for
all those medians that are grass
is that there's a road called
Juniper Drive in Almogordo and
all the way down that road, it's
maybe 1 mile stretch. It's all
just
It's all turf, all of it. It's
and and so yeah, we may be
saving money in this and maybe
in the long run, but Madam Chair
Representative, according to
what I'm reading, er skiing in
many cases can absorb heat in
certain environments and
extensive landscape elements
such as gravel and rock can lead
to higher surfaces and ambient
temperatures. So then,
That increased heat and that
change in climate that would
happen to that, wouldn't that
negate the very purpose of
climate resilient landscaping,
Madam Chair Representative.
Madam Chair Representative,
that, that is why we're giving
that time to be able to make
that planning. Um, the, uh, the
landscape that you are
Talking about
Um, it, it could that that
climate change occurs with large
patches of grass and
I don't
Know if what you're talking
about. We're not talking about
fields, we're talking about
tufts of grass and parking lots
are down 1 mile stretch of road
on Juniper Drive, correct? Thank
you, Madam Chair. Uh, yeah,
well, I'm talking about medians.
We're talking about medians in
this legislation. So those,
those are medians that actually
people used to go walk their
dogs and stuff. And so if we
replace that with artificial
turf, not only would I be
concerned about, about those,
those roads and those roadways,
but also if we put artificial
turf like the good
representative said it would
increase the heat.
On those patches and also a lot
of artificial turf is used and
made with POs.
Which I have a huge significant
problem with because I don't
want the dogs that are currently
doing their business and, and
being walked on these medians
that are made of grass. I don't
want that to be replaced with
PFOS with these forever
chemicals that could hurt the
dogs. So Madam Chair
Representative, I know either
one, even if they didn't replace
it with that, where else are we
going to walk the dogs? It would
be, we'd have to go to the dog
park, which is all the way
across town, and so that's a big
concern for me as well. This is
a mandate for counties, cities,
and
When it comes to the
implementation of this, I'm just
concerned about how that will go
and where we can
Give people options for doing
things like walking their dogs
on a median. I think it's,
there's there's an apartment
complex right in front of the
medians and a lot of people use
that to walk their dogs. So I'm
just wondering how, how do we
envision that?
Working, Madam Chair
Representative.
Madam Chair Representative, um,
this bill will not affect a dog
parks. Those are functional
turfs, so they don't affect
that. Um, uh, this bill does not
Um
Protect medians for people to
socialize or walk on. Um, we've
had bills in the past that
actually forbid that. Um, so
there's a lot of uh
Uh, studies showing that that is
not an appropriate place to be
walking as well. Um, this bill
also as stated um earlier does
not require artificial turf to
be installed.
What it is is New Mexico is um a
beautiful and strong culture,
and I don't believe that rolling
grass hills represents that. So,
um,
You're absolutely right. This is
a very big implementation.
Um, and but we have narrowed it
to state fund and state-owned so
that it can lead its way.
Um, as we are under a water
crisis right now, and it is an
opportunity for our state to be
able to take a lead on this and
be able to conserve the water.
Uh, that we believe does not
represent our state and maybe
um.
Uh, expand, it can expand our
timeline as our water Doolittles
over the next 50 years.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, and I get, I
understand the point of the
legislation. I just don't
understand how it will go in
practice when it comes to what
it applies to, and also,
Just the scope of it is so
broad, in my opinion, because,
like, for example, what about
turf that serves an
environmental role like a turf
for medians that control water
runoff.
How would those be affected?
Because they, they control
something. There's an argument
to be made that control
something, but they are not
technically functional in that
way, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, thank you,
Representative. The
functionality of the turf, um,
is also requires it to be man.
irrigated.
So, uh, seating underneath power
lines for for erosion. Um, I
know we do use a lot of natural
seeds in the Farmington area,
those are not affected and will
not be required to be changed
because they are not, they are
using the natural flow of water
per se, to be able to maintain,
and they are already low water
use grasses.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. So then, what
about native?
Grass that let's just say
there's a, there's a
Median, cause I know there are
actually some in my area of the,
of the state. It's a medium that
has natural grass, that's
naturally occurring. There's
just a road that was built
afterward and it's put, put on
that road. We kept a median that
has the natural grass, and we do
have to water it occasionally. I
mean, we're not, we're not gonna
let it just be dead in that
median. What about that, a
natural grass that's already
there, and I'm sure.
Madam Chair, there are experts
in, uh, our GSD who will be
working with landscape
architects, I'm sure, who will
advise them on what would be um
appropriate plants and
landscaping for low water use in
these public areas.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair, and
then you, you said something
about colleges and universities
being exempted. I'm trying to
find that in your bill. Can you
tell me a little bit about,
about that. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Representative
College and universities are not
mentioned specifically in this
bill, what is specifically
mentioned this bill is.
areas that have non-functional
turf, but have chosen to use
reclaim and repurpose water and
all of our state universities
already have systems in place
for that. So they're um they're
nonfunctional turf is exempt.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you, Representative. Yeah,
I think.
I mean, I get the idea of your
bill. I think there may be some
unintended consequences,
especially with er escaping
water benefits. I see that they
absorb a lot more than they
And they reflect, and even the
reflection creates some some
climate change in the immediate
areas of those medians, which I
could get you some data on that.
This is uh Boulder City Review.
They have an article about that
from some scientists who did a
study on that. And so I just
want to make sure that we don't
have unintended consequences.
And then the the burden on the
cities, counties, because I fund
the city and the county with my
capital outlay. Technically they
are all.
State funded now and especially
with all the other funds that we
have coming in for projects,
etc. I just am really, I really
have a lot of concerns regarding
that because
It's going to be a burden for my
county. We have a lot of medians
that people use, and I mean,
some people, they, they need to
walk their dog on the median,
and it's, it's not intended to
be functional cause it also has
those has trees on there, and
these are trees that are
hundreds of years old that were
planted back in 1899. So I think
it's, there could be unintended
consequences for those plants,
for the trees, and just for the
budget of the city and county,
which we're already hurting.
We're still trying to recover.
So I think that post COVID,
this, this is something that
To really hurt those smaller
communities, and so can't
support the legislation, but I
appreciate the thought process
behind it. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
I
so thank you very much. um, I
just like to say that we
purposely, I know the bill looks
very, very simple, but we
purposely made sure that we did
not say remove the watering
system, which would put um trees
in jeopardy. Um, we do, do not
say that we do not dictate that.
We leave it to the subject.
of that specific landscaping
area, and I understand the
burdensome municipalities
throughout the state, but I can
think of no greater burden than
having 25% less water in 50
years for our grandchildren and
that it is time for our state to
take a lead in this and say how
much do we really need that
patch of grass outside this
roundhouse. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative Anya
Arnu.
Oh, I didn't have any questions.
OK. Representative Mejia.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Looking at page 2, line 4
through 8. It says um.
I'm sorry.
Um
Why don't shall be used to
irrigate non-functional turf on
a state-owned or state funded
properties. Uh, what about a
refuges. Um
Mm
Refuge for victims of domestic
violence. I mean, they are state
funded.
So, I will be, how will they be
subject to this requirements.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. Can you say
what about our, I, I had heard
refu refuges, the refuges for um
better um
Woman or victims of domestic
violence.
They are state funded.
And, and is the
patch of grass on a playground
for children. Is it on a soccer
field? What, what is the
functionality of the grass
refuge in the uh physical uh
building.
Inside the building.
Outside in the building, yeah.
Outside in the building. If
there's a function to the grass,
then there's no issue at all
with that, that they can
maintain that if it's the
nonfunctional grasses the little
patches on the medians in the in
the parking lot we're asking
that they remove that.
The question is, I mean, they,
they, um, there's state funded
and they're struggling to meet,
I mean.
To help the uh the better or
domestic violence, um, um.
Woman. So,
How are we requiring them to to
change that.
I mean
was my question.
There is no um.
funding for them. There's not
enough funding for them, so it's
an extra burden for them.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Representative. That is why
there's such an expanded
timeline on this as well for us
to be able to chip away funding
for that. Um, there will also be
a cost saving as well if they
are or if the state is paying
for their water for the
landscaping.
Thank you for that answer.
Madame Fleurlier Skipanski.
I'm sorry, Madam Chair. Um,
Representative and Madam Chair,
um,
I really
Applaud you for the bold.
Thinking in this bill. I think
it's really an interesting
concept. Um, I think back to
The history of this building,
um, and when you look back at
the photos of the Capitol, right
after it was built, it is
surrounded by fields of grass.
Um, sort of up on the hill.
Incredibly imposing.
Uh, and the work that has been
done over the years by our
excellent staff here to
Create landscaping, a lot of
native plants, um, many of them
grown in a makeshift greenhouse
right above the rotunda, um,
glass, uh, uh, by a former
director of council service is
just kind of a testament to the
innovation and the determination
of of staff who who really were
not charged with making this a
beautiful landscape and did that
in their free time, or maybe a
Stress relief. Um, so, but Madam
Chair, uh, representative, I do
have a few, um,
Concerns and you know, we have a
lot of experience with this in
Santa Fe, because Santa Fe, for
as long as I've lived in Santa
Fe, uh, Santa Fe has not
permitted the installation of
new turf.
Um, at your home, um, or in
medians. And uh, however, um,
And that's led to, that's led to
some incredibly beautiful
medians around Santa Fe. Um, all
you have to do is drive down Old
Pecostrail and you will see, um,
in native landscaping with water
diversion, uh, appropriate, uh,
uh, systems created by rocks,
etc. It's not gravel.
Um, it is native, uh, plants
that need to be maintained over
time and they need to be
trimmed, etc. um, but they don't
necessarily need a whole lot of
additional irrigation. Some of
the medians near the capital,
uh, do require, they are
incredibly beautiful, but they
do require irrigation.
Um
I do not know how we would
deliver reclaimed or recycled
water to these medians. And so
that is one.
Thing that I am struggling with
because um,
Uh, we, we try to use our
capital outlay dollars very
efficiently, trying to use our
state funding very efficiently
and
I don't know how we would pipe
recycled water to medians. I
think it would be easier to
create a reclamation, uh, like
at the Capitol, for example,
even though we do have a lot of
native landscaping around the
edges. There are these large
patches of grass sort of behind
the trees. Um, that the staff
enjoy all summer. I think we
could install a reclamation
system at the Capitol that that
had water catchment and then it
redistributed, but for medians,
I, I
I'm not as familiar with the
technology, um.
So that's, that's one concern I
have. The other, you know,
including state funded property
means that you are capturing
Many, many projects as some uh
of the committee members have
noted that
are already really struggling to
get by.
You know, for example, the
domestic violence shelters
haven't had an increase in 5
years, um, which is something I
am
Working on, but I
So Madam Chair, representative,
I
I really appreciate the idea of
state-owned property.
Because I believe that the state
has an obligation to do what it
needs to address, uh, climate
change, climate change and
address uh future projected
water shortages, the state
funded property would capture.
All of the roads funded by the
state road fund and the local
government road fund. Um, it
would cover most of our
healthcare, well, virtually all
of our healthcare facilities,
many of our community service
organizations, many, many NGOs
that may not have the ability to
sort of add re reclaimed water
systems.
Um
So, so as you're thinking about
this amendment, Madam Chair, on
that point, I would, uh, wonder
if you're open to adding some
specificity around the technical
assistance that could be
provided by GSD, um,
Because I think, I think that's
gonna be required.
Um, just I'll pause there and,
and just get your thoughts on
that.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative, um, in all
fairness, my co-sponsor is a rep
representative Ferrari and this
was her bill in 2023 that was.
10 times bigger than this, and I
have, this is what I said let's
narrow it to what I think we
could do for leadership. So if I
need to narrow it some more.
I'm, I'm more than OK and I'm
sure my co-sponsor will be as
well. Um, I will say that
nothing here requires that the
medians use reclaimed water,
they require they get rid of
non-functional turf.
Um
But, but I do understand the
difference between state owned
and state funded and that that
might be the, the piece of the
pie that we need to be able to
get down to, so thank you. I, I
will certainly would look to
that when I um reamend this
bill.
Madam Chair and Representative,
thank you for that, and I would
just add two comments. One,
maybe an approach, you know, for
example, we have 1% for art in
public places.
So 1% of capital projects over a
certain amount is dedicated to
Art, um, installation of local
New Mexico artists in public
places. That's one of the
reasons why we have such
beautiful art in some of our
larger public buildings. It
might be an alternative approach
to address the uh state-funded
projects. If you had a minimum
project size to where this would
apply, or if you wanted to
pursue an alternative, um,
funding mechanism for that where
you're, if, if a capital project
is over a certain amount.
They need to include water
catchment systems or reclaimed
water or not, you know, include
the contents of this bill and
capital. I mean, there's just, I
think there's a couple ways to
get at that.
Um, but the state funded
properties, I understand because
we have more control over those
properties and we can, um,
Uh, do that and secondly, Madam
Chair, Representative, I, if you
are planning to.
Well, I think either way,
actually, with just state owned
property, but also if you
continue with state funded
property, I would just in uh the
enforcement provision that
Representative Borego had
suggested, I would just also
include a way for a a local
government to indicate that
Designate this piece of turf.
is functional.
Because local governments are
going to understand, oh, this is
actually somewhere where people
walk their dogs is
representative block mentioned
or, you know, this, this piece
of grass actually uh serves the
children of the shelter that are
staying there, uh, even though
it may not be, it may be an ad
hoc playground, right? We all, I
certainly grew up playing in
random pieces of property that
were, you know, probably
privately owned, but nobody paid
attention to me.
So, those kinds of ad hoc
spaces, local governments
understand those spaces and
maybe they
could designate to GSD or
whoever you're setting is your
enforcement mechanism. This is a
functional
Piece of turf and just allowing
that rather than the state
determining, oh, this looks
nonfunctional, so, you know, you
need to um
Apply this legislation to it, so
that those are just a few
suggestions I had to, to um make
this a bit more um detailed, um.
And were
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. So Representative,
with that, we're rolling your
bill and your, um, you can work
on your minis, please work with
our great staff regarding your
amendment, and then we'll put
you back on the agenda.
Very much
Thank you.
OK. Representative Zamora,
you're in the hot seat. We have
a lot of questions.
I just have one in case.
Are you guys
Morning, sir. Morning, morning.
Madam Chair.
Are we ready? Madam Chair,
members of the committee, House
Bill 155 relating to gaming
control changing and employment
qualifications for the executive
director of Gaming Control
Board, removing the limit on
annual salary of the executive
director in the gaming control
board, and Madam Chair, with
that I'll let my uh expert
witnesses introduce themselves.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members. My name is Pat Garrett.
I am the chairman for the gaming
control board.
Good morning Madam Chair,
members of the committee. I'm
Michelle Pato. I'm staff
counselor.
Madam Chair with that will stand
for questions.
Hey, let's
Go to the audience
Anybody in the audience in
support position of the bill.
Any help out online?
If you'd like to make public
comment, please raise your hand.
Mhm
The committee members.
Representative block.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representative
Zamora, and I feel like I just
saw you like 8 hours ago or
something. Good to see you
again. Uh, so, Madam Chair
Representative, I'm just
wondering,
One que one question, by the
way, one question, uh, why did
it currently say not to exceed
the governor's salary in the
current statute, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, Representative, um,
this statue came about when the
state chose to legalize gaming
back in uh I believe that was
1997, in my opinion, I think at
the time it was uncharted
territory and a lot of the
statues that were created were
Over regulated or over over
analyzed and I think they put
this in as a checks and balance
for some reason like other than
that, I don't really know why
this particular statute was
passed and implemented into law.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
and uh yeah, I think that
seem simple enough to me. I
think that we need to get
qualified folks in these roles,
and I think this was one way
that we can do it, so that's
all, Madam Chair. Thank you.
Representative Ona Nonu.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I
just had one really simple
question on page
one.
As we're taking out, um,
governmental gaming and
replacing essentially replacing
um regulatory agency.
Or gaming industry. So my
question is.
Like what, what does that mean
in sense of like what does
experience in the gaming
industry entail and what with
the qualifications be.
What would qualify someone to be
executive director going forward
with this new um.
Definition.
Basically, we're requesting this
change in the statute because
with the way that it's listed
now, it limited limits our pool
of potential hiring uh
individuals that are qualified
for this. So as it stands now,
uh, I would essentially have to
hire someone within within the
agency where we have uh give or
take 50, 50 employees at any,
any given time. Um, and so as a
result, they have to have so
many years of experience within
the gaming industry and so
forth. So, uh, when that, when
the position does become
available, essentially, there's
34, maybe 5 people that are
qualified applicants for the
position, and it doesn't
necessarily mean that they would
apply.
So, but in order, by doing this,
it opens up the gaming pool. We
can, we can hire from say tribal
uh entities within the state or
people that are involved in the
in the gaming industry have been
for a number of years. This
allows them to apply for this
particular position, it opens up
our pool and, and hopefully get
a qualified executive director
to to run the agency.
Right, thank you. That's all I
had, Madam Chair.
Representative Lujan.
Is this a current position uh
under uh uh.
An exempt position to the state,
um.
Guidelines, Manager.
Madam Chair
Members representative, um, yes,
this is a position. It serves at
the leisure of the board.
And Madam Chair, this is an
independent board.
Yes, ma'am.
So the, so right now under the
uh the constructs of the board,
they, they, um, hired this
position, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair Representative,
that's correct. Madam Chair, so
right now the, the governor
doesn't have any representative,
that's correct.
Um
But I don't care, it's still,
they still have, they're still
required under the DF DFA uh
composition of a government acts
and exempt position. Is that
correct, ma'am?
Madam Chair, that's correct.
Thank you. um.
I understand you.
Your, your dilemma here, what
you're trying to do but this
does circumvent, um, what we
already have in place with other
exempt positions under DFA
guidelines.
Um, having worked for the state
government and understanding
those, the differences so it's
still subject to approval by the
government.
I'm sure representative, I don't
believe so, as I said they serve
at the leisure of, of the gaming
control board. So we would, uh,
the board would determine who
the qual uh would review the the
applicant pool and determine who
would be hired for this
particular position.
There would be no oversight from
the 4th floor. Correct, Madam
Chair, but when there are any
currently any adjustments to
salaries and government exempt
position, it has to have the
approval of the governor, is
that correct?
Madam Chair, if I may.
Madam Cha so and, and
representative so.
That would be the reason for
running this bill, right? And,
and then if this bill passes
through the
Through the, through the
processes and then the governor
can decide on that whether she
supports the bill or doesn't,
Madam Chair.
Man, I just, I just questioned
the how this would affect other
independent boards, for example,
OSI Office of this um
superintendent of insurance
which has the like features of
an independent board who um
hires uh, yeah, um, approves the
hiring of their director, but.
Salary and there are other
positions that then if we move
forward with something like
this, then we leave open the
right to other exempt positions
for other.
Other like agencies to have this
to conduct the same measures.
I just feel like it's not across
the board is what I'm saying.
We're making a carve out
specifically for, for this sport
in this position.
That make sense? I'm sorry.
And, and Madam Chair and
Representative, you probably
understand the process a little
better than most of us here or
all of us here on this table.
So, but our concerns are to fix
what the
gaming commissioner has in front
of him and the issues that he's
been saving, uh.
Having to deal with in the past
years and not being able to fill
that position, Madam Chair and
representative. Madam Chair, I,
I completely understand that and
I sympathize with that. However,
there is a process right now.
We're hearing this from all of
our agencies where they're
taking uh measures within their
agencies to move in this
direction. What is that, that's
causing some conflict within our
budget process. It's causing
conflict with um rules that are
already in place, Madam Chair,
so I, at this point, I, I
really appreciate what you're
doing. I understand it, but I
believe there's a different
process and a bigger, um,
there's a bigger issue at hand
here that if we allow this to
happen, then we're setting a
precedent that we don't
necessarily want to set, we need
to have more guidance and more
information from our boards, you
know, um, and I'll.
Doesn't apply to you
particularly, but it inherently
is part of what the state
personnel office does. Um, the
difference is with exempt
position, DFA, it has
jurisdiction in the governor's
office does under those
positions.
Um
Uh, state personnel has a
jurisdiction over um all other
positions, Madam Chair, and
what's happening
Without throughout our state
agencies is that we're trying to
leap and do our own, have our
own uh process within each
agency and that's causing um
issues and, and problems um with
our budget.
And I just wanted to bring that
forward and say I can't support
this as it is. Um, I'd like to
work with you and I'd like to
work with all of our agencies,
and I think that's what we're
doing. We're going to be putting
$170 million towards a study to
really understand how we can,
um, fully, um,
take care of these issues, Madam
Chair. Thank you.
Senator Brego.
I'm going to pass, um, I had
some questions Madam Chair.
If, if we could respond to
Go ahead and respond. Thank you,
Madam Chair, members
representative Luhan, um, I
appreciate the the comments that
you gave right there, and I
understand what you're saying,
but at the end of the day, this,
this statue is is specific to
our agency, um, and I'm seeking
a way to resolve the issue when
it comes to this executive
director because as it stands
right now, um, when you have a
cap on this specific salary, um,
I think we're all aware that our
our our current governor.
Um, I, I, according to Sunshine
Portal, she makes $110,000
annually. Um, most executive
directors with agencies of
comparable size make a
considerable amount of more
money than that. And my, my, my
worst fear is, is in 2 years,
um, I have an executive director
in place. We get a new governor
that wants to come in and say,
I'll work for $1.
What do we do? We're, we're,
we're stuck then. So I'm just,
I'm just trying to fix this
issue for my agency. Thank you.
Just really briefly, I
understand that, but what is
happening is we're we're
creating um outside uh conflicts
and, and issues with our
budgeting process for agencies
to take it upon themselves to
make these adjustments and
making
sets of rules for themselves
regarding um salaries, so.
In effect, uh, we need to look
at it as a whole in order to fix
the bigger problem because I can
tell you, you met CYFD and other
agencies where we're looking to
have those where increases are
very much needed, Madam Chair.
You're having the same issues
and we're asking them.
So, um,
Refer back to us, the governing
body. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair
We're gonna call the question.
Or we're gonna be going back and
forth. So I'm gonna call the
question. I have a do pass
motion by Representative
Barrego,
representative. I have a second,
please call roll.
Did you want to explain your
Your, your, or did you have a
comment, Representative Berego?
No, I just had a comment, Madam
Chair, um, and I just love to
meet with you guys a little bit
more cause I don't know much
about the gaming industry, other
than going into a casino and
putting 25 cents in, um, so I'd
love to get, get to know your
agency a little bit better.
We have a motion for.
Do you, do you still
Oh, Madam Chair, I didn't make a
motion. OK, I'll make a motion,
Madam Chair, for a do pass. So I
have a motion for due pass by
Representative Block and a
second by Representative Anarnu,
please call, uh, please call.
Representative Anna. Yes.
Representative Black. Yes sir.
Represented.
Representative Lujan.
A resented Maia.
Yes.
Madam Floor leader.
Yes.
Representative Zamora.
Yes.
Representative Borego.
Sorry, Madam Chair, I'm still
debating it in my head, um, I.
I'm gonna say it.
Madam Vice Chair, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. You
have a due pass. Thank you,
expert witnesses. Thank you,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee.
Thank you. Our meeting has
adjourned.
