Has been.
As we have a quorum.
Please rise for today's
indication offered to us by the
general.
Percent of Garrett.
Starring in prayer.
As we gather today on this
twenty fifth day of February for
our house floor session I pray
that you'll give us wisdom
patience humor expertise
stability and all the things
that we'd like to model for our
own children nieces and nephews
father you've given us this
great commission we take it so
seriously we want to really
serve each and every New Mexico
and in the best way possible so
that their lives can be filled
with good health.
Jobs satisfaction Education so
bright us we pray for the
president of the United States
president Biden and all of our
leaders on the national level
the state level and throughout
our local areas and we thank you
for this opportunity to serve
also please guide our families
throughout the state they
sacrifice a great deal for us to
be here and we're grateful for
what they allow us to do in
their support I pray this in the
names and faces of everybody
gathered here today in the
chamber throughout the round
house and throughout the state
and on the webcast all men.
German Representative Martinez
please lead us in the pledge of
allegiance.
Because of the flag of the
United States of America and to
the Republic for which it stands
one nation under god indivisible
with liberty and justice for
all.
captions clone influencia
Representative Armstrong please
leaders in the cement of New
Mexico's flag.
This
is good morning this is
the next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
Hearing objection it is so
ordered.
One.
Announcements.
Mr speaker.
In New Jersey so for a terrible
Representative black morning Mr
speaker I just want to bring the
body attention to on December
twelfth of this year we lost
former Representative Lori of
on.
She was my pre predecessor she
served with us in this house
from nineteen.
Last year right and they're
asking for the service and the
memory of Representative viruses
rise for a moment of silence
in memory of representative of
the late Representative bond.
The gentleman.
I don't know I don't know if
his.
Representative on she's still
here in my first term.
And I remember her coming into
the floor of the house chamber
with times
that she thought we were working
madam current floor dress of the
Johns and caring hello.
Percent as you recall where she
had his wax teeth that look like
a vampire teeth mission with the
show into the speaker wanted to
to to senator chair in Santa
with a voting stick which is a
the six foot.
A long stick in passionate
chairman and and the issue
really wasn't shy many folks
know that she wanted to wrap
things up on the floor she
thought as it was an appropriate
time we we certainly Mr.
Announcements.
This.
The house I.
Representative phone and she
not have been a pleasure to have
in the house floor.
She was this is.
District.
Representative seven with her
thank you Mr speaker thank you
generating.
Other announcements.
Some messages and some committee
reports and then we'll go under
third meeting.
Speaker.
Representative Garcia excuse me
for coming in late the.
in regards to Representative on.
This must be Kirk
Representative Bonner husband
were my first
Social outing buddies.
There is a big event going on at
the.
At the Santa Fe convention
center and
and we can set the same table
that was my first social event.
And then we sat together and
ever since then we kind of
really hit it off.
But but the one legislative
session really remembers.
As Representative Eli would put
on these big mama plastic lips.
And she would walk around the
chamber you know and kind of
awkward flamboyant costume that
she had on for that day.
And as she walked over by my
chair I stood up and gave her a
big smack right on the lips.
But I'm invested.
Since then she stopped wearing a
big mama plastic lives as the
more speakers she was a delight
to work with and then we really
gonna Mr and that we pray that
that Ghana has earned his in his
glory.
the most Baker dozens.
Thank you gentlemen.
gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Chavis.
This.
Mr speaker I do want to say
something about Representative
on the first time I managed to
reminded me of the from the and
the group of.
I used to get a kick out of it
because she served me and
Representative Aidan Wilson on
the house labor committee
whenever Representative Wilson
got really sick and could not
attend.
Representative.
Bonnen are wrong that committee.
And I know that.
In for later later on speaker
can you Martinez would have
first of the twenty M. and
representative Rick Miera.
And they could persuade her to
but with them every time seem
like I was the only dissenting
voice of the deadline for the
committee but I do want to
express what chairman Garcia
said the.
Rest in peace.
Representative on thank you Mr
chairman.
The gentleman from Bernalillo.
Is that we go to the next order
of business messages.
No objections were not clear to
me.
Mr speaker I'm directed to
inform that the gross cop would
have taxation revenue committee
system for hospitals emergency
classes the settlement fund
funded offices of the Senate
vote session in terms of risk
management and on house the
chief clerk this is really
interesting.
Mr speaker I'm directed to
inform us of the time because
of the number has influenced by
the officers of the Senate
opposition crosses the ministers
of the officers of the house
respective.
Senate chief clerk this is
Richard yes Representative Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
us of the Senate as passed
Senate bill twenty one as
amended Senator sixty four.
Senate bill one fourteen.
Senate bill one thirty one
Senate bill one forty five as
members of.
Senator two sixty six and
request the purpose of the house
respectfully submitted Lenore
and Senate chief clerk Mr chair
message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
that the Senate has passed
Senate Joint Memorial as amended
and across the concerns of the
house.
Representative Lenore and Lara
host Senate chief clerk this
will be entered.
Early on.
I'm.
The next order of business
introduction of legislation
projectionists order.
Clear to me.
House resolution the introduced
by Representative Ferrary
internet resolution proposing to
amend the constitution of New
Mexico creating a public officer
salary commission to establish
and limits the salaries of
elected officers and other
public offices as provided by
law during the constitutional
provision providing for
legislative per diem and mileage
and prohibition of legislative
compensation and amending or
repealing constitutional
provisions for the establishment
of certain executive and
judicial salaries by law
how straight resolution twelve.
Resolution term having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Judiciary Committee.
Senator twenty one as amended
introduced by Senator Gonzales
from investment intentions
oversight committee an afternoon
to try to have care many
uncertainties definitions and
retire Health Care Act to
conform to the federal patient
protection and affordable Care
Act repealing provisions of that
relating to the discount
prescription drug program
Senate's bill twenty one as
amended.
Senator.
Having been read twice by title
is referred to the health and
Human Services Committee the
state government elections and
Indian Affairs.
Senate bill sixty four
introduced by Senator Rodriguez
act relating to public finance
clarifying the types of
federally insured obligations in
which county and municipal
treasurers manifest certain
public money okay and technical
correction Senate bill sixty
for.
Sixty four having been read
twice by title.
Is referred to the local
governments land grants and
cultural affairs committee ants
commerce and economic
development.
Senate bill one fourteen
introduced by senator or.
And natural for creating medical
and geriatric for the procedures
and ending and sections of the
NMFA in nineteen seventy eight
Senator one fourteen.
Fourteen hundred twice by title
is referred to the concerned
public affairs guidance
Judiciary.
Senate one third.
Introduced by Senator Stewart
Stewart for the proposal capital
outlay oversight task force and
act relating to public school
capital improvements creating
discretionary program units
defining discretionary program
units excluding certain
programming it's in calculating
distributions to school
districts pursuant to the public
school capital improvement fact
Senate bill one thirty one.
Thirty one.
Having been read twice by title.
Amendment has been titles for
G. education contents taxation
and revenue.
Introduced by senator Byrd from
the legislative finance
committee and after the state
agencies providing some
incentives for certain agencies
Senate bill one forty five is
amended.
Times amended having been read
twice by title is referred to
the consumer public affairs
committee that's the state
government elections and Indian
Affairs.
Senate bill two sixty six
introduced by senators Ivey Soto
and.
And act relating to nonpartisan
judicial retention staggering
the terms of District Court
judges and metropolitan court
judges providing legislative
finance from the standpoint of
terms Senator two sixty six.
Two sixty six having been read
twice by title is referred to
the state government elections
and Indian Affairs Committee
dense Judiciary.
Senator.
As amended introduced by Senator
Pinto HMM are requesting United
States Congress deferred Fund.
of Indian education higher
education grant program Senate
Joint Memorial one as amended.
One is amended having been read
twice by title is for the state
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee.
House seventeen introduced by
representative Garcia a memorial
honoring James G. M. P..
And recognize outstanding
service to New Mexico house
members of the team.
Seventeen having been read twice
by title is ordered not printed
and placed on the speakers
table.
Representative Figueroa.
And while increasing the
secretary of higher education
secretary of public education to
convene a teacher workforce task
force to study increasing the
number and type of teachers and
to create a diverse qualified
and effective teacher workforce
to meet the needs of native
American students English
language learner students
students with disabilities and
low income students ever defined
in the Martinez and loving
first of state of New Mexico
House memorial intime.
Just having been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the Education
Committee.
How.
Introduced by Representative
custom in requesting the public
education department of the
school districts in providing
internet access to teachers
statewide hospital management
team.
Just having that interest or
title is ordered printed and
referred to the Education
Committee.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
The next order of business
committee.
Transaction is ordered clear to
me.
Madam development community
referred house bill two seven
for the legislative
considerations present the
condition that it did not pass
for that house commerce and
economic development committee
substitute for house bill two
seventy four of ten past and
referred to the provisions of
finance committee
Representative sister.
Mr speaker move adoption option
and families for and house bill
two seventy for the federal
committee report on commerce and
economic development committee
substitute for Bill two seven
for all those in favor please
signify by saying aye.
I.
Twenty point about the.
Mr speaker transportation
programs and capital
improvements committee has been
referred house bill one seventy
two I've had it under
consideration for some of the
commission voted to pass as
amended answer for the taxation
and revenue committee
respectfully submitted on
commission consent of the green
point for the interactive one
single phone and referred to the
journal so they're acted upon
individual.
Action is so ordered clear to
read house bill two seventy
five.
In the past.
House.
Just as amended respectfully
submitted a chair.
Reduction of the federal command
point on house bill is one
seventy two is.
Two seventy five and on house
memorial three as amended all
those in favor please signify by
saying aye.
Those reports reductive.
Education.
The firm has the one forty two
has had it under consideration
for some of the conditions to
pass Representative G. Andrés
Romero chin.
The center of the committee for
through the interactive devising
of overfishing the journals of
erected upon individual hearing
objection it is ordered for to
read.
House bill two forty seven.
To pass an incident probation
finance committee House Bill to
twelve to pass respectfully
submitted G. Andrés Romero
chair.
Mr speaker move adoption of the
committee report.
Options for the house was one
forty two to forty seven and a
two twelve all those in favor
please signify by saying aye.
I'm on this was me reinforce
reductive.
Public affairs committee to has
been referred house bill two
fifty for a has had it under
consideration point and if the
conditions are not passed the
house and Senate Public Affairs
Committee Sexton for House Bill
two fifty for the.
S. and referred to the Judiciary
Committee Representative
Elizabeth Liz Thomson sure means
consent of the committee
pleasure together act on a
single reflection the journals
of erected upon individual
hearing no objection it is
ordered where to read I spoke to
a six do not pass house consumer
Public Affairs Committee
substitute for house bill two
eighty six to pass an
institution.
House Bill three zero six two
passed.
To the Judiciary Committee
Representative Elizabeth Liz
Thomson chair.
Mr speaker move adoption
transaction and informed us one
two five four but a favorable
committee report on consumer
public affairs we substance
press one to fifty four house
bill.
Rules committee for has a twenty
six and a favorable committee
report on consumer public
affairs conception prostituted
sex and federal twenty four has
told friends six all those in
favor please signify by saying
aye.
All.
Reporter that.
Mr speaker state government
actions.
For hospitals affects has had it
under consideration point
recommendation that the path of
amended Representative
directions to the center of the
committee force retainer active
on a single vote reflection of
the journals of the record one
individual hearing objection is
so ordered for to read.
Health services committee
substitute for house bill one
forty seven ten pass.
House bill one.
Don't have.
House bill one ninety six as
amended to pass.
House bill two thirty nine to
pass respectfully submitted
dredging was to.
Who.
Transaction.
Which has built ninety six
amended Health Human Services
conservative house bill one
forty seven house built one nine
one ninety six and two thirty
nine all those in favor please
signify by saying aye I.
Of those of those may.
Reports are that the.
Mr speaker services community
hospital to funding the has had
it under consideration for the
Senate recommendation that is to
pass amnesty for the state
government elections Affairs
Committee Representative
Armstrong chair.
Consent to the committee for
for the minutes of the funds and
the vote and the function the
journals of their act fund
individually hearing objections
weren't clear to read.
Has one.
House.
Yes Representative Armstrong
chair.
Transaction management and
looking for some households to
forty nine has from where one in
House memorial to all those in
favor please signify by saying
aye.
Hi of those.
Enforcer that.
Mr speaker Commons development
referred house bill two seven
seven hundred consideration for
some of the conditions to pass
an answer from to login Veterans
Affairs Committee respectfully
submitted on time just as chair
members of the committee of was
right to get their act fund
single voter function in terms
of their act on individual
hearing no objections so ordered
where to eat.
House Bill three.
To pass.
Senate to.
Time passed as amended
respect from Sierra analysis
check.
Students can.
And options of course and
hospitals to ninety seven
hospital three zero three seven
two as amended all those in
favor please signify by saying
aye.
All
of those of those names twenty
point for that.
No more not you're not eating
them.
I'm hungry.
Mr speaker Judiciary Committee
and has been referred house
labor veterans military affairs
committee substitute for house
bill twenty has had it under
consideration for some of the
conditions that do not pass
about House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House labor
veterans and military affairs
conception for House Bill twenty
ten pass is but.
Legislature consent of the
committee for twenty act in a
partisan vote
journals of their act on
individual hearing objection is
so ordered click to read.
Has been ninety one as amended
to pass.
House.
To pass as amended.
Hi.
To have.
Two twenty six as amended to
have.
Two thirty one as amended to
pass respectfully submitted
legislature.
Mr speaker move adoption option
and for.
In the military affairs the
subsurface with limited federal
funding for a Judiciary
Committee sensitive customer
veterans military affairs any
substitute for House Bill
twenty.
As was one is amended one fifty
three as amended one eighty
three to twenty six and two to
thirty one as amended all those
in favor please signify by
saying aye on all those may the
force are adopted.
Mr speaker.
Land grants and cultural affairs
committee for hospital to twenty
for twelve consideration for
some of the condition of to pass
Representative.
Stature.
This must be criminal but are
the report the committee that
some Senator of Representative
committee and house bill two to
four the one thing I assume
they.
no.
The staff of the the.
The next business destination no
objection it is so ordered.
Mr and item fourteen generated
from.
Representative Dixon are you
reading on your first bill.
Thank you for having to that
point.
Action necessary for placing
House for one forty five on
final passage has been taken
generated to explain her first
bill.
Thank you Mr speaker of the
house bill one forty five crime
of illegally dismantling of
vehicle amends the criminal code
to make owning or operating chop
shops illegal.
Auto thefts are increasing
nationwide but here in New
Mexico and especially
Albuquerque or number two in the
nation for highest vehicle
thefts per one hundred thousand
as these rates continue to
increase more New Mexicans will
suffer from stolen vehicles and
every New Mexicans will be
affected due to increased
insurance costs.
Chop shops strip and dismantle
stolen vehicles for parts and
then reset all the parts there
are critical driver in the auto
theft food chain.
House bill one forty five gives
prosecutors a specific statute
for prosecution of chop shops.
Our law enforcement has come to
us and asked the legislature to
make it easier to charge and
prosecute the people who are
driving demand for stolen
vehicles.
Topshop operators are profiting
from the victims of auto theft
and the rest of us are left
holding the bag of higher
insurance rates.
Mr speaker I do have a floor
amendment prepared which I would
like to introduce.
And influenced also to a tune
for your amendment.
Thank you Mr speaker the two oh
two number is two two zero zero
zero nine point three.
Jalen to expose the amendment.
Thank you Mr speaker based on
discussions that we had in the
house Judiciary Committee the
amendment that we're introducing
changes the title of the crime
to make it a better description.
We have removed the should have
known language and in order to
simplify and clarify the
language of the bill we
redefined the definition of
Topshop by using the federal law
as our example.
Thank you Mr speaker.
I stand for questions thank you.
And.
Is there objection to it.
House one to house bill one
twenty five is adopted generated
too much for the COVID before we
proceed to debate on your first
bill.
No Mr speaker I am ready for
questions.
There is only one person for
debate.
General Chavis Representative
Ezzell.
Mr speaker thank you very much
for the gentle lady of the.
Mr speaker I will yield to the
gentle lady from Travis county.
Very.
Mr speaker gentle lady at I am.
The one forty five.
And.
I know that a couple years ago
and the health consumer public
affairs committee a former
representative to carry to feel
like.
Very important.
that my concern in words and is
still.
Will do.
Well but you are trying to drive
you will not be applicable.
I'm sorry on the amendment that.
All of the affordable Care Act
modifiable.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
if I may confer quickly with my
expert witnesses who are with
the Albuquerque police
department auto theft division.
Thank you very much.
This they are included thank
you.
Okay Mister speaker you checking
on that because more and more
we.
Tractors and other uses one
thing here for about two week
period in those tractors or
value today.
Make sure that they were close
included in this.
Or committee for the for the
the.
So Mister speaker gentle lady
thank.
The gentleman from Valencia
Representative Baldonado.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you Representative Dixon for
your first bill
and Mr speaker Representative
Dixon so I on my spare time when
they have that this is a
provided we don't get much for
time but I like to Tinker with
old jeeps and and taken down to
their to the frame and but I'm
all back together does this bill
provides for some safeguards for
the average your head guy that's
just you know doing these things
on the weekends is not not
stealing cars and not
shop shopping cart so to speak
is there do we plan for that in
your bill Mr speaker
Representative.
this reader okay great.
Thank you Mr speaker and
representative well that that
sorry thank you Mr speaker and I
do yield to the gentleman story
yes we the selective thank you
thank you Mr speaker and
representative yes you this
would not infringe on your
abilities to Tinker on the
weekends in your free time this
is specifically for chop shops.
Interesting thank you thank you
Mr speaker Representative Dixon
I apologize for not asking you
to yield I hope that you're your
bill is successful and look
forward to the song that's what
the next thank you Mr speaker.
And the Germans from the
gentleman from Santa Fe
Representative SAINATO.
You Mr speaker will the gentle
lady from Bernalillo sealed.
Thank you Mr speaker I will
yield to the gentle lady from
Santa Fe thank you Mr speaker in
the gentle lady I'm just a quick
question on how how the how this
would be enforced on and how
that would look like in the real
world.
Our local Senator Mentzer the
turnover is with them.
Thank you Mr speaker and
Representative
Serrato the lady from Santa Fe
so when the investigators the
police investigators identified
a location that appears to be a
Topshop we'll be able to collect
the evidence and build a case
and the case will then be
prosecuted under the new statute
as opposed to in previous
circumstances where they were
only able to prosecute under
racketeering or sounds that
other charges did not apply does
that answer your question yes
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady I yield back.
there is from an inmate.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative Garcia.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
yield.
Yes Mr speaker I will yield to
the gentleman from Bernalillo
county.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
from Bernalillo well
Surprise surprise.
Surprise.
And and don't get me know let me
ask.
is the most because we have a
very unique situation here.
And
and I hope we don't done.
Have a failure to communicate.
But we have a theme going on
with the the young ladies
legislation is not speaker.
And that theme is a car being.
So this is what I'm expecting.
Otherwise I want to have to
drive you if you sing another
different type of song.
Is the must be here is that we
have a car being in the
legislation so I'm expecting a
car song.
And we got some dandies in a
speaker we've got the I need to
you all.
Therefore lady from Pasadena.
Oh where oh where can My Baby be
just to name a few garcons.
Speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo.
And I'm hoping that you got one
lined up.
And if not you're gonna have to
do a score of a hundred.
On a different type of song.
Is the most beaker.
And this must be for you know
I've mentioned some of the John
rose.
That
our colleagues of some
throughout the years.
But I failed to mention some.
you know I I'm not the first.
Some director in fact the one
that started the song being was
Representative George died from
Santa Rosa.
But during his tenure.
He had an airforce points on.
An army fights on.
A navy fights on.
Aside from the different genres
that I mentioned before.
if I.
Rock and roll I rock.
We noticed I mentioned the kiss
on by our kids from Rio Rancho.
rancheras spent on general
Spanish school Rio on country.
Children song.
Thank you Mr sun first time
ever.
Different from the Air Force
army and navy I some more
speaker.
And naturally
are some outstanding songs are
not allowed by.
Representative Allison but John.
And the and not from.
Representative Eli.
You know beautiful opera.
so you've got some competition
in terms of existing John runs.
But.
I'm holding you to acquire song.
And it does not going to come
through then you're gonna be
looking at talking points.
So
A one in a two and a three it
Joe.
Thank you Mr speaker and
representative from Bernalillo I
am unfortunately going to
disappoint because I was not
prepared to do a car song I did
however pick a song that both of
my girls who are at ten and
twelve love and so hopefully
some of the members of
the
house will know this song and I
am looking forward to having
some assistance later on from my
fellow freshman.
So here we go.
The same.
I don't know but I'm taking me
like it's
game.
It's nine it.
The state and the street that's
a knock out buddy stated in a
tweet that's a cop out which is
like Hey.
Are you okay.
And I am trying to mess with
your self expression but I
learned the lesson that stress
and an assessment that somebody
else is no fun.
And six cents does never broke
my phone so no.
And just like.
thank.
Thank
you.
The general.
Yes you have spontaneous back up
that might be the first.
The official record keeper of
House.
Senator Stewart of spontaneous
back up ever before.
speaker but does the more
speaker the sun wasn't so hot
but the city face for her
daughters I give it a passing
grade.
Thank you.
The gentle lady to close.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
house bill one forty five as
amended do now pass.
House bill one forty I just
wanted the vote is now open.
Thirty seconds to close.
Members without a reported the.
Representative Chandler.
Yes Representative.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Harper.
Representative.
Nine hundred sixty into a for an
soon get it has been one forty
five as amended has duly passed
the house.
Mexican item number twenty eight
gentleman from St Matthews are
Marian prepared on that item.
Speaker I am prepared thank you.
I'm
sorry for placing Senate finance
committee sensitive percent
don't agree with an emergency
clause on final passage has been
taken gentlelady to explain the
bill.
Thank you Mr speaker members of
the house
Committee substitute Senate bill
three is an update to the small
business recovery loan act that
we passed in the June special
session.
That act was an effort to
stimulate our economy by
providing low interest loans to
are struggling small business
community.
The authority to make those
loans ended on December thirty
one twenty twenty.
This bill re authorizes the loan
program we simplified criteria
but continues safeguards with
that I stand for questions.
Gentle lady to close.
Mr speaker I move that committee
substitute just Senate bill
three do passed with an
emergency clause on June.
When I'm close to me there's no
one on the board.
And I see I see generated close.
If you see I mean.
Mr speaker I'm sorry what I I
didn't understand what happened.
Thank you with.
Mr evidently as many of us have
had he was having internet
problems this system would not
open up he was trying to get on
and he was on.
Okay well so we will we've
called the votes will lose what
unanimous consent for questions
from the Jones leverage is gone
so we'll back up.
Jennifer Lee is thank you Sir.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Yes Representative changes are
paired terms of snow falls.
It takes a minute to look back
up when the.
When the bill is announced.
Will Mr speaker will the gentle
lady yield.
Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman from Lee County.
Thank you Mr speaker generator
this is an extension.
Okay loan program that was
passed.
In the one of the emergency
sessions of last year is that
correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes
that is correct and Mr speaker
gentle lady that program was
largely unsuccessful but here's
there wasn't much money loan
program is also correct Mr
speaker and gentleman I would
disagree with that there was
over forty million dollars in
loans made and that according to
our records from the New Mexico
finances Authority meant that
three thousand to four thousand
jobs were saved and at that
point in time and this was
occurring I think those were
pretty significant figures
perhaps not as much as we had
originally anticipated but I
think that was very successful.
Mr speaker and gentle lady there
was however five hundred million
dollars authorized only forty
million dollars was actually
expended in this effort thank
you for.
Mr speaker and gentleman
There was four hundred and fifty
million authorized for this
purpose there was fifty million
authorize for a program four
counties that program never
actually even that started so to
that extent the with with that
correction you are you are
correct.
Mr speaker and gentle lady her
this.
This legislation and attacks
Committee and we're at the
expressed reservations about the
effects of the severance tax
permanent fund could you
describe what those will be in
effect that the program is fully
subscribed.
Mr speaker and gentleman if I
may
Contact my experts right and I
just would note for the record
that I had to experts Marquita
Russel with the New Mexico
finance authority and on the
question of severance tax of
Dawn Iglesias with the
Legislative Council Service.
Contact her.
Right here the question.
Yes I sure what would be the.
Mr speaker the gentleman thank
you for giving me time to check
with the experts if you look at
page five of the F. I. R. it
projects with the diminished as
setting fully fully subscribed
the loan is fully subscribed
reflexive dement the diminished
value of the state.
of the severance tax permanent
fund.
including the reduced the
reduced amount in distributions.
And Mr speaker gentle lady with
the reduced amount.
Thank you on balance is here.
The reduced amount of the fund
itself would be between one
point nine.
And two point seven billion
dollars with reduced
distributions between one point
two and one point five six
million dollars to those numbers
sound accurate to you Mr speaker
and gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman of
you're using as I believe if I'm
looking at the same figures
you're siding to make you're
looking at the projection over
thirty years and I think that's
an important point to note.
Yes ma'am.
Mr speaker and gentle lady that
would be after all the time we
get out much past ten to fifteen
years the discount factors with
respect to these of the time
value of money no and all that
significantly that is the vast
majority of this impact would
occur in the first fifteen years
Mr speaker and gentle lady's
appearance maybe pause.
Because we were alone on the
server stacks Fund to generate a
significant ongoing revenue
stream for the.
Appropriations.
And it looks to me long and
while.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
would certainly not be opposed
to making loans to small
businesses for COVID relief
purposes it looks like this is a
very expensive place to find the
money.
Speaker gentle lady what is the
target rate of return.
The stress Garcia the state
investment council has for the
money's currently in the fund.
Mr Mr speaker and gentleman I I
would also note that the.
This is the projections are
looking at are based on various
default rates not as if it was
paid in full but in answer to
that question let me just double
check six point four.
The rate of return projected on
in the severance tax funded six
point seven five percent Sir.
Mr speaker gentle lady easy
target interest rates too
quickly charge let's presume for
a minute there is no K. all
right that would give us the
worst case scenario with respect
appropriation bills case
scenario with respect to its
impact on the fund is not
restricted the current interest
rate which will be held from the
Wall Street journal prime
would be so more of an order of
one point six percent.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
believe it's one point six five
or six seven percent.
So Mister speaker and gentle
lady under the best case
scenario with all of these
monies being repaid the
severance tax permanent fund
which show for a reduction of
five percentage points also
forgive right of return is that
thank you for.
Mr.
Mr speaker and gentleman that's
one way of looking at it but
then because the small
businesses are surviving we will
have increased gross receipts
tax we will have people employed
spending money stimulating the
economy
and we will have additional
income tax
payments as a result of keeping
these businesses alive and.
Stimulating the economy.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
could not agree with you more
let me turn now for creating to
the conscience alone as I
understand it these probes or
sure it's very generous in
comparison to what won't be
available in the commercial
market could you describe those
for me please gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman the
loans are there is up to of a
total loan of a hundred and
fifty thousand the first seventy
five thousand would be unsecured
the second seventy five thousand
would require depending on what
The New Mexico finance authority
which administers the program
would debt could ask for
collateral collateral and or a
personal guarantee.
the interest rate as you
indicated is one point.
Roughly six point five percent
of the term of the loan is a
maximum of ten percent
with in the first years of.
The first couple years is
interest no interest no interest
accrues a first year and then
after that interest only for a
couple years and then the
repayment terms are negotiated
with NMFA not to exceed a total
of for the entire period of the
loan of ten years.
Mr speaker gentle lady her
generous terms and rate when
compared to the commercial
market and for is the
anticipated the full range of
believe I saw a range of values
listed in the FOR or.
Mister chair Mister speaker
gentleman
the F. I. R. was projecting up
to a sixty percent right in part
because they were using a thirty
year pay off based on the
original Senate bill which was
amended and reduced the payoff
period to ten years
and I'm sorry what what
Representative other part of
your question.
Mr speaker and gentle lady you
very adequately answer to that
so as to sixty percent through
for virtually three hundred
million dollars plus or minus of
the rules loans developed
through this program would never
be repaired to the state is that
correct.
Mr speaker
Chairman I'm sorry chairman Mr
speaker and gentleman
Actually I didn't I don't think
I did finish answering the other
part of your question which was
the anticipated default rates on
this is for New for more
businesses generated default
rates according to the SBA is
about fifteen percent because
we're in a pandemic in because
these businesses are struggling
because of the impact of the
pandemic we project basically a
default rates about thirty
percent.
And so I I think that it's not
accurate to use eight sixty
percent right
in your calculations and your
projections.
Mr speaker and gentle lady hold
actually concede that point and
to reduce the total pre-filled
what are you two one hundred and
fifty million of the total loans
that are issued as a
consequence of this legislation.
Mr speaker gentle lady thank you
very much appreciated.
Your answers and answers of your
expert witnesses and that
concludes my questions thank you
Mr speaker.
And one.
And the reason for the debate.
Generally from Chavis
Representative Ezzell.
Mr speaker.
I'm sure my hand to serve our.
I don't know what's going on
here Mr speaker will the total
latency issue.
Mr speaker I yield to the gentle
lady from Travis county are you
I am getting an echo when you're
speaking.
Mr speaker to like getting one
okay Mister speaker more.
Use the health money.
Someone can help you with your
set up it's.
It hasn't been an issue for
anyone but the your Mike.
Mr speaker I.
That could not possibly be
correct.
One of the germs and wonders and
Strickland will come back with
you know I just want to come and
try to give you a hand here has
a John from San Juan
Representative Strickler.
Mr speaker the gentleman yield
and I'm having a little trouble
hearing you not because of the
echo but just because of the
volume.
All mall being so can you hear
me now.
As better Mr speaker and
gentleman that's better thank
you thank you gentle lady we
heard this in taxed an overview
of the station on this bill and
my concern was that
the service tax from four on is
it's not growing is it should
and the reason is not going
gentle lady and we have this
discussion
in committee is that we take
about ninety four percent of the
revenues to bond out for capital
outlay projects.
is that is that your
understanding gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman if I
may have a moment to confer with
my experts.
Yes.
By
giving a.
And all and I think that but
that's its purpose is to provide
for capital outlay.
No.
And that I don't think I go out
late.
Does and
would you please do so if when
you're confirm with your
experience the house rules to
allow expert testimony to be
heard on the floor.
Mr Mr speaker and gentleman I
apologize I.
Trying to remember all the
buttons I have to push on this
is hello complicated
acknowledges for that
and Mr at.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes
ninety four percent would be
correct.
I think you can in the the real
challenge for the severance tax
permanent fund it's about five
billion dollars which is not
going
there was some legislation that
did allow women four of and we
use the revenues from the
severance tax form for the six
point seven five percent the
bond down food food capital
outlay projects in this of kind
of a five year rolling average
and this year capital outlays
pretty significant it's you know
one point three million dollars
as as the most capital outlay I
can remember that we've had in a
long long time in.
Thank goodness.
Speak up I'm sorry can you hear
me gentle lady and I'm.
Yes I can hear you thank thank
you.
gentlelady average I was some of
my members of friends will have
a hard time hearing make so so
the point is
want to keep this this fun
healthy for future capital
outlay projects I even suggested
a committee that I revive taken
you know.
take some sacrifices and use the
capital outlay dollars help fund
this
and in the one of the members of
our committee pointed out that
the cost of borrowing we brought
down.
for Catholic relief projects the
costs around three percent
of interest and additional
insurance on that in terms that
is like one percent so the cost
of borrowing is quite quite low
and now that our communities is
being opened up
Nationally and in New Mexico
were finally sentenced recovery
we a pandemic is starting to
ease up her mentality heard
amenities started take some home
and and hopefully will be a few
few people get sick.
And and that's our hope and I
think
With the default rate being so
high
You know I'm concerned about the
integrity of of of the sensex
from the phone and do you have
any concerns gentle lady about
that losing possibly hundred
fifty million dollars from this
program.
Mr speaker and gentleman
If if I ate it this bill.
This program was originally
designed as an economic stimulus
plan.
And the economic stimulus comes
through loans that are offered
to our business community are
small and medium businesses on
very generous rates you are
absolutely correct about that
our economy is in my.
View still needing stimulation
we still have many businesses
that
our our
need help to survive and as we
move out of the pandemic our
business community is going to
be looking for money that will
help stimulate the economy I'm
sorry will help them grow and
further stimulate the economy
and this this program is
designed with that in mind.
It and it.
In New in my mind you have to
look at what we get in return
which is not only helping our
business community maintaining
jobs adding to employment but
generating gross receipts tax
income tax and other benefits to
our community and so from that
standpoint I still think that
this is an excellent investment
in New Mexico and New Mexicans.
Thank you thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentle lady
Well I I I definitely think it's
it's important that we help of
small businesses and I know the
I think we heard in committee
that the community bankers in
our our state is taking that
federal dollars and if loaned
out I believe one point three
billion dollars
to our our New Mexico businesses
is is that we is that what you
heard gentlelady
he said that the right number
one point three billion dollars
already alone down to our small
businesses.
Mr speaker and gentleman I I
quite frankly don't recall and
and I'm not sure if you're
referring to the PPP program or.
What I do know and I hear from
business people that their loans
are being called by the banks
and credit lines and so forth
are being called by the banks so
I I don't know how that relates
to what you're you're suggesting
because I can't remember what
the basis of that figure was.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
well I think one moment try to
clarify the the community
bankers we're
kind of
Put in charge much like The New
Mexico finance forties put in
charge of this particular item
and they and they alone down
the one point three billion
dollars I'm pretty sure that's
correct and I'm just saying that
started here law for Connie
storm the hill is we open for
businesses we got some good news
and San Juan county that we're
in the yellow category so on all
of the restaurants are open the
that the at twenty five percent
capacity which is a step in the
right direction and seventy five
percent capacity for outdoor and
the this is just I guess I don't
know which one time but thanks
for things are on the up and up
academies is starting to heal up
so I appreciate the concept of
this and and I know a it was was
utilized fully this helps and
to be utilized you know of more
fully.
But hundred fifty million
dollars and and potential losses
is is I think too much for us to
bear we know that Mr speaker
gentle lady that we'll get some
more federal dollars coming our
way we don't know exactly how
it's going to be dedicated
but I think you know Calvary's
coming so thank you Mr chairman
and thank you gentle lady.
The gentleman from the gentleman
from Chavis Representative he's
L..
Mr speaker thank you very much
for the gentle lady you'll begin
please.
Mr speaker gentle lady I yield.
Mr speaker thank you very much
gentle lady I hope you're not
have and and echo problem
they'll hopefully we've got this
the.
Mr speaker gentle lady as.
Read.
Senate bill three I have read
the analysis on it but I still
have lots of questions Mr
speaker gentle lady I'm
understood if I'm understanding
this right new correct me if I'm
wrong please Mr speaker gentle
lady it says that it is if a
business applies for a loan in
the calendar year two thousand
twenty one that that business.
May of.
Have the average is just to
monthly business expense from to
the from the tax year of two
thousand and nineteen then my
understanding that right.
Mr speaker.
Gentlelady let me just check
with my other experts and be
sure we're getting you
academician thank you your
second please.
Mr speaker gentle lady
That is correct until we have
more data from twenty twenty and
then the
The reference point would be
updated.
Mr speaker gentle lady thank you
very much for that information
I'm sure that a lot of these
businesses
As bad as their their business
was heartened to thousand twenty
at I understand the need to go
back to two thousand nineteen.
Mr speaker gentle lady I'm also.
Of help me out right here.
These recovery loans.
Are made for up to thirty years
is that correct and that's
determined by the New Mexico
finance authority my
understanding that correctly.
Mr Mr speaker gentle lady no
that is not correct that was in
the original set of Senate Bill
and in this bill it is ten years
two years okay ten years maximum
and that's determined by the
NMFA is that correct.
Mr speaker gentle lady yes Mr
speaker as the lady from
Bernalillo and has the interest
amount on these loans change
because excuse me what I'm
reading is
the loan shall bear in annual
interest rate equal to one half
of the Wall Street journal prime
rate on the day hello this may
is that still the same.
Mr speaker the gentle lady yes
Mr speaker gentle lady this loan
will not accrue any interest for
the first three years of the
life of the loan that is now ten
years is that is that still the
same Mr Mr speaker gentle lady
that is not correct if there's
no interest in creating the
first year after that interest
as a group of consumers to
recruit determine alone okay and
that only makes sense with it
being reduced from thirty years
Mr speaker down to ten instead
of the three year no interested
now drops to one year and
there's no penalty for
prepayment of the the kinds
still is that correct.
Mr speaker gentle lady correct.
But Mr speaker gentle lady what
I'm finding missing in here and
if if I'm just overlooking it
please direct me to the right
spot because I want to be able
to.
Be able to help people if they
call us questions about this
bill Mr speaker gentle lady I
guess my concern here is.
Like us that are bred over it
are there any provisions for
default or forfeiture of this
loan company goes belly up what
happened.
Does NMFA have any recourse is
there.
Anything that can be done to
protect the money that we have
now taken out of the severance
tax permanent.
Mr speaker gentle lady
if the loan is
A hundred and fifty thousand
than the seventy five thousand
of that will have collateral and
or a personal guarantee the
first seventy five thousand and
if that's all baloney is Dan
the state will have that finance
authority will be able to
exercise the same rights the
same remedies to collect the
debt if necessary that any
general creditor would have just
as if you defaulted on your
credit card payment
and there are a range of
Of remedies which include
certainly a lawsuit certainly
could include after judgment
garnishment lean on property and
there's a whole range of of of
of remedies to general creditors
have against
General unsecured debt.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo that gives me great
concern because if there is a
rash of these loans that have
come in to default it will be up
to NMFA to try to go back and
collect that money through
losses whatever the case may be
so that money that should have
been paid back.
Where was barred from the
severance tax permanent fund it
might take years and years to.
Make.
The payments back and that gives
me great concern right there.
Of especially.
And I hope I'm not reading this
right but I'm afraid I am.
There will be the no oversight
by the legislature.
Over the loans that are made by
the NMFA in my understanding
that correctly to.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
don't think that's entirely
accurate there are reports that
have to be filed there is a a
finance Authority oversight
committee that receives regular
reports on this which is made up
of legislators so I don't think
that that's actually a a correct
statement.
Mr speaker it seems like the of
forty that the legislative body
would get gentle lady would come
after the fact after these loans
are made even though there might
be oversight on loan applicants
through the NMFA but I don't see
that there would be that much
input from the legislative body
whenever we are the ones that
are.
More Los in charge of the
severance tax permanent fund in
there get that gives me a little
bit of heartburn I I'm not
really sure if everybody knows
what the definition of permanent
to be is and the I I'm just real
real worried that we are putting
ourselves out there there could
be up most people that really
need this Mr chairman and the
lady from Bernalillo most people
that do need is are going to try
everything in their power to
repay the loans I understand
that businesses with more money
was to.
Kind of in the same but with the
shut down order that's gone on
for way too long in my opinion
every business is essential.
I hope that sinks in every
business is essential and yes
businesses did take a great hit
Mr speaker and gentle lady there
are some people out there that
do like to scam the system and I
I hope that's not going to be
the case I'm trying to get our
severance tax permanent fund
rate that.
Mr speaker gentle lady I
appreciate your answers in thank
you very much Mr speaker I
yield.
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Well the.
Mr speaker.
Chairman I yield.
Thank you
If you'll indulge me about this
speaker and gentleman from
Bernalillo.
We go back to the special
session appropriation that was
discussed a little bit earlier.
More understand during the.
Appropriation five hundred
million appropriated for.
For small businesses is that
correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman that no
that's not correct there was
four hundred and fifty million
and it and it's not an
appropriation of this money is
still to the extent it hasn't
been loaned is still in the
severance tax fund earning
income for the state.
This is just an authorization to
in effect draw against that
money if you will up to the
extent of what this program four
hundred and fifty million
dollars the other fifty million
dollars was a program for
candies and municipalities that
turned out not to be needed and
was never.
Used at all.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady.
So for.
Welcome to the initial program
to.
Cementos is that correct.
Mr speaker.
Gentleman I you kind of I could
think I lost a little bit of
what you said they're.
I wrote down the forty million
was loan from the initial
Action during last year's
special session is that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman thank
you for repeating that I heard
you better that time
More or less yes.
Okay thank you.
Are the Mr speaker gentle lady
are the terms from the special
session.
five hundred or four hundred
fifty million.
The terms for the loan
different.
In this bill then last year's
bill.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
John.
Mr speaker gentle lady
To.
the terms some of the terms are
different yes.
Can you.
Mr speaker and gentleman
The original.
bill we passed in June of last
year had a number of very
specific provisions for example
would require that the losses
have occurred in April and may
be evidenced by declining gross
receipts tax those provisions of
all been changed in part because
that time period is no longer
really relevant
and so there's been a fair
amount of delegation in this
this revision to the New Mexico
finance authority which has been
done a stellar job of
administering this program and
based upon their recommendations
we have reduced some of that
detail so that there's the
ability to to be more responsive
to the market to market
conditions are.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
John when you say more
responsive in can you elaborate
on that for administrative
records only.
Mr speaker and gentleman
There were a number of
situations where loan
applications could not even be
process because for example as
it turns out
there are numbers there are.
Stangel numbers of businesses
that do not file gross receipts
taxes on either a monthly or
quarterly basis there are
numbers of businesses that bill
fibers receipts taxes at all
because not subject to gross
receipts tax and so the goal is
not to exclude those
and so to make it more
responsive to be sure we're
including businesses like that
also
Mr speaker and gentleman to also
include of businesses that
That are a little larger than
our original target audience
because again
based on the on the experience
of the of the finance authority
there was a real need to do
that.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
the only.
So I think that leads into the
to the next question how many
loan applications were submitted
for the original form fifteen
million.
Speaker gentle the gentleman if
I may have a moment to confirm
numbers with my experts.
Thank you.
Mr speaker and gentleman there
were two thousand five hundred
and fifty applications that were
filed and of those nine hundred
were eligible and we're able to
be completed.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
Jill you your the second part
for my next question.
So I appreciate that do you.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
explain to me.
In a little more detail than
what you came for some of the
changes Mr speaker and gentle
lady with this bill.
Why all of.
Two thirds of the applicants
were not eligible.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
Mr speaker gentle gentleman in
addition to the from a grocery
she's been in addition to the
fact that.
We had not anticipated losses
going beyond that initial
you know consciously pandemic.
In addition we had requirements
that
the owners that eighty percent
of the ownership of the business
be New Mexico New Mexico
residents
that turned out to be a barrier.
Often following you know it's
seventy five percent mom and pop
retired to Texas or somewhere
and they left the kids with the
business that Senate kind of
situation
right and let me just take a
moment and confer with that ms
Russell again but I think those
are the primary reasons but let
me check that please.
Thank you Jim.
Mr speaker and gentleman
Ms Russell tells me that seventy
five percent of the applications
that were that we're not able to
be processed was because of the
of the requirement that there be
a thirty percent decline in
April and may.
in their in their revenues and
that
and for the gross receipts tax
issues the the lack of filing
gross receipts but because of
the nature of the business not
because of a failure to file.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
general so with with those with
that number seventy four percent
applications couldn't.
Could not qualify because of
that.
Do me a favor please Mr speaker
gentle lady go back and explain
of this bill results that.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady.
Mr speaker gentleman
This bill no longer requires the
give me just one second here.
Okay Sir.
Speaker of.
Gentleman
Instead of using specific months
and instead of using gross
receipts now through rule the
finance authority can the roof
the requirement now is showing
substantial impact on the
business negative impact on the
business by reason of the
pandemic in the public and with
public health orders and the.
and now through rural the.
Finance authority is allowed to
define what a substantial impact
would be and it allows it to
make it consistent with
different kinds of businesses
and for example some of the
businesses that couldn't
get loans before were insurance
companies every culture
businesses.
Businesses on tribal lands so
we've just built in a great deal
more flexibility by delegating
to the finance authority some
ability to as I said I think
earlier of adjust to the reality
of our small business medium
business communities and I just
our our record requirements and
so forth so that it is
compatible with the way people
actually do business in the
state.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
delighting
I appreciate the response is
thank.
Understand the renewable
correctly
you also reduce the.
Percent ownership New Mexico
ownership from eighty percent
down to fifty one percent is
that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes.
And thank you gentlelady for
that response Mr speaker gentle
lady.
You also add in another of.
Line item and then the.
You can have less if I
understand correctly you can
have less than fifty percent
ownership fifty one percent
ownership as well you have been
full time New Mexico residents.
But employed with your business.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes.
Thank you thank you for
clarifying making sure I got the
right to appreciate that Mr
speaker joining
I think.
I have one last question.
I believe a Mr speaker gentle
lady that there is an emergency
clause of associated with that
is this correct.
Mr speaker had to stand on yes.
Mr speaker the lady.
Is is there a voting actually
causes whether or not the
emergency clause.
Works Mr speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker is gentleman I'm
sorry I don't understand the
question.
Mr speaker gentle lady I believe
yesterday we we heard a bill
we're at an emergency clause in
it in for for that to take the
fact.
You had to have seven three
fifths of of.
Legislative body or is it just
major.
Mr speaker the gentleman it is a
higher percentage and a major.
Mr speaker going to do we know
if the percentages.
Mr speaker at.
Gentleman I'm.
I thought it was seventy five
percent but I updated for memory
and my memory is not always the
best.
Thank you very much I appreciate
that Mr speaker gentle lady I
yield back.
The debate the gentle lady from
McKinley and San Juan
Representative Lundstrom.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady yield please.
Mr speaker the gentle lady are
you thank you very much I I just
want to ask a few questions Mr
speaker gentle lady you remind
me gentle lady Vigil the fund is
capitalized.
Mr speaker gentle lady the fund
is Hey authorization to draw up
to four hundred and fifty
million dollars from the
severance tax fund the money it
stays in the severance tax from
earning interest for the state
until it is actually transferred
to the finance authority in
order to make the loans.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady can you tell me why the
authorization one out from the
first bill.
Mr speaker gentle lady I I do
not believe it went up I'm.
To Mr speaker gentle lady it was
my understanding that it had
gone up as high as five hundred
million.
Mr speaker gentle lady at I'm
sorry I misunderstood your
question it's it originally in
June of last year it was five
hundred million and that was
because fifty million ways for
this program
for municipalities and counties
to draw to replace their gross
receipts tax decline in revenues
that program never got off the
ground it turned out that that
really wasn't needed and but the
loan program was always and four
hundred and fifty million not at
five hundred million okay Mr
speaker gentle lady.
So the loan program and I and I
know you've gone through this a
couple of times with some other
members
in general is it would it not be
considered more but grant at the
end of the day it or how house
loan retired.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
I don't believe it would be
accurate to call it a grant
there is interest
and it is expected to be paid
back and in fact it is
documented
and of the loan
the the people receive the loans
must sign written contracts and
among the representations in
those contracts to
certifications is it
acknowledgement that this is a
loan and it is expected to be
paid back and and I would just
add some of the people some of
the businesses that started
receive a loans last year have
already begun repaying their
loans.
Okay so Mister speaker gentle
lady when that repayment comes
down as it go into a fund at the
New Mexico finance authority or
what what happens with the
repayment.
Mr speaker gentle lady the money
is returned to the as severance
tax from.
So Mister speaker gentle lady is
not a revolving program.
Mr speaker gentle lady I I I I
don't believe it would be called
in rebounding programs now.
Mr speaker gentle lady I haven't
had a chance to look at what the
rules say on that I have one
final question Mr speaker gentle
lady.
Our members or family members of
the New Mexico legislature
eligible to participate in this
program.
The.
Mr speaker and gentle lady now
under article four
I have it written down somewhere
here is article four section
twenty eight legislators and
their families cannot
participate in this program
because requires a contract with
the state.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady for all of your
answers today.
Thank you there is further
debate the gentleman from
Bernalillo Cibola McKinley
Sapporo in San Juan and let's
see here Representative Garcia.
Thank you Mr chairman that's up
to the state of New Mexico of
madam chair with the.
In the field.
That.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
half the state of New Mexico are
you.
Thank you.
The representative from district
on the on the.
Altercations of all
Representative family not being
qualified what do you consider
family them.
Mr speaker the young lady.
it Mr speaker and gentleman
Thank you very give me just a
second here and I will tell you
what the constitution says I
have my may just have a moment.
So article four.
Section twenty eight.
Let's see
Mr speaker and gentleman it says
no member nor show any member of
the LESC.
Make it around which.
Mr speaker and gentleman it
applies to a member of the
legislature and anyone who is a
member of the legislature within
a year of the approval of the of
the contract.
Of the legislation authorizing
the contracts.
Mr speaker and the young lady.
I am the really on to my
question.
What do you consider.
Considering the family that did
in the whole screen where we put
does she know of thank K. you
know and I have met Mr speaker
madam to young lady you know I
have a couple of grand noted
during business for themselves.
This we punish them for the
Legislature The Little all I was
told that puts your state Mr Mr
speaker and gentleman I'm sorry
I misspoke is not it the section
does not specify family members
is simply says no member of the
legislature
He should be eight and within.
With the year thing I I just
described I'm sorry I was wrong
I did not specific business
specifically state family I
believe.
And
that at the time we passes in
June of last year that there was
an opinion from Legislative
Council Service that perhaps it
also applied to
Media family but I actually
don't recall and you would have
to check with of the Legislative
Council Service on that
interpretation.
Mr chairman of the young lady in
other words of the bill doesn't
specify.
Many of them just as I.
Provided in the immigrant that
assumption Mr Mr speaker gentle
on yes and I'm sorry I misspoke
and it's in it's the section of
the constitution the bill itself
doesn't make any reference to
family or legislators at all
it's just because of the article
four section twenty eight of the
constitution.
thank you for that the.
Mr speaker and leading to this
is a big issue with a lot of
people Representative
Representative have family
members that own their own
businesses and meeting the
qualifying pleasure in the state
of I just point out of that more
question Mr speaker in the thank
you very much.
For the next gentleman on that
point we now have a memorandum
of from the ethics commission on
these issues that I'm happy to
share with the members as well
as a memo of all I want to say
from the session or November
from Legislative Council Service
from anybody wants that I'm
happy to share with the
membership
there is for the debate the
gentleman from Chavis any and
Terrel Representative Townsend.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady help.
Mr speaker at gentleman I yield.
Thank you
I started thinking about this
bill and and I voted for it.
I guess that loss.
But I have.
Kind of flip flopped on I'm glad
I get another another kiss the
pig on this one but because of.
I don't believe.
This.
In
fact that.
This is required in New Mexico.
But because the operating
conditions of New Mexico I
different than Texas the
different from all the different
from Oklahoma different from
Arizona and a different phone
call.
The difference yes.
All of the.
States.
Back at work.
And that in.
Is the fallacy.
Representative trying to say
someone with a.
Yes if with that I'm going back
to work.
Our children are not in school.
Mexico.
But they Texas they are local.
They are in Arizona.
They are.
Sorry cation.
System is failing so I'm not
gonna vote for this this time.
But because this just in.
The current administration
became the price lock down
there.
And.
That is the Travis The New
Mexico.
That's the travesty and
education system I don't think
we ought to be taking money out
severance tax fund are important
because at the time it was the
right thing to do but it isn't
today.
And so
It's not that we don't have
better options.
This option is because of that
we have failed.
New Mexico and that's the left
free enterprise.
Work.
The people of New Mexico.
They will safely and they don't.
Thank you.
No further debate the gentle
lady to close.
Mr speaker.
Turn.
R. yes the gentleman from Cibola
Representative Garcia.
Thank you Mr Stewart adds up to
billions of that country give me
opportunities for native
question of settlement him
Representative coming better
reserves
of our private label eligible
for this funding.
Mr speaker and gentleman
Let me double check with the
with my experts said that I give
you an accurate answer.
Thank you.
Mr speaker and the young lady at
one point
The last go round some of the I
did want qualified for this mmhm
for some reason and I want to
make sure that they're included
on it.
Mr speaker Mr speaker and
gentleman
they were not.
Tribal.
Tribal tribes themselves were
tribal governments were not
eligible before because they
don't report gross receipts of
the way it the way it works now
is it under this revision tribal
businesses will be eligible to
apply for and receive the loans.
thank you Mr speaker million VAT
the question I guess someone
need to was able businesses is a
casino consider credible news.
Mr speaker and gentleman let me
just double check that again
with my experts.
Mr speaker and gentleman
they they they would be eligible
if they had five million or less
in net revenue which would mean
they would be a very small
casino so the larger casinos
will not meet the qualifying
Business definition which is
focused on small businesses.
Mr speaker and a young lady the
reason I'm asking is I know they
probably make more than five
million but we need to take into
consideration Mr speaker number
eighty these because you know
the big goal for over a year
now.
That's not making qualify for we
looking at from your for work
welcome to do that what happened
last year madam chair the
minimum needed Mr speaker.
Mr Mr as speaker and gentleman
let me just double check that
again so I give you an accurate
answer.
This.
Mr speaker and gentleman
Right now the the the way the
roll is written it's looking at
net revenues in twenty nineteen
but as of in as additional
information comes in as the
rules are written
based on the revised bill.
They will be looking at and most
likely be looking at twenty
twenty and if in fact they've
been closed in twenty twenty
then they would be they would
qualify as a small business
under assuming that their net
revenues were five million
dollars or less.
Thank you Mr speaker phone
number eighty because you know
all as we all look for the
Christian rural loans not twenty
twenty not twenty nineteen it'll
and we need to be fair while
these people the it closed down
for a whole year and not just
see more allow small businesses
J. they all need help of public
health and some of these casinos
are here
the LFC need help fluids the
concern of mine and I would like
to see some money was put in
there to take care of these
people will not the people sorry
that Mr speaker lady of these
this is the new reservations
they did all the needed take a
beating also initial as provided
by thank you Mr speaker thanks
for the opportunity to speak
twice thank you maybe there is
further debate the gentle lady
from Santa.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Thank you Mr livability you.
Mr speaker gentle lady yes I
yield.
Thank you Mr speaker the lady
out try to have a better at.
I.
Couple questions one back to
The
Small business.
Mouth and as I understand what
you're saying and based on the
bill the Max thank you get a
hundred and fifty thousand.
But there's a possibility that
if they can't pay it.
All that will really it is
possible for is have a that a
Michael Ryder.
Mrs and Mr speaker gentle lady
no that is not correct and
as the lawyer I collected of
unsecured debts from people
frequently.
But it
it is Mr speaker gentle lady
that is not correct this is a
death and it is an obligation
and there are a number remedies
that the state has to collect
the money.
If there is a default
so seventy five thousand of a
hundred and fifty thousand.
Is that it is they can't.
Then the both are for everything
our rights and MFA.
Mr speaker gentle lady the state
through NMFA would have the
rights of a general creditor
just as your credit card company
would have the right to get you
if you fail to pay your credit
card.
Okay Senator
Mr speaker what can you tell me
if NMFA has a.
Department or in the in NMFA.
The
Specializing and reprogram your.
The money that during the last
two.
Mr speaker gentle lady could you
give me a moment and I will ask
them thank you.
Of the.
Speaker gentle lady the MFA The
New Mexico finance authority has
a lemon other loan programs and
they
have the item and have on
occasion had to collect on those
loans and to the extent they
don't have the resources in the
house they would hire
additional help as they have in
the past in this connection.
Mr speaker the eight of you tell
me what their success record has
been with locations.
Mr speaker Madam and let
gentlelady let me check.
Your.
I'm sorry I'm getting a lot of
the feedback noise from
something.
Mr speaker gentle lady
in that two thirds of the cases
they received a hundred percent
recoveries and one third they
get fifty percent.
Okay thank you
thank you Mr speaker.
All right seeing no further
debate the gentle lady to close.
Speaker thank you
In in closing I would I'm simply
noted this this is a program
that is available to help for
businesses many of which still
need a life I ate a financial
lifeline and as the economy re
opens will also probably need
some operating capital to get
going again
It.
And the we think we have created
a tool that is more useful to
our business community to
provide them that kind of
economic and financial lifeline
and with that and this is an
investment in the people and our
businesses in New Mexico and
with that I would move that will
substitute SB three two passed
with an emergency clause.
Passage of Senate finance
committee substitute for Senate
bill three and with the
emergency clause the vote is now
open.
In seconds.
The electronic questions closed
closed called remaining members.
Representative Harper.
Representative Lujan.
Representative.
Representative both.
What is now closed by a vote of
fifty one in the affirmative and
seventeen in the negative Senate
finance committee substitute for
Senate bill three has passed
with the emergency clause.
We're going to go to item number
twenty seven house bill two
hundred is the representative
from Santa Fe ready on that Mr
speaker.
Representative from someone
other than to others been
requested gentleman removed
their coats they may do so.
Gentleman from Santa Fe are you
ready.
Mr speaker will you give me to
that point the record reflect
that all action necessary.
Placing House Bill two hundred
on final passage has been taken
and it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution
gentleman to explain the bill.
Mr speaker members of the house.
House bill two hundred is the
fiscal responsibility.
Clears the way to invest eighty
million dollars in the southwest
New Mexico.
Create jobs will stimulate the
economy.
And it will improve people's
lives.
And it ends wasteful government
spending.
And I might add does all that.
About raising taxes.
Mr speaker members of the body
And for the federal government
has the errors on the water so
let's act New Mexico got three
things of that.
First thing I got was the right
to use fourteen thousand acre
feet of water.
No supported to know that we
can't get fourteen thousand acre
feet of water rates.
We got to use the water there's
someone else's water.
Second.
We got a pot of money.
Thank the with additions
withdrawals currently stands at
the million dollars.
That we can either use.
To build a diversion from the
lower river taxes that water.
Or for other water projects in
the southwest region.
Which is the cat counties of
catching requests the logo on.
The third thing we got was the
promise that more money.
If we figured out how to build a
diversion.
By a certain deadline.
The next fifteen years.
And fifteen million and we spend
fifteen million dollars.
Trying to figure that out.
We fail.
The deadline for the additional
construction money fifty six
million dollars as passed.
That money is gone.
It will not be restored.
It's worth noting that we missed
the deadline.
Because we just ran out of time.
We we had fifteen years and all
the money we needed to do the
planning.
We missed the deadline because
try as we might.
No matter how you know what
projects we used what approach
we use.
There is no viable economic
options for diverting water from
the lower for.
So as far.
The other part of money stands
the right so you know fund
stands about eighty million
dollars.
We have every right in the world
to invest the thousand southwest
region the obligation to invest
that in south west region.
For stand for questions I want
to clear up a few things that
has come up during committee
debate.
The first is the fourteen
thousand acres.
We all recognize especially in
times of.
A minute drought.
How valuable water use in New
Mexico.
And there's.
There's sort of a reaction that.
Oh my god it's fourteen thousand
acre feet the tar Water can't
let that slow down the river to
Arizona.
But it's not our water source
leisure almost four.
We have the rights to paid
Arizona.
The use of water.
So if we had been able to build
its version.
Taxes that water.
For every acre foot we took it
out of the river we would have
to pay Arizona and exchange the.
The second thing that's come up
during committee is the work
for.
Under federal law.
We were given the option to do a
or B..
Any being bill the diversion.
NBC being investing in the.
We tried to do a.
There were some kind of work.
So there are going to be.
We're choosing the second
option.
It's been suggested that somehow
by exercising that option.
Violating federal law.
And it just ignores the word
for.
Third thing I want to address is
whether a joint powers entity
known as the New Mexico cap and.
The New Mexico capstan for
central Arizona project entity
is in fact the successor.
To an organization called the
southwest border study for which
is named in federal.
In the end the will swear up and
down that they are.
And I'm here to tell you that
there.
The southwest water study group
named federal law has long since
ceased to exist.
A number of different entities.
Have tried to take its place.
What happens to his most recent
to declare themselves the
successor.
But that's not how it works.
Is this entity we're talking
about is a consulting body to
their state Stream Commission.
Under existing law.
There's a certain commissions
the final decision maker and
under this bill the Interstate
Stream Commission is the final
decision maker.
This bill Maynes the water trust
board.
Which is sort of where New
Mexico keeps its water experts.
As the successor entity to
consult with I just.
This bill makes it perfectly
clear that all of the money in
New Mexico your phone stays in
that region.
It's not to be used for any
other purpose.
And all of the governmental
units and variation districts
and counties and municipalities.
Will be welcome to apply to the
water trust board.
How their projects vetted.
Have those projects recommended
to there's a Stream Commission.
And get this eighty million
dollars.
Out of the bank and into the
can.
And with that Mr speaker I sing
for questions.
There is debate the gentle lady
from grant and although and
County Representative Sweetser.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentleman from Bernalillo
Santa Fe Torrance and Valencia
will the gentleman yield.
Mr speaker telling the ideal.
Thank you Mr speaker gentleman I
think you did an amazing job of.
incorporating what's been a very
long and dramatic have over the
last fifteen years into a couple
of minutes so I thank you for
that I am I have lived it for
quite awhile a long time and and
I should begin by disclosing
that my husband does serve on
the New Mexico camp entity and
the fact that he serves as an
elected Luna County commissioner
appointed to represent the
county on the cap.
Is one of the reasons that I
have some concerns about what's
happening here so I I just need
to dispose we in no way benefit
from anything that the cap is
doing personally on our farm at
all if the division had occurred
Mr speaker and gentleman we are
our farmers hundreds of miles
away from the land that would
have benefited from that water
diversion so in no way would
that have helped and now with
all of the projects that are
coming forward.
More important is served by a
private wealth so again in no
way will be budget so I just
need that declaration out there
and as part of my concern but
that bringing you bringing up to
this point gentleman Mr speaker
the first time I heard about the
cap into TI was reporting for
the my radio stations in Deming
and was called into the Deming
city manager's office and shown
a I know but like this that
address to what was happening
with the cap and and and it's a
very complicated issue that has
gone.
Around and around and around
built up here and and in my
district which would you agree
with with that gentleman that
it's a it's a complicated issue
that you were able to condense
well I think.
Mr speaker agility I would
certainly agree it's it's been a
long process to get to where we
are now.
Thank you for that Mr speaker
and gentleman so you mentioned
in your opening comments but I
was hoping you would RigCount
what are the for Kante's
affected by your your
legislation before us today.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
I guess I would say for Tony's
are.
Was the first with the four guys
don't change right so I'm
existing federal law we have the
opportunity to invest this money
in the it's called the southwest
water management area or
something like that and it
consists of four counties
Cathrynn grant the doggo and and
and that remains the same.
Thank you for that gentleman
from Bernalillo Santa Fe
Torrance and Valencia
Mister speaker as I just
mentioned your four counties
that you Representative and four
counties that are affected by
the cap there's no overlap there
in my correct.
Mr speaker gentle lady that's
correct.
So Mister speaker gentleman on a
however Representative regions
of three of the four counties
that are affected in your piece
of legislation that also
correct.
Mr speaker telling y'all take a
report.
Well as my name plate shows I
represent portions of requests
Hidalgo and Luna County three of
the four counties in the cap
region so so I wanted to.
Before the body wide this piece
of legislation is so important
to me so.
As you about the history of the
cap and and we're what brings
this to that this point.
You madam who comprises
membership on the cap so so do
you have that information Mr
speaker and gentleman.
Mr speaker not individually Mr
speaker gentleman but but in
general who's who serves on the.
Mr speaker gentle lady I think.
So Mister speaker gentleman
would you agree that it is
elected and appointed officials
serving in the four counties
that are under this southwest
funding.
Mr speaker gentle lady I would
agree that it's a selection of
elected and appointed officials
of Mr speaker generally I would
also say that it's not
representative of all the
communities in the four county
area.
Mr speaker gentleman all of the
communities and the four county
area were initially extended an
opportunity to have a seat at
the table on the cap.
and and again as I go back in my
history of reporting on this F.
for my radio station I know that
some communities did decline the
offer to have a seat at the
table but many of them are
represented so many communities
and water into teens within
Katrin grant Luna and Hidalgo
counties have seats at this
table and the people who are
representing them not unlike my
has been our elected officials
elected by the people in this
area just like on I'm elected by
the people in this area and your
elected by the people in your
for County area so Mister
speaker gentleman I I'm coming
at this from the standpoint that
who is comprised who makes up
the cap into the right now are
people who were elected or
selected.
By the people who live work
worship in trade in the counties
that are affected from the cap.
Now my question to you is who
comprises the water transport.
Mr speaker gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentle lady it's
a fairly lengthy list.
It is I would say all of the
water experts in New Mexico
starting with the office of the
state engineer.
It includes tribal
representation includes public
Representative Tatian includes
agricultural representation it's
it's quite a list and Mr speaker
jelly I could read it to you if
you would like but it's like
the.
So so Mister speaker gentleman
in lieu of reading it could you
at least confirmed to me
whether.
The majority a strong majority
of the people who served on the
water transport are appointed by
the governor.
Mr speaker tell Eddie I think
that's fair.
All right thank you so so Mister
speaker gentleman what what
you're legislation does is is
take our.
Creating power from the four
from people who are elected or
selected to represent the people
of the four county area and give
it to four mostly appointed by
the governor.
And and they're in Mr speaker
gentleman it's my concern
this is one of those bills that
tells the people in my hometown
in my home county in my home
region you don't have it you you
don't cut it you may live work
worship and trained in this area
but you can't appropriate the
eighty million dollars that it
have come into this line you
can't make decisions.
Based on the needs of the four
county area because you're not
appointed by the governor and
and Mr speaker gentlemen I'm
telling you the people that
serve on the camp into team we
see them at the post office we
see them at the diner when the
diners open we see them at
church we see them in our stores
they are getting into constantly
on the water needs of the area.
The the diversion is behind us
as you will stated what we are
looking at now is eighty million
dollars to be invested in four
county region and if you were
legislation is not enacted in
the decisions of how to invest
that money will be made by
people who are elected and
selected fight people and that
four county region.
And if your legislation is
passed.
In those decisions are going to
be made by people in Santa Fe
people appointed by the governor
for the most part and you talked
about the meeting water efforts
but many of them you know the
secretary of finance and
administration I'm not positive
as a water expert the president
of the Navajo Nation someone not
appointed by the governor but
still may or may not be.
Water expert but the people who
have been serving on the New
Mexico Campden sixty have been
elected and selected because of
their ability to understand the
water needs of the region and so
Mister speaker gentleman I know
that that you and I have we've
debated this this particular
issue for years and we are at
this point where we are now
looking at who has the authority
to decide the water needs of the
area to prioritize them to hear
from the people in the area of
the people who elected or
appointed them to serve in this
people who understand the water
needs of the area taking that
ability away.
And giving it to a board must be
appointed by the governor and
for that reason Mr speaker
gentleman I cannot support this
legislation I was sent here to
represent my constituents again
I represent people in three of
the four counties affected by
this it is my understanding Mr
speaker and gentleman that that
there are four of us in this
house of representatives who
represent the four county area
and none of the four of us
Representative this fortunately
area are supporting this piece
of legislation and that alone
should be a red flag to the
people of this body Mr speaker
gentleman because this is that
bill that says those of you in
your communities don't have it
you can't cut it you're not
whatever enough to make these
decisions and we're taking that
power away from you even though
you were elected even though you
were selected even though you
were appointed for taking that
power away from you and giving
it to four mostly appointed by
the governor so Mister speaker
gentleman I won't belabor the
point I will respectfully oppose
this legislation and stand for
the rights of my constituents
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen there is further
debate the gentle lady from
grant and all go and hear county
Representative Dow.
Thank thank you Mr speaker will
the gentleman please feel.
Mr speaker telling the ideal.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
the gentleman
Representative Sweetser and I
did not coordinate what we are
going to say and she has
literally almost in order and.
Or line for lines asked my
question.
When I would go ahead and do
because you declined to do so
his name the members of the New
Mexico cap entity the ones who
make the decisions that affect
our local community.
I represent grant Hidalgo in
Sierra three of the four
counties impacted by this piece
of legislation the members that
represent at.
R. the chairman of the Grant
County commission.
The vice chairman of the the the
I just went to the at the
secretary of the Luna County
commission.
At there's a representative from
the city of the village of Santa
Clara the San Francisco water
conservation district thank you
the healer
water conservation district the
interstate and the Interstate
Stream Commission has a
nonvoting member to advised the
City of Lordsburg at Hidalgo
County has a representative.
Action County has a
Representative and there are
fifteen total members that
represent the local community
the water users those who live
work worship and play on the
left.
Whereas the water trust board
members.
Are the state engineer.
The executive director of the
municipally.
I know it's a new position that
I don't believe the predecessor
or the current executive
director our water experts.
There's an environmental
community representative there's
the executive director of the
New Mexico County I don't
believe that he's a water
expert.
There is an irrigation
conservation district water
Representative someone for the
Navajo Nation there is a
representative of the thank you
water users however he does not
live the current representative
is not live in one of the four
counties of which your
legislation is impacting.
Mexico finance authority Indian
Affairs Department groundwater
Representative he also does not
reside in the southern part of
the state.
Finance authority
administration.
The director department of game
and fish.
New Mexico Environment
Department there's a there's a.
Water transport treasurer who I
do believe would understand the
issues who does not live in the
southern part of the state the
current the current director and
then the representative from the
department back.
None of whom live in the four
counties impacted by your
legislation.
In addition to that you have for
House representative members on
this for and I can assure you
that there is not a debate there
is not a community forum there
is not a newspaper interview
that is not ask our position on
this issue.
Each of the members.
That we believe in local
decision making and we believe
in a continuation of the
cavities role in deciding what
to do with where the impact our
area each of us were chosen to
represent our communities in
this body.
I will be opposing your bill and
I hope that the members of this
body who would not like a bill
presented that impacted their
area presented by someone who
does not represent their area
would join us and of the bill
thank you Mr speaker there is
further debate the gentleman
from Dona Ana grant and here
representative of ****.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Gentleman from Bernalillo Santa
Fe New Orleans Orleans that
sounds your.
Mr speaker down I you.
The woman
This is a normal practice usual
prices were legislators.
For another district.
We do far away from Mars to.
Create legislation and carry
legislation that will directly
affect the districts of another
another members.
Our districts without consulting
with them.
Mr speaker till then it's normal
practice for legislators to
carry legislation of statewide
significance.
Mr speaker gentleman your
available free to have had a
conversation with.
Those of us who are representing
that area Sir.
Mr speaker Joe then these
conversations have been going on
for years.
All Mr speaker gentleman.
I have not been approached by
you or anyone else concerning
this legislation.
And I am new to this body.
And I will send your.
Representative my district this
is a big issue I'm very
disappointed that we would have
had a conversation because I am
a very open minded person with a
lot of conversations all of what
you intended on doing even if I
disagree with it I feel that it
was only appropriate for you to
do that Sir on.
On Mr speaker all rural
employment.
I would imagine that anybody in
this body.
That
Would carry legislation that
will directly affect.
One particular area.
that would affect that area
without consulting with them to
be disappointed I am
disappointed Sir all of the look
forward to meeting with your
talking with you but at this
point
increases body do not support
this legislation or none of us.
Were consulted directly.
And I'm very disappointed that
this had to happen on the on the
house floor.
And so I'm encouraging our our
phone members not support this
thank you very much for your
time I will there is for the
debate gentle lady from Katrin
Sapporo and lives here
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you Mr speaker with old
gentleman problem
all those counties.
You.
Mr speaker gentle lady I yield.
Thank you Mr speaker kind
gentleman we have as you know.
Gone around and around and
around.
As far as this Arizona water
Madam water situation goes.
I agree Mr speaker kind
gentleman with Representative
Sweetser is analogy thank you
Representative.
In a short for what ultimately
has gone on.
Hi Mister speaker kind gentlemen
Representative catching County.
The largest county in the state
with the fewest amount of
people.
This is one of the counties
Katrin.
that is going to be negatively
affected by this legislation.
Mr speaker kind gentleman I have
here.
A resolution from catching
County.
That is.
Totally against this bill.
Thank you all Mr speaker kind
gentleman that they will be
losing local control their
voices will not be heard.
They have Mr Hayden forward who
is the patron county
commissioner who represents
catching County on this the cap
and fifty.
Very well known gentle farms
Water so you know a lot about it
there's several other members on
this cap and to do that I can
tell you know a lot about the
area and what's going on.
Mr speaker kind gentleman.
I don't have a question for you
because I know.
What your answer is by reading
house bill two hundred.
Mr speaker kind gentleman.
It is my duty.
As a country county state
representative of district forty
nine.
To protect my County.
To protect.
The people.
That live work worship and plays
in that county.
And to take their local voice
away.
Is appalling.
The given to.
Government bureaucrats.
Mr speaker trying to element
that have no idea.
What goes on in catching County
the lifestyle.
This is true frontier New
Mexico.
I have a
A resolution later on this month
Mr speaker kind gentleman a
hundred years the caption.
This is their their centennial.
And this is a real kick in the
guts right to catching County on
their centennial.
Mr speaker kind gentleman we
have a lot of issues and
frontier New Mexico.
That the majority of New Mexico
is not aware of.
Mr speaker kind gentleman
I agree that.
Water is life.
I totally agree.
But let the local community Mr
speaker kind gentleman make the
decisions.
For themselves.
As stated before Mr speaker and
gentleman there's four people
that represent those counties.
On this house floor.
That are not signed on to this
legislation that we're not.
Even asked about it frankly and.
Not involved.
Our we knew we could see the the
writing on the wall Mr speaker
and gentleman but.
I will stand in full opposition
of this legislation and I urge
the body.
To take a stand.
To make sure that this doesn't
happen in your counties.
And.
Let me remind citizens that I
represent.
Let them make the decisions to
where they live work and worship
thank you Mr speaker.
I.
Further debate the gentleman
from Colfax curry Harding quay
Roosevelt San Miguel and you
Representative Chatfield.
You're still needed for thank
you Mr speaker thing ever that
yes thank.
The gentleman yield.
Mr speaker Tallman human.
I don't know what will happen to
the fourteen thousand acre feet
of water.
I'm sorry Mr speaker John that
in cash the.
I'm sorry for this mask made to
order
Mr speaker and gentleman the
fourteen thousand acre feet of
water levels available New
Mexico what will happen for that
water.
Mr speaker and gentleman built
in the river.
We will go on the repair of some
of the most.
The New Mexico what.
Mr speaker gentleman will not
will not be diverted by New
Mexico.
So Mr speaker your one.
Like some of our predecessors
a lot of money questions.
We're taken because we we stand
to agree on this of all of.
Mr speaker no one actually
captain of the remote created by
one piece of legislation which
is the Arizona water settlement
sector was.
Thank you for.
Which also includes the
consumptive use and for more of
that.
So Mr speaker and gentleman
section one point six
usually but.
Says in the state of New Mexico.
Thank you for choose your
developed both drive but for
renovation project that.
As amended by the water still
the ninety two thousand four.
The secretary Energy New Mexico
unit and authorized director
shut off track with New Mexico
have been the.
We just described.
Here
design construct operate and
maintain the New Mexico unit
four one third of this very
much.
So Mr speaker and gentleman I I
think that read the the staff in
the house for over five years
that for.
Mr speaker and gentleman a
couple points first of all the
captaincy was not created by
federal law this created percent
to a joint powers agreement
entered into by the very sense
season Interstate Stream
Commission that to create
creation of the joint powers Act
is part of state law.
Then Mr speaker domain the cap
entity is named in federal law.
But is named in federal income
taxation in connection with the
New Mexico unit.
The diversion from the issue of.
Which is not that.
This is I would also note that
in their current GPA their joint
powers agreement they're
offering a cremation will.
It says they have no authority
over other projects until there
is a record of decision.
For the New Mexico unit for the
you know the version.
There is no record of decision
for that there's no one can tell
me why there was no record of
the state.
Mr speaker and gentleman there
was no viable project.
In the plug was finally pulled.
After spending millions of
dollars trying to develop.
And your bill of four billion
dollars.
Mr speaker Tallman yeah that's
an excellent question.
They came from the New Mexico
unit fund and instead of
spending fifteen million dollars
on lawyers engineers and
consultants that money had been
invested in this community to.
Figure hello why were they all
along.
Mr speaker Tallman yes yes yes.
The players did quite well.
We can build on the.
This is one of those projects
and I've been familiar with long
time before I was elected I
think it's a shame to allow
fourteen thousand with the water
here Malone New Mexico to voters
on.
Thank you I believe a hundred
and twenty eight million dollars
for the right originally
allocated the given by the
federal government for the use
in this project is that I I
think it's so strange to think
that away from our local
community leaders from I have a
problem we.
At least some of this over
there.
all local regions and the I
think we can make better
decisions than and I
thank you Mr speaker
but that.
For the debate the gentleman
from the Representative
Pettigrew.
Mr speaker and gentleman I don't
have question the I do have a
statement and echoes.
What the previous speakers have
talked about and that is.
The fact that we have people
outside of certain regions
making decisions for people that
live inside of of other regions.
And.
I've seen that Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Throughout the session.
It is highly concerning.
And I I hope to see.
That that process stop.
Yesterday we voted on on some
items of very near and dear to
certain.
Members of of our of our body.
They have a long lasting effect
on the entire state.
In and that's hugely concerning.
To the majority of this and so
with that Mr speaker and
gentleman I just wanted to take
opportunities that go the words
of the.
Speaker for me.
the people that are from that
area and support their decision
and and I appreciate your time
and Mr speaker I yield back.
There is further debate the
gentleman from curry
Representative Crowder.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from Santa Fe please
yield.
Mr speaker chairman I yield.
Thank you general Senator John
is as I imagine you're aware you
served on the New Mexico
Interstate Stream Commission for
several years.
As a matter of fact when I got
elected to this position the
attorneys at the Interstate
Stream payments only you have to
resign.
And I said will.
Would you check into that make
sure that we don't need to you
can't hold both positions.
And so I'm very familiar with
the in the river I spent a great
deal of time in the cliff in the
valley.
talked a lot of the folks down
there been many many meetings
down in that area.
And I have found them to be
very.
Sharp about Ben manage and
operate.
The waters inequity lavallee and
down in that area.
And so
I just want to also let you know
that I served on the local
elected position for about
twelve years worked with the
water trust board on many
opportunities and
I'm familiar with how the off
the the water transport operates
how they function the members
are.
And as I listen to the debate I
find myself.
Expanding strongly in support of
the elected officials in the
area.
I believe the cap entity is the
appropriate entity to manage
that situation those monies
those waters are in the question
of valley in that area of the
need to be managed by those that
are local those are.
The closest to the situation and
not people that are several
hundred miles away some kind
gentleman appreciate you
bringing this forward but I find
myself standing foursquare and
strong for those that are
elected from that area and and
will not be able to support your
bill thank you Mr speaker thank
you general for the debate the
gentleman from Dona Ana
Representative is small.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
you Mr speaker does the
gentleman from on the fate or in
some Valencia here.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
yield.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen wanted to back up a
little bit and see if I have a
clear understanding Mr speaker
and gentleman.
Which entity currently makes
decisions for the funding a
project is that is that the
Interstate Stream Commission as
it's currently configured right
now Mr speaker gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentleman
Interstate Stream Commission has
exclusive decision making
authority.
Mr speaker John thank you so it
has exclusive decision making
authority now Mr speaker that
and that the speaker gentleman
has that been the case for the
last ten plus years as you and
and others of have outlined
today.
Mr speaker Joe that's correct.
Okay thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman.
So today exclusive decision
making authority rests with the
Interstate Stream Commission
what about it house bill two
hundred passes will that will
they lose that decision making
authority Mr speaker speaker
gentleman.
Mr chairman and would not change
it would still be the issue.
Okay.
Mr speaker and gentleman thank
you so we don't see any change
then when it comes to the
exclusive jurisdiction with the
Interstate Stream Commission for
making these decisions as to
this money
even if house bill two hundred
passes that's what you're
saying.
Mr speaker gentleman that's
correct.
Okay thank you Mr speaker thank
you gentlemen
I get just have a couple other
quick questions it was mentioned
earlier it around a record of
decision that would have been
required to go down another
pathway was that record of
decision denied under the former
trump administration.
Mr speaker and gentleman my
understanding is never reached a
record is decision
the pulmonary results in
pulmonary crafty I just.
There there was no viable
project it was decided not to
spend more hundreds of thousands
of dollars completing in the
cardinal impact statement which
would be two three record of
decision.
since it was clear it was not
going to be viable okay Mr
speaker and gentleman thank you
for that and thank you for
adding that new ones but to be
clear that all of that occurred
as you outlined under the trump
administration is that correct
Mr speaker and gentleman Mr
speaker Tallman that was for.
Okay.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
thank a gentleman Mr speaker
gentleman just a couple other
quick questions Mr speaker
gentleman I
assume that there are
Representative both on and who
can be added to the water trust
board is water transport
supposed to represent all
interests including agricultural
interests Mr speaker John.
Mr speaker telling us.
Okay Mr speaker gentleman thank
you and as we look forward and I
know none of us can say with
finally what will happen but we
would it be your expectation Mr
speaker gentleman the and this
is a question act that.
The.
This legislation **** would you
expect to grow gentleman to see
Ag or cultural projects that
either conserve water
re use water for agricultural
purposes or otherwise are a.
Mr speaker and gentleman that.
We might just under your Mr.
Right here all the it's a I
think there's a bad connection
or something.
Question is will there be
deprivations cultural prop
Hi techs the answer is
absolutely okay Mr speaker
gentle and that's something
that's really positive that's
something that's very important
couple of quick final questions
Mr speaker and gentleman Mr
speaker gentleman right now and
then over the past number of
years over ten years is it fair
to say that projects that this
amount of money currently
roughly eighty million dollars
that set aside solely for these
four counties is that accurate
Mr speaker done Mr speaker
chairman that's correct okay.
Mr speaker and gentleman during
this time and until if this
money remains unspent it kind of
seems to me that.
Citizens from across New Mexico
and there needed water projects
they're almost as a competition
amongst the whole state
including from these four
counties for scarce water trust
board recommended funds when in
fact there is a large amount of
money that is only for four
counties and not available for
the rest of the state would you
say that's accurate Mr speaker
gentleman.
Mr speaker gentleman I believe
that's accurate.
Okay Mr speaker gentleman I know
this is been an incredibly
difficult and challenging time
across the board but one final
question for close my
understanding Mr speaker
gentleman that one of your
Senate co sponsors is actually
it was recently Representative
org excuse me was elected from
the.
At least three of the four
counties is that accurate or two
of the four counties perhaps.
Mr speaker challenges from that
southwest region like I do not
mean the individual counties
okay thank you Mr speaker thank
you gentlemen and no points have
been raised there and and really
raised appropriately but I think
that certainly gives me some
comfort Mr speaker and gentleman
there are a lot of lessons
learned as we look at back at
this and I think it is
absolutely fair to say that
Working back through and
learning those lessons about the
best way to work on these
challenging projects no one
should be seems to be not enough
or not what ever but Mr speaker
gentleman I think it is our
responsibility to ensure that
the best possible process to
support a fair expeditious and
beneficial expenditure of
federal funds is a wholly
appropriate and we've spent
we've come out of some very
difficult economic times we're
in a very difficult economic
time right now the idea that
almost a hundred million dollars
of federal money that can
improve people's lives benefit
the future remains unspent year
after year going ad nauseum into
the future convinces me that
while perhaps in perfect this is
a balanced solution that will
support many important features
and help
communities in the southwestern
part of our state be of benefit
to the state and appropriately
move help move us all over so
thank you for bringing it thank
you for the discussion Mr
speaker and
From the bank the gentleman from
Travis Lee and Roosevelt
Representative Anderson.
Thank you thank you Mr speaker.
Well the gentleman yield.
Mr speaker W..
Sir I'm I'm interested in the
some of the comments that we've
made in really looking for
shorter right.
Confirmation of your point of.
And I didn't think you're short
summary was was
It is a good starting time line
my first question is is I review
this bill is where is the eighty
million dollars right now
tonight.
Mr speaker German my
understanding is that it's
sitting in the fund.
in the possession of the state
of New Mexico so it is a federal
origin Aid and it has
restrictions on on it but it's
in the control of the state of
New Mexico.
Thank you for that answer I was
little uncertain whether the
entire eighty million dollar
funding had occurred from the
federal government to the state
of New Mexico and of my further
questions would would be on
Revolved around the.
The future funding but if it's
already here in New Mexico it
and who writes the checks out of
that account does the Interstate
Stream Commission or the cap
entities who signs the checks.
Mr speaker and gentleman if I
can clarify my prior answer the
PED million in what's called the
New Mexico unit fund.
which is easy million after
additions and and so the
subtractions is in the state
treasury there was an additional
promised amount from the federal
government of it.
After inflation fifty six
million.
If New Mexico proceeded with the
construction of the version
which is not so that portion of
the promised funding is no
longer no longer there the other
the other funding is a fund
within the state treasurer.
Just a few rights the checks Mr
speaker Tallman is there's a
Stream Commission.
Thank you thank you for that
answer if I could on on a follow
up to that fifty six million
dollars is that mean it's it's
it's gone we should never
anticipate that funding to the
state of New Mexico.
Mr speaker German the cap
entities order and receive the
a couple of these extensions on
their deadline the last
extension was denied that
deadline was missed that money
is gone.
thank you for that answer
Representative I I I I guess
part of me questions whether or
not there's any further recourse
for New Mexico to try to capture
that fifty six million dollars.
Even in the event they don't go
forward with a diversion
project.
I I suppose that's something we
neither one of us have an answer
to Sir Mr speaker and gentleman
I do have an answer that.
And if I may.
Mr speaker gentleman that fund
that money because of the cost
reimbursement basis it was only
if we built a diversion.
Which is which is pretty clearly
and I think.
My colleagues in the house said
confirm not going to have.
So I I don't think in Mr speaker
I don't think there's anyone
holding out hope that somehow
the fifty six million is going
to reappear I think it's gone.
And and so my conclusion is we
we not only lose the right to
fourteen thousand acre feet per
year we also lose fifty six
million dollars that would have
been available had we gone
forward with the diversion.
Your respective of the total
cost to the diversion Sir.
Mr speaker and gentleman we have
lost the city six million
dollars we actually don't.
Lose the right.
The pair is on the for the
fourteen thousand acre feet.
That's still there.
If there was a way to use the
water we can still use that
water.
I don't think there is a way but
that right technically still
exists.
Thank you for that answer
because I I would just I
misunderstood that particular
point on the on the water itself
in my next question was when the
funding first name.
Of I suppose that was roughly
eighty million plus the fifteen
million that has been spent or
misspent
Was all of that money.
Our one hundred percent for
diversion or get the I. S. C.
look to other water conservation
projects as of funding in those
four counties.
Sir this Mr speaker gentleman
My understanding is the money
didn't all arrive at once
as of September of last year
the cavity at the expended
presses size C. is more accurate
of fourteen point five million
on expenses for the New Mexico
unit in additional seven point
five million on other expenses
so that have been the the money
came in installments have been
payments out of it
and the there is no water
settlements Act of the which of
which was the original source of
this is money.
It's really very clear it says
of the move that New Mexico unit
fund that's the name of the
funds which and person New
Mexico unit is defined as the
the diversion the sentence like.
Shelby for the purpose of paying
costs of the New Mexico unit the
version or other water water
utilization alternatives to meet
water supply the man's in the
southwest water planning region
of New Mexico so there's always
been an option to spend The New
Mexico you fund on the other
options we did not need to
spend.
Fifteen million dollars chasing
a few of the version it was
quite clear for a long time that
the with the version was not
gonna work.
In money continue to be spent
towards that project.
Thank you of thank you for that
answer
I'm up if if I could I'd like to
follow up on on a previous
comment and it goes something
like this if your bill passes.
And this eighty million dollars
now falls under the water trust
board.
Does your bill designate that
that eighty million dollars will
only be spent in those four
counties or dispatch eighty
million dollars C..
A post war the water
conservation projects in New
Mexico.
Question.
Mr speaker Tallman my bills
because that money will only be
spent North those four counts.
And do we have any of.
Listing of the worthy causes.
I'm more concerned Sir is
whether or not do we have a
responsibility to say okay we've
got eighty million dollars in
its available for.
Water projects we must make an
effort we have a responsibility
to make an effort to see that
that money is spent on the most
worthy projects.
And they're thirty three
counties in New Mexico not for
your Madam I think you know
where I'm headed with my trying
to the point I'm trying to make
a your response please.
Mr speaker gentleman I I guess
I'm not super clear on the point
you're trying to make.
it is limited to the forecast
means.
The projects will be judged on
merit they would be judged by
the members of the water trust
board which has not only water
expertise but also useful
expertise and finance expertise.
And other than Representative
other concerns and they would
make recommendations to the
Interstate Stream Commission.
And the ultimate decision making
authority of rest with the I. S.
C. as it currently does.
Thank you for that I I I may
have been caught off guard on
your explanation Mr speaker Sir
and that is of.
It is the water trust if your
bill passes it is the water
trust board that will make this
project decision inside of those
four counties I misspoke and and
therefore the I just see would
accept that I I don't understand
that connection between two
authorities over deciding how
the money would be funded in
spent going forward.
That was a quick Mr speaker down
and it is a little complicated
the highest C. is to make the
decision.
They will consult with and then
the fertilized says they were
called consult with the
southwest water study group or
its successor and so this is
naming the water transport is
the successor we size C. will
consult with and then you know.
We're hopeful that the water
because forward will you know
that these projects bring their
expertise to bear and made good
recommendations to the is seen.
But it is still alive see the
makes the decision.
Thank you and and just for
clarification or my own
understanding Mr speaker Sir is
that's the way it is already
even with the captain to do it's
still the I just see those
writing the check in making the
decision is is that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman that is
correct I I would clarify
administrative because of the
icy writes the check the they
might not physically write the
check coming up might still come
from the state treasury but
they're the one they're the ones
that make the decision and
authorize the check to be
written at the very least.
Thank.
Thank you very much for that and
I I didn't mean to mislead you
with my broad answer on who
writes checks and who does it
but it it really goes to the
point of Authority so I was
doing a quick calculation on if
you fourteen thousand acre feet
of water per year you to.
Million dollars that so fifty
seven hundred nineteen dollars
an acre foot that makes it about
seventeen thousand a water ride
acre and I think to myself what
may be the best use of this
water is.
To go to a a basin.
Surface flow bases and and
retire Water Rights because you
find a lot of water rights with
that amount of money based on
seventeen thousand acre per
water right anchor there's many
basins in New Mexico where water
sells for a lot less than that
it seems like you've we retired
that water that would sort of be
just gallon for gallon the best
investment you.
I guess it's not a question
that's an observation
I think Sir Representative you
said something that that I
thought was interesting earlier
in your remarks Mr speaker that
was time to move on.
And I thought to myself okay I I
think that so an interesting
point don't seem to disagree
with that but then I think okay
there must be different ways to
move on and why is this bill
proposing the best path forward
to move on
and on that point.
I have a question in my question
was what is what will what is
going to happen Mr speaker Sir
if you're bill doesn't pass
what.
Where will we be do we lose the
eighty million.
Is it is it this spans in these
four counties how what what is
do you have any.
Willingness to project Mr
speaker and serve as to what the
outcome will be going forward if
the bill were not to pass.
Mr speaker Ellen I think that's
a good question Mr chairman I
was here two years ago with the
different bill on the same
topic.
Propose to allocate the money to
different counties to let them
make the decision.
that building past the thing
died and house agriculture and I
told them at the time Mr speaker
gentleman if we don't pass that
bill we'll be back because the
current.
Structured isn't working.
Mr speaker gentleman that was
two years ago we've wasted two
more years we've only within the
million dollars or two.
In the.
If we don't solve this problem
we're not putting that money
toward.
In that community.
That's what I'm trying to do Mr
speaker tell.
Thank you very much for that Mr
speaker and gentleman because
of.
Obviously.
Trying to manage New Mexico
scarce water resources is a
Is one of our most important
duties as New Mexicans and
I'm I'm going to listen to the
remainder of the debate as I
ponder time to move on and
whether or not H. P. two hundred
years the best method math
methodology for moving on he
doesn't seem to me that the
eighty million dollars zoom in a
particular jeopardy although
I've I've I've heard I
understand the point about
another million or million and a
half being wasted
so I think I need to gather up a
bit more information the
remaining debate I thank you
very much for your your your
answers Mr speaker with that hi
I am done thank you as for the
debate the gentleman from only
Representative Scott.
Thank you Mr speaker.
From Bernalillo.
Jennifer torch invalids you you.
Mr speaker John I yield.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
I'm pretty much totally from
here.
With this controversy practice
bill.
Appears to be intended to
resolve.
Tension.
Twenty several entities one of
which wants to do something with
the water and the other of which
wants to do something else with
water could you describe this is
tension these competing
interests.
And.
Which are your legislation comes
spent on one.
Mr speaker John and that's a
It's a surprisingly complicated
question.
Because Mr speaker gentleman to
to begin with I I wouldn't
really say that.
There are two sides well I don't
think they're two sides of their
many sites and it's not about
what to do with the water.
Mr speaker John.
I think that's been decided.
There will not be the version.
Mr speaker German because there
is no viable diverge.
So we're not really talking
about that.
Mr speaker and gentleman what we
are talking about what to do
with the money.
And the purpose of the money.
At this point to invested in
those for community.
In Mr speaker gentleman what
this bill does it clears the way
for that to happen.
Because under the current
structure.
That money is not getting out
into the communities.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Apparently the server is some.
Disagreement.
About half the money should be
spent.
For the captain to to who is the
current.
Consultation group.
Would already be advocating
that.
Mr speaker
Gentleman.
Who will give you a couple bits
of information which illustrates
part of the problem.
Thank Mr speaker and gentleman I
would say that the captain to
do.
Is still somewhat fixated.
On the idea that you believe the
version.
Mr speaker German in recent
weeks that they circulated a
third amended joint powers
agreement.
It stated.
The construction and operation
of the New Mexico units.
You hear the diversion.
Remains a priority.
Of the cap and.
Mr speaker German one the
captain's team members.
What is quoted in the paper as
saying.
I will not be voting for any
authorization of any additional
funds for non diversion
projects.
Until there's a revenue stream
for outside funds made available
to the retail thirty as a
political stuff.
Mr speaker gentleman the cap and
the.
I believe.
Should have given up on the hill
of the version when it became
clear that there wasn't going to
work.
And they didn't.
Mr speaker and gentleman they
continue to spend money.
And they continue to take time.
And they continue to figure out
try to figure out what.
To the particular.
Now.
We need as far as all the
members in this body agree that
that's not going to happen.
We still have in New Mexico cap
introduce.
It's trying to make it happen.
Mr speaker and gentleman of
diversion.
Is an engineering project.
Not a political project was.
There are no practical way.
Construct a diversion I keep
hearing over and over this was
not a viable option can you tell
me why it was small.
Mr speaker of the gentleman that
I think that's also an excellent
question.
And I want to be very clear that
the decision not to build a
diversion.
Was not a political position.
Was not a conservation decisions
on environmental decision.
Was a scientific and economic
decision.
Despite taking fifteen years and
spending fifteen million dollars
to come up with a viable ideas.
They were even close.
You can physically get the water
out of the river I agree to
that.
But you can't do it in any kind
of way that makes economic
sense.
At one point the estimate for
the diversion structure damage
this chart structure lease what
option.
Was billion dollars.
The proposals they came up with.
The cost to deliver the water at
the farm.
Protest include the exchange
payments.
Made to Arizona because it's not
our water.
Was upwards of two hundred
dollars per acre.
The water can be used to retire
other water rights the smaller
water.
There is no viable project.
Is there a project that under
the laws of physics you can get
the water out of the river sure
if you had unlimited funds.
Which we don't.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman.
So this water settlement
agreement was the form of a
contact if you will.
Where we got.
To beneficial use of so much so
much had to be.
Look downstream is not.
Is an accurate representation.
Mr speaker and gentleman that I
believe the there is no water
solvents Act was related to the
the Colorado River compact
I can give you the precise
technical the explanation for
it.
This based on the idea that.
we're a you member the base and
member state we have a right to
use a certain amount of money.
It was structured in such a way
that.
I said million that water.
Yeah we can we can access that
water.
If a bunch of other things have.
In over and over again it's been
proven those other things just
aren't going to have.
So your basic point I I think is
is certainly in the ballpark yes
it's related to Interstate
Stream called.
And Mr speaker
Kernan we have different want to
questioning.
Basically the folks.
Thanks for currently
responsible for creating the
Interstate Stream Commission is
currently obligated to consult
with hold while some whole other
diversion project might still be
developed where if this
legislation passes and the
consultation obligations moves
over cool water quality for.
Mostly at the state level.
the roll Senator.
Thanks monies will be expanded
on something else in that four
county area is fairly accurate
summation of where we are.
Mr speaker if I heard you
correctly I I would I would take
issue with a couple things first
it's not the Interstate Stream
Commission which is holding out
hope for that version.
I think they've accepted the
reality is the cap and to do
that is being replaced that
seems to be holding out hope for
diversion Mr speaker German the
money isn't spent on just
anything in that area will be
used for parks or roads or
anything like that it's for
water projects and that's what
County area Mr speaker Joe.
Mr speaker and gentleman no meio
understanding that.
The captain to to which is
comprised of.
Thanks elected local.
Still hold strong hold.
For the development of a
diversion project.
The.
Not the Interstate Stream
Commission I think I have I
think I have a correct
understanding.
Complicated problem and I look
forward.
The rest of the debate thank you
Mr speaker and thank you
gentlemen for your answers for
the debate the gentle lady from
Santa Fe Representative Lujan.
Thank you Mr speaker.
The gentleman from Santa Fe
County the.
You.
Mr speaker John until lady are
you.
Thank you I just have a couple
of quick questions
And in the right right we are
back here on the and here again
thank you for thinking that
we've been around around into
what could be for a few times
but my questions are simple can
you describe the kind local
mortar projects or if they are
going to be
can conservation team that that
would be fun to do this.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
I imagine all sorts of different
water projects
Mr speaker gentle lady small
projects large projects you're
using projects pipeline projects
well projects.
Mr speaker gentle lady the only
restriction I believes that
their water projects in the four
county area.
Both it and thank you Mr speaker
on your lines.
Are there.
The local party waiting for the
funding.
Mr speaker gentle lady at my
understanding is that.
If you look at I see I do let's
Google lists that there are
there is a need to there was a
hundred twenty or a hundred
forty million dollars for
projects in the in the
For that area so absolutely
there's a need for this month.
Thank you thank you madam
speaker Germans and my last
question for you can.
Can you tell me if there's that
there's local or tribal support
for this bill.
Mr speaker gentle lady I really
appreciate that question because
it's present been presented in
this chamber.
Like this the local opinion is
uniformly again system.
And that's not true.
The representatives in this
chamber of state their
opposition and I accept that.
my answer with this today but
yet to call on.
Is Grant County commissioner
very broad.
my co sponsor is set Senator
Hemphill.
I have been in contact with
numerous people from the
community.
That support this bill.
And in this bill is.
In this issue I should say.
Boller the community and that
the vision thing going on for a
long time.
But to say that the community
the Four canning area.
is here for in its opposition to
this bill.
Is false there is a lot of some
of those support for this bill
including I would notes from the
Fort Sill Apache nation.
I appreciate it those answers
with the chair gentleman and.
You know if there's any of.
Any representation from.
This point you're patching tribe
or any tribal representation on
with the cap indicate.
Mr speaker gentle lady there's
not.
Okay.
Questions I have and I want to
say thank you so much for
bringing this legislation
forward in a long time coming to
to to be able to vote on this
today and supported.
Something that I I was nineteen
page I strongly supported thank
you so much and thank you Mr
chairman thank you gentlemen.
For the debate really thank you.
Thank you there is for the
debate I will go to the gentle
lady from Katrin Sapporo Lynsey
just for the body knows I made a
mistake in calling a
representative Garcia and I did
send a text to shore them up so
the generally could be short
appreciated since is the second
time.
Thank you Mr speaker I
appreciate that does the
gentleman yield.
Mr speaker gentle lady I you.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Just wanted to clear up a few
things that were stated.
The Interstate Stream Commission
was involved in helping make
this decision on the first.
Diversion project so the
Interstate Stream Commission
will be involved again as usual
but.
It's not just the cap and the
team that made that decision it
was a joint decision secondly.
We will just admit the
environmental lawyers one.
That was what the money was
spent on.
The first to fifteen million
dollars was spent on.
Roadblocks.
Mr speaker kind gentleman
roadblocks that were put up
against the diversion on the
healer wilderness I got a
message they're not going to
they don't want to do the
diversion even if they're
putting out.
Eight letters or whatever in
support of that that project is
done.
What I would like to do is sit
down with you sit down of the
captaincy sit down with the
highest state find a way to get
everyone on the same page to
help get this money out into the
four county area.
And with that Mr speaker I
yield.
There's further debate the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Stansbury.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentleman yield.
Mr speaker gentle lady I you.
And thank you Mr speaker and
thank you gentlemen I know a lot
of them ground is already been
covered in this debate today and
you know I want to honor I know
that this is an issue that many
in this body have worked on for
many years and and people have
fought over this issue for many
decades and I know it's a very
difficult emotional and hard
issue for a lot of people and
and I think that's important to
recognize that Mr speaker and
gentleman you know we were
during the interim last year we
had a water and natural
resources committee hearing down
in Silver City and discussed you
know the long history of this
project before the highest C.
made their decision last summer
and Mr speaker and gentleman one
of the things that I was really
struck by during that
conversation was conversations
that were had about the changing
hydrology the Hewlett basin and
some of the work that's been
done by hydrologist employment
scientists over the last couple
of years that show that that
basin as a whole not just the
base flow of the river itself
but the entire base and and
these four counties that are
part of that watershed are
actually facing pretty
significant hydrologic impacts
from climate change and Mr
speaker and gentleman my
understanding is that you know
part of why the highest C.
decided this last summer and
that it was both not financially
practicable as well as
hydrologically practicable to
pursue a diversion on the left
was that the water just wouldn't
be there in most years is that
correct Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Mr speaker tell lady I think you
raise a very good point I don't
know if we can see most years of
the certainly many years
they would not get the fourteen
thousand acre feet even with a
day of the count for my
understanding is in some years
they're making the.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman and the reason why I
wanted to kind of bring the
science of thought into this
conversation is because my
understanding is that part of
the purpose of this bill and
read diverting these funds to
other water utilization projects
is not only to serve the direct
needs of the different
communities in the four counties
but to take kind of a watershed
approach to how we're going to
bring this basin and balance in
need the water supply needs of
these communities is that
correct Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Mr speaker gentle lady I think
that's correct.
So I think you know it's really
thank you know them Mr speaker
and gentleman I think it's
really important that we see
this is not just you know
obviously the historical context
is really important and I think
there's been some important
issues raised in concerns that
local entities will be consulted
with that Mr speaker and
gentleman you know we put the
vast majority of our water
projects through the water trust
board which VAX those projects
make sure that they've been
appropriately planned and
designed that there's
appropriate support and
costsharing at the local level
and so that's the process that
we put our capital outlay
through we put most of our state
projects through so Mister
speaker and gentleman I want to
also you know clarify that by by
putting this within the purview
of the water trust board we're
not taking away local control
we're creating a process that is
a process that we've but the
vast majority of our water
projects through to make sure
that they're technically sound
the overall goal of doing this
is to bring the watershed into
balance and really need the
water supply needs of the
communities and so Mister
speaker gentleman while I
completely understand much of
the concern that's been raised
here today I am in full support
of this legislation I think
administratively and creates a
sound process that uses existing
administrative private bodies it
brings into balance
you know the technical aspects
of how we need water supply
needs across the community and
Mr speaker and gentleman it's
really focused on trying to
address the needs across this
entire watershed in a more
holistic manner so I think that
it's scientifically technically
and administratively of sound
well and that's going to support
it so with that Mr speaker and
gentleman I I'd like to go back
thank you there's further debate
the.
Gentlelady from you up
Representative Ferrary.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you the gentleman from Santa Fe
I just wanted to add that the
investment of I believe it's
only in his left.
Mr speaker tell lady are you.
Okay I'm sorry.
Thank you.
Can you hear me.
Mr speaker gentle lady I can.
Okay thank you Mr speaker with
the gentleman from Santa Fe
please yield Mister speaker
gentle lady are you.
Thank you
it.
Now it's left
the fund is about eighty million
dollars is that correct.
Mr speaker telling you that's
correct.
So
and we've established that there
really is going to be the
interests and the
Involvement of the local
communities is that correct Mr
speaker a gentleman from Santa
Mr speaker generally I I think
this process will affect open up
the process to the local
community they all the local
communities including those who
are not currently members of the
cap entities.
Which is significant both large
and small communities.
We'll have an opportunity to
present projects through the
water trust.
Mr speaker and gentleman that
sounds like it's you know
affirmative to no having that in
place but also I think what is
important and people need to
keep in mind from the counties
of catching requests of Dogo and
Luna is that this will create
jobs and also facilitate
economic development and my
concern is the unemployment rate
you know in these counties such
as six point six percent in
Catrine and eight point four
percent in requests and five
point four Hidalgo in fifteen
and a half percent unemployment
rate in Luna County so all of
these projects in that funding
will come into those communities
and that's why we should support
this bill so thank you Mr
speaker and
a gentleman from Santa Fe I
really do support still thank
you.
Gentlelady from yes
Representative.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from Bernalillo Santa
Fe Torrance Valencia please
you'll.
Mr speaker telling the ideal.
On thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman you said that cap
entity has been drawing down the
fund even though nothing is
being built of what sorts of
things is the money being spent
on.
Mr speaker gentle lady I have I
have several years of supplement
papers Mr speaker telling of
there have been funds spent on
non diversion projects.
No New Mexico unit I think this
is to date seven point five
million I believe it was a
pipeline of primarily I don't
know the details of that the
migration projects.
But then there's also the
fourteen point five million.
Back in September that is been
spent.
by the captaincy and you know I.
Well I think it was spent on
were lawyers engineers insults.
and you know a lot of work to
spend a lot of money was spent
on doing studies and working on
the draft EIS and and there was
so many spent on environmental
lawyers well as the other tally
said in you know there's a staff
person
this done job for awhile for
that way so you know they go
along you know and every year
they spend more.
Thank you you Mr speaker and
gentleman
As I understand it that the CAP
entity has
we could support for the
diversion project
we know that under that that
trump support for that project
was was discontinued do you do
you think there's any indication
that
Soon to be on carriers secretary
deb Haaland might have some
renewed interest in pursuing
this project.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
I don't know the ins and outs of
what occurred but it's
My understanding is that it's
very clear that the that aspect
is still on the fifty six
million and I don't think even
if you secretary interior wanted
to bring it back that you would
come back.
I think it's just gone.
Thank you thank you Mr speaker
thank you and on the other.
Thanks for the debate the gentle
lady from Bernalillo
Representative Thompson.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from Santa Fe deal
please.
Mr speaker gentle lady I know.
Okay thank thank you Mr speaker
and gentleman can you talk a
little bit about the history of
the law and how that plays into
this bill.
The.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
Could you be more specific now.
Mr speaker and gentleman about
about what that the first
wilderness.
Mr speaker gentle lady here your
current available this was in
fact the first as a wilderness
area and I think the Hewlett
self currently.
is a you know a national and
international drop.
It's not just some place where
our New Mexicans visits to camp
and hike and fish.
But I think you're in in my
assessment is that it's a great
asset to us in its natural state
to draw visitors to our state to
enhance our tourism especially
our other recreation tourism
which we've been trying to focus
on these recent years.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman that's all I have.
The gentleman from Santa Fe
speak Griego.
Thank you madam speaker Mr
speaker will the gentleman
yield.
Mr speaker Mr speaker I yield
thank you
you Mr speaker the gentleman.
All right I wanted to make a few
points that
I'm going through listening to
the debate I think it helps to
start.
You to do is really safe first
things first and second things
second.
And.
The federal law.
That is called years and water
settlements Act.
Is what sets this fund up.
To be used for water projects
and projects needing water
supply demands in there for
southwest counties in New Mexico
that have been discussed in this
debate.
And.
That law.
Says David withdrawals from the
New Mexico unit fund that's the
fund we're talking about today
of course.
Shall be for the purpose of
paying costs of the New Mexico
unit that's the damn in
diversion it's not going to
happen.
Or other water utilization
alternatives to meet water
supply demands in the southwest
water planning region of New
Mexico it was the four counties.
Then it says it is the key part.
As determined.
Hi The New Mexico Interstate
Stream Commission.
In consultation with the
southwest New Mexico Water State
reports successor.
So Mister speaker gentleman just
to make it explicitly clear.
Isn't it true that the
Interstate Stream Commission in
the Interstate Stream
Commission.
Decides how the funds in the New
Mexico you are to be spent.
Mr speaker Mr speaker that is
correct.
That is that is as it was.
As it is and as it always will
be as long as of federal laws in
place is that right.
Mr speaker John and that is
correct.
In Mr speaker German isn't
correct that.
this legislation does not take
away from the cap entity
Authority to appropriate money.
Mr speaker Mr speaker that is
correct in the capital city has
no such authority right then
that was me my next question has
it ever has the cap into the
ever had authority to
appropriate any money of any.
Mr speaker Mr speaker not right
so this legislation doesn't
change anything with regard to
appropriations.
It doesn't change anything with
regard to the decision making
process for the use of the money
in the New Mexico units.
What is doing is saying that as
we said in the two committees.
Enough is enough.
Then we have taken money The New
Mexico unit funding could then
use.
For conservation projects for
pipeline projects to spin your
available acreage in these four
counties.
To pay for the detection and
repair and municipal water
supply systems and Silvercity.
In other communities in those
four counties.
Then it could have been used for
soil and water conservation
projects to improve farming and
efficiency.
That's the sixteen million
dollars and fifteen million
dollars could administer any
number of things to improve the
lives of the people southwest
New Mexico.
To improve water use efficiency
in agriculture to improve
municipal water systems so that
we don't have so many making
pipes.
Then failed to deliver water to
people's homes instead Senate
into the ground.
At great cost.
All of these things are
critically important especially
as our State becomes more care.
And we have had this percent
since twenty fourteen or so to
try to build a damning different
issue.
And the proposed cost about two
billion dollars.
To use money The New Mexico
never could have possibly own
the water rights to.
We get to spend a billion
dollars computed fancy Hewlett
diverted water if there had been
water in the stream you could
have taken up to fourteen
thousand acre feet if there was
enough supplies certain times of
the years or complicated
how we could have calculated our
ability to withdraw in for every
bit of water you use we have to
pay downstream water users for
our use of it.
So this is this never had the
offered to us increasing the
state's water rights portfolio
by a single drop of.
Let alone forty thousand acre
feet.
In a lot of people were chasing
when I called the other day in
Morocco.
examine in diversion that would
have fourteen thousand acre feet
of water into the water supply
of southwest New Mexico.
Them I called in rise because
that was never a possibility.
The Arizona water settlements
Act ladies out in crystal clear
detail this water never would
have belonged to New Mexico or
to anyone in New Mexico.
And it further makes clear that
if there was ever shortage Mr
speaker gentleman of water in
the Colorado River that we would
have been the first ones to get
cut off is that right Mr speaker
gentle.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
believe that's correct.
So Mister speaker jump.
Spending a billion dollars to
divert a bunch of other people's
water the because you never own
here in New Mexico only in times
of extreme on extremely
plentiful water.
so.
We're lucky that we didn't go
down that route you Mr speaker
gentleman mentioned committee I
I started to learn about this R.
when I was in it is a private
attorney.
Involved in the litigation
against Interstate Stream
Commission for violations of the
open meetings act.
The open meetings act was being
violated.
As contracts were being approved
for engineering design and other
things related to the early
plans the building is damaged
version project with you and I
mentioned that that litigation
is long since concluded.
Successfully for our for our
clients the staff was violation
of the open meetings act.
But I mention that because.
For the last seven years or six
and a half years.
In his name.
Very sad and this may.
To see the two things were clear
and that litigation.
Six years ago namely that a
diversion was impossible.
The possible reasons engineering
possible freezes cost.
Yet we still spent six and a
half years chasing after that
Rauch.
And we saw the engineering
schematics resolve all the data
six and a half years ago new
then.
Then.
The the the day the divers in
the in in the damn we never
we're never going to happen is
we've lost six in a few years.
With that many could have been
spent benefiting the people who
were intended beneficiaries in
these four counties in southwest
New Mexico.
What you were billed as it makes
modest proposition.
That the experiment the effort
the pursuit of the Maraj has run
its course.
And now it's time for the funds
that are available to be used
for the year for their
statutorily intended purpose
which is projects addressing.
The water supply demands in the
southwest water planning region
of New Mexico as determined by
the New Mexico Interstate Stream
Commission.
Your bill merely clarifies it is
time to proceed with those.
Projects.
As decided by the Interstate
Stream Commission in
consultation with water trust.
And we know from discussions
with the Interstate Stream
Commission there will be robust
public input from all those
counties into what projects
should be so.
So I would urge members to
support your legislation.
Because the times come to print
this water this money to work.
To address the water supply
demands The southwest Mexico the
time is here the time is now.
We can turn the page.
And start providing real funding
right away for the people
southwest New Mexico to address
the water supply concerns I
thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman of for supporting.
Single further debate the
gentleman to close.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you members of the body.
For the motion I want to
emphasize just three points the
the res debate and find
Some clarifying comments.
The first is as the Mr speaker
alluded to.
Thank you is not now and then
there was the deciding all the.
No this process is the process
contemplated by this bill.
Will open the process to all the
communities in that area.
Second point which was raised by
one of the members suggested
that quote the environmental
lawyers want.
And Mr speaker members of the
body I disagree with that.
I think physics one.
And science one.
And economics one.
It there's simply no viable
project and there never was.
as another member said.
You've been around and around
and around.
And I don't disagree with that.
And it's time to stop more.
It's time to get this money out
into the.
Mr speaker I move that House
Bill.
Two hundred.
To help us.
We're in final passage of house
bill two hundred the vote is now
open.
Thirty seconds to vote.
You're trying to questions posed
but the remaining member.
Representative Harper.
Representative Lundstrom.
Is now closed I would forty
three in the affirmative and
twenty four in the negative
house bill two hundred has duly
passed.
Are we going to item.
Implants we're going to item
number twenty house bill two
forty Representative for her are
you ready on the bill.
Yes Mr speaker can you get me to
that point.
Thank you hang on just a minute.
The record reflect.
But all action necessary for
placing House Bill to forty on
final passage has been taken and
it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution
gentlelady to explain the bill.
Thank you thank you Mr speaker
house bill two twenty is a
change of definitions when it
comes to the definition hospital
I'm several years ago and
visited the Lansing county
decided that they were going to
pass and we're living to bring a
hospital into the community and
fortune the mill levy did not
meet the standards of being able
to build a hospital just operate
so for so quite some time we've
had twenty six million dollars
segment in account in an account
and the Lansing county waiting
to be disbursed for emergency
services in our community so
there county commissions that
together we decided that we can
make effects and so we need to
at the slight change into the
definition of hospital what we
do not want to do is effect mill
levies around the state or fact
any other existing
existing
The hospital language or
anything like that so so in a in
the bill we we restricted it
straight directly to Valencia
County only and Mr speaker after
the bill passed committee we
realized that the language may
have been too restrictive
because we don't have our census
ready at and so we do have an
amendment
that tape for the clarify that
this the levy is only this
language it only applies to
Valencia County and Mister
speaker I will it's okay with
you and if you wanted to
entertain the amendment now or
later.
gentlelady to explain down
please to order number but move
the amendment first.
Thank you Mr speaker I would
like to move house floor
amendment number one to house
bill two forty of amended and
Mister speaker the bill number
is point two two zero one eight
one dash one.
The only explaining them.
Thank you Mr speaker and like I
said that all this does is it
further clarifies the language
and our last amendment to make
sure that even after the census
is done that the the the the
language only applies to the
land state county.
Is there objection to the
amendment.
Amendment is adopted.
We're back on the bill.
Thank you Mr speaker and I would
like to defer to my co sponsors
on this bill Representative
Baldonado and representative
Armstrong.
Of.
Receive Mr speaker.
Madam speaker of the speaker
Yes Germany's you representative
thank you Mr speaker in just a
kind of go a little bit more in
detail what what Representative
part of just amended into the
bill
in in the health services
commitment at a minute that
we're gonna strike with this
anymore just a with this
ammendment and we're trying to
do is craft the language with
specific Valencia County
settlement in counties let's
accounting class B. county Mr
speaker and and body there are
five eight eight counties in New
Mexico that's Bernalillo done in
New Santa San Juan instead of
eight those counties have a
population of over one hundred
thousand people as of the twenty
and since the glass becomes
quite a few most of our counties
across the
and Valencia in the building the
most populated.
The which in twenty ten was a
little over seventy five
thousand seven six thousand
Let's see County there are two
counties that we have to worry
about one is is is McKinley
County McKinley had seventy one
thousand five hundred or so
folks in twenty and and then we
County had sixty four thousand
seven hundred twenty sevens are
amendment it it uses the bustle
of seventy five thousand.
People in the county Mr speaker
and so Kelly we don't believe it
will be seventy five thousand
when the twenty twenty Census
numbers come out US we're more
worried about mentality because
of the oil and gas activity down
in the Permian basin the last in
years good honestly being
seventy five thousands what
we've done is that it's a little
more language to sort of bracket
beans Mr speaker and body we've
used the tenants that will tell
you for rate setting purposes
which is so just to give you
context the counties taxable
value for property for this year
is almost eight point four
billion dollars with the B. Mr
speaker let's in counties is one
point five billion with the
building and and McKinley County
center billion and so by using
the language that says
of more than one million dollars
but less than five billion
dollars and then for your narrow
the language so that we we truly
only I'm here that one has
become Lancia and trying to
and then the language in the
definition to allow a twenty
four hour.
Agency health care facility Mr
speaker and body this is very
important for Valencia County we
unfortunately are sort of
thanks to the idea that we are
so close to Albuquerque almost
anywhere unless you count within
twenty to thirty five minutes
you could be at County L. U. N.
M. age or Presbyterian for
loveless medical facilities so
having a full blown you know
twenty bed hospital at a clip of
fifty million dollars is a
little bit out of reach for our
county but the idea of having a
twenty four hour emergency
facility where you know of
appearing with the the kid that
broke his arm in soccer field
could could go and simply have
that sort of health care
provided for them would be ideal
for for Valencia County maybe
someday when we're when we're a
hundred and fifty or two hundred
thousand people that might be a
good idea to have its own
hospital but at this point it's
been very very difficult to get
that that piece of of this
hospital never done for once
again so that's what you know
the amendment does what the bill
does and I think the gentle lady
from once you for yielding to me
and I'll be here to answer more
questions if needed Mr speaker
body.
Are just make certain before we
go to debate is there any other
explanation on the bill as
amended.
Sanchez anything else
Representative eight.
Mr speaker.
There is debate the
representative from Katrin
Sikora Valencia representative
Armstrong.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Well the gentle lady from Quincy
I yield I gladly yield to my.
Mexico us sponsor Rep.
You Mr speaker and kind lady
just to add just a little bit to
it as well most of the the has
been spot on.
But let's take counties been
waiting for some kind of
emergency facility for quite
some time and the people ability
County our.
Ready for this to happen we
tried some other avenues three
definition without having to run
legislation but.
Failed to get a definition that
fits our ability County so we
would appreciate your support of
this bill and I appreciate the
county commission and my other
Sanchez co sponsors for bringing
this forward and and taking the
lead thank you Mr speaker.
No further debate the gentleman
or the gentle lady to close.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
house bill two forty as amended
twice do now pass.
We are on final passage of house
bill two forty is twice
amendment at twice amended the
vote is now open.
There is a.
The electronic questions close
to the clerk to call the
remaining members Representative
Dow.
Representative get.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative get both yes
Representative.
Representative.
Your me yes.
Representative yes
Representative Lente.
Thank you.
Representative Madrid.
Yes Representative Madrid both
yes Representative Roger
Montoya.
Yes Representative Roger Montoya
votes yes Representative Dow.
Representative yes.
Is now closed by a vote of sixty
seven in the affirmative and not
in the negative.
House bill two forty as twice
amended has passed this house.
Are you ready on item nineteen.
Sorry I was muted Mr speaker
thank you Mr speaker could you
please get me to that point the
record reflect Alexion necessary
replacing Education Committee
says to wrestle to thirty two
with an emergency clause on
final passage has been taken
gentlelady to explain the bill.
Mr speaker and members of the
house.
That.
The mechanical ventilation
system in many school public
school buildings have not been
to the SS repeated all upgraded
but decades.
The COVID nineteen pandemic has
caused many issues to come into
focus in all communities one of
which is the quality of
mechanical ventilation system in
a public school buildings we
know that having high quality
systems and therefore claim
circulating here is people a
safe and successful learning
environment for students and a
safe and successful working
environment educators to make
sure this happens it is critical
that qualified person provide
assessments and improvements to
the system it is clear Mr
speaker and members of the house
that we have fallen shot in this
area and therefore Mr speaker
and members of the house House
Bill two thirty two committees
of the cage how's Education
Committee.
House bill two thirty two public
school ventilation improvement
act.
Thanks for the mechanism.
Mechanism for schools to meet
the PED guidelines for
ventilation systems required for
reopening the committee
substitute Mr speaker addresses
the key processes public school
districts will you'll was as the
examine their ventilation
systems and make repairs
upgrades and modifications or
replacements.
Mr speaker and members of the
house the committee substitute
the fines the qualifications of
certified assessor needed to
make that initial assessment of
the system that the district
used to submit the application
once the district received what
a certified technician who is
certified intestines and balance
in what's with the contractor to
accomplish the work.
Mr speaker members about.
This committee substitute.
I these qualifications.
Members of the house.
House added to committee staff.
We had some fun and PED retains
five percent of the funds
deposited into the new fund.
It's school ventilation
improvement fund is to
administer the program.
Also be used by districts but
the cost of the initial
assessment if needed.
A contractor is Mister speaker
by the district with this
in trained in structured
workforce in which at least.
Forty percent of the weapons.
From a registered apprenticeship
program in New Mexico.
The committee said Mr speaker
specifies what.
As those in apprenticeship
program to ensure construction
work is performed by workers on
job sites working together with
apprentice trained personnel.
The committee so Mister speaker
and members of the house.
I thank state funds are
appropriated the district for
follow the methodology set for
by the P. as an alliance which
Mr speaker and members of the
house and this amendment it make
sure that any funds members of
the house going into this fund
does not state funds going in
does not affect the zoning laws
because it all would have to go
through the same process as the
B. S. Hey and the piece yes C.
O. C..
Mr speaker and members of the
house.
House Bill to.
So that have a clause that says
it's an emergency clause that is
needed the reason Mr speaker and
members of the house the purpose
of the bill.
Is to address the need to stay
healthy school environment for
students and school personnel
during the COVID nineteen
pandemic and to ensure that Mr
speaker member of the house that
the ventilation system of all
school I'm also school districts
office says correctly by
qualified person Mr speaker
members of the house.
Thank you.
Asian is crucial I would
children our parents I would
teachers always secretary is our
janitors and anyone who works
within public school system Mr
speaker members the house I now
stand for questions.
From San Juan Representative
lane.
Thank you Mr speaker the
gentlelady from Bernalillo
county yields.
Yes Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman from someone.
Mr speaker I want to begin by
making sure I have my hands
around this bill correctly so
it's my understanding that.
And the purpose of what this
bill seeks to achieve is to be
able to provide some funding to
our local school districts.
To be able to either upgrade or
install and at some point
maintain.
The ventilation systems in our
school our facilities.
To make sure we have the safest
ventilation all four and
combating COVID nineteen.
The first.
Mr speaker members of the house.
As I mentioned about the purpose
of the bill.
Is to address the need for a
safe and healthy school
environment was school districts
across the state and also to
create a fun.
That in case the federal dollars
that awful the purpose of making
sure that our children are safe
in schools would be utilized in
the manner in which the budget
did state would be utilized on
school districts that is
correct.
Mr speaker that this bill have
appraise the vendor for two of
the term of art and that that
phrase is very.
And train construction
workforce.
That parade field and train
construction workforce is
defined in the bill is that
correct.
Yes Mr speaker and gentleman
who's one.
And Mr speaker gentle lady just
will actually do this Mr speaker
I'll turn our attention to page
three.
Line for.
Because I think this is is.
Central to the debate here this
afternoon.
Is the gentle lady on page four
for page three it line for.
You asked me a question Mrs from
San Juan.
Mr speaker gentle lady yes I
just wanna make sure you are on
page three line for before
asking questions.
I am.
Thank you Mr speaker.
The way that this.
Bill defined term.
Is that that you have to have a
workforce of which at least
forty percent.
Of the workers of that company.
Are graduates of the registered
apprenticeship program.
In New Mexico for the apple
construction occupation is that
correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
San Juan.
It's it's the best thank.
That scared them train
construction workforce needs a
workforce which in at least
twenty percent of the work is
I read out from a registered
apprenticeship programs in New
Mexico that is correct.
Mr speaker I wonder about the
the forty percent so we're
saying in order to be considered
a skilled and trained
construction workforce.
And later on the bill you you're
not eligible for funding under
any additional less you have a
quote yield and training
construction workforce New
Mexico.
And so I wonder about the need
for the forty percent Mr speaker
why forty one on a hundred point
seventy five or twenty five
white white forty.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
San Juan.
In the Education Committee it
was discussions about.
The percentages.
That was there.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
San Juan.
It's question was around why
seventy percent.
The aim of the bone initially
with the seventy percent and
still is.
Was that the average crew on a
typical sheet metal job is
supposed to be for example Mr
speaker and gentlemen so
technicians.
The what if the centrist always
say that one of those people on
that job.
Receive an education all have a
quiet and education in the craft
that supported became enough to
be able to do the job correctly
Mr speaker and gentleman.
And so when we discussed it.
And members of the committee we
said.
Seventy percent additional
money.
So I went back.
The request is male.
And they said.
That they wanted fifty one
percent.
Because they said we have to
have all school districts.
People and individuals and
technicians who are skilled and
qualified who are skilled and
trained.
I sent to them some members of
the committee looked at the
point of forty percent.
I think you all need to go with
twenty percent twenty percent
in making sure that the job that
you know you have sixty percent
of the company can be Mr speaker
anybody that they have but with
that it should be individual or
what trained and.
I'm cert and stand to have in
the school district.
Mr speaker that even though the
shopping.
As I did in the school system
for teachers parents would not
like to see Mr speaker and
members of the household that
anybody in the past that is not
skilled and trained to be a
teacher to teach children it's
the same way Mr speaker and
members of the house we do not
want to not have
the money I individuals to be
able to find.
An acceptable ventilation
mechanism all the children in
the classroom and that is why we
decide to utilize scale and
train individuals along with
everybody else who knows how to
do this type of work Mr speaker
and gentleman from San Juan.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
I understand that in order to be
awarded
a contract underneath this bill
the company have to completely
forty percent.
Of the workers within their
company of graduates of the
registered apprenticeship
programs.
Mr speaker going to inject a
point for me where this bill
requires that out of those forty
percent they actually show up to
the job site and do the work.
The the efforts Mr Chairman Mr
speaker and gentleman from San
Juan what do you mean with your
question that if they show up to
work I don't understand your
question can you either rephrase
it all.
What do you mean if they show up
to work if you have.
If you have I'm a in a company
that has two weapons that three
workers in a place
One one might be I do the job
and one.
I mean in terms of going to an
apprenticeship program and one
may not.
Mr speaker gentle lady I will
try to reprint question so it in
order for companies to build
will receive awarded this
contract at least forty percent
of their employees need to be.
graduates of register purging
our support program in New
Mexico.
My question is we we set that
threshold for the company to win
the bid.
Where in the bill does it
require that the actual
employees that are sent to do
the work of the school site.
Also be of the forty percent.
Register the pressure program
graduates.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
San Juan I have Stephen.
As one of my witnesses and I
will
Ask him that question thank you.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle
lady.
Mr chair Mr speaker and
gentleman from San Juan on page
ten he.
On page ten he Mr speaker and
gentleman from San Juan it
states that verification that
all what has been tested and
adjusted my certified
technicians or mechanical
engineers and that all repairs
upgrades are replacement were
performed by.
Invoices.
And training instruction one was
and what isn't Ryan with the
construction industry license
act was promulgated in Hopkins
with that act.
Mr speaker gentle lady thank you
for the response to our you know
I on paper online at the same
rate them.
The just the the work was
performed by a contractor who
employs the fuel mentoring
construction workforce there's
nothing in the text that what I
was appointed to.
That actually says the workers
themselves have to be at least
forty percent of them have to
be.
A graduate of a program in New
Mexico is that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
They have to be employed on the
job site.
Mr speaker can use.
Dimensional initially when the
tax that requires a.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
San Juan.
The in order to give the report
the verification that all the
work has been tested and
adjusted by certified
technicians or mechanics engine
is that all repairs upgrades and
replacements will perform so by
a contractor implies a skilled
and trained construction.
So Mrs and then back off I'm
page three.
It says that it has to have been
traded one point so.
In order to have somebody on the
job that would have been one of
his last as I train with them in
order to do the job.
The speaker gentle effective
response and so I I don't want
to continue to.
Are you over the text good
here's a hypothetical that this
bill allows for I hope it will
never happen.
A company that employs at least
forty percent of its employees
who are graduates of New Mexico
furniture company can fit on
these contracts throughout the
state.
They can win the award because
we forty percent of employees
are in fact graduates of the
pressure program but when it
comes to do the actual work on
the actual school district
buildings.
There's nothing in this bill
that precludes me from setting a
workforce who are not graduates
of oppression program or maybe
just twenty percent.
Or thirty nine percent or one
percent.
And so I find it hard the
premise is the need for the
forty percent of the make sure.
That we have a trained and
skilled workforce only graduates
of the the pressure program with
that definition.
When you get down to how the
rubber actually hits the road
here there's nothing to require
the actual workers on the job
site at least forty percent of
the workers I stand to be
certified and Roadrunner
company.
And so I have a difficult time
understanding why then if that's
not the case.
Why we're finding the winners of
these contracts the company that
employs of the forty percent.
Of graduates from a.
Of a partnership program.
Now my question is.
Mr speaker gentle lady out of
the New Mexico companies that do
this type of work how many
currently fit this definition
having at least forty percent.
Mr speaker and the gentleman
from San Juan.
There are three hundred and
fifty eight premises in the
state of New Mexico statewide
how many does each individual
company have I don't have that
big.
I'm.
Total of two hundred and fifty
eight.
Mr speaker I I think the
highlight.
The problem here.
We don't know how many companies
New Mexico would actually even
satisfies this definition we're
we're setting this artificial
threshold.
Of forty percent we don't even
know how many of our companies
would that within that
artificial threshold.
And the reality is I I don't
even really understand the need
for the forty percent of it
that's not in the bill I don't
think we're even debating this
bill today we all recognize we
want faith H. fax systems we
want our students or teachers or
secretaries are janitors
everybody.
To have safe breeding
environment and so when we set
this artificial standard of
forty percent.
We don't even know how many
company that's going to fly to
represent all.
And here's the reason why I
think it's a problem.
Our rural school districts.
Who would normally contract
local H. fat companies to do
this kind of work.
What we're telling a rural
school districts in the you have
less than forty percent of the
workforce.
Four percent employees and the
local age back company that they
are therefore not able to bid on
these type of contract.
Even though those local each
back company may be more than
capable of doing this type of
work.
And yet we're setting the
standard by statute which
automatically lose those local
H. back companies.
And so what that means for me if
I'm a local school district.
I now have to put out a bit more
most likely the responses are
going to be from metro
companies.
That means they're going to have
to travel they're going to have
to large they're gonna have to
pay for food and so my call for
a local school district and
having this type of work done is
going to significantly increase.
And so I I I am concerned about
the increased costs for rural
school districts.
And also local companies who
would otherwise be filled within
this area not even being able to
compete in this market place.
So with that Mr speaker I do
want to offer an amendment that
I think hopefully addresses this
issue.
and that that amendment of
health for equipment number one.
Health Education Committee from
two probable to thirty two what
I would hope that Mr speaker
I'll be happy to read the to to
number one Representative.
Thank you Mr speaker it is two
two zero two two four point one.
Going into the.
Thank you Mr speaker and so I
wanna be clear this is not
remove the forty percent Mr
speaker that that stays intact.
I understand the rationale for
the forty percent to be that we
want to create a skilled and
trained workforce in New Mexico
and so I think that makes sense
so this this ammendment not seek
to remove the forty percent.
All this amendment does is on
page six it adds a new sub
paragraph I.
And really well it says in the
palm of local school district
and I don't happen to have a
company in my district that
means the forty percent
threshold as long as that
companies can still satisfied
the construction industry
division requirements to work on
the type H. back system and that
company can at least be in and
have the possibility of
receiving an award under the
spot under this bill doesn't
mean the automatically give it
they get it they still have to
go through the bid process like
everybody else but at least
we're not creating this
artificial barrier to entry at
forty percent so this is
designed to help our rural
school districts Mr speaker.
The gentleman with the first to
the gentle lady from Bernalillo.
Is this a friendly amendment.
Mr speaker it is then on
friendly amendment.
Okay is it on.
The gentleman from the
Representative Scott.
Thank you Mr speaker.
From San Juan.
Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman from the.
Mr speaker.
You know how important it is
for.
Albuquerque to hopes Lea County.
Mr speaker a woman.
I I think on one hand how many
times I've been to all no
offense.
but I remember those being long
car rides as a kid.
back before travel to Netflix so
I don't have for the members
addressed the Kentucky four is
Mr speaker and gentleman from
San Juan Representative tree
hundred law which.
And while we have.
School qualified HVAC
contractors in our community I
do not believe that we do have
management with maybe just forty
percent threshold for your
approval.
Would allow these local folks.
To work on schools in our
communities.
Is that accurate.
Mr speaker and gentleman as long
as they're otherwise qualified
to do the work they can at least
have the opportunity to bid on
those contracts.
We're at the forty percent
threshold takes them out of the
possibility getting right from
the beginning.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
San Juan.
Which will have to be course
which.
Production industry division has
qualified to perform this work
former qualify.
To perform this work.
Mr speaker and gentleman that is
correct it would have to be
licensed and then they have to
be competitive too so again
there could be a metric economy
that comes and and bids of the
forty percent threshold if
they're more competitive than
they get their work there's no
guarantee just because your
local you get the award at least
just give them the opportunity
to get in the game.
Mr speaker.
Understand Roadrunner this
process would award to work.
The painting contractor to
manage all of this presentation.
And timelines at a competitive
price is still working.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
That is the process however if
my amendment is not adopted.
Companies that fit within the
parameters that you just
described could potentially be
precluded from receiving award
if not at least forty percent of
their employees are graduates of
New Mexico Christian program.
Mr speaker.
One with.
It is possible we would be
important.
Contractors to do work.
Some three hundred models and
significant cost and risk.
A local contractor was fully
current.
To do the work.
Would be five percent.
Mr speaker gentleman with a
it's possible if it's probable.
Mr speaker.
Was intended for to to
completely.
Leave rural communities and
rural communities contractors or
was it into.
To improve the quality schools
utilizing as much one one four
as we would have qualified and
available.
Mr speaker gentle lady Mr I
don't think there's any desire
to exclude any school district
whether rural or metro
otherwise.
I I think that the intent is is
good it's a good purpose we can
all come together agree that we
want safe and adequate H. back
systems for our for our children
for our teachers for our
administrators.
But at the same time we
shouldn't exclude local
contractors that we should drive
up the cost of installing and
maintaining these systems based
on some artificial number forty
percent which a doctor several
times for the objective reason
as to why the forty and I have
yet to receive an objective
answer.
Mr speaker and one.
A local control.
Would be able to work
competitively.
He three hundred miles distance
travel expense associated with
the work.
Mr speaker Jennifer Lee are no
expert in this area but if if
that company is certified by the
mechanical Burke bureau of the
construction industry division
that I don't see any reason why
the to do this I H. back for
particularly in light of the
fact.
That as I mentioned there's
nothing in the text of the bill
that actually makes the workers
the boots on the ground forty
percent of those foods.
The graduates of different
program there's nothing in the
bill that requires that it's
just that means that many of the
company in order to win a bid on
this contract that we forty
percent of my workforce at the
graduates of a pressure program
and then there after once I went
to bed there's nothing the tax
that requires me to actually
send those forty percent do the
work.
And.
Here.
One in those communities that
are relatively small.
Relatively sparsely populated
and need to leave home before
with other states do you see the
possibility of this this would
preclude a contract from for
example seminal.
Restaurant right next door to
provide community would preclude
sales.
Albuquerque.
For for here but to be.
Mr speaker your family I think
it would preclude them since
four percent the graduates of
New Mexico.
Although it so if they are non
state companies and forty
percent of their graduates are.
graduate from internship program
that I think.
It's very likely they could
still be in but it seems
unlikely to have an out of state
companies have forty percent of
the work of the registered
apprenticeship program.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
travel for you to be required.
To all of the qualifications of
the New Mexico construction
industry.
Mr speaker gently that's
correct.
Mr Chairman thank you for your
answers I do intend to support
your.
The gentleman gentleman from
Valencia Representative
Baldonado.
You Mr speaker will the
gentleman from San Juan.
Mr speaker and one will yield to
the gentleman from Valencia
thank you Mr speaker the
gentleman you know I kind of
want to send a little light on
your
Requests for.
Reasoning why forty percent
versus seventy.
During debate
how many miss anybody well you
were present this the Mr.
Mr our gentleman from San Juan
as you sit on the Education
Committee as well.
and I do appreciate the gentle
lady from Bernalillo the bill's
sponsor Representative Williams
Stapleton for accommodating.
And and trying to amend the bill
to make it more palatable to.
This conversation but I simply.
Where did our why not forty
percent instead of seventy
percent I mean it was just
something that in conversation
and in the question of the bill
on I simply thought will point
lower that threshold and and Mr
speaker and gentleman from San
Juan this year amendment.
Wants to open things up and I
think that's the crux of what's
going on in this conversation
right here Mister no San Juan is
that.
It it's highly unlikely that the
majority of our contractors in
the state of New Mexico or even
in in nearby states actually
have seventy percent of their
staff and have attended or
graduated from some sort of
approved apprenticeship program
in the state of New Mexico Mr
speaker and gentleman and one is
that sort of the direction that
you're trying to head is to open
this up to the contractors that
have qualified and experienced
folks that could perform the
work but not necessarily have
that many certificates of being
held by their employees Mr
chairman.
Mr speaker wants to.
So the forty percent I think
it's just an artificial
threshold I still even if we
move the forty you still have to
be.
Certified by the mechanical
bureau of the construction
industry division and so I think
what that means.
And practices yes they are
qualified to do this type of H.
back solution and maintenance.
Regardless of the percentage of
their workers that happen to
graduate from the New Mexico
pressure programs so again it's
just trying to put everybody on
an equal starting point that's
it just Nico starting point if
you're our experienced and
licensed and certified to do the
federal work.
You'll leave it a Senator budget
doesn't mean when just because
you're the home township.
You still have to show that
you're capable such a competent
and that's our pricing is
competitive and that's all.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman that answered so.
What I've what I've seen this
bill Mr speaker down is that we
were we want to deliver this.
The their standard to our our
school districts which is
definitely something we need to
do right now during this this
endemic.
But.
We're doing that through this
bill but we're also hamstringing
the the the amount of of folks
are able to build on this work
on and that that threshold
whether it's seventy or forty
percent is still a barrier to
entry in terms of getting this
so Mr speaker gentleman my next
question has to do with with the
actual idea that we have a
licensing division we have our
of the employees in the
construction industry in the
mechanical Division are we is
this bill the way it's written
that's been documented it's it's
are we seeing that.
That there are contractors that
could be licensed by the state
of New Mexico but would not be
able to bid on this work simply
because their staff hasn't been
for these programs Mr Chairman
Mr speaker and gentleman
someone.
Mr speaker gentle frequency at I
think that they would still this
these companies would still have
to have workers.
That are certified through the
construction industry division I
think that's a probably baseline
to build to bid on the second
screen contracts.
What how this bill is so
different than anything we see.
In the screen industry school
contacted now we're saying.
Just to be able to bid and
receiving awards under this type
of funding.
At least forty percent of your
workforce has to be gradual.
Of New Mexico pressure program
and I think that.
As an artificial later.
Of capability that's not
otherwise required by the
construction industry.
The to speak German do you have
any the the.
As to whether or not how long
these apprentice apprenticeship
programs that actually existed
in New Mexico and what of what
I'm getting at Mr speaker and
gentleman is that.
What if you have a company in Mr
New Mexico where are my my good
friend Representative Chatfield
representative very small town
you have Mister speaker German
do you have an HVAC company
that's been in business for
fifty years and they have five
or six employees that have been
with them for thirty years and
these these individuals have
been working in the field for
for their thirty years and and
surely are well qualified by
that point but maybe never
attended a an apprenticeship
program that is outlined by this
by this legislation Mr speaker
German I am sure that that
situation exists are we are we
then by seeing that that exists
those folks to be not able to to
to participate in the
installation of these.
Upgrades to the school district
Mr speaker.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
going to assuming the company to
describe or otherwise licensed
by the construction industry
division otherwise people than
than yes they would be if
schools and and frankly.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
the one third of I was shocked
that there's only a few hundred
of these person throughout the
state.
Forget the exact number that
we're given here during the day
but it's it's in the three
hundred and so imagine if you
have a company that has a
hundred workers
And forty of those
license part of graduates work
for your company you just suck
forty out of the three hundred
there's not a left left left to
go around eight.
And so you know one of my
concerns that expresses.
We don't know how many actual
New Mexico companies.
Satisfy this requirement forty
percent but if there's only a
few hundred graduate.
That number has to be incredibly
low.
And the chances of our rural
communities.
Having otherwise capable
companies what made this forty
percent threshold thanks for
like the committee.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentleman from San Juan and
I I do appreciate you bringing
this ammendment this bill has
perfect with the last two weeks
Mr speaker and gentleman
it's a good bill there's a
there's a lot of good in this
bill but we put in
this poison pill where we said
only certain people can perform
this work Mr speaker gentleman
during this endemic we have
realize that time is of the
essence and trying to.
Upgrade these HVAC HVAC systems
in the school districts in the
building is a very big priority
in a I hope we can.
Come to an agreement this
legislation we can amend that
we're we can open the doors to
several different many different
contractors deadline and trying
to look at for this work in
trying to get these things done
so that we can we open the doors
of our schools and get kids back
in a safe environment
and so I I do appreciate that
the amendment and the Dodd
intended to support the
amendment the bill.
At home during the the debate of
the bill we we flesh out some
more those issues that are
troubling I think the limits of
the many of the members of the
face of thank you Mr speaker and
thank you gentleman someone.
Okay is there any
caucus it is not wish to debate
the amendment please raise your
hand.
Okay.
From Chavis and Lincoln
representative Nibert.
Thank you Mr speaker.
It all.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from San Juan County
yield.
Mr speaker gladly yield.
Mr speaker and gentleman I was
your amendment
That raises some concerns of
finish up primarily because.
The terms of the amendment.
Require the business to be
located with them the school
district bankers is that
correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman so what
the thing is that if you are
located within the school
district.
you're still allowed to bid for
that contract even if you don't
have the four percent
requirement.
Mr speaker and gentleman in that
regard.
I'm concerned about some school
districts.
I don't have.
These types of construction
firms located within those
school districts.
But this amendment would
prohibit them from going.
Twenty miles or thirty miles to
the our closest pals.
That would have those I serve
construction at the two so for
example.
Full is a larger city.
And there are some smaller
school districts around the
growth will such as thanks for
Hagerman lake or third.
Yeah anticipate that those
school districts might want to
come to Ross full or to our
future.
This type of contractor.
This bill the the this amendment
would allow that because they're
not located within the school
district founders
Representative from Lee County
pointed out of maybe it works
for up to fifty dollars Senator
fences.
But if you're and Eunice cool
district you might not be you
can go to hold school district
or you could go to because of
district
Mexico twenty miles thanks again
this could go to follow up.
We go to Rose Bowl or to what
made that or for the and so.
I understand the rationale if
you're.
Because you're trying to.
You're more.
Address the situation of the
outlying communities that would
have to come through Albuquerque
for all intents and purposes to
secure
a heating and air conditioning.
Russian operatives to do the
work the one.
Work maybe locally were to be
more competitive and people
people travel yeah.
Maybe even in your county.
A lot of the builder us to have
the funds to our our
construction companies but the
good news of farming the.
Contractor for the under under
your amendment.
Mr speaker and gentleman it's on
like the young man once offers
on amendment.
so the the action of the
amendment is is not to make this
more explosive distrusted yes.
Our company is located in
districts who would otherwise be
qualified at least give them the
opportunity to bid.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
think.
For the purpose from and I think
that's what I would like to
support is there we we.
If there's not
The local the local being able.
Some few miles or or and the
miles instead of hundreds of
miles Representative the those.
Russian companies be given the
same benefit even though they'll
be for forty percent or.
Back on the the original bill
I'm gonna have some real
concerns with the forty percent
of our data file is the Commerce
Clause so I think it's it's the
fact of the matter regardless
the.
Your.
Wait for my part of the state
still has a problem for the
smaller school districts provide
would be able to go to the
county seat or to the largest
town in the county to secure
those services so
maybe maybe I can get an
amendment thank thank you Mr
speaker Mexico.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo
Representative Stapleton.
Getting from.
One could you please you.
Mr speaker I yield to the gentle
lady from Bernalillo.
This is
from San Juan.
New Mexico on your on your man.
Senator Campos been turned off.
Well.
Your camera is not turned on on
your device.
Might be are you.
Speaker.
The camera is not turned on we
can't see you sorry.
Thank you Mr speaker and members
of the house
Gentleman from San Juan Mr
speaker and gentleman from San
Juan.
The New Mexico workers can get a
gentleman's license my having a
business by the matter very find
that the work that has had the
required on the job training
powers apprentice.
We created was finishing a
program that will give worker is
not only on the job training but
the education and best practices
of the scale.
Mr speaker and gentleman from.
San Juan I was students so
wanted to make sure that the
skills by.
And.
I don't see the reason why the
concentration would be not to
have kids and train workers.
your amendment.
Is requiring you talked about
the forty percent.
And Representative Baldonado
talked about you mention it in
the air after talking to the
construction industry division
which one of my expert witness
on the line Linda Trujillo
says that.
We do not have.
Contracted The New Mexico eight
do the work and and and many of
you and then you meet this
criteria.
And also Mr speaker and
gentleman from San Juan.
When we talked about twenty
percent.
They wanted fifty.
The construction industry that
forty percent would work and I
said that was what was mentioned
in the committee.
And the bill was amended to use
the word twenty percent.
Making sure Mr speaker and
gentleman from San Juan.
Back to the job because
technicians there that are not
only learned the craft on the
job but through a traditional
education as well also known as
the apprenticeship program this
insures their ability to perform
the work and Mr speaker and
gentleman on your amendment.
Normally when federal money
comes into play we start trapped
in.
Companies coming into New Mexico
didn't work against New Mexico
contracted price is that The New
Mexico contracted me this is
because they are utilizing
individuals are not qualified to
perform the work.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Sen.
Ensure that there is a highly
trained in construction
workforce available and able to
perform the quality work thank
you Mr speaker and gentleman
from San Juan.
The gentleman from current
Representative Crowder.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from San Juan please
yield.
Mr speaker of the yield version
of the current.
Thank you kind gentleman
generally have two questions of
the person is on page two.
Under section being a certified
technician.
And it says that it means a
person is certified as a testing
and balancing technician by and
and credited organization.
Gentleman your research on this
bill can you tell me.
What is an accredited
organization how many of them do
we have in the state of New
Mexico that are allowed to.
certify these technicians.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Jennifer curry those are great
questions I I do not know and so
the credit organizations are
defined by name here.
I would I would just be
speculating and I certainly
don't know the number that would
be that.
Thank you I just wanna I will
reserve a question and for when
we get back to the main sponsor
of I began to wonder if the
international code council is a
certifying organization or is it
just the union shops that are
accredited
certifying organizations by
sector question is similar it's
on page three.
One six.
And it talks about skilled and
trained construction workforce
means workforce which at least
forty percent of workers are
graduates on.
A registered apprenticeship
program and then I began to
wonder how many registered
apprenticeship programs do we
have in the state of New Mexico.
Are there more than one or other
Senator
M. are registered apprenticeship
programs from another state
accepted within the state of New
Mexico if it's an international
code council registration
program of the acceptance of
gentleman I I wasn't sure that
you have the knowledge I know
you serve with the schools for a
long time ago
you're quite good as an attorney
and I thought I would ask
questions now but our reserve
those for the main sponsor
gentleman thank you for your
time thank you Mr speaker.
Generally for granted although
in Sierra Representative Dow.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you John for San Juan county
would you please feel.
Mr speaker I currently yield to
the gentle lady from grant and
all going here.
I thank you Mr speaker and and
prior first the first because
you and I serve on education and
we've heard this bill not once
but twice and each time and had
several hours of conversation I
think you can answer this
question here is federal comment
money flowing into our school
districts and another estimated
as much as a million dollars
flowing into our school
districts this is federal
dollars.
And is this the whole needed in
order for the the urgent.
And immediate need to get these
systems into our schools so that
we can re open our schools is
this legislation needed in order
for schools to receive the
funds.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
grand organ zero this is not
what I would.
Sort of informing described as
enabling legislation will all
this is designed to do is to to
further restrict how many
dollars are actually utilized in
local school districts.
should this should that not just
a minute but the entire bill not
pass.
schools can still receive money
for installation and maintenance
of the track systems under the
COVID relief and I think the
that's the four hundred million
we currently have I think the.
Anticipate additional revenue I
think it's still continue on.
Of congress I believe.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you Representative so the
schools will receive the money
they need to complete this work
the money the federal dollars
with or without this bill.
Mr speaker noted from Grand
Hotel going here that is my
understanding.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you Representative and and if we
do this bill there isn't since
the process already in place
that would with us would certify
that the systems are completed
by skilled workers I'm currently
Mr speaker and gentleman the.
Certifies in defined and
approved for entry workforce
can you confirm what some of
those qualifications would be Mr
speaker German in the
traditional journeymen and.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Grande all going through a again
I'm certainly not construction
industry expert or.
and maybe anything for that
matter but the construction
industry division like most
administrative of agency but I
have a problem again their own
rules.
And within those rules they have
specific definitions for state
acting the gentle lady use the
word turning into the
specifically defined that.
And the requirements so again
we're talking about public
school facilities public
buildings you don't get to just
work on those just because you
happen to know someone or or
think you're capable you
actually have to be licensed and
approved by the construction
industry division to be able to
do this type of work.
Thank thank you Mr speaker and
and thank you Representative so
the light the life journeymen
section of law is well in rules
is an intimate the fourteen six
point four point eight code are
and that describes the license
journeymen.
And in addition to being a
licensed journeymen and be
approved and which which
construction industries division
to provide that skilled and
trained workforce I mean it's
extent there's an application
process there is a yes that they
have to show a demonstrate
proficiency there's over four
thousand hours of of the on the
job training before they are
licensed or you and before they
are defined by the idea of kids
and trained workforce and that
fuel entry workforce that
defined by the ID they count in
the forty percent in this bill.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
Like a typical Lawrence regular
it depends if you happen to meet
all those qualifications and.
Rhetoric from a lack of
apprenticeship program in New
Mexico and yes but you can
actually to all those
requirements and not to attend
the actual pressure programs in
New Mexico.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
for them and we have been
investing at the body a lot of
money career clusters career
technologies we've been of
funding dual credit to CNN for
example of where they do have
the thirty nine programs yet
they're not apprenticeship
programs so.
It's as if without your
amendment.
We are limiting people who
attended only UNM as with your
amendment they could have
attended western New Mexico
university but if we're so
there's one pathway to receive
the construction industry
definition of of the of the
skilled and trained workforce
that.
Bill without your amended gives
one halfway.
Is that correct Mr speaker
Representative.
Mr speaker and gentle lady of I
understand allergies so central
yes with the only companies that
will be awarded the support for
the ones who happen to have four
percent.
employee rate of employees who
have graduated from partnership
program again not.
Not forty percent of the boots
on the ground the show up to the
actual work Representative on
the books as employees and
therefore you can bet for this
and so the only pathway there
for would be three company.
That is employing forty percent
of its employees as part of the
state of Mexico pressure
programs.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
canton E. we could potentially
have invested state taxpayer
dollars into a construction
company utilize the program at
CNN to develop a journeyman
program into a higher a hundred
percent of the people who are
considered building waiver
utilize our scholarship program
are doing programs are creating
cluster and and construction
technology pathways to achieve
what's the ID defines as you'll
and trained workforce and be in
eligible to apply for these
funds without your amendment.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Radovan zero yes if you.
That company doesn't have a
least forty percent of its
workers are graduates from New
Mexico pressure program
unfortunately yes.
Thank you Mr speaker in thank
you gentlemen and and I I do
just want to point out that
remind the folks that are not on
education there was talk about
being out of state groups that
would come in and we tried to
flood the market and take these
jobs away from our local owned
businesses and there was an
amendment which was rejected
that would have just prior
toward prioritize certified
minority owned in New Mexico
residents do you recall Mr
speaker gentle and that that was
not considered a friendly
amendment was rejected a
committee.
Mr speaker gentle lady I I
confess I slip some Senator some
big you're welcome to.
To refresh my recollection well
thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman I I want to see these
dollars The New Mexico I want to
see our local businesses are
mine are minority owned
businesses get these jobs and I
offered the amendment was
rejected I thank you Mr speaker
and gentleman I will be
supporting them.
The gentleman from San Juan
Representative Strickler.
Thank you Mr gentleman from
feeding on you here Mr speaker I
grab gladly yield to the
gentleman from San Juan right
now
An opportunity
provided.
Their construction industry.
More and more.
We have ninety.
Would you.
Every region.
Bills and then the hi to all
thank you Mr
out of the hall Roger.
For a
better
you shop
And that a usual local I.
In the meeting but contractors
shows chosen for that particular
project.
That was located and parking on
that.
They do commercial.
Also.
All of their table.
This is.
Project.
This
bill would be disqualified.
Yeah what.
Those in our community when they
are local contractors in their
their online.
With the construction industry
and services very much needed
the
Marking the rules that can be
developed
we appreciate the national five
hundred page.
Very important that we have a.
Local residents
this by the bill.
I would be qualification.
And thank you for your.
Okay I did it I almost literally
getting going going gone so
gentlelady from Chavis
Representative he's L..
Try to get away with that thank
you all the but thank you
finally received by the opposite
that okay.
Mr speaker thank you very much
will the sponsor of the
amendment please see of the
gentleman from.
Mr speaker I gladly yield to the
gentle lady from Travis.
Mr speaker thank you very much
I'd like your amendment
I represent quite a few small
schools in my district.
And it's really hard.
Senator people down there to
work on on screen and there
have.
Whenever I'm talking about
dexter Heidemann like for their
loving Tatum India echo we used
to have a school of people are
going we need to wait in Mexico
where is that what was it that
the school was that middle of
nowhere.
Mr you Mr speaker gentleman from
San Juan yes there was a school
that is approximately sixty five
miles west of artesian New
Mexico they have a grand total
of twelve students that go to
school bears that they have been
shut down they have no internet
service there are two teachers
for the school there two
buildings that school and it is
kindergarten through seventh
grade and.
And the I have been here by now
the partnership they have been
under just even get school of
would go and said prying to be
in compliance with these a bill
that the.
Good Representative is
presenting with the a true
hardship on the M. unless there
was somebody either from Markel
station our reporter Los crucis
that could come into this Mr
speaker we have seen that
happen.
In one particular school is what
I call my fellow who.
There was a roof that needed to
be replaced on the gymnasium in
one of the smallest school
districts there.
And they don't do that.
And it seems like nobody from
the more metropolitan areas of
our state with the benefit on do
you know where the particular to
the job really when eighteen.
Mr speaker gentle lady from.
I was I do not I hope you would.
Mr speaker and awarding that
feed to somebody within our
state for those funds that could
have been it and our state it
went to a farm out of Texas.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
San Juan I know that our border
towns as the the Representative
addressed earlier.
It's impossible to get that were
that is referenced in this
particular bill by
Representative Stapleton to get
to those particular workers out
there are more rural areas so
we're really proud of as soon as
it's fair to to our more rural
schools.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Travis thank you the highlight
of House problems that you're
describing is actually
exacerbated by this this overall
bill because.
If I understood the gentle lady
correction saying that we have a
hard enough time tracking
contractors to do work.
But if we throw on top of that
requirement that that that the
contractors have always
supported percent four point
the.
Our partnership program
graduates and then yes I think
it would.
Would create great hardship for
a local school district Mr
speaker that's exactly what this
is trying to create right here
and you know what
if we're going to.
Have this available for school
districts.
And there's nobody that would
fit on these contracts because
of the provision that is in here
that forty percent of the always
as the graduates of
apprenticeship programs.
That means that.
The more rural school districts
are not going to be able to
apply for even any of the drugs
that are going to be afforded in
the bill by Representative
Stapleton.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Travis what what I think would
mean in a practical sense is
that the the COVID money for
example that maybe funneled
through this but those school
districts would be able to take
advantage of those money so they
would have to fund.
Of those five H. FAQ
implementations and repairs out
of other revenue sources and so
I think that would would greatly
place burden on our rural school
districts.
Mr speaker and gentleman we do
have lots of good good
construction come down to my
area and down in the southeast
part of the state.
And Mr speaker and gentleman
from San Juan those particular
construction industry in my part
of the state have been licensed
and bonded by the state of New
Mexico through the the so it
seems really funny to me that
they would not be able to
participate in the bidding
process of this.
And have those those monies
state local instead of going
possibly out of state and so I'm
I like.
Your.
Amendment that you have here I
do played the supportive of
their I do have a little bit of
a concern and that's what and
this would be my recommendation
I just got authorization or.
The approval from the of
parliamentarian that certain
words can be taken out of the
amendment without having to have
another amendment drafted Mr
speaker and gentleman I don't
mean to rain on your parade.
And I'm in agreement with
Representative Nibert.
Whenever this is the first line
of contractor whose business is
located within the school
districts fabric.
We don't have any companies such
as that in the fixture area the
Hagerman area lake or third
loving Tatum India's go we
Cloudcroft.
There's none of those Mr speaker
gentleman from San Juan I would
recommend right now.
At the.
Line starting after business in
your amendment.
This part of your first sentence
is located within the school
district's boundary and the
stricken from your amendment and
I hope that you will agree with
me because.
Sometimes the possibility is not
there within the school district
boundaries.
Okay and I would like to
proposes Mr speaker as a floor
amendment to the pre amendment
being presented by
Representative Eli.
Julie would you review the.
Mr speaker.
Representative lanes and then
mince.
For the quotations start with I
it state a contractor whose
business.
Instruct the rest of that line
going on down to the next line.
Striking get through the word
and.
We're not going to do verbal
amendments to.
Me just no we we're gonna have a
writing and we can do this in
committee.
We we have with American and
we're not gonna take your verbal
amendments we that's okay on
occasion and committee met
generated Representative that on
the floor please Mr speaker can
you come back to me as soon as I
can get this right now.
Is amendment.
Gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative Maestas.
Okay Mr speaker I move to table
house floor amendment number one
to house bill.
Two hundred thirty two.
Motionless to table the
amendment of of yes and the
amendment will be tentative no
moving back to debate on the
amendment.
The vote is now open.
Of.
One minute.
Reporter just goes down maybe
it's because I'm out here in the
movies I don't know.
But it just won't.
The clerk on those without a
recorded vote.
It would go Representative
black.
Representative Chandler.
Representative Roger Montoya.
Yes Representative Roger Montoya
votes yes.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Representative two.
Thirty nine affirmative twenty
five in the negative the
amendment is tabled.
Chair representative have the
floor still.
Speaker thank you.
So I I will just have some
closing remarks Medicine on
hello this debate I do not
understand the need for the four
percent threshold I think it's
unfortunate as they're going to
be some local New Mexico
companies that are otherwise
qualified.
Because we send our official
gate in statute that they are
there for not going to be able
to do that they had let alone be
awarded this type of work.
And I find it particularly
troubling that there's nothing
in the bill that actually
requires.
The boots on the ground the
ground to consist of at least
forty percent of being graduates
of under pressure program and so
for those reasons I cannot
support this bill thank you Mr
speaker.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Sariñana.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you Mr speaker
from Bernalillo which you feel.
Mr speaker I yield to the gentle
lady from Bernalillo thank you
so for forty percent of
apprenticeship graduates is
wonderful Hey lady would you say
that many of our kids are not
choosing college or can't afford
college these days.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo as I
am a director
of programs that eighteen to put
children to college will in
career feels that you're correct
thank you and waiting the lady
would you say that learning as
skilled through an
apprenticeship or on the job
training is one way to help them
be successful.
Dental Mr speaker gentle lady
from Bernalillo you are correct.
Thank you kindly Mr speaker
kindly do you believe that
apprenticeships like this would
help kids throughout our
communities.
throughout our communities get
better it's not too well.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo definitely.
Thank you thank you kindly for
adding graduates to this bill so
let's go to school ventilation.
I'm okay maybe you know a work
that was on a high school for
seven years and this school was
built in nineteen sixty and
finally when we turn on the
heater for the very first time
there's a good half an inch to
an inch of dirt in our classroom
all of our classrooms and kind
lady did you know that the
teachers clean it up before the
kids get there because god knows
a what they do with that or what
they do seeing all that dirt and
knowing all the things the
inhaler every day in the
classroom because of our
ventilation systems.
So Hey lady
Do you believe rental agencies
systems especially in our older
schools need to be replaced
overhauled completely.
Mr speaker and gentle lady it is
critical at a time like this Mr
speaker and gentle lady when we
are talking about the fact that
they DO H. the department of
health.
And
the CDC is also saying that we
must have clean air environment
with the quality here by then
within our schools Mr speaker
and gentle lady and for that
reason Mr speaker and gentle
lady I think is most important
that we don't have ventilation
cleanup system across the state
in every school in every public
school and every child to
school.
Thank you kindly Mr speaker kind
lady so I have just moved to new
school miss in teaching science
and in our last staff meeting
this was a topic many of them
said they would not go back to
school until they had of a clean
air ventilation system at the
ventilation and system that have
been overhauled because at my
new school it was terrible and
it's about sixty years old also
SO two things they said.
the body just to understand two
things we'll get them back to
school being vaccinated and of
analyst at and at this
particular school of
Representative of overall been
lacing system so if you want
teachers back we need to make
sure we've been vaccinated and
we have good clean air to
breathe not only teachers
everyone in the school so thank
you kind lady for bringing this
bill.
Apprenticeship programs are
amazing and having our kids in
good clean classrooms and our
teachers in an area where the
ventilation is good and COVID
can't be spread nearly as much
is what we need so thank you
madam kindly.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
from Bernalillo.
Mr.
the gentleman from current
Representative Crowder.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
river we lose your.
Mr speaker I yield to the gentle
man from.
Current board sorry
Representative Crowder sorry
thank you Mr speaker thank you
John so I I would like to follow
up with this similar to
questions so when I had earlier
the first question was on page
two of your bill.
We talked about a certified
technician the person is
certified as the testing
balancing technician.
Then it uses the phrase by and
twelve organization.
So delighted can you tell me in
the state of New Mexico.
What is an accredited
organization how many of them do
we have in the state of New
Mexico.
I have Mexico.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
sorry this information came from
the C. I. D. so I would like to
confirm with
MAPI with this from.
From the C. ID play baby.
Since.
The gentleman from curry.
it's the American national
standards.
institute.
Eight and and see.
The lady I appreciate that very
much I'm very familiar with that
state and I am C. C. and all
those codes certification
organizations
With the language and your bill
goes on to say that the twelve
organization.
Also
has to be approved by the
construction industry and
mission not not see I'd be able
to see I see.
So my question gentle lady is
how many certification
organizations.
Do we have in the state of New
Mexico that are approved by the
C. I. C..
Mr speaker and gentleman I do
have to ask my with this.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
curry.
I've been told that they do then
that they do the CIC does the
national certification to they
have in the state they have the
and see they have an E. B. E..
It A. B. C. and D. A. B. B..
So Mister speaker gentle lady
understand for certifying
organization is that correct.
One two three four yes Mr
speaker and gentleman from
coverage thank you gentle lady
Mr speaker gentle lady you
mentioned earlier in the in the
debate three hundred and
something certified technicians
in New Mexico right now is that
correct Mr speaker APA
apprentices yes three hundred
and fifty eight.
Yes Mr speaker and gentleman
from curry thank you gentle lady
Mr speaker we're all under the
age of all certified by the same
shop or or do you have a
breakdown of which organizations
certified.
different members.
Mr speaker I don't have that
break down.
Gentlelady your maybe your
expert will begin a lot of that
will move on the final circle
back on I would like to know the
answer I'd like to speed up to
page three.
Gentlelady online six.
Senator says that the workers
are graduates of the registered
apprenticeship program.
In New Mexico can you tell me
how many registered
apprenticeship programs are in
New Mexico.
Mr speaker I have to check and
find that out from my witness.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
curry there is for registered
apprenticeship.
And over twenty companies use
those.
Registered apprenticeship
programs for their companies.
Thank you gentle lady Mr speaker
I'm assuming in the of the three
hundred fifty eight
there is a mix of them coming
from the four institutions that
you mentioned earlier.
so I I guess and and I don't
need response but I'm assuming
that those for.
Roofed.
Apprenticeship programs
training facilities are all
probably located in the
Albuquerque metro area.
But my concern generated with
your bill.
Is that while many of the
communities along the east side
of the state.
Have access to highly qualified
very well trained people within
just a few miles across the
Texas state line where your bill
as crafted and Representative
we're not allowed to use those
even though they're very close
and we would be competitive
bidders because your program
ties it to the construction
industry commission approval for
the state of New Mexico
approval.
And the qualified individuals
just outside the state.
Do not have those qualifications
makes it very difficult in the
city of calls where I live we
have very highly trained
technicians that are certified
to work on all the facilities on
the federal installation of an
airforce base.
Very technical world the flight
simulators are we have to be
dust free clean.
But those same gentleman are not
allowed to work on our schools
unless they come and go through
the the schools.
In the state of New Mexico forty
percent of the shop's gonna be
you and and I think that's going
to be a very expensive endeavor
for a lot of the communities.
Around the state I think the
price is going to be driven up
considerably so are gentle lady
I I appreciate the bill we work
hard on it.
But I think there are a couple
of glitches in there that are
going to be very expensive for
the state of New Mexico thank
you gentlelady for let me have
this conversation thank you Mr
speaker I yield.
The gentleman from
Representative Scott.
Thank you Mr Wilson chin lady
from Bernalillo she'll.
This is speaker I yield to the
gentle lady from.
The league sorry the thank you.
Mr speaker gentle lady are
Lee are heard earlier.
In the debate here are three
hundred.
And fifty apprentices.
Currently located in the state
is actor.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Lee yes.
And how many of these would be
specific.
To HVAC.
I need to know that I need to
request that information
Representative gentleman.
Thank you gentle lady.
Mr speaker the gentleman from
Lee a hundred and seventy nine.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
Determine how many school
districts
In the state of New Mexico.
Three hundred and something but
I don't know the total number I
don't recall the total amount.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
One hundred seventy nine was
correct how many of these would
be located in Albuquerque or
Bernalillo county.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Lee my understanding that the
infants seventy nine work
statewide I don't know how many
is in each county.
Mr speaker and gentle lady here.
Experts here.
This chart user should be able
to turn on my.
Those numbers or because I am
concerned.
Last but sure to please hundred
and seventy nine apprentices
would be located at a great
distance from my community
creating significant hardship
which you and corner.
Mr speaker and gentle lady as to
how many of those folks on
reside in Albuquerque or
Bernalillo Mexico.
I'm Mr speaker and gentle lady
and the gentleman from Lee would
you hold on please and I will
ask my expert witness.
Thank you gentle lady.
Mr speaker and the gentleman
from Lee.
The.
Play Bailey from the
construction industry division
said there is one thousand
eighty seven.
By the gentleman that can do H.
fax system in the state of New
Mexico and in Albuquerque this
three hundred and sixty seven of
those one thousand eighty seven.
Hey.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
Currently sure.
Roughly six hundred plus or
minus.
Available for the rest of the
state as a regular.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
eight correct.
Mr speaker order let me be
clear.
The
the one thousand eighty seven
came from C. ID and then the
three sixty seven came from
Stephen curry's.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady for prayer can you
understand.
Young lady Herrell.
With the current member these
folks located.
With the highly populated urban
areas.
For more recent conservation in
the rural communities.
These folks would not be readily
available when we ask you Mr
speaker gentle lady let's sorry
for example there was an
emergency we.
Hello to the in late August
or is required.
And as sales
conditioning system required to
pay to replace more in order for
the school to be hope.
What this legislation.
Percent.
A local contractor with the.
Forty percent the.
Printers sure program with.
The.
From.
The participating in that
repair.
Mr speaker and gentleman for me
I don't believe so.
Mr speaker gentle lady point
reading.
Your legislation would indicate.
Those folks would have to wait
for the appropriate contractor
to come for work for these
qualified people might be
available you do not agree.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Lee this is the legislation is
talking about
putting in place currently.
A system that would help.
To
district.
We skilled in states.
And train construction
workforce.
In order to perform the work.
That would enable school
districts to open up.
You Mr speaker and gentle lady
are.
May have been under the mistaken
impression.
Practice was repelled quality is
that.
And correct.
It says the business of the H.
back system and if if they found
after the assessment needs to
speak Mr speaker and gentleman
from Lee that meant elation
improvement is needed.
Then the.
The then they have to have
certified intestine and balance
to work with the contracted to
accomplish the work.
And Mr speaker gentle lady.
Certification would include.
Qualifications.
M. license.
Individuals and companies are
the construction industry
division order on that is
correct Mr speaker and gentleman
from the.
At divisional would be required
under current statutes.
To pay.
The what are called prevailing
wage would be accurate.
I don't know I could ask Miss
Mr speaker and gentleman I could
ask the the Representative the
witness from the
construction industry Mr speaker
gentle lady the answer you will
get is yes in the affair to work
requires greater than sixty
thousand dollars in for
expenditures so what makes you a
little bit of trouble.
Thank.
It would appear.
This work performed.
Larson's.
Sure for contractor.
With the requisite forty percent
approve this program.
Would have to be done.
All one of a few fruits
primarily located in the
Albuquerque area.
If this is a quality Mr speaker
and gentle lady.
Then.
Chair of local.
These fully qualified
contractors in our local
communities without having to
worry.
Your inner urgency.
For.
Currently additional expenses
because of the time travel.
Would be required from a distant
community.
Next in the line.
This is less about.
quality.
Senator is about.
Contractor selection.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
Appreciate the answers your
questions.
And that's all I have thank.
There is further debate the
gentleman from San Juan
Representative Strickler.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo place
you.
Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman from San Juan.
Hang on just a second
No no no I'm I apologize I just
I was which I can hear you.
Nearly Masser.
Thank you gentle lady
You know one of want to go back
to to my.
In a previous comments with a
little different angle
in in San Juan County
important for school district we
within the last
three years we built for New
facilities madam I.
a motion
junior high
one two nine and northeast
elementary which
real close by and.
But brand new beautiful
facilities and and and change
Corporation seems to be the
popular contractor.
in low better and in our
community and they use local
subcontractors and and they use
local mechanical of contractors
the two of you.
To very good effect and.
And I'm glad this bill doesn't
cover like Christians and
plumbers and pipefitters
carpenters steelworkers
Representative years stucco
operators and more like we we
really
B. and B. in the trouble and San
Juan county were isolated for
three hours away from from
Albuquerque and this this bill
would not count qualified and
and the license and and.
In certified journeymen
chemical
Contractors and and that that
that really concerns me.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
We have a pretty good
Local staff of of you folks
primarily because of the our
plans in the coal mines
and we've got a good we've got a
good reservoir talent of pure
but in the mechanical
contracting side we we we have
have local
local contractors that serve not
only Farmington but as Tableof
bill and ship on school
districts.
So
The young lady what about are
concealed the unique situation
San Juan County in rural areas
you see
this is being overly
restrictive.
Mr Mr speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
San Juan I didn't hear your last
words of your question.
The media I'm sorry what about.
Sorry about that what do my
concern is it in in areas like
San Juan county and other rural
communities.
That are three four five hours
away from Albuquerque that this
this requirement would be
unduly restrictive to our
communities what do thank you
and what do you think about
that.
The various different.
Mr speaker and the gentleman
from San Juan I have twenty plus
Surrey is a contractor as one of
my witnesses and he said there's
a long list of top notch New
Mexico based contractor is
already traveled throughout the
both rural and urban communities
across the state to perform this
type of work or I'm sure that's
true.
I have no doubt that so that is
the case you know have and
everybody expected ready to go
but
we we like to use some of our
local talent and we like to use
our local contractors they've
done a good job of for I'll just
keep it simple gentle lady Mr
speaker of functions to
ran is a seventy five million
dollar project and the those
those and heating and air
conditioning systems state we
are
would be on with me on the
just restless because branded so
Appreciate that comment from
your your witness but that
doesn't help us at all appear we
like we like local talent in our
construction industry done very
well
in our community southwest
Colorado's booming in a lot of
our workers are going up there
to do project is within an an
hour away and we got in in thank
you picked up in Farmington and
glad to say for the residential
side of the of the business and
of the few big commercial job so
we have San Juan college and and
and the public schools so
thank you gentle lady thank you
Mr speaker
I have real concerns about this
bill thank you.
There is further debate the
gentle lady from Chavis
Representative Ezzell.
Mr speaker thank you very much
of will the gentle lady you'll
please Mr speaker I yield to the
gentle lady from Chavis.
Mr speaker I would like to move
house floor amendment one to
house Education Committee
substitute for House Bill to
thirty two.
It is a hand written then it has
been passed out and is on the
web the gentle lady to
explaining them.
Thank you.
Mr speaker thank you very much.
On page six between the lines
fourteen and fifteen insert the
following new subsection.
A contract hi start off with the
quotation marks hi.
A contractor whose businesses
located within.
The county or adjacent counties
of a school district's
boundaries and his employees
workers certified by the
mechanical bureau of the
construction industry division
of the regulation and licensing
department to perform
construction work on mechanical
ventilation systems businesses
not made the registered
apprenticeship requirements of
the skilled and trained
workforce may be it on the
school district mechanical
ventilation system contract may
be awarded a contract if the
contractor otherwise meets the
qualifications or requirements
for the school district's
proposed work.
Number two retailer letter the
succeeding subsection
accordingly.
Number three on page nine line
twelve after the paragraph
designation to insert in quotes
except as provided in subsection
one of section three of this
public school ventilation
improvement act.
Number four on page two in line
I after the subparagraph
designation he answered except
as provided in subsection one of
section three of the public
school and ventilation
improvements that.
Then when somebody was in
attendance on trying to come up
with this panelists.
Check.
Explaining the amendment.
Mr speaker gentle lady I just
feel that this the amendment
right here will.
Show proof parity throughout the
state as far as people in
fairness throughout the state.
By having.
People that are actually.
Trained qualified licensed and
bonded by the C. I. D. to be
able to do these projects local
thank you Mr speaker let's go to
the sponsor generating isn't so
friendly amendment.
This is.
Representative you are muted.
Representative are still.
You hear me now.
Yes thank you.
Okay I'm Mr speaker and gentle
lady it is the exact same
amendment with the exception of
adding the word adjacent
counties is not friendly
amendment.
Is not a friendly amendment Is
there debate on the amendment.
Representative from Santa Fe
County Representative Powdrell
Culbert thank you Mr speaker one
the general from Bernalillo.
I'm so sorry.
The Mr speaker I yield.
This.
The lady from service.
On the why
the.
Well the state of New Mexico
would you mind I've been working
for us couple of times before
for our find terrible for the
whole already traded sort of
bump that opened up a complete
move.
Our young people male and female
who are interested in working I.
I was classes as well on the job
training.
This
will remember the phone bill and
isn't this what we.
Well this legislative session
the one preparing the next
generation the service well I go
to work.
Mr speaker gentle lady thank you
very much for those statements
yes you're exactly right you'll
find this memo will provide
fairness throughout the state
you will for the leaders the
gentleman of women that have
been training through.
Hands on training at technical
support whatever's easier thanks
those of you several of the
possible area of the city that
program that we are talking
about as far as personal issues
and
the chemical fertilizers on.
Hello Mister speaker with
Senator Vogel.
The.
Some type of compensation.
Well the training with our under
the mentorship program.
Mr speaker gentle lady you're
exactly right all these young
people are being trying of the
legal receive compensation for
their work as an apprenticeship
under these contractors what was
going on I have a few things
that are in the program similar.
The I I have been to provide one
graduated from high school thank
you ma'am thank you for.
And called for a.
A program because there are one
six one the firm line so that
both graduated.
Early high school.
These young men for their
American forty thousand dollars
our because they were able to
give them a program similar to
this one so
The lady are are really were
shot I was involved with the I
learned many years ago the for
your program.
And sometimes we get so caught
up on the policy.
There's of the
five year old.
And so what was this this
a member of the bill would be
considered.
Because of you know I've worked
with the prison system and the
parole not really a lot of the
rural people able to do the
program.
That's the we would have made
the difference when you look the
the the
Representative with the so what
with the opportunity at the
time.
In a program like this would not
have ended up with the.
What are observing want to
support this amendment possible
mergers much of.
Our communities and helpful.
We will and communities around
the state thank you the latest.
Banning over thank you current.
To see.
In these projects even though I
was only qualified for a
of the printers program would
you look for the issue.
Mr speaker gentleman from Lee
County thank you very much for
the question it would give our
local contractors who are fully
licensed fully funded by the
state the state of the approval
it would give them the
opportunity to be able to bid on
these projects and actually be
able to work on those problems
with local Boller staying right
here within that particular
district Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
Veracruz.
In those communities would be
invested in the school system.
With that correct Mr speaker
gentleman that is absolutely
correct we also have to keep in
mind if those local businesses
that do support activities that
do go on in those local school
districts so it is it's a win
win situation for not only the
communities but the schools and
the use that do attend their Mr
speaker yes.
Mr speaker generated by loan
counties through the child.
Contractors.
Yes Representative geographic
area to participate.
You would allow all the smallest
school districts and communities
where these.
Show trees and construction
companies would normally be
located you would allow.
To contract for these services
appropriations we're in the
neighborhood is that.
For.
Mr speaker gentleman from Lee
County you're exactly right we
would keep that money within the
state of New Mexico instead of
having to have a company come in
from Texas right across the
state line to take care of these
projects Mr speaker it's very
important for for everybody to
understand.
We want the same thing.
For rural communities that is
being afforded to to possibly a
more metropolitan area with our
workers that do live that those
particular districts to be able
to perform the job that the
payment.
And that is with this.
Bill that Representative
Stapleton is occurring at the
prime example we will be able to
help for local communities I
these qualified licensed and
bonded people to be able to do
distillation work that is
proposed in this bill.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
This reserve legislation.
quality and school.
Is there anything in.
What two great the opportunity
to provide.
There.
The students in for example so
please Mexico.
Mr speaker gentleman if I'm
understanding you right you're
asking me if there's any fault
quantification in here that
would be too great the quality
of fair is that what it is that
what I'm understanding.
The service there are all of
the.
Mr speaker gentleman from Lee
County absolutely not I feel
like our.
Local contractors can do just as
good or better job as anybody
else that has been licensed
bonded and approved by the state
and by the construction industry
division.
Mr speaker gentle lady are cool
current completely.
I have to support.
Mr speaker gentleman thank you.
Further debate on the amendment
Representative and San Juan
Representative Andrea.
Thank you Mr speaker does it
gentlelady from Chavis you.
Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman from San Juan.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady
I was just listening to the
overall.
The debate on the fly the bill
as presented without your
amendment.
it is necessary and I can.
the terms.
A high quality and or quality
Of companies with the with
training and qualified people so
Mister speaker and gentle lady
Communities where
Eight eight eight million shop.
these.
businesses and local communities
not be considered high quality.
professional because it as I
understand Mr speaker and gentle
lady if it's a school district
or if it's going through public
dollars
involved approval has to be
paid.
So Mr speaker and gentle lady
I'm and I know that the school
districts have to go through the
RP process and and maybe we have
to already be
of vetted by the state so I was
wondering Mr speaker gentle lady
are those local businesses that
are not you should actually not
high quality.
Mr speaker gentleman from San
Juan absolutely not they are
they are high quality they have.
The measures that have been sent
taken the exams they have
followed every protocol that
there is of these contractors do
err on the a job such as as
being discussed and of.
House bill two thirty two they
do have to pay that prevailing
wage whatever the schools go out
with there are if he that is one
of the requirements that they
have to include in that that
absolutely not there is not one
iota of difference between.
A local contractor that has
proven to the state by following
the protocols that they have
sent as opposed to a union shop
there there's no difference
whatsoever Mr speaker gentleman.
Just a real confusion on my part
for for this we've heard the
argument as to we have to we
have to pay
We have to pay all people who
work for for the government and
contract work and we have to pay
prevailing wage and now I'm
hearing that may be the sponsor
of this bill of things that
make.
Paying prevailing wage because
Senator works question
that that has for years since
I've a.
All politics being the mantra
has been.
It's going to cost us one third
of the cost.
to have all of these
Projects done
Well All.
Thanks for the quality will not
do it.
That.
Has flipped today with this
bill.
Because I I.
Is that.
The.
The suffering.
These folks are would would be
from.
And for the job.
Approved they have to have
certification and have been
licensed in the state.
But I heard the sponsor that
that
unless we do it with these
groups has apprenticeship
program but the quality is not
there.
Representative arguing against.
Local contractors what what is
good.
I have some work in our
communities and it just is that
what this is a.
A transfer of.
Jobs and wealth from communities
where the jabs would hopefully
go to local.
Of course.
Scale.
I am just having a hard time
understanding that and I I think
Mr speaker gentle lady more and
will just protect the fact that.
The jobs for the work happening
in our rural communities would
stay within those rural
communities and I just a it just
as I was listening to the debate
in just over the the the the
idea that.
Unless it was a.
Shop with an apprenticeship
program.
The house but it's not quality
so I just ask Miss Mr speaker
and and and generated without.
Is it
This is the quality is less if
it's not a union shop maybe we
should pay a little less for the
work.
So
engine light is that
and with.
One.
In your opinion.
For a short.
What happened.
That's a you have to go to
school for that you have to.
The certain sounds to plan for a
project as big as that so.
This is the.
But the question is going to
somehow not be there.
Mr speaker gentleman from San
Juan absolutely not this work
that will be done by our local
of contractors who have met all
qualifications that have been
put forth by the state.
There will not be I'm kind of.
Offended by even the implication
that there might their work
might be listed in.
Alright I'm I'm not going to be
you know they have worked hard
they have met the standards they
take great pride in their work
they want to make sure that
their businesses successful
because that's how they continue
to give business Mr speaker for
any business to be successful it
is basically word of mouth Hey
this company right down the
street they do excellent work
are highly recommend them
they've been licensed by the
state the they're bonded by the
state they've been C. I. D.
approved they have insurance
they are also teaching these
young kids a trade so they can
become successful they take
great pride in word of mail that
yes we are top of the line we do
not do shoddy work that is how
they can succeed and they are
successful but they're not going
to be given an opportunity if
this bill passes in its present
form and that's what I'm trying
to do I think everybody that.
Every job out there is essential
Mr Chairman and Mr gentleman
from San Juan and this is what
we're trying to do here is.
These companies have been hit
hard with this pandemic.
And why are we not going to for
them the ability to be able to
bid on these projects and
complete those projects with
work that is top of the line and
so I I would really encourage
that this amendment is adopted
mainly because.
Our other business R. as fully
qualified as a union shop is and
it does give our rural schools
the ability to be able to get
that work done in a timely
fashion because there is
somebody there locally to do.
Question.
already all of these charges can
be you scale.
But it's to the cost if the
crews that are coming to work in
the local areas have to pay for
all that travel maybe hotels
because all of the work now has
been shifted to Albuquerque.
I'm in businesses like the cost
of each project could skyrocket
which means.
Projects can be done because
it's still only a certain amount
of money to go around and I were
talking about doing this because
it's not in all of those
communities.
The barriers for all these
projects will go up dramatically
because of the travel and Mr
speaker and gentle lady
The.
Some of the jobs in these local
communities
I was getting up.
Just for apprentice the shops
I just think that that would
lead us to for us too much of
rural communities role is have
really been harmed
by the pandemic and by the
governor's health orders.
And we're going to now center
local jobs further Mr speaker
I would be afraid to go back
home.
And say that I voted for
something like this if I'm from
a rural community and say that I
voted against local jobs because
that's what this is doing
without your amendment.
I'm.
For your to
lady from from Chavis but just
comment briefly on those ten
points that the cost is going to
go up and the loss of those
local jobs is going to be the
result.
Mr speaker gentleman from San
Juan you're exactly right.
Whenever.
The same scenario that you just
pointed out about.
This is a print shop that would
have to travel from Albuquerque
from Albuquerque let's say to
the Hagerman area to do a job
down there such as federal
funded gymnasium of that's a two
hundred fifty mile trip for us
there Mr speaker we're talking
about fuel we're talking about
lodging we're talking about
meals of and yes the cost of
those projects will go I.
And like I said earlier when a
we're talking about our local
contractors being able to do the
job.
They have been hit the hardest
Mister speaker.
Our local businesses are the
ones that have been Harding the
mountains.
Whenever these contractors
though which.
Six of which but.
Hardware store they can go to to
order parts whatever they need
that money stays there locally
is will but they still have to
pay the same amount of money to
the prevailing wage that is set
forth by all of these are if
the.
But the cost of the project will
not escalate to the point that
it does not get done and hinder.
The ability of those schools to
be able to put a roof you know
anything that goes on but right
now we are talking about.
Of.
The ventilation for that.
As you know Mr speaker and
gentleman from San Juan and are
part of the world we have a
roofing with the whatever that
door gives people gets blown
it's important that there is a
good ventilation system in those
schools and so the sooner that
this can get done without all
the usual hiccups that come when
a we're trying to get a company
in from two hundred and fifty
miles away I think it's
important that we do pay
attention to what this bill is
for us to do.
And that is to get the job done
by a qualified and certified and
approved contracting company
that is trying to work.
Hello there locally to keep that
economy strong or get back
stronger I should say.
And also be able to help people
out that are wanting to work in
that particular field misters Mr
speaker and gentleman so yes you
are exactly right.
Support jobs in my community so
that you shop in Albuquerque
with the work that they would
normally get thank you Mr
speaker and gentleman all right
is there further debate on the
amendment seeing none the
gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker I move to
table house floor number one to
house bill two thirty two.
there is a motion to table the
amendment a vote of yes and the
amendment will be tabled we'll
be back on the bill vote of no
and will they will proceed to a
debate on the amendment again
the roll call is now open.
The issue mute.
The vote.
Hello this is Representative
Montoya having called.
Representative Montoya were not
planted I like tronic is of
voting has been completed the
clerk called the remaining
members.
Representative Anderson.
No Representative Anderson votes
no.
Representative Cook.
Representative Crowder.
Right the the the no to table.
Representative Crowder.
Representative Eli
Representative yes
Representative that.
Representative votes no
Representative Madrid.
The amendment will basically we
have billions of.
We have a billion dollars in
funding from the COVID eight.
Representative Roger Montoya.
The.
AS to table Representative votes
yes.
Andrea you're you're with.
I move forty fermentative and
twenty five the negative the man
has been tabled and we were
return to debate on the bill the
representative from Chavis and
Lincoln all I'm sorry the
representative which I was
responsible for Representative
Ezzell.
Mr speaker thank you very much
of I know how the but when it
just really upsets me that one
more time into the rural areas
of the state that is going to be
hit.
Was not been able to get back on
their feet our job to have were
put at risk we are suffering out
there in the rural areas and one
more time it is those areas that
are taken thank you very.
For the debate Representative
Chavis and Lincoln
representative Nibert.
Thank you Mr speaker will gentle
lady from Bernalillo county
you'll.
I yield to the gentleman from
Chavis.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady.
I just have a couple questions
focusing again on the thank you
the same paragraph we looked at
the previously about Graham G.
of section two.
The is the definition of skilled
trade construction workforce.
Mr speaker and gentle lady as I
understand it the only.
Our construction companies that
would be available to do this
for our construction companies
who have a skilled and trained
construction workforce is that
correct.
Only forty percent of them.
The other six forty percent of
them.
Forty percent of the work is
for graduates of affected stood
apprenticeship.
Mr speaker gentle lady but one
hundred percent of the eligible
construction companies that
would be able to perform this
work have to be.
Have to raise kids and train
construction workforce as
defined in this bill is that
correct.
It's the speaker and gentleman
from Chavis in St still
contracting construction work
was the workforce in which at
eight forty percent of the work
of the graduates of the prime
issue program.
Yes.
Mr speaker donor dollars for the
year.
But we one hundred percent of
the construction company's that
are allowed to perform this work
in our schools that New Mexico
have to have these kids and
training construction workforce
as defined in your legislation.
I will Mr speaker and gentleman
since I'm not answer where you
would like to hear it I will as
my witness thank you Mr speaker
well done.
This.
Yes.
Speaker and gentleman from
Chavis.
Do.
Sure.
Yes you have to be skilled and
trained as stated in the bill
that I read to you.
Do the assessment you just have
to be.
What's next in section eight and
thanks to.
Let me understand this Mr
speaker and gentle lady to deter
service more you know.
Hundred percent don't have to
have skilled and trained
construction workforce.
But to do the work you do.
Mr speaker I already yes
gentleman from yes Mr speaker
and gentleman from Chavis.
You have to ensuring complete
the medical thank handful of
order.
To do the assessment you just
have to you have to be skilled
entry.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
My concern.
Highlighted it when we were
discussing the amendment with
representative from San Juan
earlier and that is a potential.
Commerce Clause issue that
arises by virtue of the state of
New Mexico.
Lows in the law that restricts
the pool applicants working
actually do this for two.
Companies.
Who have.
Forty percent of their workers
are graduates of the registered
apprenticeship program in New
Mexico.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
Which.
Would you believe I'm I'm asking
you to speculate would you
believe that in a construction
company that the all of them
in their conditioning issues
outside of the state of New
Mexico we're qualified to do the
work in the state of New Mexico
under this bill.
You in in I believe that a
company outside in New Mexico is
qualified for this work.
Speaker gentle lady B. yes ma'am
the news agency Mr speaker Mr
speaker and gentleman from
Chavis.
Other states have different
guidelines different rules and
different laws in regards to oil
is qualified and we scale.
So one of the state would have
scale work.
We're talking about New Mexico.
Mr speaker gentle lady we are
talked about New Mexico we're
talking about a wall.
That I submit to you yes I.
The Commerce Clause of the
United States constitution.
Because it prohibits entry into
the state of New Mexico of those
qualified companies from out of
state but they can't do the work
in New Mexico because forty
percent of their workforce are
graduates of a registered
financial program New Mexico.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
If.
The if you are raised his
program.
There's not issue potentially
undermine your entire piece of
legislation.
Mr speaker and gentleman I will
speak to my
eagle council Steven Curtis and
I have no please.
C..
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Chavis.
I was told by late the COVID
from a strong.
And that New Mexico is the
market participants which is the
recognize exemption to be is
common for you all come on
Commerce Clause.
And even without these bear.
One hundred percent of New
Mexico where there is.
I have a New Mexico journeyman's
license.
And and and if you all correct
with the commerce clause.
In New Mexico.
Would be a problem.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo.
Sure but the those statements.
The United States Commerce
Clause is something that has
been
Spent a lot of
What the Commerce Clause both
are for commentators and.
The.
Commerce court actually been
interpreted by the Supreme Court
to have an implied prohibition
of state law
we're for discriminates against
interstate commerce.
I don't know about any exemption
but I am sure.
Yeah.
Funds that are going into this
of the to help pay for these
requests and other things could
be traced to possible federal
dollars going into our education
department.
And the may create some other
problems with the federal
government.
I just simply raise the issue
because I think that when you
put a call four years of a bill.
For all intensive purposes.
Available to.
Mexico construction companies.
I would say.
Possibly construction company
located in the metropolitan area
number but for the.
That you are going to find that
this bill will be challenged and
I believe that one successful
channels Water money the empire.
But which is not going to do any
of our school children any good
in getting.
The issue that's important
address.
This is particularly and acutely
a problem with respect to our
towns Federal.
The border of Texas possibly
renters modem maybe maybe even
Colorado.
But we will feel the effects of
the east side of the state
because a lot of the work that
is performed in our communities
and a lot of the competitive
nature of the business for these
states are.
As a result of having a
competitive market that that
does not recognize the state
department.
For those companies bidding on
projects we have New Mexico
companies bidding on taxes
project and from the purposes
the state line it was not
something that is a very to to
that commerce and I'm suggesting
to you that that if this bill
passes as the currently rent.
That you're going to see some
lawsuits filed.
The state thank you all for
companies who do not qualify and
they're all pretty.
The
problem is that they're going
to.
From another state medical
Commerce Clause issue and
potentially undermine this
legislation and for that reason
I can't support it and I wish
that you would take the
provision that all I would love
to support it other ones thank
you Mr speaker thank you
gentlelady from Bernalillo
county.
The committee Representative
Alcon.
You Mr speaker will gentle lady
from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman from Cibola.
Speaker gentle lady.
My question is.
Legislation.
Is about fifteen and flex
systems in the schools in New
Mexico for our students correct.
This is a gentleman from Cibola
yes.
Yes Mr speaker and gentleman in
water that I'm sending everyone
good health hours almost three
hours.
There were only maybe five
minutes.
Of anybody saying we need to get
our schools fix for our students
everything else was against the
bill because they don't want
somebody that might have a you
card to get a job.
So.
What we're supposed to be doing
here and we be sitting this over
and over and over again we have
to get our schools ready we want
our students back in school
but will soon be here find for
two hours and sixty minutes
three hours.
Over who gets to do the work.
And we don't even say we're
doing this for our children we
don't even say we're doing this
for our children we want to get
back in school all we do is sit
here and I because the
possibility of somebody that
might be you Guard will get the
job the only comment I have
madam Mr speaker and gentle lady
I just am really disappointed in
the discussion throughout the
whole to our students to
students that we've had thank
you generally see.
Close.
This is the and Gen.
Members of the house.
The gentleman from Cibola.
Senate right mean.
This Mr speaker and gentle and
members of the house.
Is to say specifically.
That there is more than the
capability right now to do this
work in our state.
Mr speaker this work is being
performed to an extent to the P.
F. as a process.
However.
By passing this bill Mr speaker
and members of the house we can
quickly expand the level of work
being done and the number of
schools being served so that our
children can go back to school
that we can have more hybrid
model all of children fully
going back to the classroom Mr
speaker that wage with the
recommendation to improve
ventilation systems the limited
and was granted of Corona virus
and infectious agents Mr speaker
the.
I know already women owned
businesses that believe Mr
speaker and high standards.
I would be qualified this Madam.
The speaker we need an emergency
clause so children can go back
to school Mr speaker as I stated
earlier and members of the south
no teacher no secretary no
janitor.
No principal and parents and
children what no do not want to
go back to school with the
ventilation problem that we have
in schools across the state.
Every member so both of these
men.
Representative taking care of
our children in the state of New
Mexico Mr speaker.
I know.
That house Education Committee
stub for House Bill to thirty
two do now pass.
Education Committee substitute
for House Bill two through
nineteen with an emergency
clause the vote is now open.
Uhhuh.
That included the.
Representative black.
Uhhuh Representative Roger
Montoya.
Yes Representative Roger Montoya
votes yes.
Senator forty four of twenty two
it is such occasion
condescension for House Bill to
thirty two much answer because
has duly passed the house.
From Bernalillo.
Mr speaker we go to the next
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous business.
Other announcements.
Mr speaker.
Representative Thomson thank you
Mr speaker I just want to
announce that consumer and
public affairs committee will
start ten minutes after we leave
the floor.
Members.
And do you have an answer
thank you Mr speaker good
evening everyone I just wanted
to then note that HM state will
start immediately following the
floor session.
Once again.
I need to tonight's agenda.
Those ten bills that we need to
take action on but it should go
fairly quick if everybody gets
up to the I'd say up to the
committee room stay on zoom and
so we can get it started thank
you Mr speaker members.
The chairman of course has an
answer.
Thank you Mr speaker yes Sir
fifty minutes here and they were
veterans military affairs
committee I will repeat this
this team equipment and we get a
lot of the flaws of the floor
fifteen minutes thank.
Further announcements.
Mr speaker.
Representative Stansbury.
Thank you Mr speaker and we are
currently working with your
office to try to organize the
capital outlay needing for
Bernalillo county
representatives those would like
to talk about coordination
capital outlay in the morning so
stay tuned and look for an
email.
This issue again is there
capital outlay to the members
who do Caporali sheets are due
at three Jennifer San Juan
Representative retorted that is
mistreating thank our concerns
from this year.
Stop paying attention.
Insurances Mr things that
Arkansas is for real this year.
Last month in okay.
Announcements.
For instance members remember
we're gonna start floor session
eleven o'clock tomorrow we don't
on the floor Sunday.
Some day from the day that
members can attend services and.
A surprise.
Thirty something like that I'll
visit with leader Townsend
leader Stapleton before I pick a
time on Sunday but I wanted to
let everyone know that we will
have to me on the floor and
setting.
And the next week we will still
I was looking at Monday and
Tuesday at the very least having
a four session the probably will
start at four thirty with
communities meeting before that
so will come to the floor will
go through an agenda starting
for thirty L. visit with leaders
Stapleton on their Townsend
before we make a decision about
Wednesday Thursday and and and
going forward.
that the tomorrow we'll be back
eleven Sunday let's say one
thirty and then on Monday and
Tuesday for session for thirty
so folks can start planning.
And the floor session on
Saturday but there were I'm sure
will be committees and I'll
leave it up to the chairs to
announce the times of those
meetings and at present a
committee of the committee
meeting Sunday morning before
floor session one thirty but I'm
not discussed it with the
committee chairs.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Binder to the members of the
house education that we will
