Thank you, Madam Chairman. Good
morning, uh, Representative
Block from House District 51 in
the beautiful Otero County area.
It's great to be back. A 2nd
time on this committee and
I really like it. Thank you,
Madam Chairman. You're doing a
good job.
Is wrong.
Madam Chair, good morning. Good
morning, uh.
guests and members of the
committee.
My name is Martin Zamora. I
represent House District 63.
It covers the south half of
Curry, the north half of
Morning, Madam Chair. Morning,
everybody. I'm Representative
Janelle and
Nonu.
House District 19 in
Albuquerque, it's the
international district and the
state fairgrounds. This is also
my second term in this committee
and
Good morning, Madam Chair. Good
morning members. Good morning
guests.
I am so happy to be back and I'm
actually very honored to have
been appointed, so looking
forward to working with you,
Madam Chair, and uh I represent
House District key all in
Bernalillo County.
Uh
Looking forward to everything
that's gonna be coming up. Oh,
and I forgot to mention and I
usually start off with this. I
actually, I live in Albuquerque
and I come from the pueblos of
South chair.
And back to me. Good morning
again, and I am honored chair of
this committee again.
And I'm very pleased to assist
us and each of you.
Our meeting days will be Monday,
Wednesday, and Fridays, 8:30
a.m.
Unless uh we
You know, sometimes later in
the.
60 days, we start to meet at 9
when we start to slow down, if
we're lucky.
I understand we're going to be
very busy this 60 days.
And um you know uh how we like
to run this meeting. We like to
get through our bills and uh be
respectful of one another,
we've, you know, um, had good,
uh, past.
Committee meetings.
And um our staff will keep a
list of names in order of innate
hands raised for.
Questions, uh, with our
committee members and then also
our audience.
Our audience will be uh given
one minute to provide testimony.
And uh I don't really have
anything else to share if you
have any questions right now.
Our staff will be doing roll
call, and then we'll um have
Zoom capability, short, sweet
and simple.
And I look forward to. OK.
I don't, I will, um, I will
announce it. I
don't think we're gonna meet
Friday.
But if we are a vice chair will,
so I'll, I will keep you posted.
All righty then.
