Representative Cook.
Representative Fajardo here
Representative.
Representative Lujan.
No this is not the only reason
community radio.
Representative Lujan hi.
Representative.
The Santo.
Representative Serrato
issues
or okay one moment okay.
Thank Representative Mr Chairman
representative Garcia present
that members we have a quorum
and
We're going to start off with
our.
First there
Representative Nathan small.
improvement special this act.
Representative this model.
What on your education.
Thank you so much Mr chairman
and committee I'm really pleased
to be here today to present
house bill two ninety nine to
the committee Mr Chairman
Committee I'm gonna go through a
few of the key features of house
bill two ninety nine why it's
needed by we're bringing at I'm
pleased Mr chairman to have an
expert here today miss Genevieve
Sherman and look forward to
the committee discussion Mr
chair committee House Bill to
ninety nine is really about two
core things the first Mr chair
committee is about spurring
construction supporting local
businesses supporting.
Especially commercial property
owners as they improve their
properties and that leads right
into the second part of this
bill Mr chairman committee gets
supporting that construction and
that economic development
through investments that save
those businesses those property
owners money through energy
efficiency renewable energy
things like resilience that here
in New Mexico can mean
safeguarding properties from
catastrophic floods forest fires
or other climate crisis caused
natural phenomenon.
Mr chair committee this tool is
being used widely across the
United States in a way that
supports in some states hundreds
of millions of dollars of
investment not read loose red
states blue states states that
have chosen to utilize this tool
so let me just defined kind of
describe briefly this tool Mr
chair and committee first and
foremost what's so important to
recognize that this is a
voluntary tool Mr chair
committee this to all local
elected governments primarily
counties will choose whether or
not to utilize this tool based
and I standards set of options
is fully their choice that
choices forced upon no one.
Mr chair and committee very
importantly and the the it can
differ for this sort of a
property assessed clean energy
we make sure that this does not
impose a liability on counties
or on the state.
It does not inhibit bonding or
other improvement programs of
the state Mr chair and committee
what it does is it creates low
cost long term financing for the
kinds of things that New Mexico
property owners desperately want
in which will lead to economic
development and to create safer
more prosperous communities I
mentioned briefly the private
investment this is bird.
My numbers show that it is for
two point five billion dollars
of private investment not public
two point five billion dollars
of private investment in twenty
plus states and right now New
Mexico this tool is very limited
it's not utilized in our state
due to some of the deficiencies
that we seek to create Mr chair
committee with your help briefly
we included more economic
development environmental
priorities in this legislation
we make sure that these taxes
that these assessments will be
assessed in the same way as
other county improvement
assessments Mr chair and
committee that's a key point
when you combine with the
voluntary nature that it lessens
the burden and eases the ability
for the administration of this
tool it includes best practice
protections missing from
previous legislation.
Including the mandatory consent
of mortgage holders and then not
extinguishment of assessment in
the fall essentially Mr chairman
ensuring that all of those
lenders who came before these
the these new tools that we're
offering those lenders retain
their place with in the
structures that they've created
the investments that they've
made and so we don't affect
that.
Mr chair committee
we just want to briefly note
that the improvement of special
assessment by county does create
this important legal mechanism
to allow the flow of this
additional investment.
Twenty two point five billion
dollars plus in twenty other
states we seek to bring that
tool here today Mr chair I know
committee time is very valuable
that would be my introductory
comments were refining a tool
that exists in our state doing
it with best practices that hip
place local governments and
local property owners top of
mind my expert would like to add
a couple of things if that's
okay Mister chairman and then we
look forward very much to the
committee discussion today thank
you very much Mr chairman.
Thank you Representative are
small and
I'll love recognize Mr Chairman
and Mr Chairman
You're free to
take as much time as you need to
further elaborate on the
significance of the legislation
before us.
Thank you Mr chair and the
committee for having me this
morning I really appreciate your
your time and consideration.
I'm I am the head of policy for
a company called green works we
are a company that supports
state and local governments in
adopting legislation of this
nature and we work with over
twenty states across the country
we also provide private capital
to fund these upgrades to
commercial and multi family
buildings as well as constructs
new high performance buildings
using this policy tool.
I we are a member of a group
called the C. pace Alliance
which is a group of capital
providers law firms accounting
firms are property owners and
other stakeholders that utilize
this tool to upgrade buildings.
And we are happy to help answer
or address any questions of the
committee today regarding this
legislation we have worked with
the county governments with
property owners with contractors
in New Mexico to understand the
deficiencies in the prior
legislation that was adopted by
the New Mexico legislature in
two thousand and nine.
And the bill in front of you
today we believe represents best
practice for commercial and
multi family programs that are
now in place in over twenty
states in the country.
So with that I'll actually pause
to provide most of the time to
the committee but and and very
eager to address any questions
or concerns that you all have
thank you so much.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Representative are small
just kind of a clarifying point
I think we've a entertain this
piece of legislation before.
Is that is that the case that we
have this in our committee
before it it's it sounds
familiar a I'm not sure thank
you Mr chair
Mr chairman committee this is
the first time that I have
brought this legislation but
Mister chair I think you're
right a number this is been
considered in in even adopted
before in a different format but
it's the first time that I've
brought this legislation Mr
chair.
Okay thank you for that
Representative small and if
that's on your presentation
representative will go to the
audience.
Audience.
We're going to do a Paul first
of all before we ask for your
comments and you'll you'll see a
poll.
kind of pop up on your screen
and and those of you in the
audience on house bill two
ninety nine.
Please kind of click on one of
those two items of that whether
you're in support or in
opposition and we'll give you
ten seconds.
All right thank you for that
the poll shows that ninety two
percent of the people in
attendance on house bill two
ninety nine and are in support.
And the in person in opposition
Mr.
To the audience Mr Chairman real
quick if I may
I see a Representative Lujan on
the Tennessee all right.
Yet Mr Representative Castellano
we're going to bring her over
okay.
merry we have Representative
Tara L. Lujan over on the
attendee column can you bring
their over right now please.
Thank you merry.
we're at that point on
in terms of seeking.
Input from the audience in
regards to support or opposition
for house bill two ninety nine
and the those of you that are in
opposition that would like to
address the committee
click on the race hand option at
the bottom of your screen and I
will call you in order that you
show up on the screen those in
opposition to our house bill two
ninety nine now is the
opportunity for you to
Speaking in terms of
House Bill to ninety nine and I
show
At one individual.
Miss Nancy bears.
Nancy
You're free to address the
committee with your concerns in
regards to opposition to the
legislation and seeing that I
only show you.
Because much time as you need.
To kind of reflect those are
concerns.
Merry bring are over Nancy
bears.
B. A. R. C. E..
She's the Senator Rodriguez
witness.
Maybe that's why she's raising
her hand.
Well what down your hand darn
it.
Okay the.
The we we show no no individuals
in opposition that wished to
speak.
Those in support of the
legislation.
please go to our the bottom of
the screen and you'll see a
raise hand icon click that on if
you wish to speak and we'll take
you in order as to how you're
showing up on the screen.
I'll allow you a two minutes to
kind of reflect on your concerns
so first we have
Amy Miller.
Very bringing me over.
Thank you.
Yes we can hear you okay morning
good morning chairman Garcia and
members of the committee my name
is Amy Miller I'm calling from
Albuquerque and representing the
southwest energy efficiency
project encouraging all of you
to support house bill two ninety
nine all attempts to make energy
more affordable in our state are
critical and this bill does just
that House Bill to ninety nine
include energy efficiency which
is really the first step to
saving energy lowering bills
protecting the environment and
protecting human health energy
efficiency is also one of the
most cost effective and fastest
growing job creation areas in
the energy industry both here in
New Mexico and throughout the US
let's find all the opportunities
we can for our state to engage
in energy savings initiatives
please give your full support
for house bill two ninety nine
thank you Mr chair and committee
members.
Thank you Amy.
Next we'll go to Bob well I.
Merry bring Bible over.
And you can take merry you can
take Amy off the panelists
column as well Bob I'm you
yourself and feel free to.
Share your concerns of
legislation with the committee.
Hi my name is Bob Hope all I
live in Los crucis and investor
and developer and multiple
commercial buildings here in Los
crucis twenty in the county and
the Senate race area.
And I speak in support of this
bill this is an important part
of the capital stack up for
developing and when we look at
other states and that have done
this and we look at other
project it's been very
successful and valuable and an
important part of of the need
for capital capitals not readily
available in New Mexico like it
is in other parts of the country
and we just see this is a an
important bill
to allow us to
finance these important energy
efficiency components that help
us to recruit industry and
develop multi family projects as
well as industrial buildings
in our state and city and county
so our company and
our various partners or in total
support of the house bill two
ninety nine.
Thank you.
Thank you Bob.
Next we have a Jim the Jordan's.
merry bring a Jim R. over.
And after you do that
Remove
hello what makes our country
hear me.
Okay you're on thank you I share
your concerns with the committee
and served in support of the
legislation great thank you very
much Mr chairman and members of
the committee my name is Jim day
Schardin and I'm the executive
director of the renewable energy
industry association of New
Mexico we're known as ria and
we've been in support of
property assessed clean energy
initiatives over the years
because it provides a financing
mechanism that enables
businesses to make renewable
energy improvements to their
property and these are proven
step by normally they might not
normally be able to do because
of
financing that they cannot get
so this bill clears up language
from two other bills but it also
when it's been pointed out
has energy efficiency
improvements as well so I think
that allows a lot bigger of a
lot of people to take advantage
of it.
And we're very much in support
of this important initiative and
as has been mentioned it's
totally voluntary and it's going
to hopefully help to find a lot
of jobs in New Mexico so thank
you very much for the time and
we very strong support of the.
Thank you Jim.
I'm very take Jim off the the
panelists screen and moving back
to the attendee and the next we
have a Adam Harper.
Adam merry bring Hatem over.
There you go Adam on mute
yourself and feel free to
express your concerns to the
committee in terms of support
for legislation.
Yes thank you Mr chair and
committee members for having me
today my name is Adam Harper I
am the founder and CEO of we
solar homegrown New Mexico solar
developer and I want to voice my
support of bills two ninety nine
like Jim mentioned before that
this bill would help clean up
some language from the previous
to paste bills have been passed
in Bernalillo county
and I just want to say that this
will really help some of our
clients in the business
community that has been severely
impacted from the pandemic as
well as the closure in the state
so I urge this committee to
voice their support and vote yes
for house bill two ninety nine
this should be a tremendous job
creator as well as some like the
previous gentlemen mentioned it
will also help with projects on
Capitol staff when you have
Some type budget lines and
you're trying to do the right
thing of helping climate change
in doing energy efficient
upgrades so I I you strongly
urge this committee to support
to ninety nine thank you thank
you Adam.
Next we have a John Lanning.
Very bring over John.
And then remove a.
Adam you.
There you go John John on mute
yourself and feel free to
I share your concerns in terms
of support for legislation not
maximum two minutes John.
Good morning at thank you Mr
chairman and committee my name
is John landing number three
crosses regional hospital were
actually a new newly opened
hospital in Los crucis New
Mexico
as a health care organization we
all know the importance of of
good health care in our
communities we are also very
high energy user and we're in
support of bill two ninety nine
in the fact that it will
continue let us allow us to to
do the work that we do and and
pursue energy efficient
technologies which is so
desperately needed in terms of
controlling our costs as well so
we are in support and the thank
you for your time.
Thank you John.
Next we have Steve new building.
Merry brings the over and
And send John back to the
attendee.
There you are state stable mute
yourself and
You're free to share your
concerns in terms of support for
legislation maximum two minutes.
Your ons this morning Mr
chairman committee members my
name is T. V. architect Los
crucis have been for about forty
five years.
And over the years champion
energy efficiency in buildings
are designed read go eight of
our buildings and so I'm a huge
proponent of house bill two
ninety nine.
Interesting that timing is
everything.
currently the state of New
Mexico just adopted new
international energy
conservation code.
What that code does is it.
Choirs and mandates higher
energy efficiency in all
commercial and multi family
buildings that we design.
Of course this sense cost years
as the energy efficiency code as
continue to increase
requirements I have had projects
cancelled because came out four
in order to meet the
conservation code.
With this bill House Bill to
ninety nine this will provide a
funding mechanism specifically
for energy efficiency.
And that is a huge piece of our
development.
So as an architect in as a Las
Cruces citizen I strongly
recommend that the committee
support House Bill to ninety
nine thank you thank you see
next we have a Kobe gear.
Very bring Colby over.
And
More stable over to.
Happy hunting grounds.
Good morning Mr chairman and
committee my name is called be
here I'm with your out energy
services company a local energy
efficiency contractor based in
Albuquerque New Mexico thank you
guys so much for your in the
bill this morning I would just
like to speak in support of this
bill because of the opportunity
it provides not only to expand.
Energy efficiency projects
related to commercial buildings
in the state but also spur
economic development and growth
within the construction and
construction industry statewide
so we worked on this for a
number of iterations and I think
that this is a very good good
deal for you guys to support and
we would speak in a hundred
percent supported so thank you
for your time.
Thank you Colby and lastly a in
terms of those so wishing to
speak in support is a dog right.
merry bring got Doug over.
There you are done on yourself
Doug and feel free to a share
your concerns in terms of
support for legislation to
minute maximum.
Thank you Mr chairman I'd
sincerely appreciate the efforts
of Mr small Mr chairman and all
others involved in this proposed
legislation I'm based in el Paso
Texas but I'm active in southern
New Mexico and real estate
developments and investments and
this bill will go a long way
toward stimulating economic
development in New Mexico and
not only for the benefit of our
projects but it will create an
environment that will stimulate
growth
and downtown Los crucis and and
and all over the state of New
Mexico and I think in our
current
economic environment hopefully
coming out of this comment
pandemic environment with some
momentum that this can be a
tool that will greatly benefit
the state of New Mexico and and
all that are involved in
development and investment in
real estate in New Mexico so I
am a strong supporter of House
Bill two ninety nine and
appreciate the efforts of all of
those who are working hard to
get this legislation passed
thank you Mr chairman thank you
Doug we still have to other
folks that just a
raise their hands
George low one.
I'm very can you bring George
low one it's one word on the
screen.
There you are George on me
yourself and feel free to
express your concerns in terms
of support a two minute maximum
there Mr George you're on thank
you Mr chairman committee
members I thank you for the
opportunity to speak before you
a lot of the sentiment a lot of
the comments that have been made
already our our our our in
parallel with my taking up as a
developer of real estate both
industrial and residential and
medical cannabis I think that
this the state of New Mexico in
the city of Los crucis would be
greatly greatly benefit by this
infusion of capital that would
come from this
capital is up at this this
legislation as part of the
capital stack we will do nothing
but encouraged construction and
will go a long way for people to
incorporate energy management
systems I think that that'll
it'll be a great economic
enhancer and I just thank
everyone for their support
Representative small you and and
people have been working with
you we just appreciate your
efforts we see this as as
something this would be a great
win for the community and for
the real estate industry and for
the energy industry so thank you
so much among strong supporter
of house bill two ninety nine.
Thank you George
and next we have a Andrew stone.
Merry bring Andrew over.
There you go Andrew.
Yourself and feel free to
express your concern to support
legislation to minute maximum
theme models share and committee
members I'm Andrew stone of pace
Fund New Mexico and I studied
property assessed clean energy
pace for the last three years
this voluntary program lets
business owners update the
energy efficiency of their
buildings with new H. back solar
panels and water retention
measures without any capital
expense instead the property
takes on an assessment.
Just like a sewage process was
get paid back over twenty years
and is cash flow positive for
the owner day one.
This solves the problem many of
our business owners have their
money is needed for inventory
and payroll and there is no
extra cash or collateral to get
loans to make their buildings
energy efficient.
Why Denver's first C. pace deal
was a one point five million
dollars H. FAQ upgrade to the
petroleum club.
I stand in support of H. B. two
ninety nine thank you for your
time.
Thank you Andrew and that does
that for comments from the
audience
and I want to thank the audience
for yes Representative yes ma'am
I didn't realize that Nancy
beers also wants to make a
comment on this bill Jeez
Representative are not teaching
our Nancy Rodriguez okay okay
well I thought she was going to
so did I an interfering in the
internal affairs of house bill
two ninety nine what is that all
recognize our she's proficient
use the real McCoy.
Nancy are.
Inger over a merry.
She's one of our illustrious
officials of Bernalillo county
there you go Nancy unmute
yourself and feel free to share
your concerns in terms of
support for house bill two
ninety nine two minute maximum.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'm I'm
sorry that to be a throwing a
wrench in your system here
and apologize for that thank you
so much yes my name is Nancy
burst on the Bernalillo county
treasurer and chair of the New
Mexico counties treasures
affiliate of county treasurers
do not support this bill we do
not believe this is the
appropriate financing mechanism
for private loans and that local
government should be made to act
as private loan electors so
there and other equipment is
exempt from property assessments
and therefore not part of the
tax roll the assessor provides
to the treasure in order to
create the property tax bill
mixing private loans with public
property tax bills is not is it
an inappropriate use of
government resources justice
County treasure's don't collect
on electric or hybrid private
car loans neither should they
collect for private equipment.
that's our our main opposition.
I will say that we we all want
to economic development we all
want more of financing to come
into New Mexico we just don't
believe that County treasurer's
should be the one collecting for
that private investment and
putting it on the tax bill
really muddies the waters of for
for us we understand it's a
voluntary we understand that
each county can go to their
county commission and accept
this or not but that but at this
point are we we do not believe
it's appropriate for county
treasurer's as elected officials
to be put in the position of
collecting private loans thank
you so much thank you for your
time.
Thank you Nancy and and have a
great day we'll see you I guess
on the other bill.
but if not that have a great day
Nancy members that does that on
our.
Yeah of questions I I mean
comments from the audience and
it now will go to the committee
committee members questions
discussion we have a
Representative black first on
the list.
Thank you Mr chairman
and I have a few questions or
Representative small.
I'm I actually has Nancy verse
stated I stand in opposition for
the same reasons that a and she
stated that there's a couple of
things in the bill that I have
some questions about
My notes here.
So Mr Chairman representative on
page five of the bill online
twenty five it talks about that
there should be a guide book
established who is going to
have.
I guess prepare this guidebook
and and what agency or or where
does this fall your lab right on
that a little bit please
absolutely thank you Mr chair
thank you Representative in our
legislation the Economic
development department would be
responsible for preparing the
guide book Mr chair committee as
we've heard testimony from
investors developers and
installers this is an economic
development tool and so Mister
chair Committee that's how we
currently have it structured and
the it's not really to see it's
simply to have a standard form
in a standard outlined that then
if.
Counties choose to utilize this
tool they can they have a
standard form and so it makes
the ease of utilizing this tool
for both investors.
Property owners and local
governments it makes it all
standard clear and and much
easier to administer.
Thank you for thank you for that
represented Mr chairman so.
Okay next question.
On page ten.
Nibert.
The county show quarter special
assessment we.
So my question would be who
prepares that that lean
document.
And and just as well as who pays
for the filing of that document
is is I'm are you is is the
language in this bill saying
that the county is responsible
for doing this that's the way I
read it.
That thank you very much Mr
chair thank you Representative
great question the capital
providers would pay for the
filing madam Mr Chairman
representative that would not be
any expense borne by the public
by the county Mr chair committee
Representative also
In the past and currently on the
books now in New Mexico these
sorts of programs and projects
are assessed as property taxes
that's a concern we change that
this would be assessed in the
same manner as a property
improvement this kid some of
these other local improvement
districts that counties
absolutely have.
Many counties I should say have
experience assessing but the
none of the feet the fees would
all be born madam Mr chair
representative by the capital
providers.
Okay thank you for that
Representative I'm and so we're
what that.
We're with that place there
Lee in in in the chain of I
guess I'm trying to get a word
this properly
what priority I guess with with
this leading from the solar
assessment the on the property.
I mean Mr chair representative
about being told by my expert
that the lean would be co equal
and the same way as existing
laws Mr chair committee as we've
talked as I talked about in my
opening
it would not be in front of
other financial instruments
mortgage or otherwise which is
why
we're we're making some
improvements to current law.
The same is existing law sorry
Mr chair thank you
Representative thank you
Representative Mr chair I'm so
seven thirty eight of forty
eight is the actual property tax
lien statute.
I'm.
And so my my concern is if if
this bill may conflict with that
I'm not sure if you're familiar
with that Representative you Mr
chair representative I am
certainly not as familiar as you
are Mr chair representative but
this would not conflict and and
I would repeat Mr chair and
representative very importantly
it would not conflict with those
property taxes in that are the
province of.
This very important province for
county treasurers
Mr chair representative it would
be assessed in the same manner
as these property
Property improvement districts
or other districts not as a
property tax
Mr chair and representative of
its at my expert
is is texting me here Mister
chair representative that it's
the already the same as Mexico
lost four dash five five.
And thank you for that
Representative Mr chairman I
understand that I I just I'm
really having a hard time with
it being on the on the tax bill
You know current losses that
that.
Treasures collect property taxes
And then distribute those and
and it's actually in statute on
how we collect those of their
delinquent
The penalty and interest has to
pay first and then the and then
it goes to the oldest tax year
so I guess really that that's
where I'm having a hard time
Getting this getting my head
around how this would actually
work at the local level I'm
please understand I I am for
economic development and at
House Bill for forty that
representative keel actually at.
It was.
I'm two years that I believe it
was and that was at Bernalillo
county that approached him and
wanted commercial pace which I
you know I think is a great idea
we did we need the economic
development we need our
businesses to be able to to do
these things but my my biggest
issue is our.
Attention to residential
property
that's that's a big thing do you
know offhand Representative and
Mr chairman what what is the
cost for residential.
Let's say say solar panels what
what is the dollar amount that
thank you so much Mr chair thank
you Representative and I
apologize for not being more
clear
Mr Chairman representative if we
go to page two the **** live
beginning on line thirteen.
this would not be too single
family individual residential.
Properties Mr chair
representative this actually
goes back and does some more
work on that same C. pace area
the commercial property assessed
clean energy and so when for
this bill Mr chair
representative the eligible
property means privately owned
commercial industrial or
agricultural or non profit real
prime property or multi family
residential real property with
five or more dwelling units so
Mister chair representative this
would not apply to those
residential those single family
residential homes you might be
thinking up I apologize for not
clear.
And we actually as it's
currently construction would
repeal the statute that has
That's on the books in not
really saying much investment at
all that applies to those
residential properties actually
maybe fixing an issue that
exists out there right now.
Well thank you for that
Representative Mr Chairman that
was a huge concern I was having
and I did not see that in the
bill
thank you for pointing that out
I'm I just have a couple more
questions so.
I heard during the testimony
that
This is going to going to be low
cost and long term financing how
does it lower the cost.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative and and my expert
is back in the attendees section
miss Genevieve Sherman Mr chair
representative the main way that
it lowers the cost is that it
lengthens financing term.
Mr Chairman representative so it
allows these substantial
important improvements to these
commercial properties or the
multi family properties
it allows propose improvements
to be put on after a building is
constructed or during
construction and for that pay
out to be over a longer period
of time therefore lowering the
cost of that financing.
Thank you for that
Representative and and Mr
Chairman to me it and and
forgive me if I'm wrong here but
Representative if you are are
these financing entities are
they charging interest on the on
these purchases.
Mr chair representative I I
don't have any first hand
professional knowledge of the
some of the financing entities
Mr chair representative it is
the market place and so I I
would think that they do recruit
some financing costs Mr chair
representative.
In the lending institution be
that whomever that may be
Would it would be eligible to
provide these financing
instruments and they would
certainly be eligible to recoup
that cost in a more in this
marketplace.
And and we get Mr chair
representative of my expertise
taxed me
We're kind of a no different
than a than an improvement bond
with that low interest rate over
that longer term.
Okay thank you for that
representative Mr Chairman I I
just my head's going wait a
minute it can't be if it's a if
your financing it out a longer
term you're going to pay
interest so it I I can't but
lower cost in in that equation
I'm sorry that's just the way my
aunt works
Let me see I have
referred to the representative
of black excuse me
Very can you bring generation
Armand back to the panelists
column she's the expert witness
for Representative small and
In some of the questions are
resented black is asking could
have been.
Answered by
I Mr chairman there she is okay
sorry a Representative black
proceed thank you Mr chairman
thank you Representative.
And and I just muted down this
down Representative it it so I
can get my head around it if you
don't mind so basically these
are introduce these solar
companies I I'm I'm guessing.
Or who is it that actually
provides the the capital is that
a bank is that do we know.
Chair Mister chair
representative any lending
institution would be eligible to
provide that capital
Mr chair representative we have
a representative in expert today
that is here
from at one of those
institutions greenworks lending
that provides that the that it
provides this financing any
lending institution would be
eligible Mr chair representative
also.
If you look at at the on page
two lines eight through twelve
this goes through what the
eligible improvements are and so
it means and as we heard about
energy in a permanently affixed
energy efficiency improvement
these are things that lower the
energy usage for buildings there
by improving the efficiency and
saving the homeowner money
excuse me not the homeowner the
property owner the commercial
property owner.
Other eligible improvements
renewable energy improvement and
that's.
Could be geo thermal it could be
so or it could be when or others
water conservation improvement
particularly important in New
Mexico or resiliency
improvements installed on
eligible property and that
resiliency that can mean things
like making properties better.
Suited to withstand floods
forest fires in some parts of
our state so these are the
there's a wider suite Mr chair
representative of eligible
improvements just one of the
reasons we think this will drive
substantial investment therefore
substantial construction.
For.
For these commercial property
owners in New Mexico.
Thank you for that
Representative and and Mr
chairman
I think that's all the questions
I have at this time
Representative I appreciate your
answers and and like I said you
know I do have to I can't vote
for this because I don't
honestly in my heart feel that
it is the county treasurer's job
template collector on.
Privately financed that so so
for that reason I can't support
this but thank you so much for
answer my questions thank you.
Thank you for Representative
black
Representative Serrato but
before I go to Representative or
St act all.
Representative small.
In your presentation you you
didn't reflect on the amendment.
Is that still up.
The game plan here
Representative just bought yes
Mr chairman thank you for that
reminder I apologize that is
Okay I represent this model what
we are the act on the amendment
right now can you give us the to
to number the bottom.
Yes Mr chair
Right now.
Mr Chairman the two oh two
number.
Is.
Point two two zero two eight
nine point one.
Okay and now the entertainer
motion for discussion purposes a
the free to
tell us what the amendment does
represent a small.
Thank you very much Mr chair
and thank you very much for move
in the amendment
The.
In trouble clicking on the right
thing here.
Mr chair on page six line
seventeen after the word and we
insert issue.
So if we go to page six.
Line seventeen.
It just
It specifies that the word issue
should be there on page is six
line seventeen right now it
reads Mr chair and capital
providers and specialists and it
authorizes and directs the
county official to enter into a
special assessment this
agreement with property owners
and capital providers and.
Issue special assessment
assignable certificates we need
that word issue there Mister
chair in order to spell out
after they entered into those
agreements then they must then
they issue the special
assessment certificates.
Okay
that's pretty clear cut issues
definitely needed in there I
know it's kind of just left out
in the early probably members
are doing have a questions
discussion on the amendment.
I see none as their opposition
to the amendment.
seen done.
The amendment is adopted
representative of you have a and
amended bill will go now to a
further questions discussion
from the committee
Representative Serrato.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you to the sponsor of this bill
I think this is such a
fascinating program and and
really just to learn more I'm
gonna apologize in advance in
case some of my questions
somewhat repeat Representative
blacks I just wanna make sure I
also fully understand the state
I apologize for my ignorance of
that comes up but I I am kind of
curious they did see the you
like spelled out you know how
Lee would happen or how if there
wasn't if there was a failure
for payment how does that
collections I guess it's not I
don't mean to say hello the
collections process but let's
say the whole thing goes bonkers
I guess how does how does what
it does is the county chair
because a town contractor
remains part of that process
that go directly I guess I'm not
understanding how that would
happen if if there is a complete
failure to pay.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative I'll defer to my
experts
to go through some of that but
Mr chair representative I you're
asking him for an question I'd
like Mr chairman to help address
that but the fact that this
financing is available and
twenty plus other states
financing billions of dollars of
improvements.
Propose improvements help save
those property owners money
allow them to re invest in their
business allow them to stay in
business or to grow their
business so you ask a very
important question like Mr
Chairman who has more expertise
to help answer it but the the
upside to this legislation
currently unavailable to New
Mexico commercial property
owners is that longer term lower
cost financing that helps them
stay there that said Mr Chairman
can you walk through briefly
what that worst case scenario
would look like please
feel free to elaborate on the.
Question before us.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Representative Serrato and
block.
The us very good question and
that is the question you should
be asking.
In many ways House Bill to
ninety nine is meant to address
this very question and overcome
what really is a technical
deficiency in the previous bill
which was adopted all the way
back in two thousand and nine
which was really before this
program took off around the
country.
One of the challenges with that
bill was exactly as the Act
county treasurer mentioned which
is that it instructed county
treasures to collect the special
assessments in the same manner
as property taxes specifically
and property taxes are collected
in a very specific manner in New
Mexico as in those states I'm we
just heard a tax sale and
foreclosure.
What this bill does is it keeps
the same classification for the
C. K. improvements as a special
assessment but changes the
collection and enforcement
mechanism away from property
taxes and it now allows the
county to collect and enforce
these special assessments in the
same manner as a county
improvement assessment which is
a different kind of assessment
governed under for dash fifty
five of New Mexico law.
This kind of improvement
assessment is much similar in
character to see pace these are
improvements that County for
example would make to build
improvements that benefit real
property like a sewer line or
water line or road I'm and if
they can if the properties that
are benefited by that
infrastructure don't pay their
special assessment the county
actually has two options to
enforce that.
He treasurer is authorized to
enforce just that delinquent
assessment that has been on
paid.
Or the county may lean on what
is called the certificate holder
effectively the bondholder the
person or entity that purchased
or funded the infrastructure
they may also directly in force
just that special assessment
that is delinquent against just
the property that has not paid.
So this bill really addresses
that issue by providing the
counties optionality the county
treasurer still retain their
statutory rights to enforce
these types of assessments but
they may also be in this case on
the capital provider they will
have a signed a special
assessment cert I'm to directly
enforce just that delinquent
assessment amount so we hope
that this will address the
concerns of the county charters
have had previously and this
structure has been adopted in
its own way and then whether
states and to address similar
concerns but I will say that the
reason that the counties are
involved in the first place is
and nature of this type of
financing.
I want to reiterate that these
are improvements that benefit
the public they must otherwise
they they can be funded under
this program so the idea here is
that when a building is improved
when it meets that higher code
established by the state the
solar system is put in place
that will benefit not just that
property of the public for the
full twenty to thirty years that
that piece of infrastructure is
in place and for that reason C.
pace laws when they are adopted
by legislature's come to a
finding that these improvements
create a public benefit and for
that reason it is appropriate
for the local governments to
utilize their statutory
authorities to Levin's types of
special improvement assessments
on the property.
You Mr chairman thank you
Representative thank you Mr
Chairman is that the right title
agency thank you I I didn't and
you disagree you you touch on
other question I had as well and
I eight I actually think you
answered I'm good on that on the
only other thing I was kind of
curious about was
This is such a a minute point
guards ask hello this really
look on on a on a bill I guess
because now you're saying that
it's in a different section
essentially
and and so and in two parts I
guess so one is that the
counties would not lose out on
additional revenue that they
which are generated from from
that area what is seems to be
and it seems like the
representative is audience
that's good to know and then to
I have look on the bill thank
you.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
Mr chairman would you find
additional technical expertise
on an excellent question again
yes.
I will look for this section
I believe it is on.
Okay page seven line thirteen.
This bill also Representative
Serrato two addresses that
concern.
By specifying this time around
that this may be inserted on the
physical tax bill or on a stand
alone.
That is an innovation that many
municipalities and counties
around the country have adopted.
To provide them a much greater
degree of flexibility
operationally and how they
conduct this voluntary program
many local governments have
software that very easily allows
them to create a separate line
item on the bill for new water
charger and C. K. that.
How these don't have and they
prefer to print and mail a
separate standalone bills and
perfectly reasonable so this
Alaskans.
Thank you.
Representative says Russell used
to have the floor thank you Mr
chairman and thank you
Representative thank you Mr
chairman I I just want to say I
I really appreciate this bill
you know I I also Sir said on
you know commerce and economic
development and I I would I
really appreciate about this is
how forward thinking this piece
is and I apologize but I think I
really like is making weird
things but I try to wrap my head
around it and I think that's
what is going to be difficult I
think at times for folks is
really this is a newer season
when we have to adapt to that
but I appreciate is that it's
optional for all the parties you
know involved in it used to to
be do this or not I appreciate
that it's it's really is giving
opportunities for rural
communities as well to have
these economic opportunities and
then again you know I don't
actually realize this is an
entire market of of lenders and
so seeing that in again you know
this is the interest is taxable
to and tastic but then also
there competitive rates involved
you Senator to so I I appreciate
this piece of legislation thank
you for those answers and I may
be in touch again Mr Chairman
just when I don't understand
something else should this come
to the fore force again thank
you.
Thank you Representative
throughout the next we have
Representative Montoya.
Mr Chairman I'm going to
withdraw my questioning right at
the moment thank you thank you
Representative Montoya next we
have Representative Castellano.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative small quick
question
so that the county treasurer
gonna be to get administrative
role in this with this bill
correct collecting these fees
You know I have a problem with
percent for these county
treasures I mean if they're
gonna be doing administrative
role I think one percent is a
little.
I guess a little too short for
them why would we do like a four
percent administrative fee like
most credit card companies do.
Why is it one percent.
Thank you very much
Representative Castellano
the the current administrative
the.
And and perhaps Mr chairman can
speak to this is something that
is
I would presume is in operation
and some of these other
localities we want to keep Mr
Representative Castellano Mr
chair you make a great point we
want to make sure which and have
sufficient funding for that
administration while also
working to keep these rates low
in order to help the property
owners
Get the you know access to kind
of financing that's going to
allow them to make these
investments but in the you know
I'm not one to say that that
balance for sure has been struck
in this case thank you
highlighted very important area
to have and and if there's a if
there's a better balance in that
area to ensure that this von if
if the county chooses to go down
this route that there's
sufficient funding for that
administration which is the key
R. I'm very open to discussing
what that administration fee
should be.
Okay thank you there's a small
Mr chairman also Mr chairman
Representative small so a lot of
property owners
have that by getting a loan to
buy the property so who would be
the first lien holder on this on
this tax or would it be the
county would it be the the banks
with the mortgage company who
would be the first thing on this
it can make me think that is
because a little bit of conflict
between.
Who will get the right to the
lead.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative
that this does not replace Mr
chair representative and that
mortgage or some of these other
loans Mr chair representative Mr
chairman can went into it a
little bit earlier with the
multiple ways to help
If there is a default to recoup
that.
but she Mr chair representative
Mr chairman I think perhaps can
explain that better than I can.
Thank you Representative.
I think your question was with
respect to private landholders
so all address that first of
these correct me if I
misunderstand your question.
Now right I my concern is who
who gets the first part of the
legal is going to be the county
or the mortgage companies.
So I'm.
Expanding of New Mexico laws
that the county's needs always
takes priority and that will be
the case here all aspects of the
counties in our people and they
had a private folder like a
mortgage thank.
One of the issues in the prior
legislation that was not there
was having a requirement that
the mortgage bank of what's
called consent or acknowledge
that this type of special
assessment is going to be based
on the property that's an
important policy protection that
has been adopted by the much
every state has
and what it means is that when a
developer like those you
programs J. the hospital have
you.
They're going to make major
energy efficiency improvements
to the building and finance it
through this program they need
to notify the bank that has a
mortgage for the property first
and that bank needs to provide a
written confirmation that they
they are okay blasts the special
session going on the property.
The reason that banks are
allowing these special
assessments is because they
really do.
Properties.
A lot of value of the property
which of course is good news for
the bank.
And more often than not they
reduce the operating expenses of
the property as well which is
also good news is because
there's more cash on hand for
the property owner to pay their
mortgage that's all I'm there
are many resources you can find
online about this from from
nonprofit or neutral sources but
you'll find that there are now
hundreds I think well over two
hundred fifty one thing
institutions including
everything from the national
banks to main street banks that
are consenting and have agreed
to allow these assessments to be
based on the property because
again this is providing a very
important this fall source of
capital to either get these
buildings improved or to build
new high performance qualities
so we expect the same will be
the case in New Mexico and I had
the opportunity actions speak to
many our regional industry banks
in New Mexico that I think will
probably participate in this
program both in allowing these
needs to take priority but also
in funding projects.
Nice to have the floor.
thank you Mr chairman thank
representative Akhil.
Our next we have Representative
Fajardo.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative I do have some
questions I'm and I hope for
your I hope you'll be patient
with me were absent because.
I just have a hard time grasping
and so it just because I'm I
haven't
had I hate this stuff
and so my first question is
what's the difference between
this and the rate.
Thank you
Representative Mr chair.
The it would be just it would be
treated in this manner Mr chair
Representative Representative as
a kid not as a as by the county
treasurer Mr chair
representative and Mr Chairman
can answer additional
Questions but a public
improvement district is for
usually that public
infrastructure this Mr chair
representative this as a public
benefit but it's for that
privately owned infrastructure
therefore it's privately
finance.
It in in Mister chairman if
there is anything you would want
to add
in to that to help clarify for
Representative Fajardo.
And and and Jenny in your
responses the specific to the
question in terms.
Representative it is similar to
a public improvement district in
the manner in which the
assessment is created and
collected.
It is different in the
governance structures this bill
doesn't require an actual public
improvement district to be
created more a board of
directors or other governing
structure to manage that
district because the
improvements as Representative
small said are typically not
shared among buildings in the
district each improvement is
made to an individual property
thank you for that
Representative thank you and the
Sherman Mr chairman so I'm the
kids are are accessed through to
to think that the county
treasurer's office county
assessors office
is there a percentage making the
medicine is there's a one
percent admin team on this our
our kids just yes and and and
admin fate.
Thank you Representative Mr
Chairman representative I'm not
aware I don't know that specific
answer I don't know if Mr
chairman does but it I can
Let me work to get an answer to
that question Mr chair
representative will reach out to
one of our county officials say
that means that Mr chairman you
happen to know the answer to
that.
I don't know.
Thank you very much I'm and so
and it's my understanding so you
have a for a property the
privately owned property
commercial nonprofit or
residential.
They can go and get a loan to
have improvement solar
improvements on that property my
my right and my at the same rate
track.
This Mr chair representative yes
the it's a for multi family five
units or more and it's it would
just be for the solar be for the
energy efficiency but you're
right on this but not single
family Representative not single
family not condos like I own a
condo I could not do that for my
individual condo.
Zacks Mr chair representative
thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative so I would have
to be a a property owner with
with five or more residential
properties or commercial or
nonprofit building new
government buildings.
can they apply for this
Representative Mr Chairman
representative.
Mr chair representative I
believe the answer to that is
no.
I'm.
I think I might I I'm hearing
from from from my county
assessors well and she you know
in it she and she's on the same
page with with every with
everybody else this is just it's
she doesn't feel like she should
be responsible the government in
entity to be making sure a
private loan is taken care of so
and I don't understand what that
means Mr Chairman representative
what would she be responsible
for doing this in the mortgage
I'm assuming correct me if I'm
wrong.
I have a property and commercial
property the mortgage I would
have to pay every month.
But this being the assessor pays
every month can you explain that
to me because that's what that's
the problem I'm having a hard
time.
Thank you Representative thank
you Mister chair Mister chairman
could you help go into that
please yes.
So what the county treasurer
will be to bill and collect the
special assessment.
and in the same way that they
would bill it collecting we have
here.
Assessment.
In the event of a delinquency or
default the county treasurer has
two options as I described
earlier they retain their right
to enforce that assessment in
the same manner as the county
improvement assessment.
For the capital provider that
has funded the improvement which
in this bill is that that is
through I think what is called
an assignable certificate may
also enforce that delinquency.
So the so okay thank you I I'm
trying to be real simple here so
if I have a mortgage on a
property.
Who pays the mortgage part.
Property.
Okay and the assessment is paid
through toward.
So that they yes the assessment
that that is put on where does
that money go to and who pays.
Property owner pays it to the
county and the county we miss
those funds to the capital
provider.
And which is the mortgage
company or the company that
provided the seller the finance
yet correct okay okay so okay so
what we're we're not even
talking about a mortgage okay
now I'm getting understand so
this is so this is the
improvement so who's ever Joe
blow his financing the
improvements is getting I have
to pay that fee plus there is a
additional tax fee on top of
that.
So when I talk about mortgage so
that's taken out so that it can
understand my correct in that Mr
Chairman representative.
Mr chair representative yes okay
what what exactly okay this is
helping me so then there's the
improvements and that is
financed to whomever private
company correct Mr Chairman
representative okay.
and then there's a testament
that.
That entire fee that goes to the
capital company is there any
part that I is the owner pays
all of that run to the clerk's
office.
Mr Chairman representative.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative Mr Chairman can
add
The the specifics but I think it
would go through that the
assessment through the through
the treasure.
Mr Chairman can you confirm
that.
The assessment is collected by
the treasurer and the colors
that they collect for the
assessment prevent acts remitted
the capital provider that
finance the investments
the that you're speaking to I
believe it is that is mentioned
in the bill is for the county or
its program administrator to
charge.
There are costs in qualifying
you improve as eligible first
states and those may be included
in the financing thank you and I
and I I appreciate your patience
Mr Representative chairman I
really really appreciated this
this is difficult for me so if
if I finance do a capital
company to have these
improvements and let's assume
that it's you know I have to pay
five thousand dollars a month
for these improvements as the
assessor I would be charging you
five thousand dollars a month
plus a fee that goes to the
capital company I get to keep up
the one percent but the rest is
just I just and the password.
Is that correct Mr Chairman
representative.
Yes Mr chair representative.
And I know this is a dumb
question I apologize Mr Chairman
representative because I own
property but I get eight my part
my taxes are assessed monthly.
They're just fast I guess you
know you know.
Adam annually or you know semi
annually things like that so
with the assessor then have to
change how they build or do they
bill annually.
All of this explained that to
then maybe I'm completely wrong
and maybe there are some people
that kids get billed monthly.
Mr Chairman representative.
Mr Chairman please.
You will not need to change how
it built it can build these
assessments in any cadence that
it deems necessary pursuant to a
voluntary ordinance that it
would have adopted so it can
build these at the same time as
property taxes their of their
assessments and that maybe once
a year and that's difficult
across the country for these
types of assessments I'm thank
you Mr chairman thank you
Representative so so as an
investor I'm paying I'm not
paying a monthly amount can.
Is that correct.
The time is that the county.
She's collected they.
Semi annually that would also be
acceptable okay thank you would
likely not be monthly thank you
for that Mr Chairman
representative and so
I have one more question and I
just lost it.
So
I think that's it for now I have
another question it just slipped
my mind I can't recall what it
is if you want thank you
Representative are the thank you
Mr chairman I had an we got an
answer to one of representatives
Pardo's questions.
You're free to the respond
Representative small thank you
very much Mr chairman for that
opportunity Mr chair
representative Fajardo at from a
county official they said that
the administrative fees for the
public improvement districts are
allowed they cited
I dash eleven dash ten so in
answer to your public
improvement district
administrative fee the answer
I'm getting from my County in
Dona ana is that yes those are.
They are thank you I'm and Mr
Chairman representative I didn't
I didn't remember my last
question I apologize and this is
voluntary by the county is that
my understanding Mr Chairman
representative absolutely yes Mr
chair representative the county
commission that decides on that
Mr Chairman representative yes
Mr chair representative and is
there anything with and those
guidelines that if the county
commission said yes we want to
do this but we only want to do
this in certain parts of the
county the only one allowed this
in certain neighborhoods are
they allowed to do that Mr
Chairman representative.
That's a very thank you Mr chair
thank you Representative for
that question
I would imagine that the county
would have I don't know honestly
I will I would imagine that the
county could retain.
Pretty significant authority to
set out those geographic
boundaries more in line with the
public sort of a hybrid between
the public improvement district
in this the property assessed
clean energy so I would I would
think the answer is yes but I
don't have any example to cite
one where the other Mr chair
representative at eight I need
to apologize one more question
is already got chairman he's
looking at me I apologize
Representative are there any
call backs in this let's say I
own a property and I do put and
I do invest in capital and I
default
is there any call back to me as
the assessor or to the county
because we're incentives were
partnered right where we become
a partner in this loan and a
sense and now we have property
that who's liable for that
what CarMax do we have.
That thank you Mr chair thank
you Representative the county is
is not liable there's no general
fund or other obligations pledge
for the county the county cannot
be collected upon for any of
these Mr chair representative
and also
this will allow county
commissioners to designate a
specific geographic area to have
eligible for these.
Thank you and thank you once
again for your patience with me
these things are complicated for
me I don't like these issues
that much I do appreciate you
taking the time to answer my
questions and kind of help me
break it down thank you Mr
chairman thank you
Representative thank you
Representative Fajardo those are
really significant questions
that we all appreciated
Representative part the next we
have a Representative Lujan.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
for the sponsor
For bringing this legislation
forward and really good
questions thank you
Representative Fajardo and
yeah I know and that those are
really good questions but.
To the point Mr chair and.
Representative.
This is the county already
engaged in public private
contracts.
In other ways.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative I would imagine
that there are other sorts of
partnerships that counties
absolutely do and should engage.
Thank you thank you Mr thank you
Representative so.
With the.
The comments from from
Bernalillo treasure beers.
I'm just trying to put this all
this all together that this
seems to be the
The big issue here that that
that plan what how you're going
to interact if we move forward
with this legislation with the
the county treasures and the
assessors
so is there a way that you can
can we figure this out with the
county because this is I believe
is that a good piece of
legislation and it's and what
it's trying to accomplish and
what would be able to
accomplish.
Thank you so much Representative
Lujan for the question the
answer is absolutely yes you
know twenty plus other states
are implementing this red and
blue they found a way to
implement it Mr chair
representative we have the
statutes on the books right now
in New Mexico but they're not
leading to the sort of
investment that we need and so
we're working to bring some
adjustments back we had a
conversation earlier with
Representative Castellano in
regards specifically to
administrative fees and so I
think they're on we're of areas
to ensure that we have a program
that'll work here in New Mexico
All of our stakeholders but that
fundamentally will help open up
the investment that currently is
closed for this very important
area for commercial property
owners.
Thank you thank you Mr thank you
Representative for that that
answer but I am looking media at
Lee right now with their is
there a chance for you to get
together it County and figure
this out.
Sure sister.
Thank you Representative Mr
chair thank you Representative
absolutely me I I'm excited to
have I think this is the next
step in this very important
conversation we work through the
challenges Mr chair
representative and that what it
can offer residentially
we know this so yeah you know we
we will absolutely work on this.
If we're fortunate to move
forward from today's committee
and work in a way that is
helping to address any concerns
that are out there.
Wonderful thank you Mr chair
thank you Representative that's
exactly what I wanted to hear.
Encouraging so thank you and
with that you would get my
support on this bill thank you
thank you so much.
Thank you Representative Lujan
members that does that the
questions are.
Comments from the committee
what is the wish of the
committee.
Representative Serrato in the
past I second we have the best
recommendation that I.
No my apologies I thought we for
at the moment during the year
right we did we did include that
that.
We have an amended bill so we
have a do pass recommendation by
ever since about the second a
resident of the line.
Further question discussion
members.
I'll allow Representative to
small to close up before we take
the the vote.
Thank you so much Mr chair thank
you committee deeply appreciate
today's hearing the excellent
questions this is a program to
unlock.
Tens if not scores of millions
of dollars of financing for New
Mexico's businesses at a time
when they need it most in a way
that helps our environment and
all of our communities I am
absolutely committed to working
with all stakeholders including
the treasurers to make sure that
this is a program that will work
here on the ground in New Mexico
with our specific circumstances
and would deeply appreciate the
opportunity to move forward
today and to continue that
collective work thank you very
much Mr chairman thank you
Representative a small and think
you're a.
you very professional expert as
well on the plantation members
that were on a do pass
recommendation the secretary to
call the roll.
Representative black.
Now.
Representative Castellano.
Representative Cook.
Representative Fajardo.
Yes.
Representative Lujan yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Serrato yes.
Representative Castellano.
No.
Representative Fajardo.
Now.
Mr Chairman yes members by one
of four in the affirmative three
in the negative house bill two
ninety nine as amended the only
passes this committee.
Thank you very much larger.
Thank you bill is gonna do pass
recommendation.
Thank you for.
Members were going on to our
second bill it's our first
Senate bill for the year so
we're real excited.
will kind of bring out the money
actually is that that's going to
do the best recommendation.
But the merry merry bring over
Senator Nancy Rodriguez.
There she is
What are the are the are service
Senator Rodriguez on your
experts are do you have experts
on the legislation so we can
bring them over thank you Mr
chairman yes I have Nancy
appears to the chairman of the
county treasures affiliate for
the New Mexico association of
counties in the county treasures
thank you Mr chairman you live
there is yes.
Okay
so we're all on board
Senator
Rodriguez to put on your
federally insured obligations
bill Senate bill sixty four
thank you Mr chairman you are
probably familiar with yelp many
of you probably already we were
here last year and that the bill
passed unanimously in both
chambers are by it got hung up
on the calendar yeah and you
know how sometimes you get your
all bills right so we have you
on your and then there is merely
a bill that correct
that would make technical
corrections to an investment
statute on a bail we had all
counts again then this the prior
to two.
Merrily change your one word
that should be warranty
placement services instead of
registry service was being hard
registration of the trademark of
the promontory in our financial
network for investments for
county treasurer and so the word
really needs to be corrected to
reflect the workplace that's all
it does to allow them to be able
to invest as intended in the in
the statute without any
limitations to and language that
needs to be act perhaps.
That's all it Mr chairman you
have any questions I'll be happy
to answer our records of the gas
and
Mr chair so do you wish to are
also reflect on the significance
of the legislation.
You're free to do so right now
Nancy.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee and
thank you to Senator Rodriguez
Senator Rodriguez originally
brought this bill several years
ago that added this important
investment tool to county
treasures and others the state
treasurer and state investment
committee during the inter of
several years
the one company that created
this tool registered.
The name.
Of their placement services so
it became like a trademark so we
approached the Senator again
and so the.
Let's not have registered
trademark names in our statutes
we because that would limit us
to only going through that one
financial institution and now
it's very common place to get
this tool and machine very
kindly agreed to making these
technical changes for us so that
instead of just buying clean
axes we now can buy facial
tissue
is kind of the analogy that I've
been making yes it you know it
happens and legislation you know
you put something in and then
years later you find out the
original creator trademark set
so and I think the senator again
I think she did a wonderful job
explaining it it is just a
technical correction thank you
so much and I stand for any
questions thank you Nancy and
thank you Senator Rodriguez so
this in essence is also kind of
an equal protection it should.
Now in terms of a and is
thinking that the with the A.
trademark the and to do so
Senator Rodriguez is that it on
your presentation on your Senate
bill sixty four thank you Mr
chairman that is all I have a
pretty simple bill thank you
very much.
Okay we'll go to the audience
Those in opposition
to Senate bill sixty four all
right now is the opportunity to
reflect on that I'm going to
bypass the pulmonary Senator
worry about the people
those in opposition I would like
to address the committee on
Senate bill sixty four go to the
race and I can at the bottom.
I don't see anybody we'll go to
those ins.
Those in support of the
legislation.
I would like to address the
committee and I see a couple of
individuals are done and see
what.
Mary I bring Dominic over.
Mr Dominic
feel free to address the
committee Dominic in regards to
your concerns on the Senate bill
sixty four thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee Dominic
civil with the independent
community bankers association I
want to thank the senator for
bringing this back of course we
did work with her several years
ago on this legislation and it's
just another tool for our county
treasures to
Investment opportunities and
keeping money in our in our
communities so it's very
important to just addresses and
thank you and I appreciate the
committee support.
Thank you I've done a gun next
we have a Brian more to speak in
support of legislation.
bring Brian over Mary.
There you are Brian.
I'm here subrident feel free to
our area concerns the for
legislation thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee I am Brian Moore of
New Mexico counties of course we
support our treasures in this
move to fix this will technical
correction and we support
Senator Rodriguez has been a
great from the counties over the
years thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Brian and the good
hearing from you good senior
again rather.
that's all we have in terms of
our attendance participation
we'll go now to the committee
and we have a Representative
Fajardo.
I mean you're so.
The only last thing I apologize.
Okay.
Representative black.
I was I'm I didn't mean to do
that.
Your.
I'll make a motion when you're
ready.
Are there other questions and
discussion members.
Representative us our auto I I
just have one quick one to be
clear this is just what the one
word or two words correct that
are being inserted in here in Mr
chairman and madam.
Senator Rodriguez Mr Chairman
thank you thank you for there's
a lot of recognition for our
ninth year I'm yes it is merely
a replacement of the correct
word that she would be in there
to to reflect the placement
services that registry thank you
thank you Mr chairman thank you
I just want to the.
I think there is a throughout
the next we have Representative
Lujan.
I thank you.
I thank the sponsor for bringing
this word and say hello to our
good Senator here in Santa Fe
and thanks for having and this
be our percent bill thank you.
The the high next we have
brought Representative Montoya.
Mr chairman and Senator
Rodriguez I support this bill
and I make a motion of a do
pass.
Representative month I am going
to reserve that
relates to Representative black
who kind of initially suggested
doing the motion.
great but when it comes to a do
pass recommendation we don't
speak in terms of.
qualifying comments we just
basically go in straight into
the motion.
So if there's no other questions
or discussion out Senator back.
Our motion.
Thank you Mr chairman I move too
fast.
And that we have the best
recommendation representative of
black second by rest of the
Pueblo
before you go to the vote I
think to recognize
Representative Senator Rodriguez
on our closing.
Thank you Mr chairman I don't
have any other comments or
appreciate your committee
putting me on the agenda
yourself and many others for the
great comments I appreciate all
of you thank you I I didn't know
I was the first one from the
Senate to your question.
great thank you I found a
different in the same screen a
little bit just you set up with
great thank you so much I'll see
you all in committees in the
Senate to I'm sure.
Thank you thank you senator that
members wanted to pass
recommendation that Senate bill
sixty four as amended is there
any opposition to the to pass
recommendation seen none that
the record reflect that all
those present what information
Senator Rodriguez
congratulations you have to pass
recommendation on Senate bill
sixty four our first Senate bill
for the year thank.
Yes up to have a great thing
thank.
You want.
Members of those four today we
have a couple of bills on for
another again a couple Senate
bills on for Thursday so we
stand adjourned.
And
enjoy the rest of your day and
god bless you all and all we get
are built through our Senate
committees and about the house
floor.
