this year Representative
Figueroa here Representative
Garcia.
Representative Lara here.
Representative Johnson.
Representative Martinez.
Representative right here.
Representative Terrazas.
This year.
K. to weigh in on this and.
Chair of.
Eight.
Okay we reduced it off of the
forty five states for renewable
you he'll.
Care two kids.
Years with every year it.
Good afternoon Mister.
Great to share with you right
after session.
so I'm Representative regular
County this afternoon I want to
ask thank you for the
opportunity to present this bill
and I would like to introduce my
guests and expert witness
captain Martin Salazar from the
Albuquerque fire and rescue
department.
And I would just add that he
looks very handsome the
uniformed and I told them that I
might.
And.
That I would Mr chair
representative person I would
like to introduce you.
Is that fair he is the political
liaison for the New Mexico
professional firefighters
association and these are some
of the individuals these are
just a few of the individuals
that I've been working with
who is not here with me today
and I wanted to be here with our
union president Miguel Tippmann
of male party fire and rescue
department and also
The county fire chief Matt cross
is currently they have some of
the committee.
Well.
So
I'll tell you what House Bill
three forty.
I is as you all know
firefighters are the leading
providers emergency medical
services and have some of the
most hazardous and sensitive
jobs in the state.
Usually they are the first team
to appear at the scene of an
emergency and
you know that much like our
police department our police
officers they work long hours
away from their families and
they often times deal with life
threatening situations.
the issue that in Representative
is a mystery.
Is that we are having difficulty
attracting for firefighters and
people into this profession
fire departments are struggling
to attract you could yes.
And the changing workforce we
have seen fire academy and drop
year after year.
At the same time we have
firefighters retiree in large
numbers of most firefighters can
retire at about forty two years
old usually they come in young
and they leave early and a lot
of them go on to do other things
like you know take other jobs
after they retire maybe some of
them are paramedics and the
majority of them actually are
certified paramedics and some of
them go on to do other other
jobs I have right now who's
retired firefighter was working
in the film industry and
basically what he's doing is
he's the paramedics of the film
industry
the thing about firefighters Mr
chair and in this particular
bill what does set up a
mechanism to created funds that
and and all we're doing in this
bill actually is we're setting
up a mechanism to create a fund
we are not doing it allocation
at this time we will be coming
back in the in the future for
the allocation of but what we're
doing is that mechanism would
give incoming firefighters five
thousand dollars
to the so it's sort of a way to
attract firefighters so the
number of emergency calls
continues to rise state why the
average salary salary for New
Mexico of course for New
Mexico thirty nine thousand
firefighters more than fifty
percent lower than the rest of
the United States so even though
they're doing these really
hazardous jobs their pay is not
really very high and that's a
problem is also the issue is
important
my father was a firefighter for
thirty years and I came to learn
this later on with my mother she
does not get social security so
most firefighters do not.
Obtain social security when they
retire which is another issue
the goal behind three forty five
is to set up with the funds this
will begin to address the
recruiting and pay issue for our
state the recruiting and pay
issue our state is facing and I
do have a hell of.
Committee substitute in your
packet you should have.
Right.
That outlook and I'll explain to
you why we have a committee
substitute.
Care.
When we were reading the bill we
noticed that there were some
numbers that were not correct in
the original bill so that is and
when they should be FY are in
the analysis and captain cells
are actually helped me with that
analysis in so that's why you
have a committee substitute in
your packet we get to for this
to make sure that everything was
correct
and I we can discuss that
further but basically what
would.
Sorry.
They live in the.
Two thousand.
due to a number on the bottom
chart right there.
I can Mr chair
the committee substitute is
point two two five seven zero
three point one.
You
know we had loads of stuff.
The lady in the order your case.
Home care what I'm saying is
that basically.
What.
Notes here.
Well please.
Basically what this one would do
is a firefighter would receive
five thousand dollars upon you
meant that if the firefighters
is not remade remains in place
the fire department shall be
repaid unless there is an
extension waiting circumstance
if and so that's basically what
this fund would do with and
that's how we're setting.
And I have
Late last for here to answer
any.
Have questions about the number
of firefighters that this would
provide
in the future to that we're
hoping.
Or or any other questions the
motion to adopt the.
We'll go forward.
I move to adopt this substance
use.
I.
All.
Everything over the.
So I will go to the audience of
the one of the.
I just want to talk about
To help create parity with the
law enforcement they have a
similar fund that was created
last year.
So we're creating this fund for
we have a mechanism.
In a location to put funds in
the five thousand dollars is
spread out over three years
based off municipality
guidelines similar to house fire
funds distributed so that apply
for it and we managed by this
within state
verify similar to the same
process that on for I.
Thank you Sir.
Representative that you have a I
just Mr chair of stuff right
right right right right we.
I'm not going to get but I do
not I'm here really thought out
loud those wondering if you have
problems water problems the rest
of your question general
administrative.
You have something going on to
hear you talk about love.
Because yes my question but what
I'm telling you Mr chair I was
just following I was asked is do
I need something to I'm just
trying to figure out the changes
from the with the substitute
bill.
No problem okay good.
And again we're just creating a
fund that no appropriation for
right now that later can be
funded similar to the law
enforcement finance trade last
year and snapping funded are a
bill in place to to set the
recruitment and retention so the
money will help attract more
individuals currently right now
rate the parent is twenty four
hundred and two thousand four
hundred ninety four
beautiful firefighters paying
into care a and that number is
short on average even within
Albuquerque as an example we're
short for people we hired forty
five and we have twenty nine
meeting are academy
and that's just part of part we
have other departments
Representative.
Right now we were experiencing
the same situations where we're
looking for ways to bring new
talent to New Mexico to help
fill voids within our public
safety.
Go to the audience and see who
feared for.
Is there anybody here in offices
in the.
Everybody on the.
Is there anybody in offices.
Okay is forced to deal with the.
What are your.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
committee job The New Mexico
federation they were.
we stand as strong supporters of
the measure are you know we live
in this committee and I know
we're going to hear some more
today about number return to
work after both here
frankly frankly we we have an
opposition all that we do not
believe that that is a great
tool for recruiting and
retaining public employees for
our law enforcement or those who
are accuracy this is a measure
of what we've seen with our with
the fleas are done in in a
previous session this is the
measure that will absolutely
help with recruitment one that
we think is a lot better use and
targeted to see real tangible
results and so for that reason
we are as I.
I thank you.
There.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is a Lopez on
the local president of the
center firefighters association
Representative hundred sixteen
members here in center property
we stand for this bill see more
more for us to provide
recruitment around you know this
area we're hoping we're able to
provide some maybe outside of
the state as well using this
tactic and as you guys all know
transparent when it comes to the
public safety is is a pretty
fragile things so we just had to
maintain you know the interest
maintain their recruitment and
retention more often actually.
Thank you.
The.
Representative thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you Representative and.
Thank you those are.
You know before I get out of
here I heard a commercial and
they were given sign on bonuses
as so.
I would think would I mean those
people are reported to.
When they're in the this is an.
And I appreciate.
Eight of working.
What do you think that the five
thousand dollars.
Act I.
Mr chair all of my experts on
that.
Here Representative it helps
create an additional pool
there's several other field out
there and hitting a property tax
exemption things that we're
looking at to get people here
as long Madam correctly again
following some of guidelines to
fire fund was account that one
departments requesting money if
they don't have the personal
effects of the forty five
similar to.
Current laws in place within the
state that again is just an
additional tool.
We need to we need more people
to make sandwiches and we need
more people to at first
responders and this is again
just establishing the funds so
later on with in future sessions
or junior funds we can request
money to their we just have to
have a place to put it currently
right now it's unfunded and
there's not appropriation for it
and there's also no place to put
money for the work to get it so
this just helps create that and
hopefully again with some other
things going on with advertising
throughout New Mexico.
Outside of the state to help
bring that into it again it's
it's a thank you put the money
into Mr Chairman representative
and sent we have sort of a group
of cells that are going to be
coming and I'm not sure they're
all coming to this committee but
and I don't have the numbers I'm
sorry I apologize but they're
all sentences designed as
incentives of one of them is to
wave the for people that come
from out of state to waive the
out of state tuition requirement
for their children we're also
encouraging and there there's a
couple of others I'm not going
to discuss but
The other point that we're
looking at this we're looking at
the private sector to see what
incentives they can provide to
our public safety such as
lowering mortgage rates or
things like that just a little
bit this to help incentivize
people to go into these
professions thank you Mr chair
representative Kevin cells are.
So this fund this will be a
state funded.
Yes on.
Yes well the the account has
been created the fund in later
on appropriations will be made
to put money in it what kind of
money here Mr chair
representative what kind of
money are you looking.
How much is the cost to do that
so initially her not gonna to
down this.
So initially it would be five
thousand dollars over three
years per individual that
applies and goes through
currently like right now as I
said we had forty five that we
hired and we only have twenty
nine left
it's really a county fire had.
Ply and they have two left so
when you start looking at the
numbers it's not astronomical as
far as.
How many people so we need ways
to attract people so the real
it's there's not a set number we
know we're short on average most
departments are short about
fourteen percent other
department that's why we have
people held over we have people
who were working astronomical
hours because trying to keep up
and provide that public safety
service to the citizens of New
Mexico.
but as far as a solid number the
fiscal impact we don't quite
know we have to just establish
the frontier right now to get
people in there and we could put
a cap later on once we have a
funding source and Mr chair and
Vincent I haven't reached out to
do it go on record who used to
be a firefighter retired and he
said that they would be willing
to work with us to come to those
numbers so you will be seeing us
again next year but I think at
this point we're just trying to
get the mechanism in place so
that we can make this happen Mr
chair representative.
And captain cells are have you
ever seen.
It this bad not being on the
higher end.
We haven't and that's.
One of the parts not just us
with law enforcement and you
look at the numbers of how many
officers are putting in
Albuquerque police department
are mandated for twelve hundred
and they're looking at nine
forty three Bernalillo county
they're short fifty officers and
as you go and that doesn't sound
like a lot but if you're
Department small department any
of the other and you only have
ten officers and you should have
fifteen at fifty percent of your
manpower and those are things
that we're trying to put in
place to help recruit and bring
new people and it it starts from
the bottom up those new
employees contribute care
they're here for the long haul
we have a good retirement within
that and they serve their
communities and we want we don't
want individuals leading our
state to see employment
elsewhere we want to keep our
talent in New Mexico.
Thank.
Mr chair representative and get
themselves are I'll do whatever
I can to help the Alexander
what's important and I know that
when people call nine one one
their based on really bad and I
know I know of your department.
And I know that you have a
professional department of
trade.
Long time ago and.
We need to get all of our first
responders put back in place and
have a roster is full so we can
take care New Mexico and I'm not
gonna tell you look handsome
uniformed like the
representative would you I'm I'm
proud of.
The.
The uniformity proud that's all
I have Mister.
Thank you.
Sen here comments Mr chair the
market.
There's no question there.
Mr Chairman representative
I I.
Point owner Stan.
The difference between the
original bill in the committee
substitute.
Could you.
Show us what changes you made
well Mr chair representative the
numbers that were in the first
bill in terms of how many
officers there are in the state
of New Mexico incorrect and
that's why we went back and
changed and amended it.
Mr chair representative can you
show those numbers are.
Oh sorry Mr.
Mr chair and representative
Martinez we took out the rules
that I'm I'm I'm confused with
the other bill that we're
working on which have the
numbers this one actually what
we did was we took out the rules
on page point.
Compare the two you'll see.
We basically took out on almost
all feature for.
Representative Martinez.
Mr chair representative
Just a couple of other questions
Use the don't get social
security.
Thank you for your my
understanding Mr chair
representative is that president
Reagan removed that
And maybe my wrecked my expert
witness can help me with that
Representative chairs and
Representative Martinez.
Part of our retirement system
how we're set up within para.
We don't contribute to social
security as a first responder so
it's not just fired law
enforcement and other entities
like that so.
Even if we work before and
there's a limit fund we don't
receive that benefit and that's
another detriment to our
recruiting efforts here
we are.
At the end when we retire we're
basing everything off the
percentage we made base pay with
no
cushion of security.
Mr chair representatives of
captain is that is that a
federal or state.
It's federal Mr chair and
representative Martinez and the
reason that I know that is
because my mother does not
receive my father's federals
social security.
Understand that chair
representative for this is that
federal.
Our state is.
That that's to cross the country
yes Sir.
Thanks for all.
Mr chair representative for you
setting up a fund without
funding clued.
Mr chair quite frankly because I
didn't put in an appropriation
because I'm still learning and
this is my first year so I was
that was that was something that
I didn't know I didn't know
exactly how to do that.
So that's the truth.
I mean I could lie to you and
else Here Representative I pre
appreciate the truth the whole
lot more and this Mr chair R.
Representative I also say that.
As a committee member of the
Appropriations to DC this
happened we're we're pretty of
legislative statute that were.
Everywhere one of the things
that we tried we stay with Mrs
habitat as far out as a fiscal
year twenty five that we try to
it
the language funds into that
they do that
a lot of patients that we know
that.
The inner session to get this Mr
chair.
Mr chair Representative and
captain.
What's the reason for the
attrition in the academy.
A lot of time.
Chair representative
Representative Martinez a lot of
it is just.
People get into the profession
and don't realize the issues
that it causes as far as the
mental anguish the long hours
and low pay
when I started twenty years ago
I got maybe six dollars and
forty three cents an hour twenty
years ago and we have
firefighters now currently
qualify for welfare.
And some get in can't afford to
be in anymore and have to leave
and go back to their other jobs.
Mr chair representative.
Why having to work your with the
City of Albuquerque yes.
Mr chair representative why
having to work with the doctor
percent increase the salaries
chair.
Senator Wirth are working for
that we're just this we're here
right now I'm here for the state
as a whole a lot of departments
don't have the ability to send
someone to come talk you the
chief from the landscape County
the chief had become and he's on
his way up.
I'm here representing the state
not I'm not here as Albuquerque
we have things in place but
we're still short and this is
this is a of bills in a fund
that will help the state as a
whole.
All we were looking at again
twenty five hundred diesel
firefighters and another seven
seventy seven hundred volunteers
so there's.
Spread out within your own
community in Santa Fe County
you're looking at a couple
hundred firefighters we have
seven hundred and our department
in Terrill you have fifty six or
sell from last numbers those are
this is we're here to help every
it's not about Albuquerque our
municipality it's about the
state as a whole how can we get
that talent here to protect our
communities Mr chair
representative.
This bill is not going to help
recruit volunteers correct.
In its current language.
It's chair representative
Representative Martinez it's to
create a an ability to later on.
Get
those positions filled their
vacant right now.
Mr chair representative do you
see this fund.
being used once years.
Hi
Mr chair representative I think
this fund is going to be
designed to recruit as many
people even through the high
schools as possible going
through the process of the
training.
Just the training sometimes
people get discouraged because
it's very religious but I think
that will bring
this as I mentioned earlier of
Representative Martinez this is
we have several other bills and
we're looking this is sort of a
package at this point to try to
recruit it's it's really a
recruitment efforts.
Thank you Mr chair.
Representative the.
Thank you Mr Representative.
I
just have to drive so we're
working on of health.
Thank you very much.
Of this bill I see the poor for
the it is just another tool to
help recruit and retain is what
after we started talking he said
that for three years five
thousand dollars per year.
for misunderstand that Mr chair
representative.
It's a total of five thousand
dollars total there's.
Yeah absolutely okay so Fisker
Representative I just really
don't have a lot of questions is
because I don't want to make
this a good bill I just my
question would be how old cost
to that this is just a state in
or is it and what triggers a
first
that first initial payment.
They graduate from this is Sadie
calving the workers monitor or
after one.
Yes I was in person Mr chair
representative to this it would
actually be that that would be
part of the rulemaking and that
would probably come with the
appropriation for and that's why
we took several making out this
this time because we felt that
we needed to really nail it
down.
I have one last question that
and and that would be Mr chair I
Representative going to happen
here.
Well other than this is that I'm
getting paid enough.
Of.
Just the last three years
because when this movie star
going sounds like.
What else is causing them to.
One of the state or even joined
that you can think of
Mr chair representative
Representative also.
Part of it is just the changing
working conditions a lot of the
majority of across the board
people would rather receipts or
you deliveries or other things
of to control their time and
along that lines.
Most departments are actively
trying to recruit individuals a
lot of smaller apartments don't
have budgets for that educating
we try to.
Go out and meet with schools as
a whole working together
tomorrow for example is fallen
fire fighter memorial day will
have trucks out here all those
trucks around here individuals
from various departments from
the state will be talking to
perspective applicants to let
them know education I think is
the biggest educating people on
the benefits of public safety
and.
The passion I've been doing this
for twenty two years and eight
years of record for that so most
of my adult life is.
I know Sir.
Thank you Mr chairman that's all
Mr chair and representative I
served as a city planner in
Albuquerque for twenty years and
I worked very closely with
with the Albuquerque fire
departments in city planning
department
I would just also mentioned the
increasing crime and the you
know the we need to be out in
the in the in the front at the
front line we saw that during
the COVID and you know these
individuals were there day and
night working to to deal with
that issue but in in the in
addition to that.
The crime the homelessness I
mean they're they're the people
that are out there picking up
the people and helping them to
get help and so their job
descriptions have actually
expanded.
Representative repetitive in
medical stuff like to make a
motion okay your.
Sarah I have questions thank you
to see more Motors yes the two
of them were due to the fact
that Representative we would
all.
But he had felt okay
thank you Mr chair and thank you
Representative and thank you
very bill.
but package in thinking in terms
of tactics is.
We have to try and take this
shortage from all different
directions right so Mr chair
representative I think it's a
really good concept I don't
think the bills quite ready yet
I think you took out some things
that probably need to call back
in
and senator owing to
appropriations next passes I'm
gonna.
Suggests on page two section do
you to have.
reporting.
You might.
Please refer this to continually
and appropriations you're gonna
want database shows it's working
Representative please page two
section the.
Regional bill started with the
sentence contingent upon
completion of reporting.
Thank you took out the language
about what needs to be reported
and that probably can be done in
rules Mr chair so that's not a
huge idea.
but at the top of page two
lines three to seven.
Mr chair representative if we're
talking about pulling an
external.
Then within a specified in this
language something that
clarifies they will be external
high.
Otherwise we set up and.
A system for lateral moving
around to get the bills and
that's not going to feel when.
So that's the goal.
That language then is there
there and to.
Mr chair you representative she
took out the language about what
happens if the spouse gets a
great job in Colorado the family
has to pick up and move.
What happens then.
and that also can be figured out
the rules but it it needs to be
considered.
And Mr chair
I think the last thing.
Two things.
The law enforcement recruitment
and retention Fund has some
language about what to do with
the fund doesn't have enough to
pay everybody I doubt what's the
backup plan and I believe the
languages they will pay it out
proportional to whatever's
there.
So Mr Chairman representative
you might think about whether
you copy that or whether you add
prioritizing those departments
that have racial.
And honest that retention piece
this is a good recruitment
these.
But the law enforcement.
Tension fund there's the owners
at five to twenty and we just
passed a bill in this committee.
Mr chair representative that
would rate the bonus for every
year after twenty.
So those are things to consider.
Putting this and to strengthen
it as in our thank you Mr chair
thank you.
If the for what I think in the.
Thank you all are doing here is
creating a profit.
The case we appreciate it.
Once we get the money then we
figure out how to spend it.
Close this year nothing more.
The new way to put the money
aside if we can get it through
the for.
Thanks embedded no thousand that
federal government for money.
Thanks a million that were
around houses and Senate
appropriations.
He gets money into the fund
right now all this is is a place
to put that money until we get.
Wonder that.
That is we can fax it to.
After the debate my wrong or
more I.
That is correct Mr chair.
Percent of.
So but I do work for some of the
questions that were asked.
So Representative intends to
have a motion for do I.
would you
please.
Okay I need to retract that and
I would like to make a
suggestion.
That's what I want that's what
life is and figure out he's he's
he's a.
I want this to work.
Would you be interested in
rolling this let's work on it or
do you want to just.
What I distribution this is not
the rules this is the place but
the money you.
Right now we don't have the
money to study rules for.
Well we're doing here is making
a savings place a place for us
to but one of the if we get it.
I know.
So if you Mr chair in the house
of the floor.
I think
the thousands of the most of
these us.
The review the most.
Is not made a motion
or two thousand four and the
federal government through the.
Then through member doesn't lie
with the your body.
Representative market want to go
ahead and do whatever you want
to thank you Mr chair so I would
like to make a motion for it to
pass this on three forty five
all second amendment of the
most.
Well that.
Render yeah I some.
Do not stand on the do not sort
of.
Find out on the the committee
substitute.
Know fast.
Regional do not pass for House
Bill three forty five that they
do for us.
for Committee substitute for
House Bill.
The second amendment's Act.
The of the of the physically
that.
The the.
Appropriate thank you thank you.
This
can added that.
They'll fix it for the.
We will.
Exactly.
Bosses have.
Staff.
Not like appropriations.
Okay.
We're gonna go ahead
Representative the from every.
Thank you chair Roybal Caballero
pleasure to be with you the
several members of the committee
I'm joined this afternoon with
the representative Garcia who is
and passionate advocate for
Veterans Affairs will also serve
as the size vehicle sponsors
will also be by my expert
witness.
So.
Members this bill is prompted
because frankly there are not
enough transportation
opportunities for disabled
veterans at present
the department of Veterans
Services is funded at about
three hundred seventy five
thousand dollars that's
incredibly inadequate and and
more distributions that are
tribal communities almost
nonexistent transportation
services and many of our
veterans are in need because
they cannot find themselves to
their appointments medical
appointments and that's with
transportation and sports for
medical appointments and is as
you age or as you have
combat related injuries
obviously that need is greater
and it would it would be nice if
everyone in our community had
the financial means to be able
to a forty transport themselves
or have the physical ability to
transport themselves
unfortunately the field and so.
Chairman members this this would
appropriate about a million
dollars so that we would have
state why services including our
tribal communities moreover I
received a phone call to maybe
three phone calls last summer
because apparently something had
occurred I'm north of the
funding specifics were calls
from disabled veterans that they
were being cut off from being
able to attend their
appointments at the VA in
Albuquerque and I thought to
myself well I remember that we
had a bill that was supposed to
provide funding for our were all
rural veterans and there is some
but not not enough and then now
in Albuquerque is being cut off
all together so this point I'd
like to go Representative to
Garcia to win as well madam
chair Matt was children.
Thank you for your budget chair
you know if you all we comment
on backroom.
And.
What the representative saying
is a lot of groups and with and
if you look at you know most of
our veterans not all our Vietnam
veterans that are getting up in
age.
Worked fine on.
of the Vietnam veterans and come
down the line thank you well a
lot of work
will give a more forever but.
The groups you all seventy three
years old now well almost all of
the members of the.
If they meet maybe a little bit
older not much younger than what
I am and
My district is the rules
committee in New Mexico which
covers part of someone McKinley
small oven under to support
companies and did a lot of
native Americans out there in
the north I thought from all
times they're having issues of
transportation you know all
under this appropriation.
We all the money is not an offer
to.
But this is a footprint so we
can.
Trying get down the road so we
can make it happen because if we
don't from what we understand
now never happened and
Representative Martinez their
use of advocate for veterans
matter fact isn't that the
secretary of Veterans Affairs
why don't and while we're on
the.
What's the The New Mexico not
only in my district for the
industry the representative
told.
To all of the state of New
Mexico the problem you know
that.
Mr.
Representative.
Stock questions you wanna I just
add one couple minor things we
have approximately a hundred
forty thousand veterans in the
state of New Mexico all of those
forty eight there's about thirty
seven thousand veterans that are
disabled in some some of and so
imagine that of those there's a
subset that economically can't
afford to make those
appointments and.
Mr Chairman general going I one
of my frustrations I I know the
representative Garcia as we say
this before I get frustrated
with empty platitudes toward
veterans are we thank them we
salute them and thank them for
their service and then we have a
chance to vote overall what we
can do that so Mr Chairman we
stand for questions Mr chairman
that might get a one more thing.
Of.
There is a better you do not
have to be disable to over the
veterans hospital.
You know in a lot of these
there's like I said prior or up
in age and ill on the the even
more to the veterans hospital
and you know transportation is a
big issue New Mexico and it
always has been no I've been.
and Office.
Or ninety years ago.
In the village of the same
thing.
Maybe next year maybe next year
what we need to step up to the
plate in New Mexico and have to
make it happen twelve others
before all that are up in the
know we would have the same
problem thank you Mr.
The weather of course and.
Gentleman we are.
Really at is anybody here for
the legislation.
Anybody in opposition.
The most of the three dollars
believe I am the screen I'm not
in favor of the bill.
to
table it.
Terry Bryant.
Thank you very much for the
opportunity Mr chairman of the
committee my name is penny
Bryant and I am the
communications chair the
veterans military family caucus.
That will better currently
limiting the mountain I hope
that you found because like my
father who the were working
better and I suffer from PTSD
and I crave the security and
safety of living in a rural
community with less white noise.
And many of you know New Mexico
was the fifth largest eight the
land mass and has a population
of two point one million I
compared the city if you can
practice has two point three
million.
What that residents are
scattered throughout our state
many veterans prefer living in
these rural areas at my myself I
do what they're listening to
rural areas medical act I
important it be within thirty
minutes the VA and I myself
other veterans are not as
fortunate with seventy percent
of the veterans in New Mexico
over the age of fifty five
act medical care is extremely
important we already know that
rural Americans struggle to keep
the nation the medical services
they have to wait haven we can't
wait for a possible new fit
renewable energy or new path
break bill you get approved
these role medical doctor who
yes our rural that are in need
act the medical care right away
and the fact that would make
that happen through a rural area
transportation program they get
our back better your doctor's
appointment larger out this bill
is actually to create a new
program that the supplement the
existing program at the New
Mexico department of Veterans
Services currently run and you
live.
I think you'd like it would be a
grant and the grant called the
highly rural transportation
grant funded by the VA and
implemented by the the.
I transportation programs the
accounting for yours for per
square mile there is no cost to
participate in a program for
veterans.
Follow is that of the thirty
three County you are really
large land mass only fifteen
counties are covered consider
highly role in the state and
that is primarily role currently
only the following are currently
fifteen counties are eligible
for the H. R. P. T. services but
we actually have twelve other
counties that are meant to cut
off their considered make urban
and rural communities by New
Mexicos indicator based
information systems.
That is where the trouble lies
they're not small enough to
qualify for the a grant but
they're not big enough to have
better transportation programs
like Albuquerque lock.
The accounting for getting left
behind but the the just received
that request for transportation
to Currier deposit or even south
county they had to say no and
referred them to other providers
October give them a I know let's
help neediest regions gap
between you counties that
qualify for the a grant program
and those that completely our
lead up because they're not big
enough to be eligible for better
transportation if we can't keep
initiatives medical services in
our rural areas let me get a
better there was provided a
education to counties that are
currently being left out thank
you for this opportunity.
Martin.
Can you hear me.
Yes thank you I would like to
extend our appreciation to
Representative Cruz
Representative Garcia
Representative Castellano and
Representative Martinez ringing
this bill forward I am retired
meshed up first sergeant New
Mexico Army National Guard and
I'm the chairperson of the
military veterans leadership
council.
I'm here to testify on behalf in
support of house bill four oh
two.
I am speaking on behalf of the
following the following Military
and veterans service
organizations the illicit
association of New Mexico Army
National Guard the military
officers association the
association of the United States
Army the marine corps league the
navy The New Mexico chapter of
the purple order of the Purple
Heart veterans of foreign wars
disabled American veterans the
American Legion and the
association of the of the Air
Force as a military veteran.
Living up here in a rural area
of northern New Mexico this the
need for transportation for
veterans is an important the.
Right we need to bring forward
Albuquerque and a lot of the our
populated areas already has a
lot of
Supporting entities which can
assist the veterans in those
areas but as you get out of
these larger population areas
such as some again more awful
facts you are allowed to put
counties they lacked these types
of services so we are here to
support this effort by these
representatives to bring this up
funding for thank you very much.
Well is that what okay thank
you.
The committee no yes that.
The lady the committee.
The market.
The second.
Yes Representative in the
property act Senator of life in.
Where is the New Mexico
department of.
Okay.
I don't see there's no wonder
the recidivism donde chairman
that's a good question.
Hi I'm curious I don't see
anybody from there.
Remove the bodies state that the
favored or you the one of the
last two.
And if I hours the and going to
have to.
The grant program.
Of your.
you have an answer that on the.
I do have a promotion
representative Representative
office session Representative
grew up whether the offices.
from members both present voting
in the affirmative.
That would appropriate is going
to happen thank all of you know
you're getting a million dollars
I don't want I.
We have a full set of.
To get to it.
You know relate have problem
with.
That would be me and
The order pending appeal here.
Okay go ahead representative
Garcia.
Let's go ahead and read.
The.
Rio of of.
For the.
Four thirty three.
Here Representative.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee.
Although forty three with we'll
try to do is take the phone fell
off of a bill that was passed.
All of the old one sixty people
fast last year's.
In the new year of centered on
it.
Number three or something Mr
chairman and members of the
committee.
Of.
Photo will allow the agency to
guide Veterans developed more
mature the time of the war
accordingly.
Yes Representative.
For some but ladies room one
year with the prior year so
we'll have two years the
gentleman on the phone to
someone trying to do the status
of the office of the.
Well if you can.
That's basically what this does
nothing else changes.
Funding formula stays the same.
Just a surgical instrument well
you know I don't have enough for
windows could not provide
important services.
Cool.
Question from thank you for your
opinion
the other is anybody in support
of this legislation.
Anybody in offices in.
It's part of the legislature
great thank.
Yes are all all go ahead and buy
passed the introduction I am the
retired first started the New
Mexico National Guard to
represent the I am the
legislative chair for the
military veterans leadership
council we appreciate
Representative Garcia and and
the co sponsors for this bill.
to go ahead and bring a sunset
to this
to to the veterans personal
income tax exemption we are in
support of this initiative thank
you.
Richard.
I Mr chairman and members of the
committee my name is Richard
moody I'm a member of the
veterans and military families
caucus HB four thirty three if
passed would provide a dual
benefit it would potentially
attract for military retirees to
move to or stay in New Mexico
because of this tax break and
would show veterans that the
state of New Mexico values their
service to our country.
Since the exemption was put in
place last year letting it
sunset after three years would
be a breach of faith with our
military veterans the veterans
and military military families
caucus strongly supports this
legislation thank you.
The.
Session that.
I really believe.
What do pass on H. B. for thirty
three so.
I have any questions.
Romo who brought fact is that
the application.
Lotus.
I was a little upset
If you were.
With the market some of the
bookkeeper.
Okay.
Okay the no offices and so all
members present voting here for.
Representative
I don't know that.
You.
In a state of the that thank you
Mr thank okay Representative
Trujillo CL.
This
level of the field.
Your budget.
As.
I can.
Let thank you.
Christine.
Try.
For.
The.
This is a fair.
It is.
Of the server for.
Others he can.
Thank you for your thank you.
Whenever you're ready okay thank
you madam chair.
Of the.
For the house bill four with
seven.
we think the D. it's created a
presumption that the yes the for
preventing presents order.
If the problem of the possible
implement or.
Law enforcement officers and
emergency medical.
For more.
I have with.
With me a.
With the Michael Hohl general
counsel for at.
He is here thank you for
questions.
We could have the basically get
that you have a.
But he won't.
So with that in mind the
man's here basically what we're
doing this.
I think the last year request
the state that you know that
would cover up.
What law enforcement officers
and we do it now.
If we are we need in the for
example officers do the right to
the office to the the basic
referral and probation or parole
and then pair I have in the.
Thank you.
To move to.
There's a motion.
There's a motion made by
Representative seconded.
Thank you.
Okay Mr chair.
chair a committee number two two
five seventy three forty one.
Imported basically with the I
don't think I.
Eight two eight five.
And nine seven thank you and.
Six two eight seven five B. as.
On the
two thousand and eight.
You include an adult information
officer.
There is no doubt that they can
offer and need into the second
officer.
And the lift weights with the
fund over people the process is
that the server.
Question on the amendment.
Madam chair and Mr chair.
We're taking in and out online I
was seven that we are putting
and in at the end of the F. and
she.
Do you really want the hands or
not.
Me too they all have the same
thing every line seven and every
line not haven't.
I'm sure madam chair whether
restrictions.
Struck.
M. I. I and seven the work the
you madam chair and
The the the the people that live
in the bill so that logically
yeah a lot of it.
Madam chair and and Mr chair
then you probably don't want to
benefit need either.
Full full.
So.
No was my only question movie
reviews ever reviewed this
longer effective date.
I don't see a problem.
I don't see where it was with
the definition.
The word and the.
Or the in or out of the
beginning of.
Mr Chairman who have of
clarifying question presented to
us how will that affect the
number three.
The reason why our this.
Yes.
Well if we if we take them out
and what in fact for
the other two F. and G. are
being.
To see more they're all kind of.
Bill.
I see the same right now.
There was a.
And
the chair of the.
Chair of.
The the the striking a man is
basically a stylistic.
For.
That Legislative Council loses
and they're not necessary to
really look at for the
beginning.
Terms of law enforcement
officers.
A.
B. C. and and.
There's no need for an.
He's
this does that change.
From.
That the legislation.
So.
More and Mr chair that it's my
contention that it's not needed
in a hundred years the that's
why it struck.
Since I'm in seven and I think
it needs to be in Athens.
So.
Representative Representative
shares.
I guess the question is is one
thing because system going to do
the other yes consistent so
Representative that's the
offered appointed for the
patient and so that thank you.
Madam chair I
realized for several bills that.
And I I I would accept the over
fifty.
To amend my.
If that is out
there.
I would.
In the in
the women's.
So we have to so in order for
the record the.
Could you restate it.
Happen independent.
Again the hearing in on page
three eight five by the end of
the through line seven perfect
in the and and then on page two
nine seven eight thank you we're
just adding if and this is an
officer and see if you would not
have.
Okay so we're leaving basically.
Subscribe you.
That is
that so
We have a motion on the for.
And seconded and the maker of
the motion and seconded and
motion our parents.
And
then you can for so that we.
Go ahead and set that.
Is there any opposition with the
opposition's quick question this
might be for my clarification
are we able to amend the
amendment for the district okay.
You just need.
Parents of since you did we.
I can do it for.
I just didn't know if we could
act okay.
So it's been accepted by the
maker of the second and so now
we is there any opposition.
Any opposition office say no
opposition you have to.
It's a little.
To adopt a new.
As amended.
The.
Representative Johnson is there
such.
So we have a motion to accept.
The amendment and then as
amended.
And the proper sentence.
Is there any opposition.
Any opposition
no opposition we now have Mister
chair.
And amendments and amendments.
Thank you.
Shares.
Madam chair I think a pretty
basically please feel.
with that residents here Reese
will report.
They are expected you mentioned.
the the the the.
Michael Vigil general counsel
for workers compensation
administration.
So
Is there anyone in the audience
that you're speaking favor of
the bill.
Okay let me just check and
anybody online wishes to speak.
Okay so we'll go ahead with the
those in favor of the bill so
that thank you madam chairman
Josh Anderson without.
This bill we Representative of
state corrections and you know
corrections officers both the
tensions around the state some
local law enforcement agencies
and your score Committee I don't
the the German opposition as but
this is already in statute for
firefighters of firefighters off
at I.
Additional conditions section
which is let's all numerous
additions that are subject to
work on plans yes does not offer
all of those as we know the job
of the job through a little bit
different so.
Some of the things that some of
our policy folks
but we do know the statistics
show studies after studies have
shown officers pursued funders
correctional officers you know
folks who don't retired and
active military their issues
with PTSD and mental health of
far outweigh the public so we
just want to insure support of
all farmers with fifty vote and
urged.
Thank you madam chair.
The other hand okay.
You.
The
labor
I was able.
Because we actually we asked.
Thank you.
Thank you and still no one on
the line one person has okay one
percent online Mr Carter's
antique you may have.
Madam chair members of the
committee Carter Bundy with
asked me in addition to the
points already made I I I think
it's important to sort of put
this all in context that if
we're looking for things that
are going to be supportive of
recruiting and retaining people
I think making sure that
officers in these kind of
positions feel that they do have
mental health care available to
them and that they will be
taking care of when things go
wrong as they inevitably do this
is a really important step
you're taking so I want to thank
all the members of the committee
and we hope that you will pass
this as part of a comprehensive
set of ideas for improving
recruiting and retention thank
you.
Okay now go into opposition is
there anybody in the audience
those.
Anyone of health okay and now
online anyone opposed.
So
We're back to committee anyone
on the committee.
No question Representative
health problems.
Madam chair.
Representative.
How many people do you
anticipate taking let me back up
a little bit Madam chair
representative hi how many
people who qualify on under this
right now let me one second.
C. will live red is going from
chair representative certain
occupations see a lot of drama
a lot of.
First responders police officers
I can use my staff to see
tremendous for the New York from
his tragedy and things with your
doctor or whatever.
All school.
On.
Here's the.
I will see you in a year of
service you could probably see a
lot of things that would be
traumatic I know it was from the
one that started in my business
to us so with that dissipation
is this just for health services
this to put on on on permanent
disability can you explain to me
real quick Representative Madam
chair representative
madam chair right could I have a
controlled the.
The idea that were
Madam chair of representatives
and Mr chair
Right now
The the individuals that are
classified in this bill they can
already pursue PTSD claim
they can do workers compensation
act and if they do it under the
occupational disease act
this bill is discussing the
activation Act
And what it does is.
Once the person gets in court it
creates a presumption it's an
evidentiary presumptions kind
like a head start that once the
trial they they would normally
have and get you know a
psychiatrist or psychologist
communicating with the reason
the growth degree of medical
certainty.
Their PTSD condition is related
to their work okay so what this
bill does is says in essence
here alright your presumption
that if you get this diagnosis
of PTSD
if it's related to work
activities
The defense lawyer could
potentially but it with certain
types of applications
So if you.
In terms of the new numbers it's
hard to project the people now
can come before workers
compensation and file a claim
for PTSD and pursue it they just
don't have the benefit of his
presumption
To answer your direct question
Representative
are there going to be more
people that they just be easier
for that again it comes.
Because it's easier for them to
P. R. file case and pursue for
and be successful
You that's hard to predict I
just was reading and FIR that.
Came out
And some people are saying that
it may increase the number of
such claims
and we were just yesterday REC
just yesterday to you know do
some research and we really
haven't been that many claims
under the basically it's just a
few.
Hello Madam chair representative
on sure so what I'm
understanding here is basically
they can qualify now well they
can play now but they go through
a process a little goes a step
there do you have to confirm
that through
to six all district whatever
this would be removing that for
the the almost like.
Get of
Give automatic assumption that
they have it just for the work
that they're doing without this
this without going through the.
motions of having to to go
through the psychologist for or
any of that is that what I'm
understanding Sir.
Madam chair
Senator essentially you're
correct the date they avoid the
staff of having to retain or go
pay a doctor to give a
deposition and say this is
because of related to your your
appointment.
And they can say I'm in this job
classification I.
you know I have this medical
condition and and that's enough
at least to win the case absent.
Contradictory evidence from the
employer
if the employer came forward
contradictory evidence that they
may have to go resources that
the position of that doctor who
establish their case
so Mister chair representative
is basically granting on that
without the process is what this
would be used.
Of going around possibly
eliminating the process and then
the office of back backwards to
the the presented very presume
that you have PTSD automatically
because of your work and then be
player would have to then we
bought it in order to succeed
Office of other qualified for if
you thought everybody qualify
and so madam chair the bill I
don't want to make it part of
the and the of these.
First responders and stuff like
that but we we just heard Matt
madam chair representative of
how it's hard to retain these
these individuals and so
effective but police officers
say you know what.
Because I'm gonna tell you this
special mortician the things
that I've seen in my life I can
probably staff of those people
in this room and and seeing some
of the ugliness of sadness
disruption I see them I
understand that but that's our
job and so we're gonna see that
this is part of a for career
right and so with that being
said.
I don't understand how this
could I guess my question would
be if I was a police officer
said you know what I have
automatic that PTSD.
The status qualify to be out and
about working as an officer that
disqualified me just you know if
something was to happen
Madam chair representative.
Okay.
The example the tech.
The representatives reach sixty
percent the PFT okay thank all
of I the communities.
Question so madam chair
representative what I what I
would say is this you're not a
police officer carrying a gun in
a hop and a hostile situation
possible that having this
automatic diagnosis of state I
have PTSD.
Could because it and the way I
see it possibly because of the
liability to the city of this
part of where we're just just
placing it on yes but but the my
employers to let me go out there
and those.
Previous situation we're not
talking about running out of
committee we're talking about
people that are there that are
not not not for or even in my
system just mean that I don't
mean that disrespectfully Madam
I mean that it is a this is an
individual out there which was
in tough situations tense
situations and it could that be
kids become backed by automatic
so you have it and insert
allowing used to work.
For that because you're all of
the to to everybody including
himself statewide you still out
there give you reacted involved
that's why I think.
I love when you're trying to do
Madam chair representative I
just I'm afraid of if we take
that little step step of
qualified them first I think
that could cause other issues
and that's just for what I've
read in this last I love to hear
the rest of that is anybody else
as you know something to to.
My mind was somewhere else but
that's the only thing that
really.
Total all over Madam chair
representative and gentleman
that work I can't but the I do
on the related to the committee
that we think the state mobile
fire fire okay I I with the
state in the late.
A profit.
Well we're doing this right in
the state saving for these other
persons.
Thank you thank you.
Process some thank you.
Mexico Representative.
Madam chair representative.
Just just to clarify.
What inveterate.
Is in a contact no there's a
presumptive.
There's a presumption that C.
will have PTSD but that doesn't
mean that every veteran combat
jewel has PTSD.
So.
I hope we clarified that that
not every cop is going to have
PTSD.
In.
With a veteran.
Yes No
they're still process.
And I assume that a law
enforcement officer will go for
something similar.
Yes the VA is not just going to.
Presume because you were not
hospitals only that you're gonna
get PTSD.
You're still a burden of proof
if you're going to apply for
this benefit.
Am I correct.
The suing that this will be in
the same Madam chair
representative.
Expert witness.
The individual.
That Madam chair of
Representative Martinez
again this.
You don't get to this spot until
the qualifying individuals have
filed a claim caller complained
with the workers comp and
ministration.
usually by that time from the
events in question is already
happened.
They have how the diagnosis of
PTSD
and what this does is his it's
it's an evidentiary presumptions
that kind of substance that
substitutes for the usual burden
of proof thank you madam
Representative Martinez
so instead of calling that
doctor.
They can establish one of these
qualifying individuals
The state average the fact that
they have this medical diagnosis
of PTSD
and the century made their
private patient case now before
the judge
and absent contradictory
evidence defined in this bill as
to what the employer is allowed
to introduce
they would prevail and case
based on that presumption
against your question
Representative Martinez Madam
chair representative thank you.
Mr chair representative Mr
chair.
To further clarify.
I think page two.
Such.
Well.
We need to because of the
state's in that section.
What.
Once the first responders for
emergency medical services.
In your case is that knows.
Right twelve thirteen.
Following all of those lines
fourteen to nineteen th and
twenty cents the condition is
presumed to the I
Worker's compensation case
the they just do not have the
benefit of the presumption they
can still win the presumption
bill would make it easier and.
if this bill passes.
Madam chair
Thank you for the.
Thank.
Are there any other questions
from.
I just.
Your question is that this was
my first it's a question is
madam chair
It is the only thing that's
hanging me up is of.
If as a police officer that
person claims immediately that
he's happy to me is.
Is by claiming he is
automatically as is the some
does that officer get removed
from duty because not fit for
duty or do they believe that
going on and and and he still
works here she still works and I
they get in this lethal force in
situations and I'm talking about
this because of the
Our community issues and all
that can.
That
That officer
the whole health level for that
we causing we created a
situation of ability that's
really my only for for coming up
so if I may representation of us
I don't think your question is
the scope of all Representative
is proposing and that is a
burning question of years maybe
we should just.
You might need to ask that
question outside of the
discussion that's my estimation
I have known for over step Mr
chair.
Doesn't seem to relate to.
I don't see it and and and madam
chair and and and you're correct
that the officer and the
department that they were for
nothing to do with the.
The officer.
Amid firefighters here with fire
fire of qualified for the here
in New York.
And we could have a and their
department and if and this is to
Mr chair representative Gallegos
still possible no one can just
step up and claim we have PTSD
that.
Thank you for that clarification
there are no other questions and
what is the.
Your motion with Senator thank
you there's.
Second second by Representative
Johnson.
Second.
The.
So let me just ask this is there
going to be in the office.
Any opposition.
Mr chair you have
Responsible for twenty.
Thank you for.
The working.
I.
What I was trying.
Is.
We think that.
I
think
what
for the.
It was.
Right here.
This.
We're not.
I.
As well I.
Okay.
Good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee
Representative here we were in
the hot seat if your house bill
four for the for yes Mr.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee I bring you House.
For twenty four which simply
makes changes to the workforce
solutions department in terms of
Updating information it the we
we took the names of the
departments and we also need to
include the PED designate into
the into the.
District council as he there
isn't one right now and very
very other small issues to my
right I'd like to introduce to
you Mr Martinez who is.
Of.
In his maiden voyage of.
Trying to speak with you as a as
witness.
Like making board no.
He's just.
What is that.
He is the deputy secretary.
Doing and listen with the tax.
Mr chair members of the
committee again first of all we
like to think of Representative
Trujillo for us sponsoring this
bill and as she stated what
we're we're looking to update
the job titles in in the sack a
lot of the titles in your old
don't exist anymore the other
pieces we've got when we went
when possible we do look for
federal dollars for
apprenticeship program and we do
get audited by the US department
of labor and they've got it
little things like this to make
sure that the titles everything
correct.
Thank
you Mr chairman some of the
other issue is the inclusion of
the of of.
As a committee as I stated
earlier simply because we're
focusing on of CTE programs
throughout the state and it's
really important that
Representative for the PDP
involved is there for who
actually have the find the the
educators and connect with the
apprentice program so that the
students can move forward so
they need to be involved in the
game into this council and we
stepped.
Of those to the other is there
anybody here it's part of the
state.
There anybody in opposition.
Three more years offices.
Okay and that I think we're who.
Okay all right members of the
committee.
I would just.
The second.
no problem.
For.
Authorities so
I have a Representative role is
to factor offers active the
I have the opportunity to do
that.
More for the non show all
members present voted in the.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
what committee.
The
New Mexico.
The
love thank you.
I do have.
Also some seven.
With three year whenever you're
ready thank you Mr is yours
thank you appreciate that this
of the committee knows and
journos Representative Dennis
Michael Sanchez she she's
planning on being here Senator
Kernan HSC so she might pop over
and at that point we're still in
the presentation of my.
Request that she Mexicans as
well.
Mr as you support those efforts
okay Mr chair with me is grace
Phillips my experts from the
suspicion counties.
And I know Mr chair we are from
speaking hyperbole in this
building
but this is one of those
scenarios where when I say that
we're out of crisis.
When it comes to our staffing in
corrections it's January and and
I wish it was hyperbole but it's
generally not prepared.
And I'm I'm fully aware Mr chair
that can work bills are not
populations committee and and
for good reason of submitted
three times
but the vacancy rates are at
such an alarming level across so
many County.
That we have to revisit this
issue
and and the vacancy rates are at
such a level in corrections that
it is impacting the safety of
the workers.
it's threatening the safety of
the inmates and the other thing
I would submit Mr that I think
people don't think about
typically is it's also limiting
the amount of program that we
can offer our inmates because if
you don't have enough staff to
be able to safely left inmates
move and interact and offer
things like programming that
means that there's retain more
of their cells during the day
which I submit is not a healthy
way to to move towards
rehabilitating people so.
as far as I think it's good to
highlight some of the vacancy
rates so right now someone
counties at thirty six percent
Santa Fe County that forty three
percent Rio Arriba county that
fifty five percent and
Bernalillo county's that fifty
two percent and so the vacancy
rates are at what I was meant
arts extreme levels this is in
spite of the fact that we have
increased compensation rates for
correction workers and I'm aware
that
there was a bill passed house
committee that has brought forth
that takes the of the retired
cap from ninety percent to a
hundred percent I think that's a
good long term solution I think
that hello this bill is designed
to offer more of a short term
solution and so of.
What some of the the guards are
is this is only for three years.
You can only come to work as a
uniformed detention officer.
and you can only work a maximum
thirty six months you you pay
into the pair of system and you
don't get any increase in
credits are benefits as a result
of that we've actually worked
with the you to try to get
language in there intent to meet
their.
requirements which we we did now
obviously you're going to hear
from you so that I don't support
the bill we tried to make it as
limited and as focused as we can
again because we have such a
crisis on our hands and it's
this is our what I would submit
is a temporary fix to get us to
the point to where
we can have more long term
solutions that we just as a
legislative body to continue to
increase.
salaries I think that's a long
term fix I think the ninety two
hundred will help in the long
term fix but the question is
what we do in the short term and
so no this is not suitable but I
think it's one of the short term
help so we can bring because I I
again I think our staffing is at
such a level that New Mexico's
potentially gonna start facing
lawsuits from both employees and
employers and then of course the
the programming is an issue well
also Mr chair that I would ask
that my co sponsor
Representative data excellent
well.
Members of the committee
committee my apologies for
running in but I'm not quite
sure year leader lane has
started with
But I certainly wanted to this
bill because I detention
facilities are in crisis.
Over many years I have
demonstrated my commitment to
the conditions faced by those
incarcerated in our state the
majority of whom are survivors
of trauma struggling with mental
illness and substance use
disorders
especially after my couple of
years working for the New Mexico
corrections department under the
previous administration grew a
deep admiration and respect for
the people who walk into
correctional facilities both on
the detention sites the state
prison I every single day
because when those.
Kate Klunk behind somebody.
They're in that facility
together.
And the working conditions faced
by folks who walk into jobs
every single day where sometimes
there are mandatory and force
overtime.
Of winter on ships that do give
them room to three or exist or
refresh when they're full the
way to less families and loved
ones and other responsibilities
means that for anybody inside
the sales.
They are as safe as they need to
the
I appreciate that this is a shot
in the dark.
It is an effort to try to get
something
different with our vacancy rate
and it might not work.
Right now for me as a policy
maker it seems like we have the
obligation to the people who
work in this attention
facilities and the people are
there to at least consider doing
something different to see if we
might bring increased safety to
facilities so I'm with that and
the available for questions and
they come.
Mr chair.
We we do have a moment to
address the concern expressed by
parent FY are.
and I don't know if you want to
go to public comment we can
dress amendment after structure
anymore yes.
I can Mr chair so it is the the
two to five numbers point two
two five seven point five point
one the number of the bedroom.
You.
The mid.
Thank you Mr so.
Of these.
That.
Think about.
The gentleman.
Thank you Mr chair so this a
minute closes a loophole for
those striving that bar much
appreciate them of catching that
and so what this basically makes
clear is that when you do if you
return to work and you make
contributions the to the pond of
those contributions are not
refundable so this is just to
make sure that the fund stays
full we want to do anything to
negatively affect the fund's and
so this would just ensure that.
Thank you.
Mr chair would happen to the
bottom of the page six number
five paragraph that was already
there.
Madam chair Mr chair of rules.
Says the amendment says
everything use.
Rick Scott.
In has stricken and you put in a
new fortified and this board I
the old port I is now gone.
and I think you need you need
the.
Current number five to say the
retired member who returns is
entitled to receive interment
benefits but not title to
approve credit service at you
want to keep that part I don't
think you want to distract
twenty one.
To the top of the page seven of
Mr cherry added yes some I'm
consulting with Mexico I think
we if we look at the amendment
itself.
I think what are tourism pay six
line eighteen to page seven line
one strike for for.
In its entirety and insert the
following new paragraph and then
it would be these two combined
is.
For.
Okay and insert the following
two paragraphs four and five and
then re number accordingly.
Mr thank you Representative
protection of stretch of route.
Mr chair if I may ask think the
amendment wants to say.
On page six lines.
Six nine eighteen.
Straight to line twenty.
And then Senator.
District one eighty to twenty
then answered these two
paragraphs and then remember
accordingly.
Second.
Right right.
She's to.
Chills.
To support I.
Representative you let every.
He knew to do I would just
affected already with.
Mr chair the five numbers point
two two five seven four five
point.
Yes reserve for five five six.
And Mr the amendment offered by
Representative Figueroa would be
from with.
Yes.
Mr chair and move an amendment
to.
Okay it.
Yes that's right.
and then the management so that
it would have read on page six.
Straight lines eighteen through
twenty.
Inserts.
The new paragraph.
And then try to three remember
accordingly.
Then.
Representative.
That is really good thank you
thanks for note this Mr chair
we're gonna lemonade to section
the old section for insert a new
section for I and then we
members.
You'll tax act to be sixty six.
We're lines eighteen to twenty
are currently in existence
inserted the language and the
number.
The.
Do.
One more time yes teachers.
Is that a.
This is an important message
media yes your trust of the.
Right line eighteen through
twenty on page six.
Insert.
Online twenty inserts.
The language.
Those in the amendment
paragraphs four and five.
And then I remember.
The old line twenty one
paragraph I to be fair that six
because we inserted two
paragraphs right over the top of
the field for
the.
Resita Mr chair.
You will.
That would clarify even further
it's just normally minutes we
have number one.
And I think this is a and so are
this is a three so you're number
one distracting.
To.
Seventy four.
His claim number three.
Try that.
Yes okay the.
The flat roof numbers need to go
through this the places for.
We for on the amendment and I I
am the amendment you know
whenever I.
Number two the number I will be
number six chair.
On the original.
Will change all the.
Does anything Representative.
Right.
Don't have.
I think that.
Thank you for signing that no.
Tracking for only four.
The only consideration share.
For real.
These two paragraphs and then
the project is number five B.
six both.
There's.
All of them before.
Thank you.
Four of the five and.
Changed for.
Teacher yeah we're trying to
for.
To reach this goal.
Lauren I withdrew from eight to
to on page six the number one
thing that I understand the
amendment.
Mr chair I'm amending the
amendment so that it says on
page six direct line eighteen to
twenty all only eighteen to
twenty.
Insert two paragraphs.
That's number please.
Second we're keeping the number
I keep a number I don't remember
yet number six four.
So one if.
To.
We're not.
We're not.
The one.
The six through the on the take
Sen record.
Correct Mr chair that is my
admin admins.
them.
All right.
And I understood that the for
the movie.
Mr chair from in New.
The.
Your.
Okay.
So with that in mind.
Do I have a motion to accept the
amended amendment so.
We have a motion.
The.
It is that I share the land with
no opposition to the of.
The mom of three kids.
For most your vote what the
revert back to the thing the
doctor bill.
Thank you Mr chair I think we
made our comments so that we've
already sent questions
the importance of this in the.
And for those who are in favor
of the places to raise.
Two three.
Those are those who favor.
All right.
Hey we're federal review the
audience self that would be men
and.
In the hi there there will from
that side.
Thank you Mr chair
representative it's just
important insurance Mexico
detention affiliate also the
chair of the official standards
council Mexico.
Sure some of the information
programs needs with you and and
and reiterates the taste and
told you about the staffing
crisis or C. cross Mexico.
Right now we have several
facilities if you heard that are
operating.
Above forty percent.
Which means that we're asking
the other sixty percent all
covered most of those shares so
this is an impact on the
officers and detainees also
impact on families because we're
asking them to give us those
additional hours we feed our
families to come in fulfill that
obligation to our communities.
In the last year we've seen
as an ASP solution make changes
on on their operations server
myself which I work at right now
I closed down we because they
have enough staff to
appropriately manage that we
reduced by population that I can
house from four hundred to about
three forty which will affect
the services I can provide to
the community six other
detention centers and out to do
all the clothes and have formed
other detainees other
facilities.
Some were looking at trying to
ship some out of state.
And this is again because they
can't get their staff to come
they can't get people higher in
a perfect world we would be R.
eight full time employees when
they started we talking about
working twenty five to thirty
years will retire with this and
that would be great over the
last couple three years we've
been working trying to find
those people we change some of
our requirements for some long
hiring people who are both
twenty one years old which is a
common standard one point
dropping it down the team trying
to find these people younger
you're working on forced.
And even that those groups are
difficult work.
A lot of them don't want to work
a lot more interested in
technology and not being in
there communicating and working
in and with with the changes
were seen escalations and use of
force which in the media makes
it difficult to recruit people
when you're reading in the paper
that also was assault or to to
detainees were involved in an
altercation resulting in
injuries so we're trying to be
great if we challenge the
tensions related to the
administrators to bring ideas
working with account managers on
how they recruit and they're
things that they've been doing
offense successful we've seen
counties that have thrown a lot
of money and this trying to
recruit people we've seen people
have increased our hourly rate
for their starting officers as
much as forty six dollars an
hour they're still seeing their
vacancies we're seeing people
are built in retention programs
are saying if you've been with
the county I users incentive ten
years incentive for staying
thank but those excel people
once we have but getting people
to come and apply in trying
stated job this is not a sex
Ezzell.
People do not wake up and say in
school I want to go working as
tensions are working to preserve
Sir greetings venues a problem
for us everywhere everybody's
trying to reject I think we have
two facilities are planning to
be close to fully staffed both
nine percent.
This and those two facilities
have have staff less than
twenty.
So I really want to say that I
recommend to support this
because we need to try to give
every opportunity to get people
into the building office the
help that they need some help
the security staff make the
state department so far.
The with next of go ahead.
I thank you Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is
Katherine Christiana register
log in New Mexico counties all
thirty three counties support
the still in fact we have aided
our priorities legislation on
for all the reasons stated that
specifically for the safety of
the workers is something that
all counties are very concerned
about
in addition to that we want to
highlight that this is being
recommended is a temporary
solution to a very severe all
problem tension Senators there
is a three year sunset hard stop
July of twenty six on this piece
of legislation and so in this
there's some of the concerns
that we address we did have
conversations with some union
representatives trying to
address the concerns that they
have worked in our rails that
they would like to see in this
critical legislation thank you
to the Sanchez is forward and we
are just for.
Right.
Thank you.
Yes my name is joy amply
Einstein you go from the manager
I'm also the chair of the
managers.
And this is the right leader but
he also says the safety issue.
In our facilities thank you for
our office for a few minutes and
it's not acceptable to have been
right we have a hundred twenty
five plus the facility are easy
rate is about twenty five
percent which is significantly
less than some of the county but
it's still.
It is creating the staff.
So as we have
no affirmation process anymore
because if you wanna and record
we're hiring you.
And it's really of this their
positions that need to be more
vetted we need people with more
experience meeting people who
are committed to keeping the
facility safe and so all the
previous recommendations and
comments I would just reiterate
the urgent need for to pass on
this legislation.
Your inner self scale registered
lobbyists for San Juan county we
we support this bill for the
reasons stated by the
Representative and they got off
the to the point this is also
about the for the safety of of
the infants were.
There put in detention it's the
state's responsibility it's the
county's responsibility it's the
responsibility and say there's
not enough staffing bad things
happen in those industries
Mexico to sing that things and
these types of.
Thank you for.
Mr.
What we certainly see Mexico
state police as part of this
bill we appreciate Sanchez three
four for all the reasons
mentioned but in addition you
know this bill doesn't directly
affect the staffing of our
agency but it's very much
affects what our agency they
will do operationally
in several ways of for example.
Well recently asked for
additional support the in
Espanola we get that a lot of
areas but it's always an issue
whenever we have some sort of
enhanced operation of whether or
not the jail of the capacity to
be able to deal with those
individuals so state secretary
that operational standpoint in
addition we have officers
correctional officers are
assaulted or injured we often
are the ones that handles
investigations that we
definitely have seen.
That happen
when you know there's a a lack
of staffing and on the other
side talking about vetted
individuals when we have
correctional officers that
perhaps because of staffing
issues get hired that maybe not
as editor at the take people
that they normally wouldn't take
I mean we end up doing a lot of
those investigations to will be
have individuals you know some
of the contraband into jails are
doing different things like that
so did indirectly is very large
impact on us and for those
reasons we appreciate the
Sanchez freeing bill and we
stand strong for thank you.
Thank you for your.
You're only Parker.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and members of the port I won't
take up a lot of your time I
just wanted to to let you know
you know we to face all the
challenges everybody else has as
you know Bernalillo county's a
pretty large County we have a
one thousand five hundred forty
eight inmates at this time a
vacancy rate of fifty two
percent and just to put it into
perspective
We have
not very many corrections
officers that are manning the
ships so if we're at a fifty two
percent right we only have well
like two hundred of corrections
officers that are there or less
than actually less than two
hundred boots on the ground
manning each shipped so as you
probably figured there working
being forced to work overtime
and taking on heavier workloads
and we're also concerned with
the inmates it's creating stress
among the inmates when they have
to remain in their cells for
longer periods of time so as you
know we've had quite a few
deaths as well at the M. D. C.
which are very it's it's
horrible and heartbreaking to
hear every time something like
this happens but if we had more
corrections officers this would
certainly help and we've done
our part we've tried incentives
like everybody else's talked
about we offered our corrections
officers very recently a
thirteen percent increase and
our at our youth detention
center where at a sixty six
point seven percent vacancy rate
so we just appreciate your
support and thank you so much
for me an opportunity to
present.
Rural.
Yes.
Mr chair and representative in
some forever do we assist with
the dental facilities with staff
vacancy of them hopeful this
bill will pass by the committee.
As for the counting I'm living
in which is that our county is
from committee for the same
labor market is those are the
only gas which obviously we
can't do bills salary demands
even utilizing out of the box
thinking concerning sign on
Senate's longevity pay shift
differential educational system
program our pair of
contributions by the county full
insurance paid by the county
were still struggling to hire
qualified applicants I'm hopeful
for do passed by the committee
and I appreciate thank you.
Just
for the enough system to this
legislation.
I would turn back.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee options of that
population first off I do want
to say thank you to sponsors.
Representative have you have to
this is actually one of the only
return to work bills are going
to be built where of those
actually reach out to us for our
concerns we appreciate that we
do pre the staffing there's a
staffing crisis in our detention
centers and we want to do
everything we can to help the
session I know pay is not always
the issue I just kind of want to
represent the bank yesterday I
kind of love some of the job
posting.
Some experience for people to
come in a little bit higher rate
another someone had monus's.
Recorded have
been officers make.
Thirty five eighty nine and and
Chris.
C. M. L. fourteen sixty three or
six to sixteen point six Sierra
as well as high as twenty
would need earlier was one
thirty four.
Dollars.
I'm here to appropriations Grant
County fifteen dollars and
ninety seven cents sales to
forty eight the account one
million eight hundred seventeen
fifty starting to set of four
thousand six thousand dollar
phones on your account.
Thirty to thirty five thousand
dollars for entry level
positions.
Our.
We're good friends with I.
Just.
Twelve dollars because every job
is different why.
What I meant but I am in the
state of New Mexico so there two
thousand rate and.
In our two forty seven dollars
and.
Look at McDonald's dot com
twenty two to twenty thousand
dollars that's just a little bit
more painful branching fractions
officers this is a issue with
compensation and I appreciate
the the counties that were
mailed County just raise our
rate here our phones have been
have been talking about the HSD
issue that the issue since I've
been with us and it's never
really been interested a
significant I don't know the
wages regarding Russia's offer
several times to see the seventy
dollars an hour that is far too
low the other than of the
component this bill which is a
significant issue and it's going
to be a significant issue with
the next those well this is
applied to detention officers at
the county level.
So you're talking our
incentivized expressions
officers sheriff's deputies
police officers that are that
are plans to retire.
Without work for detention
center now we're gonna we're
gonna make the the **** the
staffing levels of these other
public jobs.
All of return to work as we take
our eye off the ball we don't
invest in our current workers
our future workers and we
essentially try to fix one
problem and we made problems in
other places when we when we try
to take over from over here and
have them call work work and
he's like to patients of course
people.
So I appreciate it I understand
the need for the for for not for
additional the for staffing what
we create more problems than the
fix and we never states the
court issue that is paying for
workers wage so we can route and
retain the best people in the
all of these public jobs this is
what we should be focusing on
not work and you know if you Mr
chairman you just have to
firefighters funds are locked
with the fund.
We said we would support
corrections one for for local
tension we would support for all
these are for positions you also
pass increasing both retire
Water post in the least increase
retirement income Affleck to
patients like the other things
that you're passing become a
relevant if you get this is a
half so we appreciate it we know
we need to build a staffing
issue but these.
Your bill's call for falls thank
you Mr.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee jobless youth with
the New Mexico department of
labor my colleague Mister Anders
laid out all those points very
well just a couple of other
things to talk about we always
like to talk about comparing our
state other states and health
things like and I know our state
might be a little bit for states
I you know if you look at a two
thousand nineteen survey by the
U. S. bureau of labor statistics
that means our the wage for
corrections officers twenty four
dollars and cents the media our
hourly rate was twenty one
dollars and seventy two cents
I don't know what we for all of
our corrections workers way I
have a feeling that a large some
of those fall below that the
report the wage so we are
clearly under pain our
corrections officers here your
New Mexico by you know I'm
certainly no expert on this on
this topic you know we we have
our public employees are
published CTE workers that have
spent years working on this
issue I I will say that you know
this is maybe the fourth or
fifth return to work bill this
is our so far this the session
and you'll probably be here more
I see there's one trend that I
think we see what all of these
yes that is you know big this is
a understandable issue we we all
understand that this is a crisis
I on one side of the argument
you have in essence management
you have you know management
saying this is what we think is
needed to solve the problem our
side of the argument is the
representative.
The ones who are currently doing
the job.
Clearly said this is not the
solution we do need help we do
need more people we need to have
better benefits we have better
pay that is what they're asking
for in in in the meantime
Management in again very well
intentioned fan I don't want to
believe them at all their
intentions are trying to figure
out a solution but they're not
listening to the workers who are
coming up with a good solution
all right you know this is
really going to be up to you all
the committee of which side you
want to listen to in this
argument I mean we have seen
return to work happened in the
past unfortunately those results
did not bear the fruit that that
people were hoping for when they
brought that up we're not
exactly sure why we think that's
going to change now that we're
trying to now but again it
really is up to you all decide
which side of the argument so
again very respectfully ask you
to to reject this proposal but
we do understand why this keeps
coming up and why the advocates
are pushing for so thank you.
Anyone else.
Resiliency yes.
Harder funding.
Mr chairman members of the
committee Carter Bundy with
asked me first I really do want
to thank leader Wayne
Representative Lara Cadena and
especially grace Phillips and
Katherine Posada for reaching
out we have had discussions I
think some of the ideas in here
you know the we told them that
we weren't going to be
supportive but we did try to
make it a better bill
unfortunately the general
problems with double dipping and
some of the specific worst parts
of it still really applaud here
so for example
people would have to people
would have to sit out for a
period of time and then they
could come back and double dip
and essentially get doubled
their take home pay
that's going to actually cause a
huge incentive for group people
who are currently working to
leave as soon as possible so in
the short term you're actually
going to exacerbate the
situation and I want to make it
clear we do represent
corrections officers and a lot
of these facilities and if we
thought this would improve
staffing and make it safer we
would be a hundred percent on
board we really would and we do
appreciate that the sponsors are
trying to solve this problem we
don't think that'll happen in
fact the way this one is written
it we actually in sent in the
short term a spike in
retirements because if you could
double dip you really owe it to
yourself and your family to go
ahead and start that clock
running as quickly as possible
so so in the short term we
actually make it worse the
second thing is we do appreciate
the attempt to the sunset but
three years where people can
start within those three years
the way we read it we actually
really be a six year sunset
because people could start right
before the end in twenty twenty
six and then still get their
thirty six months so are while
they did change it from an
initial draft where it would
include non consecutive months
are the two.
to somebody coming in twenty
twenty six and do this for
another three years
and and look if if there were
any chances for really going to
significantly boost numbers we
would have seen it when we tried
this in the two thousands to the
extent that anyone does come
back.
We also don't know that they're
going to be in those positions
the law does say that they have
to remain a detention officer.
But first of all we're not
entirely sure that's going to be
an adequate definition and there
may be some people were more
management types you still could
be classified as tension
officers secondly there's no
enforcement mechanism Perry has
told us that when they get the
information about workers it
does not include their job
titles just a certain amount
sent in by the employee and by
the employer so there's really
no way to make sure that people
aren't moving into management
jobs the third problem with
keeping people in entry level
jobs is it they should be for
when this happens complaints
were up before the EEOC.
And APDA was the entity that was
sued and they had to settle to
allow people to take the
management jobs I appreciate
that we that the intent here and
I really am grateful to New
Mexico counties for trying to
put the intent of the law but we
really don't know and it's
certainly uncertain at best
whether we can actually enforce
it and keep people on the front
lines
there are a lot of solutions
some of the solutions that
currently accounting some other
people have talked about
literally just went into effect
this year we do think they
should be given time but the
truth is this bill actually
exacerbates our staffing
problems in the short term and
then all the other problems with
double dipping where Perez's
sensually subsidizing payroll
will continue to make it so that
are newer younger people don't
end up speaking or staying in
the shops thank you.
Sean will be.
Thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee thank you
Representative lane for at least
giving opposition an opportunity
to inject on this particular
legislation we have been
advocate Lee against double
dipping bills for several years
and we've never actually had the
opportunity to be involved and I
I want my my hat is tipped to
you for for that as you know the
AP away we don't support double
dipping of any kind the reason
why we don't support it is
because it doesn't work it
actually exacerbates the problem
six years or three years from
now with fifty percent of your
workforce has to build their own
vacancies for double the money
there will be fire wind and fire
about we can't get rid of double
dipping because it's all we have
in half of our workforce are
occupied by people making double
the money the truth is is that
this isn't even a budgetary
problem this is a priority
problem I mean I I I love
hearing from the county and I
love hearing that there's a
group of smart people that are
working on this crisis but the
truth is there for people they
they know that the national
average of correctional workers
we fall short by over ten
thousand dollars a year if the
corrections department which is
the dangerous tough grueling
twenty five year job in the
state of New Mexico with violent
individuals and people that are
that are having troubles and
this rotating door of of inmates
going in and out when you're
competing with McDonalds and
Walmart to do that dangerous job
it is no wonder to me in common
sense to everyone else why you
are having trouble filling these
jobs it is the same problem with
policing the world is changing
these jobs are harder than they
ever work and we're going to
need to compete with everything
else around us double dipping is
not the answer we need to think
outside the box we need to come
together we need to.
Come up with the program that'll
help the state in New Mexico and
go forward and conquer this will
set New Mexico back this will
further cause prices to the
staffing situation in the state
of New Mexico especially in
correcting corrections and I
wish that we could be on solid
ground with management in
regards to safety and staffing a
lot of times we are but in this
instance regarding double
dipping we are not and it's
because of personal experience
of how it ruined our morale
because of personal experience
these individuals don't want to
come to another twenty years on
the line they don't want to do
it they want to come back into
management that's what we saw in
Albuquerque when we were sued
for age discrimination and we
had to let individuals go to
desirable inside jobs and
management positions which
they're still there today.
So please vote this bill down
let's get together in the office
session let's come up with a
plan that'll actually work put
our minds together put our
hearts together and try to fix
the problem instead of kicking
the can down the road thank you
so much for the opportunity to
testify today and I hope you
guys have a great day.
Just.
Changed.
Thank you chair but I was just
Cheney with the New Mexico
professional firefighters
association vice president for
over a decade firefighter labor
leaders and our members have
opposed this type of legislation
and will continue to do so.
Like my brothers and sisters
said before we appreciate all
the sponsors of this bill for
all the reasons that they have
given other reasons we oppose
and New Mexico professional
firefighters stand opposed to
double dipping thank you.
Mr.
Okay.
Representative Lane.
I think that know thank you Mr
president questions.
The members of the committee.
The representative there yeah.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Sanchez
Bring this initiative for
You know
I voted to
To the table this legislation
and protect.
It's come up.
And
In that then Mr chosen my
frustration.
I really can't see take this
bill this call or press.
And then let me let me state my
reasons why.
Because the the the last efforts
Mr chair in terms of bringing
this mission forward.
We always have this worker
lands.
That's presented on the part of
the.
The opposition.
And we we kind of have those.
Administration lands on the part
of their supporters.
And in this committee kinda
Just sided with the Germans.
But Mr chair but.
This initiative still gives
coming far from.
With no solution.
You know that's what's
frustrating is that is that the
the different parties come
before us with with the same
this is the the with the same
presentations the same
perspectives.
But there's no moving forward.
And I. women though
and maybe maybe having a
different perspective of
different plants in the next
committee which is Judiciary.
You know I kind of get us
somewhere I don't know but we
never done that we never had
this bill will want the
judiciary.
And given that second bite of
the apple from a different
committee and indifferent
Committee perspective.
But Mr chair I am concerned
about the issue of pay.
And and I know that
That some
Initiatives were presented in
the testimony in terms of
increasing Hey during the bonus
etcetera etcetera but what else
is in the mix Grace in terms of
pay that was not mentioned.
You know in the.
in those and support
legislation.
Thank you Representative Mr
chair members of the committee
and grace Phillips from New
Mexico counties and he certainly
every county has been looking at
and has been implementing rate
increases on average two to four
dollars some counties as much as
six as Justin mentioned to
increase the pay counties some
counties have taken steps to
implement recruitment bonuses
retention bonuses we have as a
as a
Opponent of our priority package
a retention and recruitment fund
for detention to assist with us
we also have counties that are
really interested in doing
APR campaign to let communities
know that these jobs if you're
interested in making a
difference in your community if
you're interested in affecting
people's lives these are these
are the positions that can do
that so we we feel that that are
that women and men working at
detention facilities should have
the recognition that they
deserve for the work that they
do so from a financial
perspective and a the PR
perspective we're we're we're
trying to make that work
but we are in a hole I know you
got our handouts that I think
illustrate what we're asking for
your help we're we're in a hole
and and works with detention
facilities for over eighteen
years and I have never seen this
level of vacancy and across the
board and it is a it is a force
multiplier in the wrong
direction this number is the two
around at that you Mr chairman.
That is thank you Mr chair
representative.
I was really struck
but how you offered us some
committee and in particular I
just wanted to appreciate that I
think this is complicated and
one of the.
Often hardest bravest things we
can do as policy maker is to
admit that we don't actually
have the answers.
And I heard you say Mr chair
representative that we hear from
administration in counties and
care for workers and I among so
many of you all as labor
champions you all on this
committee specifically as folks
that have built the community
power that are you also know
that there's workers that
sometimes find other avenues to
express their concerns and
considerations those
whistleblowers those those
people that we know and love our
neighbors parents the of of kids
that we know who are also
telling us on the side he like
we don't exactly know yet what's
right can you start trying
something different and I think
what you mean to Mr chair
representative is that it's
probably more complicated then
just say double dipping is the
enemy and the administration
should pay more what I know is
that every county of heard from
its findings every dollar every
penny every way to incentivize
workers to come in and they
still don't have worker showing
this is the way to creatively
imagine a different labor pool
I don't know how this will land
but sometimes when I hear
The toffee media slam on double
dipping I also think about how
the state workers have been
going to their jobs for shift
day after day year after year
decade after decade and I
sometimes see well maybe finally
this would be a way to rise by
that because they have certainly
earned those salaries they took
home all those years they
certainly here in those benefits
and maybe this is the we
actually appreciate what they
did in the state government job
all that time and that doesn't
mean it's a solution for every
career path that doesn't mean
it's a solution for other state
agencies or other government
bodies but when I look at
corrections when we just can't
find the labor work force to
ensure security in these
facilities I think it's time to
get into that mess the middle
for a short window and see how
it goes
chair representative for me that
right stuff in the state
colonies and at least we could
continue that conversation to
see what comes out thank you for
that Representative that was
really meaningful
And
but I've what I wanted to also
get that is that we're really
exhausting our initiative at the
county level at the state level.
Mr chair in terms of this issue
because of the the statistics
that
that the opposition raised does
put it at the it does put the
salary of the tension workers in
in a row the small way.
And
and I want to know if counties
Mr chair have exhausted their
gross receipts tax.
You know in terms of addressing
this issue and if we've done
anything at the state level to
possibly do
I kind of public safety gross
receipts tax increase
Mr chair this is Becca has a
public safety gross receipts tax
you know to kind of address
public safety issues within the
metropolitan area and I don't
know how much of that went into
law enforcement I don't know how
much of that went into other
initiatives I there's been
efforts at the local level to
increase gross receipts to deal
with public safety features.
So have any counties go to that
extreme.
Mr chair in terms of bill gross
receipts tax to go to the park
public safety that tail last of
the.
Increase a intentioned workers.
Or maybe even for Smith's
Chair of the department that
says senator question for the
industry.
They increases etcetera
etcetera.
Mr chair representative no I
don't think any County has
implemented a public safety tax
I do know that in recent
sessions there's been efforts to
earmark of G. R. T. increments
at one point there was a
courageous.
There was a correctional
increments that existed but I
don't believe that that is still
in effect I think that that
group the effort has been to
make gross receipts to prove
they are not to press to.
And certainly counties need to
be conscious of the races as
they implement them that they
have to be sustainable.
and they can't just before one
one department.
Yeah.
In the thank you for that made
some Mr chair the other thing
that I want to ask is the
workforce recruitment.
What does that entail Mr chair.
Mr chair representative in that
Mr chair I'm I'm I'm not
including to the to the
financial element.
I mainly looking at what you
guys are doing Mr chairman
members of for forces for
recruitment.
The targeted.
Not having to do with the pop
the bonuses the rate increase
differential pay increases the.
Secondary milling on the ground.
To to to reach out to people.
In terms of offering the
package.
You know and so what what does
that entail.
Mr chair Mr chair representative
there are twenty five different
counties that operate adult
detention facilities for those
counties also have juvenile
detention facility this so what
I can speak for each count
individual county is doing but I
do know that in in addition to
that because regular recruitment
that counties have been working
with workforce solutions to try
to access some of those those
recruitment resources those
betting resources I think it's a
practical matter you heard
administrator Porter talk about
just simply Tate changing the
requirements for the job
reducing the minimum age to work
in a detention facility which
may or may not be the best up
but it's really getting to the
point or you you heard out of
the chair actually talk about if
you have a clean record and
you're applying and that the
vetting the vetting has gotten
less rigorous and and that is by
necessity but it's not
necessarily a good thing.
Well Mr Chairman just use.
Have you reached out to our
federal delegation.
In terms of this workforce issue
with detention centers.
In terms of.
Possibility of utilizing.
The ratio loss.
Because we have immigration laws
in the book of Mr chair.
That look at.
Allowing.
Immigrants.
to come into this country to
feel essential work positions
that are not being met.
We have immigration laws that
I'll.
Of.
Immigrants to come into this
country.
that to fill specialized
workforce professions.
You know and I think this is an
Avenue that you all need to look
at and read in court in
collaboration with the federal
delegation.
Is that there's an opportunity
and you haven't explored it.
That means you're gonna come to
this.
This.
Legislature time and time again
without kind of changing.
Your your your your your your
plan of action to just what
you've been doing this sort of
thing in the box for the last
four five years in prison.
But there is that there is that
many.
And that is in federal statutes.
That in in in cases.
Shortages etcetera etcetera that
there is that potential no and I
can tell you that.
You probably have the
recruitment team.
Mr chair coming out of Mexico
so I'm not I need the some of
these countries that have large
pools of individuals that
meet certain criteria of
correction officer detention
officer in all but in their
their late teens.
The most mature that you guys
are getting that's how can for
them.
You know it's it's like there
there in half the amount that
they're the same here compared
to what they're getting in their
native country Mr chair I've
seen this happen time and time
again in other initiatives.
for example Mr chairman that
mission.
Thank.
Welcome back to an all French.
Initiative.
All French in the schools.
All French initiative and the
business sector.
Or corporations added another
means in French.
they they did the whole the
gamut of transitioning from
English names in their streets
and the in in their natural
settings the mountains that's
that secretary of the villages
they all transferred to French
what did that because Mr chair
there was a void the fiery
Crisis proctor's.
In order to better do their
Representative went to France a
recruited friends teachers.
Your success one implementing
their apartment owners percent
of of the Quebec pants are.
a French speakers.
And what's the Mr Jones to keep
us from doing that in regards to
this particular issue.
You know and maybe our work
orders and I'm here to the
filling the slot a bit by New
Mexico but we're not.
In the Representative or in the
EDD.
And it but we've got an
instrument Care within our
immigration laws that basically
allow us to seek out.
These positions for specialized
or workforce solutions and and
the central.
The man.
So but Mister chair I think.
You know.
This
is on the table.
And I do see kind of getting
these folks of and other
opportunity in the.
The
for the reasons stated.
Subject.
Of the market.
You Mr chair representative but
just a quick comment and then.
The question for you.
I was interested to hear.
The public testimony were.
these organizations have opposed
this for years.
And it's got here.
So I think.
What I like representative
Garcia talked about this time we
change our perspective the
little bit out of the box
My question to you is.
Do you only see this is a the
public safety bill or.
Can you expanded to.
Clinton meets safety filled
because the last staff.
The more possibility for
something going wrong in in.
The jails so.
Is is that part of what the
thought processes behind this
chair representative
Mr chair so.
I think obviously there's in a
safety there's there's a.
Corrections officer safety those
are those are paramount because
those that's sort of base level
right if we don't have that
level of staffing to our
security become such a an alert
issue
then we run into serious
problems but I think I will say
this one of the things that
thank you and also to see that I
was conservative one of the
things I think that this
legislature has done a good job
in recent years is it a push in
the criminal justice system and
make sure that we're we're
actually trying to to
rehabilitate people.
And not just punish them right
and so part of that
rehabilitative process means
that we need to as a society
when you are spending time in
corrections.
That you are getting whatever
help it needs and and I it's
going to vary from person to
person.
And so I think that's a good
push that we've had as a body
but the issue is if we don't
have staffing in our
corrections.
Then how do you possibly
rehabilitate people on the
inside before they get out.
Mr chair representative Martinez
if I might add
in my County and the Indiana
county and I'm grateful that
we've heard from our fantastic
administrator now but we
struggled and our county one of
the biggest payouts we've ever
the settlement over ten million
dollars was when we accidentally
left someone locked up in a
county jail for years who is
severely mentally ill who did
not get the behavioral health
care that you could nor the
court hearings or anything else
you just sort of lost and locked
up and forgotten for years
intern when my County was ready
to build a crisis triage center
where folks could go in without
incarceration without lock up to
get emergency mental health
services are crisis triage
center with empty for more than
five years because we had to
spend all of our money came on a
settlement because we forgot
about someone and left them
locked up and severely mentally
ill.
So then all the other folks the
condenser by HB under how do we
we've just open that within the
last year it's been an
outstanding resource for our
community but we literally
couldn't afford to fill and
staff are are building sitting
empty because of it payment we
made over ten million dollars to
someone that deserved it after
they've been left and forgotten
again.
That is not to say that we don't
have incredible people working
those facilities but they
deserve to be fully staffed so
that they can bring their best
to those positions in those
responsibilities every day thank
you Mr chair representative.
Thank you Mr.
Representative do we will.
Thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Sanchez for bringing
legislation I don't want to
repeat Mr chair representative
Garcia's comments in our history
with.
Return to work bills and leading
ladies that can go wrong and the
many ways they have gone on in
the past.
Mr chair it worries me to hear
people talk about.
Building on sites we have to all
be on the safe side to solve a
problem is to from all of this
and the counties and
corrections.
Current workforce.
Unions that represent them us as
a legislature we have to be on
the same side and we have to
deal with problems in front of
us.
This return to work legislation
is different from others that we
have C..
Mr chairman highlighting that
Preciado representative bodies
and that is the restriction to
work this uniformed tension
officers.
Well I'm.
Exactly Mr chair what that means
this is the first thing.
and that's important because
that's where the need is this is
targeted to a very specific
needs and it has that guard rail
a time limit out on the and the
which someone can apply it has
the Guard will of thirty six
consecutive months.
It's missing a key piece.
That will help deal with the
problem of incentivizing.
Current workforce to retire week
ninety days in combat the tire
income from our sheriff's office
our state police or other
branches where we already have
shortages we don't exacerbate
that problem.
To deal with our detention
centers and we cannot grow the
workforce if we just incentivize
the current workforce to step up
and come back to get the two
paychecks that's not going to
bring in the work the workers
that we need.
So I would really like to see
the line added in here that.
Only people who are retired.
As of now as of January first
can come back and I thought Mr
chair that we had seen a an
amendment to that effect it came
in the email from miss Dudley on
and I don't know.
but it would make me feel more
comfortable with this
legislation.
Mr Chairman responded up.
I have no idea where I thank you
Mr except for state rooms of
federal bring this up we did
have an interactive
in an effort to what I would
submit is to encourage good
faith dialogue I think and so I
do have an amendment and Mister
chair I guess what I would like
to do at the that said the
pleasure of the chair of course
but
maybe we can move the number for
discussion because generally
what I would like to hear is is
health the committee feels about
that change I have a prepped and
it was delivered within the
timeframe required
but I'd be curious to hear if
the committee thinks that's a
better change so
with that we can maybe move them
and I can discuss with them it
does.
repeated two years later I.
In on Google.
The.
That I sort of presented to this
committee.
to fix Google other than the
first amendment to got amended.
And because of a the rules that
I follow that I follow for
everybody I did not offer my own
movie to amend mobile.
so I hope you understand that Mr
chair no this was delivered well
in advance of today my.
Forty six
days ago.
Of the.
Thank you madam chair you know I
don't I have a here to present I
wasn't sure yes Representative
how do I present those he was
gonna directing I'm I got the
discussion the pharmacist to get
March.
Right.
J..
Both out because I receive them
so I Senator.
On this record I think you
should push the the your
amendment to the committee I
would just.
Like I said I mean I myself will
not break my own rules okay
service industries I don't I
certainly don't argument here
what is the rule that I'm
breaking just say for the the
fact is that to have your
amendment that presented to us
so we can process that that on
the committee twenty four hours
in advance and Mr thank.
Less than.
So
okay.
Loses second amendment do you
feel that you did not bring that
up first that would be perfect
thank you for explaining all
well Sir you're processes thank
you know what you're thinking of
us as you did need the amendment
to the nose to the.
It explained that chair I will
take accountability ask for this
decision so what we'd appreciate
it and part of my approach as a
policy maker is that I like to
be transparent and bringing the
bill that we brought forward I
am especially grateful to
Representative to get off for
raising this concert in
consideration in a good faith
effort we did move to have
Legislative Council where the
amendment and have the amendment
said over for myself what I'd
asked my sponsor and are experts
to consider is that we bring
this ammendment as a starting
point in conversation so that we
can here the the dialogue that
comes between our original
proposal the the marketing time
that Representative the head
office suggested I'm potentially
something else that might come
again from the expertise that
you operate so this was a good
late that we apply we did not
agree both of the amendments up
with the state that that's all
I'm asking of well I guess the
distinction there and again I
own this if I miss Steph was
that one amendment was coming
from us and what was a good
faith effort to recognize the
considerations and concerns
brought by Representative to get
off and then of course follow
the correct that committees of
direction if they did so but to
me it wasn't the starting point
that we brought but it was out
of respect and
of Representative Figueroa to
have this prepared and drafted
and of course of all of the
committees direction once we got
to this point in the
conversation.
Mr chair perhaps I should just.
I should move the amendment and
ask if it would be considered
friendly is that the more
appropriate way to do this.
The use of the of the the best
way I give you have a state
that's already written out of
this cool good.
The leader and with the.
They're not.
I just.
I mean like I said I mean I have
an amendment.
My own view.
Negative I didn't have a
program.
We need the wi there's before I
managed to do this
thank you.
No.
But I was going to amend mobile
without making sure that I
follow my own rules.
Mr chair we don't mean to be out
of order and follow the rules
again it was submitted to the.
About forty eight hours in
advance of the committee.
So I thought it be transparent
to present the bill as we
project forward and then get to
this point opposition to have a
discussion about about
retirement starting point should
be.
I suspect Mr chair that this
might have come about because.
In discussions about this bill I
did not previous return to work
bills I have stated publicly
that I can't support a bill
that's going to incentivize.
A large mass of people to retire
much earlier than expected it
ruins it affects the pension.
Is that a matching that is why
this amendment was drafted.
Thank you thank you sponsor
because I think this is very
important both for the pension
and to deal with the actual
workforce problem we will get
new people.
Retired people to come back well
that currently working people to
retire and get the two pages.
If we don't specifying set of
our deadline to have to be.
Goes into effect.
But.
That is what it is improvement.
In the form of the question.
To the Sanchez.
This is a friendly amendment
it's got on.
The.
Mr chair of the competitive
corner well done.
No no yes I you know I've
stated.
It is printed and I would Mr
chair and I was thank you Mr
chairman I would also I think I
appreciate hearing some dialogue
from committee as well on on
this change.
After this ammendment.
This
is the.
Please.
No effective because we have
enough of.
You too.
Is that a low disappointing two
five four four point one.
Mr chair I have a question on
the amendment proposed by raise
at all.
Representative OWLETT.
something that often you are
akin and that right.
The reason for the amendment the
service for.
And what it what it results in
terms of a contradiction.
Okay.
Thank you.
It's just part.
We presented before side
Senator.
We sent off to the.
In terms of the kind that comes
from the.
And I know that you are you
really sincere.
In line with that and and that.
Missy question Mr chairman.
Okay Mister chair representative
if we're going to.
And seriously consider a return
to work.
It has to be extremely narrow
crafted and this amendment in
particular.
Addresses the concern.
That without.
As written.
The bill would incentivize.
All current employees.
Closer time to retire earlier
than you normally would.
So that they can come back in
ninety days and get their
retirement and a paycheck at the
same time that is.
Want to call it financially
responsible thing to do if you
can everybody would.
That throws off our retirement
actuarial studies.
Predict retirements.
That.
A huge rush of people to
retirements thanks to retire the
pension negatively.
But more importantly in this
case.
It does not bring to really
bring people back to work it
just and satisfies our current
workforce to act in certain.
We want people to come back to
our current.
To fill in the gaps so we need
to specify and language with
this ammendment.
Not worded Mr chair awarded in.
This amendment.
To specify that only people who
are retired.
Present today.
So you can't retire in March
when the session ends on the
governor's.
You can't run and retire to
collect paychecks new pension.
it just.
Is an offer to people out there
who are already retired to
encourage them to come back from
thank you Mr chair thank you.
Sanchez.
That is.
He's still.
Representative zero make a
motion to effectively.
Mr chair and.
We adopt the amendment point two
two five seven four four point
one.
Provisions that.
The other rule on the on the
amendment.
Four two two five seven four
four point one amendment.
Hey
Representative Jarvis.
Representative Figueroa yes.
Yes.
Representative act.
Representative Johnson.
No.
On the leave and.
Representative Martinez.
Representative right yes.
Representative that officers.
Representative this is.
Question.
No on the.
One no.
The.
Bill number the second amended
bill.
So therefore.
Thank you.
To go over here.
Thank you Mr chair I believe
this
bill even twice and.
Is going to address the real
problems.
And I would like to hear from
the sponsors and the extra.
But how they might use the
timing of breathing room that
this might provide to actually
make substantive changes that
will bring in the workforce.
Mr chair so I think.
We have to understand this
problem is multifaceted so this
is a small bridge I think that
the change of the bill that
passed out of this committee
that changes the cap from ninety
to a hundred percent is one.
After we need to pursue.
We've heard that counties have
been increasing wages and that's
got to be the focal point as
well
it's it's the the nature of the
work itself is taxing to say the
least and then to not pay at a
competitive rate I think it's
because of doubly problematic.
So by doing a three year bridge
you've given.
Time for implementation of a
policy like for example ninety
to a hundred which incentivizes
people to stay in the work force
that might otherwise retire you
give counties a few years to
increase their their wages and
then maybe meantime you allowed
them to tap into a population
that's currently retired the
taking utilized to sort of fill
the gap in time.
Thank you Mr chair I think we're
gonna have to expand.
Expand that list of of tools
that tool box it will really
going to attack this problem.
Mr chair and sponsor.
If do you believe the voters
would choose to raise their G.
R. T. if they can direct those
funds for public safety.
Mr chair and representative you
get off.
I believe that New Mexico voters
wanted to write for themselves
and their families and their
loved ones.
Many years ago I was part of an
effort to increase the G. R. T.
Bernalillo county so that we
could point this money towards
behavioral health services.
For me those conversations are
intertwined our public safety
issues and concerns are deeply
connected to our behavioral
health issues concerns and I
would say yes if we could build
campaigns that were about
resiliency and trauma and honest
conversations about what's
happening in our families and
yes I think people would be
willing to make those
investments in our in our
communities to do different just
added another piece to your
first question whether we're
talking about educators and
correctional officers any of
these incredible professions
where people have been there the
source and undervalued.
I think we also need to
highlight and lift up the
questions about what it means to
walking to these jobs and have
any sense of morale when I got
to get the corrections
department I became an
instructor is mental health
first aid for correctional
workers for first responders and
so I got to go into different
prisons and help pretty intimate
conversations with people about
what they're walking into every
single day and the kind of
conversations that meant
sometimes after shift they were
sitting in their truck with a
loaded gun deciding if that was
the day they were going to end
their life and when they would
respect respectfully reflect
back to each other when they
would talk about how significant
their PTSD ones they would also
say things like.
It would just feel good to be a
little bit appreciated I want to
be seen and heard for the time
that I thought someone
struggling and I got the medical
care and that day they made it
through or they were able to get
some treatment or some
programming for the time I was
able to connect them to a
program on the outside so that
they could go in and do
something different in their
lives so I also think like money
matters it's always going to
matter it's going to be aware we
have to find as a state and
county governments real
resources to few people they
deserve but we also have to
appreciate conversations that we
can invite social workers and
educators and others to going to
the facilities every day and how
different kinds of conversation
and relationship so that we can
actually change what's happening
in the cultures of those
detention facilities.
Mr chair poses for taking this
a little off court you can
listen to.
Hi Mr chair.
This doesn't serve a purpose if
action is not taken in the next
three years radical action that
is beyond what we are currently
doing it currently considering
we need to come back with
suggestions for the legislature
how we can.
And the counties need to
seriously look at how they can
raise the funds to do this job
because we can't this is not a
long term solution chair.
I won't vote for this twice
amended
It can continue on thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you Mr chair colleagues
thank you sponsors for very go
forward I was listening to
testimony and
According to testimony
the tension officers experience
a not so sexy job if not safe
long hours of working chefs.
You know a lot of negatives
about the job.
What does that being sent the
return to worker for
experiencing those same
conditions.
You know how does that make it
any better for the return to
work for that's my problem at
and that's my thought on that
for me because I have firsthand
experience in it will have as
well and I've seen firsthand.
How.
Detention officers are not
respected and treated well in
the work force.
So what are we doing about
training and education.
And lifting the morale and
investing in our workers.
You know
That's my.
That's my concern you know and
and I.
You've heard before about
million.
children and grandchildren.
You know another one on the way
and my my desire for them is to
be self sufficient and to get
educated and have awesome
amazing careers but if we
continue the cycle they're not
afforded this opportunity.
So I just you know I I I
appreciate your concern I have
respect for the detention
officer workforce they need but
I don't think this is this might
be some of the solution
at just for yourself.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chair
representative I have a few
questions one of them is
something that was just recently
stated in terms of sort of this
three year plan right
and that's about would
increasing wages so my question
is what's the concrete plan to
do that I think it's Mr chair
Representative I mean I think
it's that's great to sort of
hold out
And when the state phone but
just sort of you know that's a
good way to you know give
everybody some hope right but
really what's the concrete
reality what are the counties
doing in terms of
the wages so that we're able to
keep those officers in the
facilities.
I thank you Representative Mr
chair counties we we've
collected data from the last two
years and counties have made
very significant increases to
pay too for six dollars an hour
increases in pay in the last
year and I I think what some of
those managers we say and San
Miguel managers in the room the
rates paid by four dollars an
hour and it did not affect their
their staffing levels we are in
a whole.
That is very hard to dig out of
and one of the things you know
that Representative Johnson is
talking about the importance of
training really important it's
important for retention for
safety but it's something that
you cannot do if you don't have
enough people to cover the shift
so you can find the training and
I I think you know
Representative Lane started with
the you know there's a lot of
hyperbole here and I I agree I
don't think we can overstate the
situation that we're in
collectively but what I can tell
you is counties have raised
salaries for sure.
And I think they're going to do
that as much as they can within
you know with cognizant of the
fact they've got it's got to be
sustainable for also working to
have this legislature hopefully
passing fund at detention
recruitment and reimburse at
work and retention Fund so that
we can also keep employees by
giving them retention bonuses to
enhance their base salaries but
something to keep in mind when
it comes to detention facilities
is that counties or independent
governmental entities so I can
speak on behalf of the
association and certainly I
interact with our members a
great deal but every counties
going to have its own plan and
it's going to depend on the work
force is going to depend on the
labor shortage and it's going to
depend on the resources but
we've already demonstrated that
counties are raising the wages I
just workforce and it simply
hasn't been enough.
Today to.
Madam madam chair representative
and I think part of the problem
is that of correction officers
have started out with a very low
wage so that even if you raise
that six dollars an hour it's
still not where it needs to be
so I think that you know the
counties and whoever is
responsible for figuring out how
to and probably some of us here
as well to figuring out how to
raise those wages
so they're real wages so that
they're they they're
commensurate with the job that
that these officers are doing
right
So the other questions that I
have is in terms of I know that
that some of the counties have
of miss Mr chair representatives
have implemented bonus programs
I see the billboards in
Albuquerque about that right
five thousand dollars in the to
me that's not a lot of money.
so my question is how how many
workers if you know that how
many workers have doubled the
bonuses
brought in how many workers have
the bonuses you know it's the
state.
Representative share I don't
have that information I would
have to ask all of the counties
that have implemented bonuses
but if you give me a little more
detail about what you're
interested in a lot of follow up
with them members okay so
basically my question is how
many how many workers have
proposes to track that mixes
maybe a little bit more
concrete.
Okay
Mr chair representative
The other question I have is.
So say this passes
and we're bringing workers that
have already retired do they
come in at the same rate at the
left or do they start as a new
worker in terms of their wage.
Representative Mr chair under
the strict narrow confines of
this bill they would come in as
a uniform detention officer and
it would be that salary right
not at whatever rate they had
when they retire that's that's
the the the most desperate need
is for officers who worked on
the floor and detention facility
and so those are the only
positions that would be
available for a retiree to be
hired into and to work in so Mr
chair Representative does that
mean they come in at the entry
level that.
Enter level wage
Representative Mr chair every
county is going to have a pay
scale that will be whatever
their pay scale is for a
detention officer and those
positions and that was so it's
going to vary by county but it
would be it would be those
positions on that pay scale so
maybe of Mr chair representative
so then they would possibly get
experience credit and that might
place them on the way scale
from.
Of the Representative Mr chair
depending on the county if the
county counts that it it might
be but they would still be
within the band for detention
officers not lieutenants
majority is security chiefs that
kind of stuff all right
all Mr chair representative and
then early on in the
conversation I think I heard
discussion about
mental health.
If the inmates who are in jail
because of you know their own
mental health issues is that
the letter correctly.
Send Representative.
Team the as is the case in many
states New Mexico detention
facilities and prison system
have become our default.
Landing spot for people
struggling with mental.
So then my next question Mr
chair representative is.
What do we need to reduce the
numbers.
Two separate and mental illness
and our cars what I mean to me
it seems like that needs to be
part of the plan terms of
producing the population of
inmates absolutely Mr chair
representative Chavis I couldn't
agree more like I said my County
is certainly a big investment
today to have this crisis to
your center that includes that
went up for folks that may be in
the middle of a law enforcement
engagement or interaction
instead of those law enforcement
officers taking them to the
county jail they would have
previously we're not trying to
especially solidify the enabling
legislation.
The officer's room to bring
people to the to create the
crisis triage center again they
will be in the cell they will be
locked up but they will be
getting twenty four hours of
care and assessment to help
stabilize and moved on I was
also impressed to see
a coalition of counties in
eastern New Mexico New Mexico
coming together to do a similar
triage center in eastern New
Mexico to that same effect so
that those counties can share
resources out of place where
they're struggling constituents
to land in the middle of Christ
and hopefully this version there
instead of taking people to jail
where they just don't belong.
Thank you Mr thank you Mr chair
representative do you mentioned
to counties for at least one
county in another region what
can you tell me what the other
counties are doing.
Mr I know several County has is
implementing a similar program
and I actually talked about this
a little bit on house bill two
during my comments on that I
agree with representative Cadena
I think that's the model that we
should push for.
I think there's a lot of people
in our system that have mental
health or drug addiction issues
that we can deal with on the the
front end and do a better job of
serving them and and and lower
costs the taxpayer so I know
that my home county is is
involved in that I've been
involved in those discussions
with with different stakeholders
there and then Mr chair let this
Phillips said she knows of any
discounts thank you I really
love this question
Representative Mr chair because
diverting people with behavioral
health needs from a criminal
setting has been a priority of
our organizations and counties
collectively for many years now
and it was actually a priority
that in the early two thousands
was identified by our law
enforcement and detention by
Rick council that said we me in
fact I met Representative
Martinez in the very first task
force that we convene to come up
with strategies for how to
of make sure that people who
need behavioral health response
are diverted from detention and
I can tell you that
It's it's led to a number of
legislative initiatives this
legislature number of years ago
created the rise fund which is
now in I think ten count for
eight eight counties which is
funding things like on the back
and there's a transitional
housing services and and to the
consequences and Sierra County
these medication assisted
treatment and several of our
counties there is at crisis
triage facility internet account
for only County Santa Fe County
curry county had a collaboration
with a local hospital where they
were too young people in the
emergency room instead of
bringing them to jail so there
there are a lot of efforts to
divert people the work still
needs to happen you know we
definitely need the support in
that regard but I'm very proud
of that collaboration that we
have had with the Human Services
department in the department of
health and I think we're
stronger together in terms of
our initiatives in this regard
and if you look at what the
detention population was in two
thousand sixteen it was about
eighty five hundred people on
any given day in detention when
we got to come six thousand a
day and and that may not sound
like a big reduction but that
that is a that I I think it's an
important reduction in efforts
to make sure that we're
incarcerating people who need to
be incarcerated and not people
who are simply not seeking
services in the community.
So would love to have a really
long conversation with you about
this effort but that is
absolutely a priority we Fund
crisis intervention training for
law enforcement in detention
like Representative Cadena I'm a
mental health first aid
instructor we sponsor mental
health first aid training around
the state COVID really put us in
a lot of that but but we need
your support to help us to get
out of it I think our priorities
are aligned.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Review Representative that.
Thank you Mr chair I.
Do not pass on H. B. three forty
four to pass on the.
Twice amended.
Fourteen.
I'm scared by some of the.
With the house House Bill three
forty forty four and.
As in.
Mr chair.
Assistant to the.
This is just an ordinary bill.
Is a substitute
for the.
Hi
Pass.
And so.
HB three point four as in the.
Sorry about the placement I was
committed to.
We have a second on the second
we have a second okay.
I
do think there anybody else that
wants to that question.
The reserves now thank you
Mr I thank you with me that.
We will get.
The
last year.
thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative for.
Attempts to address all the
issues that you.
Rep which
I'm very well aware I have do we
for this.
The situations we stand in the
media all the time.
I live in County and.
Regis what we hear going on.
I have.
Senator concerns.
And that is that
And I think Miss Phillips an
annual well I recognize that
these are systemic please visit
than just occur are.
Yes in my personal experience.
The Cibola County.
And then the economic developer
for that area.
seen firsthand.
The the cycle you in recent not
recent.
Cycling in and out of employees
in the corrections.
In especially in detention
officer positions.
Mr chair and representative of
really just a quick story of
how.
The failure to pay.
The failure to provide benefits
to address the budget the high
benefits
That detention officers face
because this is a physician.
That.
Should have begun from the very
beginning with a high salary.
And with the other
working conditions benefits.
This is an example Mr chair of
how employers.
Should have recognized from the
very beginning the hardships
associated with being a
detention officer so it's not
just
We can't just throw two dollars
four dollars or six dollars
increases those of someone
else's mention I can I think
Representative is don't even
begin to.
However the the.
The longevity of the.
Failure to pay.
That doesn't even.
You could even get close to that
in the example of using it and
see what is that in my son's
high school class
they did a fantastic recruitment
they were trying to recruit from
the high school students and
offer train and offer all
incentives and in that
particular community which Mr
chair is familiar with and
others in that particular
community there are very few
employers and but we have for
this and we have a huge
The disabilities and it's also
an area that's been used to
house we're other counties can't
house they bring them to Cibola
County I don't know the reason
why they do.
So.
One of his or several of his
friends decided to follow in the
footsteps of other family
members I'm going to.
The detention officer or
whatever this training program.
They did not even last I don't
think the amendment authority
here
the conditions for.
The working conditions were
totally stress
they were afraid to report.
What they were faced with.
For fear of retaliation fund
management.
So across the board Mr chair
representative we heard story
after story this was in the
early two thousands.
story after story about.
One of the work here you don't
want to work here you know what
if I go to page five to one
County what effect is simply
self because I thought that
training right they got the
receive the training they could
grow and everyone's telling them
no that's even worse if you go
to these facilities there even
worse and everything's being put
under the under the
Whatever the issues are not
being addressed management's not
addressing this.
So there's there's a lot of.
History in systemic issues
associated.
With this line of work I mean it
just hasn't changed and I heard
this I went to Cibola County in
two thousand and the year two
thousand one and I think that
this Phillips very on top of
that when I first took over
That's a lot of years.
Of lack of attention.
And a lot of years of failing to
pay Mr chair along the years of
failing to address.
Problems that employees.
For fear of losing their low
paying job because it's their
only thing although Mr chair
will say that that these young
people not only works there but
they also have to take on a
couple of other jobs because as
it turned out the became family
and we need whatever just began
after their families wasn't
enough to working because of
working part time also.
For more time
claim something else whatever
rate they have to maintain
several jobs because that the
tension job corrections officer
job was not sufficient to begin.
And then they were being
subjected to all these horrible
conditions and then they could
talk about so I have to just
a couple of questions related to
what I don't know if that was
representatives of miss Phillips
brought up.
And I don't think you answered
the question misspelled
something.
Fifty PM the question
Representative Travis but
If they return to work.
Will they return.
At the level that they.
I know that is no.
The question then is is the
position that they're taking.
Considered an entry level
position.
That's very different from the
answer that you gave which is
depending on the county
independent on.
Has there pacing.
Scale.
Right the question is is that
position in the position.
Yes
Representative Mr chair.
The detention officer position
is an entry level position.
The the part of it that I wasn't
sure how to answer was they were
there might be a pay scale
within that entry level position
and that's going to vary from
county to county so I I can't
answer your question about that
the position would be entry
whether it has one dollar figure
or range it's going to depend on
the county so thank you Mr
chairman thank you Mr so that
putting money for your cap on if
that's the case and employee if
that's the case and I'm coming
in is.
Okay all right that scales
associated with what I bring to
the table.
Experience skills knowledge
previous training certification
whatever all those.
Factors are that I bring to the
table as a plus then my hope is
that if I'm returning to work
them into the place that
whatever high scale and it's
light because I'm here bringing
all these things to the table in
hopes that I'll get the highest
state has paid on that scale so.
Questions.
That's just the way it works
right.
Competing for position here so.
The basis to questions
associated with that.
What is.
Will this return to work
employee be able to collect and
their pay scale whenever they
come back after pay scale.
Cost of living increases for
those years that they will be
working whatever the cap was
thirty six months three years
whatever that is temporary fix
that's one question.
I'm Representative Mr chair my
understanding is they're para
retirement payments would not be
affected by the return to work
that's the way the bill is
drafted so if there were the
cost of living increases they
would have that just as if they
had taken a job outside of
government right so they would
they would have the same
experiences that they were you
know working in at Texas
detention facility or they're
working it also observe or
someplace else it Mr chair so
the only difference is that the.
There it will fit they will
receive the increases for the
fact that their contribution.
Representative Mr chair I'm not
sure I understand that that
question there they would the
way the bill is set up they be
entitled to continue to receive
their retirement benefits as
they would if they were employed
in another job outside of the
detention.
Thank you Mr chair.
Okay so that makes it even more
problematic for me.
Because then what I'm seeing and
I'm agreeing with much my
colleague.
That.
This is David M. as it was
presented temporary fix.
The problem in my thinking is
that we've known for years I did
check I just trace that two
thousand one when I came back to
New Mexico to take.
Opposition.
It was already a problem then.
And I already Mr chair for that
for years before that there was
a problem and that's why they
try to create a generation of
family members this particular.
To to follow in their family
members footsteps right because
that was a sure.
Employee pool.
So if your father and
grandfather worked there your
high school senior you're being
recruited here that's your
family then that's the
recruitment if they used in
those small communities so
It becomes problematic from my
standpoint because if we keep
doing temporary fixes because we
face crises.
And I'm I'm very sensitive to
that Mr chair all we're doing is
creating a revolving cycle of.
Problems because what this does
them is.
They receive the receiving
entitlements.
They're coming in at whatever
pace scale we qualify for one
one.
They're going to receive cost of
living increase.
So the question is who wouldn't
want to and what are we doing to
address the systemic problems
the questions have been asked
forward over the line committee
members about.
This being a systemic problem
and there was a model
Representative
the model that Representative
have enough.
Mention was a fantastic models
that's one huge range earlier
County has also begun a model of
intervention I guess for lack of
another word intervention Mr
chair.
The.
So my point being that these
models are just now coming into
place and we have no way to
To quantify qualified there.
Kind of a faith in the questions
were presented to.
Ask could not be answered I was
also interested in that.
So all the weight all across the
board.
People resist I think referring
to right referee trying to work
as double dipping the in this
particular situation it's
probably the most.
applicables because of what we
just described is happening even
though we put in the three year
I was trying to find a three
year.
Thirty six months
Somewhere in the bills to for to
all the sunset somebody referred
to as.
What I'm afraid of is what about
Mr chair all of those employees
that have held the line.
I should have left.
We are still struggling.
That can't give it up because
this is the only thing they have
for them.
And for their families and their
subjecting being subjected to
all kinds of horrible conditions
but they can't leave what is
that going to do to the morale
what is seconded due to also Mr
chair the
It reduces.
The strength of.
The unions in this case
representing those employees.
The strength of being able to
park in on behalf of their
employees for higher rate.
For better benefits for better
working conditions it just sort
of.
Minimizes.
that.
And so I see okay I see Mr chair
of of the issues I appreciate
wanting to fix the problem I
always want to fix the problem.
Especially when we see it first
hand right now we are seeing it
firsthand
but I think I think that.
Over and over and over again
there's a reason why this
committee.
In other committees with
different faces have not passed
this kind of legislation because
it creates a whole new cycle of
problems in the TIRS management.
From actually looking at long
term solutions.
One final question
And it has to do with.
I was trying to understand the
pair Aspin doesn't.
So.
Currently working for the.
They will continue making their
contribution.
The employer will continue
making contributions.
Researchers okay thank you Mr Mr
Chairman representative so that
I'm sorry I was just knowledge
and heading out in the comments
of researchers alarming.
Something in right.
Thank you
And I'm not feeling real well
and want to get out here and try
to go over to make.
If the employer and the
employees and making
contributions.
What happens is that the three
year when that employee goes
back to.
Retire do they compound their
retirement Mr chair no stated no
additional service credits under
para when they return to work so
Mr chair.
Representative there everyone's
making a contribution the.
So that contributions going into
this big pot for everybody
else's coming in line to retire.
Except for the return to work.
Employees in this particular
case.
Mr chair yes that that is what
keeps the funds all of.
So Mr chair and Representative
that was a huge concern of the
representative of the
And I hear about the phone call
before we I I so concerned I
think that many things just look
at this I think the thing I
wanted to well one final
question.
Mr chair representative.
In all of your.
Discussions with the counties.
with the
Well everybody at the table that
I know that you've made an
effort to really work with the
unions and.
They've made on their statements
pretty strong but yet they've
been willing to.
Process Procellariidae and work.
How much in somebody raise the
plan so I'm interested in the
long term plan.
Half the county.
I.
I don't know if I statute or.
Is obligated to have a long term
plan in place a long term all of
what they call loans.
The bill call it different
things but plan whatever their
plan is counties have to have
the funds in place to address
the growth and expansion of
services on the programs and how
the usually a five year or ten
year.
and these plants so I am
interested in knowing how much
the counties are investing.
In on their own without state
the state funds that you asked
them in jest Mexico how much are
they.
When you are five and ten year
plans to break the cycle.
Of
Having an issue with with this
with this problems I'm
interested putting in the
investment for to address it.
Without the state.
Just what does it say how are
they addressing employment
across the board and then in
particular to.
Detention facilities.
Representative Mister chair I
don't believe there is a
statutory mandate for the kind
of plan that you are describing
and I'm checking with the
managers who who are familiar
with that so I I don't believe
such a thing exists what I can
tell you in terms of you know
you painted a picture of a
chronic problem in detention
facilities what I can tell you
is before COVID we were.
At in fact even the year if you
look at the at the chart in
front of you even a year to
comment we just a little bit
short of being fully staffed.
I that's not to say from time to
time the facility might not
struggle but in general we never
seen before the circumstances
that were and.
For the county staffing
perspective it's not when we
first met in two thousand one
this is this is very different.
So Mr chairman for
Representative in the Phillips
do you have
The indication that you have
data that indicates that because
the roof I just saw this.
So you're saying that because
of.
We're in the crisis that we.
Representative Mister chair I
can certainly say during the
COVID we experience this
dramatic drop in staffing
I guess I I don't know that I
can blame COVID but there were
lots of things about COVID that
me operating detention facility
more challenging and there were
options for people who are
unemployed to be able to survive
or if there were other
considerations what I'm telling
you is that in the many years
that I've worked with detention
facilities this widespread
precipitous drop in staffing at
before and work and work.
For us here help to help us the
adults.
And the
Mr chair and.
To.
Yes I would.
Who are who have seen the track.
On.
Here is that correct because
it's hard for me to believe
because I have.
That that just since also family
members working.
Who are hurt on the job.
And who literally had to
take work comp other sectors of
and then they were account
recounting all kinds of this and
this is the a long time so.
I just don't want to say it's
not true.
But it's just hard for me to
believe that for years and years
and years and years of hearing
about problems and then for
years and years and years with
them depending on return to work
with.
And thank god we have these
other little programs certainly
now finally finally
unfolding.
The they still fail to see that
the effort on the part of the
counties to offer two dollars
four dollars or six dollars
increases.
to bring in individuals.
Act entry level a sales
representative positions.
And all the other things that
were mentioned are going to.
Help.
Correct the problem.
I think it's a bandaid.
And I don't think legislature's.
Legislative force I don't think
we for.
To continue.
Branding program problems.
We need to be looking at.
Investing in the model program I
would have preferred to
appropriations.
package bill that would have
incentivized for all the
counties to help with your
health.
And bypassing the.
whatever system you want to call
it I hate to call it anything
because our human donor.
for whatever reason he needs.
So that's.
I would have liked to see in ten
years that twelve years that
twenty yes that is this is the
plan this is how we're gonna how
we gonna funded this is how
we're going to execute it
implemented.
Make an initial investment as a
state and then he will make sure
that we continue.
So Mr chair and.
Representative I think you I
think the we've been in position
we're trying to make a fix.
This is.
So it doesn't work it because
it's awful other.
you don't want.
You don't want an uprising of
employees versus management.
You don't want to see we walked
out because of conditions I
think you want to.
I think that's what I anticipate
that happen
This is just about but anyway Mr
chair and representative for
all.
Questions I have thank I'm not
gonna be able to I thought I
could if I heard the discussion
I thought I could entertain the
amendment and and fifteen other
changes but it goes against the
principle right principle of
looking for long for
alternative investing in them
and avoiding the pitfalls that
we may need thank you for
principal be subjected to thank
you Mr.
The.
Thank you long before we go to a
both guys gonna have property
taxes.
But the that those Hey your
number one.
We're talking about that the
person that is going to retire.
That could include level.
That is the level thank.
That is the work right.
The three levels of.
Reference Mr chair at entry
level position and I believe as
I understand it there could be a
pay range within that.
One of the there is a.
Here is a okay that person that
requires its retirement.
And I'll go back.
And that low position at they
were Dale this.
The the little touches and one
two three and four to that
effect.
What I do wrong in the field
within the like that.
And
at Mr chair I think every county
is going to be different in that
regard we would be.
So The New Mexico everyone of
the year so this person that's
coming that would probably come
back in Senator level services.
But who is willing to say that
that person is doing an entry
level job who is willing
contract that.
Mr chair that's what the law
would find that they would be
serving as a detention officer
which is a position that has the
job description and connected
detention facility so that the
duties are defined
Representative Lujan now.
Who is going to track that these
processes.
That this retired person.
It's really.
Our feminine is due at the
district level job and not
something that was going to do
that Mr chair if I understand
what you're really asking is
who's going to keep the council
accountable.
For making sure that they follow
laws up there.
Representative Lane that is
exactly where the code
of where you can keep me
accountable.
Mr chair so what what I would
submit would happen is if you
have
a unionized workforce which
exists in many of these
detention centers.
And you have someone who's
retired comes back to work and
then move up into a supervisor
position I'm suspecting that
that's going to be I hopped
student highlighted
and so that I think there's a
built in enforcement mechanism
with employee some self.
We
will get away from that because
all of the movie showed me that
we have no way of state of
what's going to happen.
Act relating fruit anything.
Would you back did you idea is
simple some of the salaries that
were mentioned is roughly yeah
we're offices making sixteen
Bucks an hour right.
On an average.
would you give them about eight
hundred eighty dollars every two
weeks.
And after all those the
deductions on everything that
guy that person
that person is taking a lot of
six hundred seven hundred
dollars we.
This is the.
Retired.
Thank.
About that same amount but he's
going to take another two
thousand dollars a month four
hundred.
Thank.
Correct roughly were left Mr
chair I did run the math but I
think you're examples is but I
I'm not exactly perfect but it
would be a very very right.
And there's a thing okay.
Correctional officer on board.
Okay we did not have trouble
retired right.
In the photo back to work that
whatever day of this.
And if you love when we still
have this nice.
To our friends.
Right.
A nice easy job forgets and ICC
assignments even though they are
by April level position who gets
a.
Mr chair I I I would say that
when it comes to these kind of
frontline correctional positions
there is an easy question
position.
Mr
the other this positions like us
is that.
In the office and all want to
the door of the people coming in
at fifty fifty is that you don't
you have to be here correct
officers and there is to level
the state funds.
I would agree Senators.
That.
So.
Really that live retired grow to
love affair has also threatened
to income.
The New Mexico we've been making
seven hundred dollars.
Or less every day we.
Just
to be there.
And the reason for their cause.
He's going to get all the.
Should be done.
Well the other the that a group
that came back is going to be in
a really nice I.
This lets us.
I jails are going to do exactly
what that we wanted to do
whatever.
Well they bring in the the
and lady gave me another phone
and that.
The broom and handed this
collective of COVID now.
And now that.
Thank you there is a one.
They don't even they have no
incentive at all to make life
better for that person who was
talking on the money because
they know now that they can fill
these positions.
A retired people that are
getting lots of extra money I
can afford to work they're at
that stage with the money.
We're gonna take a little bit of
something for the future.
Hello everyone you employees
of the reunited this officers
right now.
We do that and pay them and keep
them.
The.
Now we have all these retired
people there yes the one thing
to do so.
For the people people there.
There are over New Mexico or.
Your that's an offering there is
user it is with fifty six.
Early fifties.
No no incentive whatsoever.
To help.
From the federal level a real.
Representative seven of the New
Mexico level.
And the what I notice okay.
I did two years in Santa Fe
remember.
And I started a new level.
And then I lived in two years I
knew that that was not my kind
of dust.
He is very helpful to know that.
Not for me the based on.
And that the other one through
it I got if there were wanted to
or not and they didn't they
didn't come in and think monkeys
at the end of the shift
the home.
A matter of months making
distributed.
On that side of the aisle in the
home.
That's the way it works and
there is no incentive at all
of the families of these ideas
the related ideas he's been all
these people and bring them
back.
There's no incentive for them to
do anything especially the
current new young people that's
out the door.
No longer need to train on the
other people that you know.
It would be very those other
people at that same way that
were paid this young person that
we're not afraid anymore.
This is really a great time yes.
This is really a great idea and
I hope we will go to the voters
will vote for that will.
Because proved to be we don't
care for our younger generation.
The only thing we care about is
how we're going to save those
counties money.
The the the correct and
laughter.
What.
The security.
At the casino is making like in
the Middle East.
I would.
Follow.
The Billboard billion well the
thirty for the casinos offering
that this doesn't dollar bonus.
And you know what.
The security guard at the sea
though.
There's.
The goal.
It would stay there.
No so we're doing the county
figuring they were regular.
Yes now other news that.
What makes their money.
And in those homes.
And they're both in the room red
and they got lots of money.
Though we're and they get hired
for another two years the
another four year contract.
And these are lovely but in the
meantime.
Four young person feel making
thank you know seven hundred
dollars this we do we.
About how much you're doing for
our younger generations by
passing this legislation.
But that is the office that we
have a proper motion.
madam secretary hello.
Representative Chavis.
Representative Figueroa yes.
Representative percent yes.
Representative Figueroa no.
Representative Johnson no.
Representative Martinez yes.
Representative right yes.
Representative Terrazas yes.
Representative Ezzell yes.
Vice chair Roybal Caballero no.
And chair on one the lady.
Sixty two.
This is the best.
Yes thank you Mr chairman Mr
chair.
Your bill's
continued.
The ticket.
One hundred.
So for your information I
learned this thing.
I wasn't able to the one is.
This.
Senator.
Senator.
How.
He ended up.
This this is.
Senate.
No.
The.
The Senate.
Is.
Since.
House monsters presents with the
senator.
Senator.
Members of the so we.
Yes.
That that I was.
Your.
Okay there.
Thank you all for.
Six.
This is.
And.
Because.
Eight
dollars.
Those.
As.
A lot of.
I.
Yes.
I.
The.
Yes.
At the
stop sign.
This
one.
Yes.
To the fact service.
Is.
And.
By the officers of the.
Our state.
Six
wanted to do.
This these.
Knocking.
Persons.
When we first.
You can reach our.
Because the station with the.
Number one.
Two
things that are not.
Yeah.
I.
Can
the.
So.
To.
To.
The
our.
These little things
in the past.
Is.
I.
Eighties now these are.
Full is.
By.
We.
This is.
The US.
You too.
There's one.
Well as.
It is.
I like to.
Is.
I.
As Mrs C..
Processes by right of your.
She
has to figure.
And.
You should.
This
is.
They all.
This is.
This is.
So.
Issues.
Do
you.
Question basically what.
What
was.
This.
US.
That
was.
Right.
Covers a certain.
Just
call.
Josh's issue since.
She said it was right there
just.
Right
right.
This.
What
are.
Is.
Our.
Years.
What is.
Is.
Is
this.
Working out to.
Sell.
Right.
Martinez.
The.
Nothing
state government job.
We are we do.
For the most.
Eight years.
To get a.
Is that.
This.
The the actuals for angles.
Your record is.
Members.
What the.
Yeah.
More.
Yeah yes definitely.
Thank you.
There's a lot of answers.
We have.
Four.
Yeah.
I.
G..
To all persons.
Is.
Because.
For three years for the.
At the.
I had
a stroke this that would.
Find reasons.
yeah.
Let's hear that.
The.
Want to back up the Mr chair on
line so on this one of the over.
Right the number you ready to
get ready.
Thank you Mr I realize that the
system the floor shortly so I'll
keep my presentation brief so Mr
chair Senator Steinborn a
discussion terms return to work
the way that this bill
difference from three forty
fourths of hoax in the context
of corrections what this bill
seeks to do is it allows a law
enforcement members who retires
to return to do one of two
things one is serve as a school
resource officer which is think
of police security in local
schools for service as a court
security officer four point
within the bill this is from
discussions with certain members
of the union I did exempt out of
the county of classic County
that is higher in populations
that six hundred thousand and
the reason why I did that is the
focus of this bill is really to
provide help to our rural school
districts so our rural school
districts often times don't have
a lot of resources to hire
something like a school resource
officer and so for example my
Community Aztec.
Date of work with their local
municipality aspect provides two
police officers that serve as
the school resource officers for
the school district and so this
bill would rely this bill would
allow police officers who are
certified return to work
in a limited role in serving as
a resource officer our schools
and then I also heard from our
courts a lot of times what
happens are shared speed
staff our courts for security
and so this would allow for
our our younger members of the
police force to to be actually
on patrol instead of in the
courts running security and so
Mr chair I do have the same two
amendments that I would like to
offer so that were these were
just between this bill and three
forty four.
The.
Good.
Thank you for.
Thank you I got it thank you.
Thank you very much.
What would also.
Yes.
I.
This question.
Global.
Rating going.
Thank you the number on the.
Amendment thank you Mr chair so
the first amendment is point two
two five seven five four point
one so this is again to address
the concerns of
pair up and Mr chair this has
the same technical that we
discuss in three forty four so
we would need to.
change this amendment to make it
consistent what we discussed
earlier and I what I think the
change needs to be Mr chair so
within a minute the first
program says on page nine comma
lines two through and I think.
What should readers six straight
ten.
All the way strict tractors
tracks record apps for.
And strike I in their entirety
in the thank and in certain of
their of the following two
paragraphs four five and of to
remember accordingly so not in
other words we need to strike
lines two through six on page
nine.
Insert these two paragraphs and
the number of ports.
We will.
Food.
Mr chair.
The difference between the
amendment.
Floor and were in the original
bill.
It looks exactly the word for.
