And we have a little
housekeeping. We are not gonna
hear house Bill 241 today, um.
At the request of the sponsor,
it is rolled until further
notice, and we are going to hear
how Bill.
2831 and representative
Chandler, Chairwoman Chandler is
here.
So you may begin.
Pump. Thank you, Madam Chair,
and thank you for the
accommodation. As I said, I have
a thing going on in tax as well,
and I don't want to miss the
vote there. So I appreciate your
willingness to adjust. Um,
Madam Chair and members, this
bill is um.
Brings forth a handful of
amendments to the information
practices Act of the state.
That act is.
More than 40 years old and has
sustained very few amendments
over the years and we're
bringing this forth thinking
that it will add some efficiency
and certainty and how we
approach certain record
requests.
Um, you'll be hearing from the
municipal league, um,
representatives who I have with
me, Madam Chair, and their names
are Allison Nichols and Rebecca
Martinez about the um explosion
of information requests and
everyone in this room, I'm sure,
Madam Chair, including myself.
It is very supportive of the
values behind the information
Practices Act.
Um, in that it affords the
public and the press an avenue
to seek information to be
informed about government
operations and to, you know,
hold people accountable and
elected officials accountable as
appropriate.
But
It has also turned into
something that is very hard to
manage for municipalities and
counties in the state, and it's
becoming increasingly expensive,
and this is a, this is, these
are small changes we recognize
more work will need to be done
over the course of the summer
perhaps. The bill does suggest a
working group that will look at
the statute as a whole, to try
to address some of the issues
that the counties and the state
have been um really working on,
but so this thing does a few
things.
first, it um it allows
governments to charge what we
call commercial requesters and
example of a commercial request
to Madam Chair would be
something like LexisNexis. They
are scraping information from
local governments in the state
on a daily basis, and it has the
potential really for squeezing
out those individuals we really
want to have access to
information like, like our
citizens and like the press, so
it's a small chains. It it's
simply.
allows um local government to
recoup some part of the cost
that they incur in addressing
those um requests.
It also sets up an
administrative framework that
will allow government agencies
to what I would refer to as
cure. Right now, if an agent, if
an agency or an entity uh
governmental entity fails to
reply appropriately, the person
can go immediately to court
without giving any notice to the
local government that they're
not satisfied with how the,
they, they responded to the
request, so this would allow a
framework that gives the
local government or state
government, obviously, um, the
ability to cure that they have
to give the government notice
that if they've not been
satisfied with the information
that's been provided so that the
local government can cure, and I
think that will help facilitate
and perhaps um encourage
discussion between the parties
before any litigation is filed
and lastly, oh, there is an we
do create a statute of
limitations to bring suits for 2
years right now in the statute.
There is no statute of
limitations for someone to file
suit against a governmental
entity, and, you know, just
about everywhere in our
statutes, there's some sort of
date certain when um someone has
to, you know, make a claim, and
I think this is only fair and
appropriate, Madam Chair. So
with that, I don't know if my,
my um colleagues here wish to
add anything, but if you do it
briefly, um, because I'm sure
the chair has a full slate of uh
items before us. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, and thank you,
Representative Chandler. Um, I'm
Alison Nichols of the New Mexico
Municipal League. I just wanted
to provide uh some brief context
for why we think this bill is
important and and why we think
it it's um especially meaningful
for local governments.
We'd heard from many of our
member municipalities, you know,
over the past year plus that
they'd really seen request
volumes increase quite a lot,
um, at the same time, the time
required to review and redact
records was increasing, um, in
large part, uh, because of the,
the increase in body worn camera
records, um, was quite time
consuming to manage, and they
dedicated more staff and
resources to processing
requests, but they were still
struggling to keep up. Um, so we
decided to gather some data. We
looked at
over 200,000 individual IPRA
requests from local governments,
29 cities and counties across
the state, um, and we've handed
out the report that that
We, um, put together based on
that data. We also gathered
survey responses, and we found
that a lot of what we'd heard
anecdotally really was bore out
by the data, um, for example,
the number of average monthly
requests doubled um between 2020
and 2024. So for example, in
Santa Fe, average monthly
requests went from about 230 per
month to over 850 in those four
years. In Farmington, they saw
um a little over 300 requests
per month in 2020 and over 70.
50 and 2024 and Albuquerque went
from about 500 requests a month
to over 900. So significant
increases.
And we learned that many of
those requests were coming from
uh commercial for-profit data
brokers, primarily LexisNexis,
which takes uh public records
and resells them, repackages
them, kind of puts them in some
of their data warehouse
products, uh, overall, 15% of
all requests were for the from
these commercial data brokers
and in some cities, Farmington,
Rio Rancho, Santa Fe, for
example, over 1/3 were from
commercial data brokers.
At the same time, local
governments, like I mentioned,
had tried to increase staffing
to keep up, um, overall, they
increased IPA-related staffing
by almost 50% during those same
four years.
Providing public records is an
essential function of
government, and we know that our
records custodians, our local
governing bodies take that that
responsibility seriously, as
shown by the increased resources
that they've put into these
functions, um, you know, we,
there's a lot of other essential
functions that probably have not
seen a 50% increase in staffing
over the same time period.
However, at the same time,
increasing request volumes and
increasing complexity of
processing records lead to
backlogs, um, and especially
when commercial requests
increasingly are crowding out
requests from New Mexicans,
from, from the public, from
journalists.
New Mexicans should expect that
their requests, especially
simple ones or processed
quickly, but the more and more
backlogs we have, the harder and
harder it becomes for local
governments and other public
entities to keep up.
We believe that the intent of
IPRA is to serve New Mexicans,
not enrich for-profit companies,
and we think that this bill
addresses some operational
procedural issues to make sure
that records custodians can
efficiently and effectively get
records to the public.
These are common sense measures
and they're supported by local
governments across the state. So
thank you for your
consideration.
You're good. OK. So, before we
um hear from public comment and
committee discussion. Let's go
ahead and um work on the
amendment.
It's been passed out.
And uh I will move to discuss
the amendment, um, thank you,
Madam Chair. Yes, the amendment
number, um, last three digits is
77.2. Madam Chair, and it's
really just a few cleanup items,
um, on page 3 line 13. It was
brought to my attention by one
of the online media outlets that
they thought there was an
ambiguity and that they thought
they might be included as a
commercial requesters, so we
added to ensure that they were
excluded from interpretation as
being a commercial requester by
adding an online media outlet
and to be clear, we want to be
very clear that, um, the
journalism, journalists outlets
and so on would would not be
bound by this commercial request
or um provision on page 11,
Madam Chair, we tightened up
some of the deadlines and this
was at the request of some input
that we received from fog, so on
page 11.
um line 24. We um shorten the
time frame to from 15 days to 2
days for for someone for an
entity to respond and to remedy
any alleged violation, and we
also, you know, just did some
grammarical cleanup after that,
Madam Chair. And lastly, on page
12 lines 22 and 23, we, um,
struck the 15th day references.
We eliminated the 15 days, Madam
Chair. It's very, it's really,
Madam Chair, just a little bit
of a cleanup amendment.
Representative Zamora on the
amendment. Thank you, Madam
Chair. So, so on the 2nd Amend
the 2nd Amendment you did on
page 11, line 24.
Strike 15 calendar days and
strike 2.
Is that correct? The way the
amendments written or not? I
think you did, you, you
described it different. It, it
is strike 15 calendar days and.
To end strike too.
It's
I think your amendments written
wrong.
OK, so let me ask my colleague
to express it to clarify. Thank
you, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Zamora, so the
amendment as it's written is
correct. Um, essentially what we
are doing here is we are
striking the 15 calendar days on
online 24, as well as the word
2. So essentially what we are
doing with this is providing for
115 calendar date. So if an
individual has
A, um, you know, would like to
submit an allegation, then once
the public body has received
that, they have 15 calendaries
from receipt to respond and
remedy if there is a remedy
necessary Madam,
and I'm good with that. It's
just the way representatives
said strike 15 days and, and
we're gonna go to 2 days and
So I think it was just
misinterpreted. Thank you, my
mistake. Thank you. No, you're
good. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Presented a block on the
amendment. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Representative, quick
question about
Where we're adding online media
outlet. I know that there's some
YouTube channels out there that
are like crime related.
And
They do a lot of IPA requests to
get body cam footage and things
like that. Would that count as
news since it's, some of them
are commentary, some of them are
just straight up.
This is what happened here and
here. So, can you just give me a
little clarity on if that would
include them as well.
Madam Chair and Representative,
certainly this will be subject
to to rulemaking by the Attorney
General, but I would interpret.
that as a media and, and
therefore that would that
information would be available.
Um, Madam Chair and
Representative, thank you, Madam
Chair. That's all I had. Thank
you. Do we have um
Representative Lujan.
I'm just gonna read
This is
Yeah, I'm gonna read it, um,
Madam Chair, so once the
amendment, uh,
The 3rd amendment on page 11
line, oh, I'm sorry, 2nd
Amendment, page 11, line 24. If
you read it.
I'm gonna start from line 21, so
it's a full sentence. Once the
public body has received the
written notice, the public.
Body shall have 15 cal calendar
days to respond to the written
notice and to remedy the
violation after the 15th
calendar day periods have
lapsed, that reads correctly, so
I just wanted to say that and I
think that's it on this.
amendments, man.
Are we ready to adopt the
amendment?
And
OK, I'll second that.
Uh, do we have any opposition?
Seeing none, you have an amended
bill.
And now we will go to the
audience for in the audience,
those in support of the bill,
please raise your hands.
OK. Since we have many of you.
Let's go ahead and take
public comments for one minute.
Thank you, Madam Chair. My
name's Joyous Sarson. I'm the
executive director for New
Mexico Counties. We are
incredibly grateful that the
sponsor is bringing this
forward. We did dirt work with
the municipal League during the
interim to kind of assess what
we're finding and the reality is
IPRA is being used more and more
to obstruct services. We
currently have counties that
have 5 full-time IPA custodians.
We certainly want to make sure
that we have transparency and
accountability to our citizens
and to the media, but that's not
what IPA is being used for
today.
I think these are very
thoughtful changes that will
address some of the larger
concerns and put some guardrails
on the types of requests we're
seeing. Thank you.
hold it, OK.
Uh, thank you, Ethan Watson,
city clerk for the city of
Albuquerque. The city stands in
support of this bill. We
currently have 30 people at the
city who just process public
records requests full time. We
are very in support of the
public records law, but it needs
some common sense reforms. We
are not robots. We need to
notice provision. If we made a
mistake, we need a chance to fix
it. Um, I'd also like to push
back on the notion that
resources are the issue. We have
continued to invest more and
more resources every year in
IPRA and request volume just
goes up. We hit 15,000.
last year and we're on track to
hit more this year. Thank you
very much.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Eric Enriquez. I'm the
mayor for the city of Las
Cruces. I'm also the chair for
the mayor's caucus of New
Mexico, uh, municipal League
that serves 16 mayors, cities,
uh, villages and towns, uh,
definitely in support of this. I
want to thank Chandler,
Representative Chandler for
supporting this and and bringing
this bill forward. It hasn't
been touched in over 40 years,
and it's something that we as
municipalities and government.
continually take serious and do,
it is continuing to increase in
the city of Las Cruces, we saw
1800 requests for the year of
2023 and over 3000 in 2024. Uh,
there are some updates that are
very thoughtful in the process
and, and assisting so that we
can get things done in a timely
manner, and we will continue to
do that this bill supports that
and will continue to work with
the public to get their requests
in a timely manner.
Good morning, uh, members of the
committee. My name is Erin
McSharry. I'm the city attorney
for the city of Santa Fe. I'm
here also with our IPRA manager,
Catherine Garcia Gallegos, and
one of our assistant city
attorneys, Kevin Nat, who is our
lead on IPR matters on the city
of Santa Fe received 10,824
requests during 2024. Um, we
have 5 staff members dedicated
and several high school interns
who also help on a daily basis
from the Santa Fe Public
schools. Um, we, we definitely
are interested in being
responsive to the public as most
as possible. So that
the types of reforms Santa Fe
has been implementing our things
like putting our crash reports
online within the last 6 months,
um, which will hopefully reduce
our, our caseload and, and be
more responsive to the public.
And that's the type of thing
we're always trying to do.
However, we are getting lawsuits
about matters that um were filed
3 years ago with the city, and
we didn't even know there was a
problem with it at the time. So
that type of liability for the
city is, is really profound. Um,
and, and as soon as we found out
about it when the lawsuit was
filed, we immediately responded
and filed those responsive
records with the requester.
Um, that type of thing is a huge
liability for cities. Thank you.
Good morning, committee members.
Uh, my name is Cardin Martinez.
I'm the municipal clerk for the
city of Espaniola, and we have
um various numbers of IPRAs that
come in to the city and for the
most part, I agree with this,
uh, the previous comment, um, it
presarine overused for personal
um use and we certainly
appreciate the this.
Bill and we support it, uh, we
do get, uh, numerous, uh, calls
for a process.
The one that stands out is Nexus
Lexis, so we, we certainly
support. I'm here with our city
manager Eric Luhan and our mayor
John Ramon Vijil, who are
wholeheartedly support this bill
as well.
Chair on committee members,
thank you for having us today.
My name is Kenneth Brennan. I'm
the mayor of Edgewood, New
Mexico. I'm here to support this
bill because the public records
requests that coming in, puts a
serious strain on
municipalities, especially small
municipalities. We have a
limited amount of people
working. So, most of our efforts
are gonna be processed by the
town clerk, and the town clerk
already has a ton of work to do.
We're looking at getting extra
software to help us to
process and go through this
faster. But even that, that's
$16,000 a year for that. Any
help that we can get to help
mitigate uh what we're having to
do is greatly appreciated. And
once again, we fully support
this bill. Thank you.
OK, do we have any public
comment online?
Oh, and my apologies, yes, go
right ahead.
Good morning members of the
committee. My name is John Ramon
V. Hill. I'm the mayor of the
city of Espanola. I'm also the
North Central director for the
New Mexico Municipal League
representing Santa Fe Espanola
Taos, and Los Alamos counties,
well, Los Almos County, uh, I'm
here to speak in support of the
bill by Representative Chandler.
Specifically, I allowed my clerk
to talk about the IPRA and the
impact that it's doing to our
community, but I'm here also to
speak on behalf of the updates
to the municipal code, uh, the
municipal code is extremely
outdated for statutory reasons,
and because of this,
Espanel is a statutory city.
We've looked at going down the
path towards a homer
municipality. It's something we
just can't afford, about 500 to
$60,000 just to do that study.
Uh, this will allow us that
opportunity to clean up the
existing municipal code and
modernize it for 2025.
Thank you. Let's go to online,
comment and support.
Daniel Duran, can you hear us?
Yes, um, thank you, chair. Thank
you committee members on behalf
of Los Alamos County, we also
have seen enormous increase in
if we request, not always from
citizens or from newspapers, and
we really appreciate the efforts
that Representative Chandler has
made with this bill, and we ask
you to fully support it. Thank
you.
Thank you so much, Danielle.
Now we'll go to comments in
opposition to the bill. Do we
have any in the audience, please
raise your hands.
OK, please, one minute, please.
Uh, I'm Lucas Pearman. I'm the
assistant managing editor for
the Albuquerque Journal and also
president of the board for the
New Mexico Foundation for Open
Government. Uh we feel that HB
283 is well-intentioned but
potentially harmful. A
journalist and open government
advocates are not in favor of
this proposal.
We feel HB 283 attempts to add
unnecessary red tape to the
process of getting public
documents, giving officials
additional opportunities to deny
or add barriers to information.
New Mexico has some of the best
open records laws in the country
and has for 40 years. You can
scrap this bill and keep it that
way. The alternative is an
environment in which corruption
and cover-ups can more easily
thrive. Don't leave your
constituents in the dark. I
could provide a specific
journalistic example if you'd
like to extend my time.
Good morning, members of the
committee. My name's Amanda
Lavin. I'm an attorney and I'm
the legal director for the New
Mexico Foundation for Open
Government. I echo my colleague,
uh, Mr. Pierman's comments. Uh,
we are in opposition to this
bill. We believe that there
isn't a single provision in here
that wouldn't fundamentally
change the way the public can
access public records in New
Mexico and also enforce their
rights when public bodies
violate those rights. Um, we
feel that this treatment of, of
different types of users of
public records is a fundamental
departure.
from what we understand to be
good transparency, and that is
that government records should
be available to anyone for any
reason, and HB 283 would change
that. Um, I understand that, uh,
many municipalities feel that
they are burdened by large
requests. And I had a brief
conversation with folks from the
city of Santa Fe this morning,
who I would laud their efforts
to post crash reports and other
public documents online, which
they have done, and it sounds
like that in and of itself has
cut down on the number of
commercial requests. And so
those are the kinds of efforts
that we would.
be promoting and encouraging.
Thank you.
Um, good morning, Madam
Chairwoman and members of the
committee. My name is Christine
Barber. I'm the executive
director of the Foundation for
OPA Government.
So let's say I am a wanting to
start a, a building contractor
business.
I have to get about 20 permits a
month.
Um, under HB uh 283, that would
mean I'm gonna get charged $7000
a year at a minimum.
That's the difference between me
making it as a business and not
making it as a business.
I understand the record
custodians behind this bill. I
know we've talked with everyone.
We know that the reasons for
this bill are, you guys are
feeling overworked, but there's
two big reasons, which is, you
want to cut down on the number
of businesses that are making
requests, and you want to
You want some money.
There are very sympathetic to
you guys being overworked, but
there are other ways to do this.
We've talked about other ways to
do this.
This bill will put massive
barriers on businesses.
Thank you. Do we have any
comments online in opposition.
Jasmine, uh, can you hear us?
Oh
She's gone. Oh we lost you.
Anyone hoping to make comments
in opposition, please raise your
hand.
Oh, we have one here.
Um
Vanessa, can you hear us?
Good morning. Can you hear me,
Vanessa.
Thank you. Um, I would just like
to echo the concerns uh from and
fog and the uh lady uh before me
this New Mexico is a
It's it's own little twilight
zone when it comes to uh
transparency, um, or lack
thereof and uh frankly just flat
out corruption and incompetence.
Um,
anything that would limit uh
access to records of any kind,
um, it should not, uh, really be
considered what should be
considered is better training.
Uh, for our officials that uh
handle IPA requests. Uh, so they
actually know what they are
supposed to be producing, um,
and also the uh agencies
themselves, uh, that know what
records they are supposed to be
producing, uh, how to create
those records, how to maintain
those records, because that I
have found uh it takes up a
great deal of time, uh, is
the.
All right. Moving on to uh
Vanessa Jasmine, you hear is
Jasmine?
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Jasmine
Tying Fong. I'm an attorney with
the ACLU of New Mexico and we
ask that you um respectfully,
uh, oppose HB 283. We appreciate
that the intent of the bill is
to increase public access, but
we worry the definition of
commercial purpose will sweep
more than its intent in an
unintentionally limit what are
transparency, genuine
transparency advocate advocacy
requests, commercial use must be
narrowly defined, legal and
transparency advocacy
for civil, criminal, or
investigative purposes is not a
commercial activity and should
not be treated as such. Um, the
new certification requirement
contradicts existing ER law
which ensures that no one must
explain why they are requesting
court records. This creates an
unnecessary barrier, especially
for everyday New Mexicans
unfamiliar with the legal
process.
While the also the proposed IPRA
task force is heavily weighted
in favor of government entities
undermining the transparency
this law is meant to protect. We
should strengthen laws that
promote openness and
accountability, not up on up in
them. We urge the committee to
vote no on this bill.
Thank you so much, Jasmine.
Thank you, committee members,
Representative Lujan.
Thank you Madam Chair. Um,
I do approve of.
Of the reforms that we're
looking at for IPRA. I too have
worked for, for state
government, and I was in charge
of, of working of um taking the
requests and um
Going through the, the training
and everything and everything
that comes through and every
request. My question, one of my
questions, madam chair is.
Um
How much
What is the litigation and what
is the cost to it for that
litigation that people are
are making because we don't have
enough staff.
Um, really.
I don't want to say they're not
trained because I believe
they're trained, but they just
don't have enough time to
process the amounts of requests
that they have, Madam Chair,
what do we have a sense of that,
Madam Chair?
Uh, Madam Chair and
Representative, I'll ask one of
my experts to answer that.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, Representative
Lujan, um, well, we don't have
the exact figure. We know that
it's in the millions. Um, this
IPRA process, um, in large part
as we've all mentioned here
today is a very human process.
And so when records are
requested, sometimes the
specificity is not always
detailed within that request. So
there could be a very simple
mistake made in terms of
interpreting what the requester
is asking for. So we feel that
the notification process will
provide that level of
communication to immediately get
the records in the hands of the
um individual who's requesting
the information.
Madam Chair, and thank you for
the answer. Um, I have talked to
two other, other people that,
uh, in the government and there
are repeat offenders, Madam
Chair, that they go through the
process and, and our, are making
a substantial amount of money
off of the mistakes and, and,
um.
And the processing procedures
and I, I feel like that needs to
be stopped. That's why I do like
what.
part you're doing here in your
bill, and it's um
It's unfortunate that we have
bad players probably everywhere,
so if we could do something to
um reduce that, I'd be very
happy, um, but I do have some
concerns about the bill as well,
Madam Chair. So some of my
questions are, um,
What have you, have we looked at
maybe having a task force to
examine if there, has there been
a task force to examine these
issues, Madam Chair.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
the bill provides for a task
force.
Thank you, Madam Chair. And
when, what were, what were they,
when would they meet and what um
influence would they have in the
rulemaking?
Madam Chair and Representative
of the.
The task force would be chaired
by the Attorney General's
office. I don't know the date of
the task force would start, but
my experts can probably help me
with that, Madam Chair
Representative.
Madam Chair Representative Lu
Han, um, the bill, uh, requires
that the task force, um, would,
uh,
Report its recommendations no
later than December 15th of this
year. So if this bill is passed
and goes into effect, then uh we
would plan to work with the
Attorney General's office to
convene the task force
immediately and get started
within those months time frame
to provide a recommendation by
the deadline set out in the the
bill.
Hey man, what is, uh, so what
would
Be the what, what, excuse me,
the penalties or remedies if
records are later found to have
been used.
In a way that constraints the
original certification. What are
would be the recommendations
there, um, Madam Chair,
honestly, there are no remedies.
I think the intent of the
certification, um, is to just
reinforce what's already in
statute, which is these, these
records are not to be um sought
so that they can so that the the
um request or can solicit um
victims of crime.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So,
Thank you for these answers. I
mean, I think we're, we're
hearing these and maybe you
I'm trying to grasp all of them
as we're talking.
So in the bill, you're asking
for the purpose of the, the
request. Is that correct? I'm
sure.
Um, Madam Chair, um, actually
not. It only in one limited
circumstance and it's in the
context of, well,
It, it identifies whether or not
you're, you are a commercial
request or or not, how you're
gonna use it beyond that it's
not um required through any of
these amendments or in current
law, Madam Chair and
Representative, thank you. Thank
you. So that, that's that
answers the next question I
have, Madam Chair. Um,
So
Are there limitations or
constraints on any of these uh
requests.
Are there limits, number amounts
of requests that an entity can
have, Madam Madam Chair and
Representative, no, it doesn't
change current law.
A person can make as many
requests as they deem
appropriate, Madam Chair.
Representative.
And
So as we were hearing from
businesses, we're hearing, you
know, they have multiple
requests in order for the, the
facilitation of their, their
business models and this bill
would increase what the amount
of those records.
Madam
Madam Chair.
I'll ask my expert to.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative Lu Han, with this
bill asks for is if a requester,
um, when they submit the
request, they need to certify
whether they're using the
records or intend to use the
records for commercial purposes
under the proposed definition.
If they do that, then the entity
is able to charge a $30 per hour
fee to produce the records, but
that is after the first hour. So
the first hour is free. So for
instance, in the example that
was given in testimony,
in opposition to this. If
somebody is requesting a permit,
that permit will likely take
less than 15 minutes to provide.
So therefore they will not be
incurring a fee, even if they
are a business.
And Madam Chair, Representative,
I also want to clarify in the
permitting example, if somebody
is obtaining a permit, that
would not be through the
inspection of public Records Act
anyways. I mean, if you're a
developer who is getting a
permit to build that process
would be entirely separate from
this.er wouldn't, um, these, uh,
These businesses need
information, um, other
information, uh, that would go
under IPRA would request, uh,
publication Act request.
I.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
I think it's really hard to know
what a builder might need in
terms of information and and
this is not an impediment for
them to receive that
information. I think um it's
very important to underscore we
are not limiting access to
information in any way. We've
not increased any exemptions to
information. It just adds a
little bit of structure in
certain circumstances when
there's a disagreement as to
whether or not, Madam Chair,
the, the, um, the public entity.
has provided the requested
information and it simply
requests that someone who is
seeking the information for
commercial purposes, helps
support the process through a
small hourly rate, um, Madam
Chair, and Representative.
Madam Chair, um,
So
Not, not sure how far I can take
this, but when you, when you
were having conversations and
putting this legislation
together and
And
The opposition that we heard
from today, which is a concern
of mine.
They have a concern with that
$30 an hour fee. So, as I'm
reading through the structure of
this bill and other information,
some of these requests can take
up to 7 hours. Is that correct?
What would be those, those types
of requests that would take?
Over an hour worth of time,
Madam Chair. um, Madam Chair,
um, representative, it's very
hard to identify. It would, um,
depend on the scope, the level
of detail provided, how specific
the request is identified and,
and so on. So it's very hard,
but let me underscore again, the
individuals who are the
commercial requests coming from
individuals who are making money
and revenue from these things
like LexisNexis, which is a
national company, maybe even.
International for all I know,
Madam Chair, and I
$30 an hour is very nominal in
in this context, Madam Chair
Representative. Thank you, Madam
Chair. I appreciate that, but we
have the foundation of our
economy in New Mexico is our are
our small businesses. And so if
they're going to be affected by
this, and I want to make sure
that maybe through the process
of the task force that this,
they could create exemptions
with that.
Would that be something that the
this bill would allow Madam
Chair.
Um, Madam Chair, certainly, um,
that issue could be looked at
through the task force process,
Madam Chair Representative.
Sure there's nothing in this
legislation that would um bind
them to that, uh,
To the outside world that would
make it statutory rather than
through the rulemaking in the
$30 an hour. Madam chair.
Well, Madam Chair, just to be
clear, the bill provides for a
$30 an hour rate for commercial
requesters. I don't want to
mislead anyone, Madam Chair and
Representative, that is
statutorily added through this
amendment.
Madam Chair, so it would be
statutory, it wouldn't be
subject to rulemaking, um.
Madam Chair, I think the, uh,
the next question goes to the
foundation of open government,
who I have heard from, and they
do have concerns about this.
Can you speak to some of the
concerns that they have, Madam
Chair.
Talking about the public comment
that was just made. Yes, madam
chair, um, well, it's very hard,
Madam Chair, because um my
colleagues here did attempt to
work with fog prior to the
session, um, we did get some
feedback after the bill was
filed and essentially it was
what you heard, Madam Chair and
Representative is we oppose all
of it. And no amendments or
other kind of constructive input
was received, Madam Chair and
Representative, and so I just
want to clarify that.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair. I appreciate these
answers. I think this is, you
know, as we're, we're looking at
really, um, reforming, um,
This statute, and I, we do, I, I
really do feel that we, there
are places where we really need
to change some of these things,
um, I'm gonna listen to the rest
of our
Conversation today, Madam Chair,
and make my decision. Thank you.
Majority floor leader Skipanski.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
thank you, Chair Chandler. Um,
I, you know, I looked at this
bill and sort of its totality,
and I appreciate that these
public record requests are
taking up an enormous amount of
time and energy and um
particularly the ones that are
for commercial purpose. So, um,
Madam Chair, I wanted to share a
few
Comments and questions and um
uh they sort of are in three
areas. So, uh, the first area is
just the definition of
commercial purpose, I think.
Um
Madam Chair Representative, the
intent is here and I think it's
pretty well crafted. There's
just one, I'll give you an
example, um,
Couple of examples that I'm
aware of where uh a business
Ibr.
Comparable contract rates.
For a service they were
providing. Now they weren't
selling the public record or
anything like that. It was a
service that they were providing
through a contract with the
municipality, um, or the county,
and they wanted to see because
there was a contemplated change
and they wanted to make sure
that the other businesses were
also
Seeing that same change, and
that's a commercial purpose, uh,
not, I don't think it falls into
this definition, but it's a
little vague cause you have rent
or lease of a service or any
use, um, by which the user
expects a profit, so if we're a
for-profit business.
Who's just trying to make sure
that they are, um,
Achieving the, you know, sort of
the same rate that other
businesses are being
Offered a second example, and
then I'd love for you all to
just respond, um, would be, um,
uh, lease uh lease of city
property.
Proposed lease rate change by
the city.
And then Ibraing comparable.
Leases through the city to
ensure that the same price per
square foot.
Was achieved, and these are for
for-profit businesses. So do you
uh do you, I don't.
I know the intention is not to.
Capture those kinds of IPA
requests, um, but I just wonder
if maybe this definition is a
little broad.
And could unintentionally
capture that, Madam Chair and
Chair Chandler would love to
hear your reflection on that.
Madam Chair, um, representative
Sapansky, thanks for the
question. Um, I, I don't believe
it, it would capture those uses.
I mean, again, I guess with
those kind of specific
scenarios, um, that may be
subject to some rulemaking, um,
but if it was just for kind of
general business purposes, not
directly to sell the
information, um.
I don't think it would be
captured and, and I, and I
guess, I just want to clarify
two things as well, you know, a
lot of the information or or a
lot of the um interactions that
a business might have with the
city is not necessarily going
through the IPRA process
anyways. I mean, deeds, permits
that you would be obtaining
those like through the county
clerk's office, through planning
and zoning, so a lot of these
functions would not even be
covered by IPRA anyway, so it's
not in the scope of this bill,
um, and then also just to
reiterate that.
We don't, we didn't necessarily
see a lot of those uses in the
data we looked at the by far the
biggest use is LexisNexis and
our position is that it is not
uh intended to enrich for-profit
companies. It's for, it's for
citizens, the public,
journalists.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
that's helpful. I think actually
if you.
Um, if this bill moves forward,
rearrange the wording in this,
uh.
Page 3 lines 2 through 6. I
think you could hit it. It's
just not super clear that the
commission salary or fee is a
result of the director indirect
use of any part of the public
record and
I think you just want, or you
might wanna do another exception
for
Businesses for the, uh, I, I'm,
I'm not exactly sure what the
other exception would be, but
something for businesses doing
business with the city or
something like that, City
county, um, and then secondly,
um,
I
The, the notice provision is
what I'm really struggling with,
um, and then some of the
materials I received via email,
there were references to similar
notices.
Required for Human Rights Act.
Um, unfair Practices Act, and
Open Meetings Act. Now, I did
not find um a notice provision.
Before an administrative appeals
process.
In the uh unfair Practices Act
or the Open Meetings Act. I did
find that for the Open Meetings
Act.
Um
And I just
For me, it
It runs the risk of
Incentivizing
Local governments to run the
period basically for 30 days. So
15 days.
Um
And if you don't produce the
record.
Someone has to provide notice
and then they get another 15
days, so, Madam Chair and Chair
Chandler and experts. What
If someone doesn't provide a
notice, it doesn't seem that
there's any
Requirement that the local
government didn't comply.
Because the, the also the
The penalty period doesn't start
tolling until the notice is
provided, so you're really
cutting off any any requirement
for the local government to
reply timely, it feels like to
me, but Madam, ma'am.
Please um
Madam Chair, representative of
the statute requires.
timely response. This really
just goes to
Frankly, when the person can
bring suit, really, that's the
primary goal for this notice
provision. They're already
required to, to provide timely
responses, but the concern is,
and there are these sorts of
things that come up is, um,
someone's not satisfied, they
immediately go to court and the
the local government has no
recourse now but to try to
negotiate a settlement, which
usually involves attorneys'
fees. And so that's what's going
on here that it's not an intent
to slow any response down.
I just want to make that
perfectly clear. And I would
point out, Madam Chair,
Court Claims Act. There's a
notice provision there.
Um, that, that local governments
are entitled to before someone
can bring suit on a, on a torch,
so this is, I think, very much
in line, Madam Chair, and
Representative with um practices
and in other other statutes
where local governments and
state government involved, Madam
Chair.
Um, Madam Chair Representative.
I think the.
The issue, the issue that I'm
struggling with on the notice is
that.
Um
Currently, the way that the
inspection of public records Act
is enforced is basically left to
the courts, which I agree that
there should be an
administrative process before
the courts. That's a very costly
and potentially wasteful use of
resources.
Uh, however, this bill doesn't
establish the administrative
appeals, which is one reason why
I love the task force that's
being specifically charged to do
that. To me, I think it's
premature to put in the notice
requirement before the
administrative appeals. If we
could do the task force, have
the administrative appeals
process and then require 2
weeks, but the way that this is
set up.
The local government or or any
government entity has 15 days.
To produce the record.
And then
If they don't produce the
record.
The penalty doesn't begin until
the person files notice. And so
if the person doesn't file
notice and they have 2 years to
file that notice, which I also
support, I appreciate that
statute of limitations there.
Um
But
And then the so you're basically
It's just it's very difficult to
expect then timely information.
I think given the structure, um,
And so that
You know, and
Madam Chair and Cha Chandler,
the testimony around putting
public records on.
Websites to sort of preempt.
The
Requirement for local
governments to spend all of this
exhaustive time and energy
producing records for LexisNexis
or other.
Entities is good, um, I think
that may happen less under this,
and then you'll also have an
additional, I mean, best case
scenario, 30 days to get this
information and for some
individuals that may be
difficult because they may be
trying to meet other timelines
for other things that they are
are requiring this information.
To obtain. So I think I, I don't
want to belabor this, but I, I
Um, I really have a hard time
with that, that notice
requirement without
An administrative appeals
process and, you know, and, for
example, in the Human Rights
Act, there is a notice provision
required, but that's after you
have already gone through the
administrative process at
Workforce Solutions. And then if
you want to go to court, you can
file that notice, and I think
that's fair, you know, I think
that that's appropriate, um,
Because we want people to have
timely access to information. We
don't necessarily want the
courts to get involved in every
piece, so.
You know, I don't want to cut
off your, if you want to
respond, um, but, but that's,
that's basically my major
concern with this, Madam Chair,
I, I'll ask one of my experts to
respond.
Madam Chair Representative,
thank you for the question. Um,
as representative Chandler
stated this bill does not um
alter the way the inspection of
public records Act timeline
works right now, other than it
incorporates a notice provision
so that if a requester believes
that they did not receive a
record that they requested, or
they have questions about
redactions, we're building in
that ability for them to work
with the
records custodian to get those
things taken care of or cured.
Right now, there is not an
allowance for that to be done
whatsoever. Right now, if you're
a requester, you can file a
claim with the Attorney
General's office or the DOJ's
office, or you can go to court.
Under this, we're provi
providing a less costly
informal, less expensive, um,
opportunity for the requester to
go to the records custo
and say, hey, you didn't provide
me with this record. Can you
please do so? And so we're not
prolonging the time period
whatsoever in which your records
custodian is already obligated
under IPRA to provide those
records. We're not extending the
clock by any means. That stays
exactly the same as the bill is
proposed.
Ja and Chandler. I appreciate
that. I
I just think it's premature to
put in this notice provision
because it isn't an appeals
process. It's a notice provision
that you were gonna file and it,
it sort of leaves it up to the
local government as how to, as
to how do they, how they respond
to that where it's not clearly
spelling out sort of.
Go to this person, they can then
respond in this way, etc. etc.
um.
And I think you, because you
have the task force, which is
great, cause there's probably
other updates needed to this.
Um, I, I would prefer to defer
that to um the task force with a
more comprehensive solution.
Thank, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative Ona
Nonu.
Madam Chair and thank you, Madam
Chair. It's good to see you this
morning. Um, I just had a couple
questions of clarification for
myself. If we go to page 3, line
15. Could you outline
That last exception for
commercial use for me, please.
Just cause I don't really speak
lawyer
so if you could clarify that a
bit. I'm sorry, I'm on Madam
Chair and represent a line which
page? Page 3 line 15. 00, line
15 and through 17. Yes, in the
preparation for prosecution or
defense of litigation claims or
settlement by the parties. OK.
Um, so what this is saying,
Madam Chair, is we recognize,
frankly, that lawyers often seek
records.
And we are explicitly stating
that that shall not be
considered a commercial purpose.
So
Doesn't touch
You know, the use of the of IPRA
for litigation purposes. That's
really what the intent there is,
Madam Chair and Representative.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
Madam Chair, so if I were a
civil rights attorney trying to
Find potential victims of like a
police brutality case, I could
still file the IPRAs.
Necessary to do that. Um, Madam
Chair, that's a different
provision that already exists in
law, uh, that would prohibit.
And someone seeking to identify
victims and am I misstating
something my colleagues are
looking at me perplexed. Madam,
in current law, um,
There's a prohibition against
soliciting victims, um, so I
believe in that scenario, you
weren't necessarily referring to
soliciting soliciting business
and not soliciting just like
establishing a pattern sorry,
Madam Chair, Madam Chair, just
for the purposes of potentially
establishing like a pattern of
behavior. Correct, so that would
not, Madam Chair, um.
Under your scenario
representative, this none of our
changes would affect um what you
just expressed representative.
OK, great. Thank you. And then
my other question was back over
on page 11, line 23.
Um
Where it says that the public
body shall have 15 calendar days
to respond, and I know we talked
a lot about responses, madam's
chair, and I don't want to
belabor that point, but I don't
see in here, I didn't see like a
definition for what qualifies as
a response, so.
My concern then.
Yeah.
If we go then to page 13.
Where it's, where a person is
allowed to take action.
If a response has failed. I
mean, that's.
13 line 8, it says um.
And has failed to respond within
15 calendar days without a clear
definition, Madam's chair of
what a response is. My, my.
Wonderment then is if
Simply saying, we need more
time, qualifies as a response
without like a loop counter of
that you could technically say
we need more time.
Could you say that indefinitely?
Madam chair
Chair and representative on page
11. I understand your point
about a written response, but
then it says and.
To remedy the violation. So if
the violation hasn't been
remedied, um, I would, I would
suggest to you that that that's
the triggering point. There's a
written response and failure to
remedy, and then the clock
starts to run.
OK, so, um, simply saying we
need more time is not a remedy
to the written request.
OK. Correct, Madam Chair and
representative. OK.
All right, I think that.
verifies all my questions, I
still.
I don't know, I still have
concerns about this, but I'll
keep, um, listening and
listening to the debate. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Representative Black.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative experts. So
I'm just gonna be really blunt
with you guys and just tell you
I don't know how I'm going to
vote on this. I am so confused
on so many levels I've heard
from both sides.
And
I hear, I hear.
The
Stories back home, I know
there's one person who's a
serial IPR requester.
Who runs a
I don't know if you'd call it a
news.
I, I think I would call it a
screed.
Website
Essentially we just attacks
people. So
I do have concerns about that
person potentially being able to
be included in this, and then,
Madam Chair, Representative, I
do have some concerns when it
comes to
Picking winners and losers on
who's gonna be able to
You get
These are requests and I do
understand we're trying to
target very specifically a
narrow individual market, which
is these large scale.
Conglomerate, maybe even global
companies. And so I, I'm
wondering, Madam Chair
representative, if you've
considered on page 3 at the top
of the page.
When it says a commercial
purpose, maybe making that even
more.
Defined, where it comes to
We're, I guess maybe defining
what a what a large scale, like,
let's just find what LexisNexis
is and try to define that in
into what?
corporation we're trying to
exclude, which I agree with you,
we shouldn't be giving out all
these information for free.
And then just allowing them to
be profiting off of it.
But Madam Chair Rep
representative, I'm wondering
the current laws. I know that it
says if it's excessively
burdensome.
That there's some kind of
stipulation in there that you
could charge per record. Can you
tell me, Madam Chair
Representative, if, if that's
even a thing and
I, I guess I'm just asking for
some clarity on that.
Madam Chair and Representative,
thank you for the question. I'll
ask one of my colleagues to.
Madam Chair Representative
Locke, thank you for the
question. Under the current law,
the, there is an allowance for
the charge of the copying of
physical pieces of paper.
So there is not the allowance
for records custodian to charge
for records based on the amount
of time it takes to produce and
fulfill that record's request.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
representative. So, so I'm
guessing if it was something on
a
Dropbox link, then you wouldn't
be able to charge people for
that. It would be based upon the
actual record itself, not on
the, the labor and the hours
that it takes to do these, and I
know some of these are extremely
extensive requests.
And I know I've, I've done a lot
of of IPA requests in my day,
and I still do occasionally if
I'm just interested in
something, but it's not
something that's commercial. So,
Yeah, I, I guess that's one
concern I had, but if it, if
we're tightening it up, that
helps me on that. And then I'm
wondering about the response
times. I know we we put some
timelines on here, 15 days, and
I think we tightened it with the
amendment to 2 days for
It was kicked back or something,
or if it was rejected.
So, can you just tell me how
that would change.
Getting these records because I
do want to make sure that we're
not allowing really long amounts
of time for governments to say,
oh, let's just kick it down the
road for a few weeks, if it's
something that could be
newsworthy potentially for like,
you know, a breaking news story.
They need to know how many
victims this person's associated
with or whatever it could be.
And could you just clarify that
a little bit for me, Madam Chair
Representative and experts
representative.
Madam Chair Representative
Bloch, again, thank you for the
question. So this is a really
good opportunity for me to
explain the way the inspection
of Public Records Act currently
works now and um for those of
you that are not aware, I am a
retired city clerk, so I have
many years of experience in the
clerk's office dealing is a
records custodian in fulfilling
these records requests. Um, the
way the law currently works now
is a requester can submit a
written request to the public
body. The public body when
they receive that, they have 3
days to respond to the request.
After that point or during that
response, they can let the
individual know that their
records are immediately
available for inspection.
That they are going to be
provided to them electronically
or that additional time is
needed to provide a, um,
response or the records. Then,
based on that 3 days, they have
from the date of receipt of
request, they have a total of 15
calendar days to get back to the
requester. This is already the
2nd point of notification given
if more time is needed for the
requester. At that point, the
requests are given, and the
records request is closed.
fulfilled
If the if the public body is
unable to fulfill the request
because let's say it's a
voluminous request, for
instance, I want any and all
emails for
The mayor from, you know, these
past 5 years, that's gonna take
longer than 15 days to provide.
So in that case, IPRA allows the
governmental entity to deem that
is overly broad and burdensome.
Ipra does not provide a
definition of what overly broad
and burdensome means. So in this
case, it just means that more
time is needed. So the public
body is required to notify the
requester and let them know how
long they believe it will take
to fulfill the request. What
this looks like now in real time
is usually the public body will
every week or so, every 2 weeks,
reply back to the requester
saying, here are more records.
responsive to your request and
additional time is needed, and
we must give a date certain as
to when we will reply back to
the requester. None of that
changes right now under this
proposal.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
Representatives, representative
experts that, that does help me
on that a little bit. And this,
to be clear, this does, this
exempts everyone pretty much on
page 3, that includes just a
regular citizen, correct?
I guess regular, I wouldn't use
the word regular, uh, just to
The general public.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative
block, yes, I, I mean, a
citizen.
If they're not using these
records. OK.
That, that does help on that.
OK
And then I saw one other concern
that someone sent me, let me
see.
So
Also, I'm, I'm usually inclined
to to always vote against a
brand new task force to do
something.
So I see that it's just creating
more
Things the government's
responsible for doing.
And I get it if it means
creating more efficiency.
So could you go into that a
little bit for me, what the task
forces accomplishments should be
at the end of the year, and do
we know if that 6 months, around
6 months time frame would be
enough time for them to conclude
that, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair and and represent a
very good question. I'll ask one
of my colleagues here to answer.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
you know, I think we've heard,
um, comments today suggesting
that there is more work to be
done, um, especially around kind
of that administrative process,
um, you know, believe in, in
their analysis of the bill that
MDOJ noted there is
Um,
so I think there are some
unanswered questions around what
those processes could look like
to facilitate people getting
their records efficiently as
well as records custodians being
able to get clear guidance, um,
you know, in, in terms of what
is covered, not covered by the
law, what should be redacted,
what should not be redacted, um,
we know that over 1/3 of states
have some kind of administrative
process and or an ombudsman. So
I think those are some of the
key questions we would like the
task force.
To answer, Should New Mexico,
um, set up some kind of similar
structures as, as we've seen in
other states, so it helped make
this process more efficient and
effective and, and what
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative and experts and
and I agree. I think if we're
going to create a new oversight
or at least task force, it
should be to make the government
that we have right now, more
efficient.
Which I think is a good thing.
And then I did have one other
question, and I apologize. I
said the last one was my last,
but I do have another one
regarding page 3, we're talking
at
Line 2 and 3, commercial
purpose, direct or indirect use,
and Madam Chair Representative,
I'm wondering if this could
potentially allow a loophole for
For nonprofits who are not
included because they don't make
profits to share.
That information with commercial
entities after they have gotten
it from.
The locality or the county. I'm
wondering if that could be
something that the task force
would also look at, Madam Chair
and representative.
Madam Chair and Representative,
um, certainly, I wouldn't want
to limit what
The task force would look at and
that's obviously something if it
comes up with.
and represented.
Perfect. OK, thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Representative
and experts and good answers to
questions and I, I will continue
to listen to the debate, but
it's a very interesting bill, at
least for me and personally in
our, our neck of the woods,
sometimes there's these people
who try to abuse the IPRA
process and I think those people
should be
I wouldn't say they should be
hunted down and locked up, but I
would say that these people are
the reason we're here today, so
it's, it's a problem and, and I
understand that. So thank you,
Madam Chair.
Representative Barrego.
and uh remind me not to get on
his bad side.
I
Um, thank you, um.
Representative Chandler and
your, your witnesses, um,
I
Actually, very much um
appreciate, Madam Chair, that
this bill is coming forward.
To me, it
It
It really calls out the
different types of IPRAs, which
are have in the past sort of
In my mind, I've been sort of
lumped out altogether in one
statute. It's like doesn't
didn't really matter the type.
It was just people had to.
Um
Produce, which I think is.
And having worked in government
for
Way too long, um, 32 years.
Um, of IPA requests.
Um, and having worked, Madam
Chair, as uh as one of the
persons who actually had to
provide some of the information
regarding IPRA, I came to find
that a lot of um the people who
are putting this information
together are very low level
people unfortunately, and, you
know, they do the best they can
oftentimes, um, and I know that
there's somebody at a higher
level that, you know, approves
that.
response.
Um, one of the issues that I
have, um, and I'd like for you
guys to take a look at it and
I've always had this issue with
IPRAs, is it, there's a 15 day
response time.
Four of those days are not
government.
Working days.
There, there are 4 days of
weekends in there. And so Tippe
really the response time for
government is typically 11 days,
um, because there's 4 days that
are most, most of those people
that are trying to get the
information together, um,
You know, they don't work.
I mean, they're Xeroxing and
cutting and pasting or whatever
they're putting, uh, you know,
the information together and
oftentimes, Madam Chair, which I
think is very transparent in a
lot of cases, um, the person
who's the requester of the IPRA,
um, Madam Chair Representative.
sits with the
Individuals that are trying to
get the information. So they're
going to files and files and
files, and some of those are
paper files, um, unfortunately,
there's still paper files. Some
of them are microfiche, some of
them, I mean, it just depends on
the government's ability, um,
but
The first thing that I wanted to
bring up was that 4 day weekend.
Sort of carve out and that would
maybe be something that you
can't handle in this bill, but I
need to call it out. I think
it's an important issue, because
truly it's not 15 days if it's
calendar days, so you may want
to consider, um,
You know, Madam Chair, and, and,
uh, representative.
If that would be more like
working days, um, instead of
calendar days, um, and maybe
that's something for the task
force to consider, but I think
that it's an important point
because
Truly government only has 11
days.
Um, and then the other thing
that I wanted to mention, um,
was when I, uh, Madam Chair and,
and representative. I'm, I'm
really glad that we're looking
at a 40 year old statue.
I mean, it's way too long for us
to
So with any of our statutes,
For 40 years without
And making any amendments. It's
just it's, it's absurd. Um, the
other thing that I wanted to
mention is that looking at the
task force and the makeup, and I
appreciate that you are, um, you
know, providing a, a mechanism,
um for.
You know, really reviewing the
statute in detail, um,
I didn't see in here a member of
the public.
And I didn't see in here a
member of the judicial branch.
Because these, in fact,
I mean, the, the statute goes
across government, municipal,
city, county, state, judicial,
and so I would, I would consider
possibly adding
Um, those two, I heard those.
Individual that was testifying
online, Madam Chair, and
representative that said, oh,
there's this, you know, um,
There's this process and then
there's possibility of
People not being transparent and
I mean, I, I'm not gonna repeat
what she said, but it was
somewhat concerning to me. And
so that's why I suggest a person
from the public because I think
that, you know, we've got to
turn that, um,
Sort of sent.
Negative sentiment, um, around
to let people know that we are
trying to be transparent and
that this is an ethical process
and that government is not
corrupt, I mean, you know,
people are gonna think whatever
they want, but I think having
been in it for 32 years and
having had to provide
information and knowing that
there is a process, um,
I just want to put that out
there on the table, Madam Chair,
I think that's an important
thing that, especially when it
comes to law enforcement. I
think law enforcement tries to
do their best, um, most of them,
um, I mean, you know, there's
always that.
That element in life.
But that goes across the board,
so um I put those um.
I offer those um as some things
to consider as you move forward
and uh I appreciate that you
guys are bringing this forward.
Representative Zamora.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Representative for bringing
this bill forward. So, I think
we've vetted the bill pretty
good. I think we've been from
one end of it to the other.
And my question is,
What, what has brought this
problem on. We talked, from what
I understood in the testimony,
it's been the past couple of
years that this really came on.
What, what's the issue with
that? What?
I brought it on.
Madam Chair.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative for the question.
I, I think there's a few
potential factors, hard to say
for sure, um, I think one factor
certainly is the introduction of
required uh body worn cameras,
um.
That just created a lot of
additional records that just
kind of added a lot of
additional records to the mix,
and records that are in video
format, so our particularly time
consuming, um, to review and
react, um, our records
custodians have told us it takes
about 2 hours to review and
redact every one hour of body
worn camera footage, um, and you
know, if you think about a
single uh police incident, there
can be several officers on
scene, many hours of, of body
worn camera footage.
That's time consuming. So I
think that's one factor, um,
when, when we, when we looked at
kind of broader trends in this
study we did, we did find
similar trends at the federal
level as well. So, you know, to,
to whatever extent this is kind
of a national trend, um, I, I
think we're seeing that and,
and, you know, to be clear, it
is good that people want to
request records. I mean, that's
not the issue. Um, records
requests in and of themselves
are good and like I said, our
records custodians take that
duty seriously. However, they do
mean
Um, you know, more backlogs,
more crowding out, um, you know,
I think there are some questions
around um people might need
records for a certain deadline
or timely records. Um, if it
doesn't provide any procedures
for records custodians to
prioritize certain records over
others, so it's just a numbers
game at the end of the day. The
more records you have, the
longer, you know, generally
it's, it's going to take to get
those records. Thank you for
that answer, and, and Madam
Chair and
And uh representative if
If we change this,
To just effect out of state.
If a request.
Does that, does that make any
sense at all or not?
Um
Madam Chair and Representative,
I think that could create some.
I don't know if it's a commerce
clause issue, but I think there
would be some difficulty if we
treat.
People from one state
differently from people.
From our state.
Um, Madam Chair and
representative.
OK, thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair. That concludes my
questions.
Representative Mejia and then
Representative Little.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Just one
question, um, Representative
Chandler and experts, um, to
requesters have to be certified.
They are in New Mexico, Madam
Chair Representative that's
similar I think to
representative Zamora's
question, I think that might be
viewed as improper asking
someone whether they're in state
or out of state for the purposes
of seeking records.
Mhm
So, I mean, anybody can request
these records from.
Anywhere, even internationally.
Oh, Madam Chair, Representative,
yes.
Thank you. Thank you for that
answer.
Representative Onionarnu for a
2nd time.
Thank you. Sorry, I thought I
was dead. I found something else
that jumped out at me, so, um,
page 13.
Um, subsection A.
Enforcement. So it says what um
when a person can.
While an action to enforce after
The public records or the public
body has failed to respond
within 15 calendar days. But my,
and it says a person who's
written request has been denied
can file an action to enforce,
but my question is, can a person
who has been explicitly denied.
Violent action to enforce, Madam
Chair.
Um
Uh, I
Well, of course, well, I hate to
say it that way, Madam Chair,
representative, someone who's
been denied.
Verbal, you know, actually in
writing, of course, can file
suit, but I believe there's a
provision, Madam Chair, if, if,
if there're a failure to timely
respond is deemed a denial as
well, um, Madam Chair and
Representative, so you can be
denied in multiple ways. One is
explicitly and one is by failure
to act within the appropriate
time frames, Madam Chair and
Representative. OK, thank you,
Madam Chair. So if I file an
IPRA and the response is just
no, I can still file an action
to enforce against that.
Written response.
Madam Chair. Yes, I believe
that's right. OK, thank you,
Madam Chair.
Right, Representative Little,
Vice Chair Little.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I would
like to move a do pass with no
recommendation and explained my.
As amended. Thank you.
Do we have a motion for a due
pass with no wreck as the men
did, House Bill 832 as amended.
Please call roll and I have a
second. I representative.
go.
on Nonu.
Yes.
Representative Block.
Pass.
Representative Borego.
Representative Lujan.
Representative Mejia.
No
Madam floor leader.
Representative Zamora.
Yes.
Representative Block.
Yes, Madam Vice Chair.
Yes, Madam Chandler, you have to
pass with no wreck on house
amended
House Bill 832 as amended. Madam
Vice Chair, to explain your vote
very briefly, um,
Madam Chair, Madam Chair, uh, I
appreciate the discussion and
debate debate this morning. I
learned quite a bit here as in
addition to what I was had been
reading, I think um there were
uh this is a bill with very good
intentions and with the
suggestions offered.
I think it's going to actually
become a better bill. Thank you
very much.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
representatives. Thank you.
Thank you, everyone. All right,
let's move along to house Bill
297 as a man did.
Gonzalez and Serena Serena.
Sean
OK. Are you ready?
sorry.
Um
Good morning everybody. Um, so,
good morning. Morning chair
committee. Um, we're here to
present, um, House Bill 297
amended, um, essentially this
bill is an extension of previous
legislation, um, that allows for
the endorsement of the
endorsement, uh, a computer
science endorsement for teachers
and the teacher pathway. Um, so
it just essentially states um
that for teachers seeking to add
an endorsement for computer
science. It defines the pathways
that they either or could earn
5.
post-secondary course credits in
computer science, pass the
department approved teacher
license or exam, have a minimum
of 2 years of work experience in
an industry, have an industry
certification in a field related
to computer science, complete 60
hours of professional
development within the 3 years,
or have 3 or more years of
computer science teaching
experience. Um, the other major
difference between existing
legislation and now is it does
expand, expand on the different
types of teacher licensures that
are eligible for this
endorsement.
Um, so with that, you know, as
we are entering into, we like to
call it the 22nd century of
computer science professionals.
Um, this just is getting our
state ready or new coursework,
um, new pathways, um, new
industry work. So, um, at this
point, I would like to introduce
my expert, um, Ms. Paige
Prescott. She is the executive
director for the Computer
Science Alliance.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Paige Prescott. I have
an education nonprofit Computer
Science Alliance, and we've been
working on computer science
education policies since 2017,
in order to expand computer
science for our students. Um,
this endorsement, uh, in
previously in 2021, HB 188
established the initial
endorsement. Since then, we've
had a 129 educators in New
Mexico pursue it. However, there
are hundreds more that are
interested.
but they have been blocked
because of the restriction on
the exact type of license uh
required. This bill is expanding
that and is sensitive to our
educators and their desire for
an endorsement in computer
science and as um representative
uh Gonzalez mentioned, this is,
um, to bring
Better capacity to our teachers
so that our students can access
computer science and um high
quality content that will help
the workforce development. Thank
you.
And with that, we stand for
questions.
Thank you. Let's go to the
audience, those in support of
the bill, please raise your
hands.
Those opposing the bill.
Let's go online. Do you have any
comments?
Anyone hoping to make public
comment, please raise your hand.
Committee members
Representative Zamora Madam, I.
And for due pass a second, do we
have any opposition?
Please Carro
Representative on None. Uh.
Yeah.
Representative block.
Yes.
Representative Borego.
Yes, Madam Chair, I'd like some
of those Cheerios that he eats
every morning
Representative Lujan.
Represented Mejia.
Madam floor leader.
Representative Zamora.
Madam Vice Chair. Madam Chair.
80.
We have a do pass.
On House Bill 297 as amended.
OK, committee members and
audience, let's move along to
House Bill 405.
No,
I have 405.
OK, I understand we're not
hearing that one. House Bill
411.
OK, you may begin.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee of
House Bill 411 is a proposal for
adopting and state mineral.
Um, most people would think that
turquoise should be the state
mineral, but it's actually our
official gemstone.
So, um, as you can see, I'm
wearing the mineral that I am
proposing to be made the new
state mineral. It is called
Smithsonite, um, the the Mexico
history is um intimately tied to
the states, um, and formerly our
territories and native lands,
mineral wealth.
Um
With Smithsonite was mined in
the Kelly mines in Magdalena,
New Mexico, upon the, um,
Uh, downturn of the silver, uh,
crash.
And so, um, it is highly known
across the world as a beautiful
mineral, and with that, I would
stand for questions.
OK, let's go to the audience.
Those in support, please raise
your hands.
Those in opposition. Let's go
online.
Anyone hoping to make public
comment, please raise your hand.
One.
Hey committee members,
Representative Zamora and then
Representative Bloch.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
Thank you for bringing this bill
forward, minority leader
Armstrong.
Why not turquoise?
Mm
Thank you, um, Madam Chair and
Representative, because
turquoise is already the state
gemstone.
OK. And that, that makes sense.
And, and
People, when I go back home, I'm
sure this isn't the first bill
they'll hit on, but they'll ask
me if, if I get asked.
What is this mineral? Did you
ever hear about it before you
voted on it and
It's not very commonly talked
about.
Thank you for that, uh,
question. Uh, right now,
Uh, Madam Chair and
Representative, um.
It does have worldwide
recognition far surpassing all
other minerals found in New
Mexico, in large part because
its beauty.
And this is, this is one of the
colors. There's many shades of
the colors of Smithsonite
uniqueness of specimens from the
Magdalena district among
Smithsonite world um um our
known worldwide. Economic
historical significance to New
Mexico, the mining industry in
New Mexico took a, took a large
downturn with the crash of
silver prices in 1894, zinc
production starting with
Smithsonite or in the Magdalena
Distric.
tri c t revitalized mining in
New Mexico. Asa B Fitch
discovered Smithsonite or
formation as a calcium carbonate
replacement for the first time
in New Mexico in the Magdalena
District. This went on to be the
proposed process this went on to
be the
Prospecting model for hundreds
of deposits throughout Southwest
US and New Mexico. Smithsonite
zinc ore brought major companies
to New Mexico, which have been
huge economic drivers for more
than a century, including
Sherwin Sherman.
Williams, who used lead and then
zinc as whitening weather
resistant agents and paint and
in New Jersey, zinc, AKA Empire
Zinc, one of the first companies
to operate the mines in
Magdalena District. Zinc has
been mined in no less than 25
mining districts in New Mexico,
zinc, one of the main ors.
Of which Smithsonite is among
the critical minerals currently
identified in the US.
Uh, in the US and New Mexico
deposits still, um, a national
significance. So it has, it, it
brought back mining when we, it
took the, the silver took a
downturn. Um, it's not, um, it
is well known in if you,
there'll be a, actually,
there'll be a sample down in the
rotunda later on today, and the,
the deeper aqua turquoisey blue,
um, is the, uh, the higher
quality of Smithsonite, and it
is actually really well.
known in the
Geological industry.
And, and Madam Chair and floor
leader.
Uh
Is Smith tonight still being
mine today?
In New Mexico
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
there are a few places where you
There are a few places where you
can still get it, um, but it's
not like a, all those mines are
shut down now.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Presented a block.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative, uh, for the
bill. So, I too have the
question about turquoise,
because I know it's it's a
gemstone technically, but it's
also
Literally a mineral as well.
And so, another thing I was
looking at, Madam Chair
representative was
How you get a hold
Of a piece of Smithsonite and
I was looking online on Etsy and
eBay and all kinds of places and
it can get really, really
pricey.
And I don't know if the average
New Mexican could even afford a
specimen of this beautiful
stone, and I, I do think it's
beautiful as, as uh you're,
you're showing us today, but
could you just go a little bit
into that for me, because I do
want to make sure that if we
have a state mineral that
The everyday New Mexican can
actually see it and touch it,
maybe even own it if they like.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair and
thank you, Representative. I
remember you bringing that to my
attention before, um, in
Magdalena, there's actually a
little, there's a rock shop that
has several specimens of mag of
uh Smithsonite, um, other
entities around in the Socorro
area have it as well. Um, it,
the really high, high quality is
really hard to find, um, as I
stated earlier, um, the piece
I'm wearing today is not of the
highest quality. Hopefully you
all make it down to the rotunda.
Um
turquoise, I, I would have
thought it to be turquoise as
well, but since it's already the
gemstone, I don't know if it
needs to be both. Um, it is a it
is a mineral that is mined that
you can actually touch and feel.
I know along with, with copper
and oil and all these other
different minerals we have
across the state of New Mexico,
but this one is just so well
known in the geological part of,
of the history of New Mexico,
that a lot of people just aren't
aware of the history. But you,
but it is accessible.
I wouldn't buy it online, just
saying, I would be go brick and
mortar.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. I guess I need
to stop down in Socorro and, and
check out some mineral rocks. I
was stopped by a rock shop. It's
between, I don't even know where
it is, to be honest with you.
It's like after you
Is it Binghamin? It's right off
of the, like an outlet road to
the to the base.
So, it's very interesting, but
thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for the bringing it forward
and it seems like a very
beautiful gemstone. I just was
wondering.
How do I get my hands on it?
Cause I, I'm a person who likes
rocks. When I was a kid, I used
to collect a lot of rocks and
Crystals and all kinds of weird
stuff. So, definitely need to
get my hands on some smiths
tonight. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Represent Barraco.
Thank you, Madam Chair and Madam
Leader, um,
I
Not sure how I feel about this
bill, because when I, and I, I
deal in, in rocks. That's what
my business is, um.
So most of New Mexico's mineral
production comes from coal,
copper.
And potash.
Um, and then it also mentions um
sulfuric acid, and I don't know
how to say this,
malam
gold, uranium, and silver.
And so I just put this on the
table, um, the other thing that
when I, when I look at our, our
gemstones, um,
Some of the things that it
mentions are different types of
garnets.
Um
Diamonds in from the Pecos River
Valley, um, quartz, which is one
of my favorites.
Um, I actually collect quartz
and uh copper.
So I'm just wondering how you
came to.
This particular stone.
Or
To recommend it. Thank you,
Madam Chair, and thank you, uh,
Representative. Well, I'm from
Magdalena, and we have the minds
there and it's been a big deal
in the area for a long time. New
Mexico Tech, um, actually has,
you know, the mineral museum
there, uh, at New Mexico Tech,
and they have beautiful
specimens of of the Kelly, it's
called the Kelly Smithsonite,
and um it's this one has dated
back for many, many years,
silver.
Of course, we have the silver
mines in Magdalena all across
the state of New Mexico. This
one is just so unique.
Uh, copper's unique, a lot of
other things are unique, but
this one is very unique to New
Mexico and most places really
want to get their hands on a
sample of the Kelly Smithsonite
to put on display across the US.
And so that's, and it was
brought to me uh from New Mexico
Tech, who has a huge samples of,
of the Smithsonite in their, in
their, um,
Museum.
And, uh, Madam Chair and um and
Madam Leader, um,
With, with, you know, I think
your jewelry is beautiful, by
the way, um, and I always admire
you for having beautiful
jewelry, um.
I just wonder, has there been
any sort of public input
regarding this?
Besides,
Coming from Magdalena. Uh no,
ma'am, uh, Madam Chair, uh,
Madam Representative, not that I
am aware of. There's been no
public input except for these
vetting it through the committee
process is the only thing that I
know of. And then I once again,
um, you know, there's a lot of
other states that have minerals
that are diamonds and and uh
courts and all the other things.
This one is specific.
Um, to New Mexico, majority of
it is specific to New Mexico.
And it's just very rare.
Thank you, Madam Chair and and
Madam Leader, I'm, I'm still
sort of on the fence about this.
I mean, I
You know, I think that
It's kind of hard to, yeah, I
know. I'm trying to get this
out, um, it's still kind of hard
for me to just say, yeah, that
should be the stone without
knowing that there has been a
public process. Thank you.
Representative Brago have
representative, uh, Vice Chair
Little.
Thank you, Madam Chair, I would
like to move a do pass. And for
a do pass in a second, uh.
Do we have any opposition to the
motion.
Seeing none, you have a due
pass.
Adam Chair. OK, let's move
Good morning, uh, Madam Chair
and committee, thank you for
having us again here today.
haven't been in this committee
in 3 years. I've been to and
consecutive days, so I'm very
happy.
Um, House Bill 340. Make sure
that critical DNA evidence can
be used to help solve crimes,
even if a suspect dies before
their case is fully processed.
Uh, this bill addresses two gaps
in current law that hinder
solving up in criminal cases by
allowing judges to order the
entry of DNA into the caddy,
that combined DNA index system
from suspects who died before
being charged with a felony.
It also mandates automatic DNA
entry for individuals who die in
prison or were released before
July 1997.
provided that the DNA was
collected in accordance with
law.
And with me, I have two expert
witnesses, um, commander Haock
and, and, um.
My, uh, baker who will be here
to support with um um with this
wisdom for questions.
Um, do you wanna say something,
sorry.
OK.
Let's go to the audience. Those
in support of the bill, please
raise your hands.
Those in opposition. Let's go to
online.
Anyone hoping to make public
comment in favor please raise
your hand. Anyone hoping to make
public comment in the
opposition, please raise your
hand.
Hey committee members.
Representative Zamora, Madam, I
do.
for I do pass a second. Do we
have any opposition?
Seeing none, you have a due
pass.
Thank you. Thank you.
OK, let's move along to House
Bill 367.
And you may begin
you may begin.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
We can start now.
Just kidding.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh.
Thank you committee. So
basically what this bill does is
it adds a racing days to our New
Mexico tracks. I'd like to
introduce, uh, my co-sponsor if
she'd like to say some words and
then I'll introduce my experts
if you don't, don't mind, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. This
is a bill that's been a long
time in the works. Um, I've been
working with uh many of the
constituents relevant to this
bill, and I just want to make
sure that we uh bring it up to
parity, inclusion, and equity as
far as the life racing days.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, I'd like to
introduce my expert witnesses.
We have Mr. Gary Ball and Mr.
Michael Auletta, and if you
don't mind, I'd like, uh, Mr.
Gary to talk about the bill a
little bit.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
committee.
My name is Gary Roybon. Um, this
bill basically has this uh.
Going to make stability for the
horse racing industry.
Whenever
The legislators approved.
The gaming for the race tracks,
they said the horseman will be
number one.
They will work with the casinos
or the the
I'm gonna say associations which
means racetrack operators. So
basically the racetrack operator
said, look, we need you guys.
The legislator says you guys
gotta, we gotta have racing or
else they won't let us do
gaming. So we, we agreed.
To 299 days of racing.
And that has been happening
throughout.
Since the gaming compacts
started.
So I gave you guys a packet of
how they dwindled down the
racing days.
So what it basically does is if
you have a horse that's in
training and you want to run him
and make some money.
If the person is a million
dollars or $10 but, but there's
no race for him. What do you do
with him?
What do you do? What do you do
with these horses?
So the, the associations uh are
owned by offshore companies.
None of them reside in New
Mexico. So whatever money they
siphon off on, on gambling
leaves, leaves the state.
But the money that they leave
here for racing generates the
economy.
So we have the trainers, the
ferriers, the people that sell
horses, that the, the, the
ladies that that clean the rooms
at the motels. It is, it is an
economic driver.
So by reducing the racing
opportunities, it has a negative
impact on the state of New
Mexico.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and uh
Ms. Churchirata, do you wanna
say anything or should we just
stand for questions?
I
Sure
Uh, Madam Chair, my name is
Michael.
Agusti Archuleta, um.
Myself and my family have been
involved with horse racing my
entire life.
Um, it's a culture of our state.
Going back hundreds of years.
Um
It's very important as uh Mr.
Roba was saying.
This is a big, uh,
Motivator of of uh
Of people in the state, OK, uh.
From the people that own the
hotels, the restaurants, the
people that uh
Farmed the lands, um,
The people that breed and raise
horses.
Um, and it has become
Very difficult to run horses
here in the state anymore. Um,
for various reasons, but the
biggest one is
The race tracks continually
cutting our race states.
And like Mr. Roba was saying.
Um
The money these racetracks make.
Go somewhere else.
Yet the little people, including
the grooms,
The shoers, the uh
The hay producers.
They, they get cut out and um
We appreciate your time.
Or at least listening to this.
Thank you, madam.
Thank you. Let's go to the
audience, those in support of
the bill, please raise your
hands.
OK, let's do one minute
comments.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Gabriella McCarthy, and
I'm a registered lobbyist with
the New Mexico Horsemen's
Association. I stand in strong
support of this bill as it
benefits the horse racing
industry in New Mexico, and as a
result, promotes tourism, helps
create jobs in urban and rural
areas and helps provide revenue
for the industry. Thank you.
Oh, excuse me, uh, yes, uh,
Richard Royal, uh, uh, past
horse owner and uh a participant
in the racing industry for many
years, uh,
This bill will help our racing
industry, uh, basically it's an
economic development bill, uh,
historically are racing days
have been uh re reduced
significantly over the past few
years, we used to have like
about 273 race days a year in
the past and they significantly
been reduced, uh, over the past
few years, uh, I think the last,
uh, number of race days we had
like was about 183.
So that's a significant drop in
the number of racing
opportunities uh for our
horsemen and uh uh it's a real
drop in our economic development
priorities within the state of
New Mexico.
Thank you.
OK, let's stay with the
audience. Do we have any
opposition?
OK, one minute comments, please.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Brent
Moore. I'm a registered lobbyist
for Penn Entertainment. They
operate the Raino down in Hobbs
via Park. We stand in respectful
opposition to this bill. I would
note in your FIR the state
racing commission has
highlighted that increasing the
number of live race days may put
safety and the safety and health
of equine athletes at risk. They
also note in their, in their
analysis that there's a shortage
of vets when you mandate more
race days, you raise the
question
Can those race days be conducted
safely, both for the for the
horses and needing the vets to
check on those horses. You, it's
very difficult to create demand
just by mandating it. You need
the horses, you need the vets in
order to conduct the race days.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Catherine Crociatta, and
I'm a registered lobbyist for
Sunland Park Racetrack and
Casino, Sunland Park stands in
opposition to House Bill 367,
the number of horses is down
significantly and horse racing
in New Mexico is struggling with
less demand and increased costs.
This bill is attempting to
create demand, ignoring the
reality of the economic
environment in New Mexico. There
are not enough horses as, as has
been highlighted in the FIR um
to run more.
race days in New Mexico. This
means horses will be running
more, leading to more
catastrophic injuries and um
safety for the jockeys as well,
and for these reasons, we
oppose.
Do we have any comments?
Oh, good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, Jason
Weeks, I'm a registered lobbyist
for the Albuquerque Downs
racetrack and casino. Over the
past 1520 years, number of races
has declined, and it's not
declined because the tracks
don't want to run more. The
tracks do want to run more.
There's just not horses to run
in the relevant races.
At present, we're not even able
to field full fields for
individual races now. So if you
add more races, there'll be
fewer horses in every race, and
it does not change the amount um
that is available to win.
Basically, the purses are driven
more by casino revenue or by
ration of revenue than they are
the actual horse races, um, that
are being conducted. The horse
racing industry as a whole does
not make money.
The casinos associated with the
horse tracks do make money, they
buoy the fund, which is the
purse fund. So what we've tried
to do in New Mexico, both for
horse safety and for the value
of creating a product that is
exciting is try to reduce the
number of days, so that when the
horses do race in a race, that
it's a full race. It's not a
partial field. It's a more
competitive, um, it's a more
competitive thing to watch,
which brings more entertainment
and brings more folks into the
state. So, quite frankly, the
economic driver is reducing
races and having a more
high quality product that is
being offered so we
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Marla Schultz,
registered lobbyist for Reso
Downs racetrack. Uh, we stand in
opposition of this legislation,
increased race days will hurt
the quality of horse racing in
New Mexico and throughout the
country, the equine athlete
population is dwindling, and at
Riodoso Downs, as well as the
other race tracks, as you have
heard, are held to very high
standards to protect our equine
athletes and jockeys. Too many
race days equate to too many
breakdowns. The horse racing
industry has been moving towards
quality, not quantity of this
high-end product. Horsemen have
tried in the past to overrun our
equine athletes and the federal
government had to stop in and
establish the horse racing
integrity and Safety Act to
establish guidelines that would
protect these animals and the
jockeys. Uh, we stand in strong
opposition and we hope that you
will stand in opposition of this
bill also. Thank you.
OK, let's go online. Do we have
any comments?
OK
Thomas
And, and support.
One minute, please. Thomas, can
you hear us?
Yes, sir. Thank you very much,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Tom
Goncharoff. I'm president of the
New Mexico Breeders Association
comprised of roughly 1000
members who breed, sell, own,
and race horses, while I raised
my hand in support, um, we
remain neutral on this bill,
simply for the fact that uh we
would urge the supporters of
Bill's like this, or of similar
uh regarding similar
issues to reach out to the
stakeholders, such as the New
Mexico Breeders Association, so
we could discuss this in further
detail and discuss the the
impacts pro and con. Simply put,
uh, we would have liked to have
a voice in the formulation of
this bill with the bill's
backers. Thank you.
Thank you so much, Thomas.
Yeah, Vanessa, Vanessa, can you
hear us?
Good morning. Can you hear me?
Wonderful. Um, I'm sorry, I
just, I need to kind of uh point
out that uh given the
opportunity, uh, I would love to
testify in front of the
committee, uh, based on what the
lobbyists have just told you and
what Mr. Goaroff, uh, has just
told you, uh, the fact of the
matter is the racing commission
is uh a fiduciary arm of the
race tracks. They do with the
racetrack.
bid, the cutting to race days
has been absolutely devastating
for the horsemen, and yet it has
been a boon to the tracks and
their profits, while they're
telling you that the economy is
terrible, we don't have enough
horses. They're also uh boasting
broadly about the record sale
prices and record uh races and
in the meantime, while they are
cutting safety uh standards and
uh
All of these other things to cut
corners and save money, uh, they
are cutting race days and
driving the horsemen out. Uh, I
will be, uh, presenting further
evidence regarding the racing
commission's, uh, testing is
fraudulent, uh, the, what, uh, I
mean, I would like to know.
Thank you for your comment.
He's my Ismael Turjo. Can you
hear us?
Ismael.
OK, sorry, it looks like we
cannot hear you. Uh,
We're gonna move on to Paul.
Paul, can you hear us?
Yes, I can hear you. Can you
hear me.
This is Paul Jensen. I'm the
president of the New Mexico
Horsemen's Association. I am
also a veterinary surgeon.
And
We are in favor.
Of this bill, we have 500 horses
in
Arizona and 500 horses in
California that would come to
the state.
If they have committed to come
to the state, if, if they would
want run more race day.
The, the state would improve and
veterinarians would return to
the state who have left if there
were if there were more races
and more, more work to do. The
Raino's profited $146 million
last year. The agriculture,
including horse racing, uh, part
of the economy is 3rd largest in
the state and losing race days
in the manner we have has uh has
limited the number of horses
that can afford to stay.
And, and run in the state and
there was a, there was a bill,
uh, that preceded this one
several years ago that that a
lot of uh 17 days, 17 race days
to the uh state fair meet and
some of the casinos, Rainos have
adopted that 17 day number, uh,
for, for their meats as well,
which is, which is really cut
the racing.
Thank you so much, Paul.
Thank you.
Anyone hoping to make comments
in opposition, please raise your
hand.
Hey, committee members, I have
Representative Lu Han, Vice
Chair Little, and Representative
Zamora. Representative Lujan.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um, and
I.
I just like to, to say that I am
a sponsor on this bill and I'd
like to, um,
Ask some questions to.
Our primary sponsors here. Um,
As we heard testimony today,
Madam Chair, um,
Representatives
Does this bill at all, um,
Revoke or
Um
Go against any of the federal
guidelines that we have in place
in regards to this.
Sport.
Madam Chair, no.
Madam Chair, in regards to the
safety of of the animals and we
just heard again in testimony
from veterinarian, one
veterinarian, and others that
That, um, would come to the
forefront if there were issues
with the healthcare and health
of of of the race, you know what
is being asked in this bill,
they would be adamantly against
this bill. Is that correct,
Madam Chair, Representative?
Madame Chair, one second, my
expert.
Um, Madam Cha committee.
Rio do so uh just advised us
about a safety issue that is
very grand.
Rio doo
Has an opted out that they are
going to put the thoroughbred
racing on the shelf.
I read also this year.
That is a safety concern because
HSA regulates thoroughbreds.
So that is telling me that their
track is not up to par.
And, and we have an issue with
that because there's a lot of
people, readers, owners,
trainers, where are they gonna
go with these thoroughbreds?
If Reid also is going to put
them on the shelf because their
track is not safe. If it's not
safe for a thoroughbred, how can
it be safe for a court horse?
That's my question.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for that response. I think
that there are mixed, uh, there
are mixed messages going on
here, Madam Chair, in regards to
this piece of legislation, um,
and we heard from a majority of
people, uh, talking about.
And putting on record that this
is a driving.
Um, sports and revenues for
certain.
People for certain population.
What this bill is doing is
trying to even out the the
playing field here and um Madam
Chair Representative, can we,
can we comment to that?
Well, the, the, the, the thing
about raising that it's not
really about racing.
This is about economic
development.
The horse racing industry used
to generate, be the biggest
generator of the state's economy
at one time.
Well, once oil and gas got big.
Casinos came on board the, the
gaming compacts came on board.
The tables have changed now the
racetrack operators are number
one and
The racetrack says no, we, we
don't need you. You're the
residue.
The legislators in the beginning
said no, horse racing will be
the premiere.
Number one, and gaming and
gambling will be #2. The tables
have been reversed.
This is God has a negative
impact, I believe, uh, 3 years
ago, the horse racing industry
generated $677 million.
So people that run restaurants,
sell trucks, buy cars, they
don't even know what horse
racing is, but they get
impacted.
It, it hurts, it hurts the
state's economy.
It is a big economic driver. We
need to understand that. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, I just want to add
and thank you for the last
statement, I was gonna say it's
a huge economic driver for our
state goes without saying I
remember growing up as a young
child to and being taken by my
godfather regularly um to the
horse races. And I can also
personally attest to the fact
that if safety to humans, to
horses, 2, are there any safety
issues whatsoever. They would be
addressed and no one would be
subjected to that. Thank you for
the question.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair, um, and
Sponsors, I also too have asked
other um um
Animal, um.
Advocates in, in before uh
coming into this bill and they
didn't have issues I'm hearing
that industry is proposing
today, Madam Chair, um, I'd also
add that, um,
When I'm hearing that we're
driving.
Our athletes in the sport out of
our state. It, it is, that is
the concern and I'm wondering,
uh, if this, if you can respond
to
That, that driving out of of
this sport again, you did
mention it, but how does that
hurt our athletes and our, our
horses, our breeders and what
this industry used to be, so,
um, robust in our state.
Madam,
um, there is a lot of uh
Trainers and owners that have
elected to go to Canterbury to
Paradise.
Because there's a shortage of
races, so they're, they're
taking our money, our horses,
and taking them enhancing other
other parts of the country.
On the other hand, if we have
guaranteed racing days like Mr.
Jensen said, these people will
come from California to Fila
race. So there's a race in New
Mexico that fits their horse,
they're liable to ship their
horse here to to compete. And
when they come here, they bring
their money.
And that helps our economy, but,
but further than that, we have,
we have safe horses.
The racing commission before any
meet shall commence, the racing
commission shall make sure that
it is a safe racetrack. That is
the job of the regulator, not of
the racetrack operators.
The racetrack operators are
saying we are going to do this.
It's not their job. They're
licensee just like any trainer.
They need to abide by the racing
commissions statutes and
regulations, they will create a
safe environment.
For their horses
And for the writers, and that's
what these regulators are
supposed to be doing.
Thank you, ma'am.
I'm sure that's all.
Madam Vice Chair Little.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
thank you for bringing this bill
forward and um I appreciate the
opportunity to ask about this.
So one of the questions that I
have, um, Madam Chair, uh,
representatives and and and
guests, um.
I've heard some of the uh the
discussion so far, but I have a
kind of a direct question about
why live horse racing days.
Why can't they be increased and
brought back in line.
With the original established
days of 287 days per year, which
I'm understanding correctly, are
part of the compacts that were
entered into when.
When this industry became
established.
Um,
Madam Chair, committee, this was
a gentleman's agreement between
the associations and the
racetrack owners and uh the
breeders, the owners, all of
the, the people that are
involved in this, in this
industry.
So it was a gentleman's
agreement, and and it and it
held, it held good. We, we, we
have a history of running.
Approximately 280 days.
Since the compact started, but
last year and during the COVID,
it's been whittled down to 187.
And that, that really has a
negative because
All the money that's being
generated by the casinos, we
only get 20% of net take, so we
get the crumbs.
They, they enjoy all of these
millions of dollars and send
them out of state. We, we need,
we need to be able to hold 20%
of net take.
For the racing industry, so that
that money stays here.
It's a, it's a, it's a big
economic driver, I hate to
repeat it, but
That that's what this is
basically about, and it will,
and it will bring folks from out
of state also.
Like Riosa Rioso's racing is all
people from out of state.
Because it's a quarter horse
thing.
But they do bring money, the
tourism is, I'm sure happy with
that.
And I hope I answered your
question, uh, Madam Chair.
Yes, uh, thank you very much,
um, Madam Chair, um, and the
representatives.
Uh, I'm gonna follow that line
then by asking
If
The number of race days are tied
to gaming in the Rossinos like
the, the machines that are
there.
Um
Are they operating fewer days if
there were 187 days.
Of racing, are they, it's my
understanding, and you know, I.
This is a personal question I'm
wondering, uh, interested in. So
are they not having
Uh, gaming taking place on non
race days.
Or simulcast days, Madame, from
what I understand, the, the
casinos operate all the time,
whether there's races or not,
uh, what this comes down to,
from what I understand is it's
more profitable for these race
tracks just to have the casinos
and to have the horses, but when
they sign these agreements or
when they came up with these
agreements, part of them getting
a casino license was that they
would support the racing
industry, which is, what is uh
uh the argument right now, which
they're not appearing to do.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Representative
for um.
Answering my question.
Um, I think I have other
questions, but I think those
would probably be more
appropriately directed to the
resino industries then it would
be regarding this bill
specifically. So thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Vice Chair
Representative Zamora.
Madam Chamova do pass.
I still had discussion manager
representative before we took
the vote.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Just a
couple of questions for you
guys, not a couple, like a few.
Handful. So I'm just wondering.
We're, we're talking about the
compacts versus our statue. Can
you tell me how many days of
racing is mandated in the
compacts.
Madam Chair Representative.
There is no uh
Pacific
Amount of these
Uh, this was basically, uh, in
good faith by the racetrack
operators of the associations
and, and the horsemen.
And basically it was being done
on good faith and that is why we
feel that it is time.
That we create some stability in
this industry. That's what this
bill does. Thank you, Madam
Chair Representative. And then I
heard a figure it was 187 days.
I believe. Can you tell me what
that figure is and how did we
arrive on that? Was that from
the racing commission itself?
Where do we get that? The
correspondence that I left with
you shows a pattern.
Of racing days past and present.
The present is 187 days.
And what you're looking at there
is a proposal that would work.
But there is your history that
you're looking at right now.
So you look at 287, 235, and
then all of a sudden 181.
That is a big, big difference.
There is no stability.
At all.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. And then did you
guys work with the racing
commission on this? So I believe
that someone from the racing
commission is on there, they're,
they're hand raised. I don't
think I heard from them.
Did you guys work with them on
that Madam Chair, I'll let my
expert answer that, but from
what I understand, uh,
I guess I won't get into that,
but I don't know if you want an
answer. Let me be very brief.
Madam Chair, uh, and committee.
This, this is, I'm gonna be
brief.
The racing commission.
Is appointed by the governor.
To enforce the horse racing Act
to make sure that it's safe and
equitable with respect to
agriculture, tourism, horse
breeding, and, and it is, it
isn't statute, by the way.
The racing commission has no say
as to what we do here. Their job
is to enforce what we do here.
Thank you, Ma.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. OK, so from what
I gather, we did not talk with
them. That's yes or no.
Madam Chair
long. I have not heard anything
from any of the racing uh
employees to include the, the
director.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. And then also I
heard some concerns regarding
safety.
And I know that they would say
we would need more
veterinarians, etc. from, from
public comment and then I got
some emails about this as well.
Could you tell me a little bit
about that? Cause I do want to
make sure that we're having safe
racing while we're increasing
the number. Can you go into that
a little bit for me on, on what
specific guidelines and and
mandates that we have in place
to ensure the safety and what
have the tracks been doing
specifically to increase that
safety because I believe that
they have their own safety plans
that they have been updating in
the last few years.
The the associations by mandate,
Madam Chair committee.
Uh, by mandate by NMAC.
The associations have
Only one thing that they must do
and shall do.
They shall abide by Emma.
The regulators will go in there
and approve every racetrack that
it's going to be safe for all
employees on the backside.
That they will comply with the
track surface, and they will do
a complete, complete.
Walk through on the grounds
before any race meet commences,
so the regulators are charged
with that, not the associations.
The associations are only
licensees. They need to abide by
the racing commission, whatever
rules they have, and if they
break them, they shall be fined.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. And then can you
tell me how many racehorses are
there today? Do we know?
I do not have that figure, but I
think if I can go back to what
Doctor Jensen just said.
We have enough horses.
To be able to fill races, if you
look at the schedule that we're
proposing.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. So current,
currently,
I'm sorry. Yeah, that door keeps
opening currently, do we, we, we
do have enough racing horses
today that currently do races.
Is that what I under, I just
want to make sure we're not like
on a deficit where we just can't
race at all.
Madam Chair committee, the, the
Response that Doctor Jensen gave
you is that we have horses that
have gone out of state because
there's no racing opportunities
for them here.
So if you guys give us the rep
if we get this, these people are
gonna come back and they're
going to feel racism.
And they're gonna enhance every
community.
In New Mexico.
No, I, I, I think we, we do want
more racing, right? I, I, I
don't disagree on that one. I
just, I'm wondering if mandating
more days could actually
Do the opposite effect in some
cases, and I just wanted to make
sure that we were taking that
into consideration as well. So
Madam Chair, um, if you look at
our schedule, proposed schedule.
These associations shall meet
before the commission to get a
raceme approved.
This is in and Mac title 15.
So every May, the association
shall go to the commission and
propose their racing dates for
the coming year.
And the ones that approved these
racing dates, of course, the 5
commissioners.
On the racing commission board.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, and then I'm not
very too familiar with, with
how, how it works totally. Uh,
so racing is the commission
overseeing racing on tribal land
and are there any
tribes that are doing racing in
the state now,
Madam Chair, the, the gaming
compacts.
Have specific language where
only
Uh, racetracks shall have
racing.
Uh, there is some simulcast
issues.
That have arisen because of uh
the racing commissions, uh,
ability not to embrace the
Horsemen's Association. On the
other hand, I don't want to get
too complicated. The Native
Americans can have simulcasting
than they do, but they are not.
And in no way, shape or form,
even thinking about operating a
racetrack.
For for the compacts to to be
valid.
And uh last few questions, how,
what's the percentage of tax
that Rainos must pay to the
state versus what tribes pay to
the state. We know that figure?
I know it's higher. I just don't
know what it is.
The, the, the figure that you're
asking for would be something
that you would have to get from
the racing commission or the
LFC.
But I do know that we're
supposed to be getting 20% of
net take per statute.
For horse racing. The rest of
it, you'd have to get with the
LFC on that.
Great. Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. I just have so
many more questions on this, and
I know we're pressed for time,
so I, I'm gonna be a no on the
vote because I just don't have
the time and uh.
Thank you.
OK, so I have um agreed to hear
um
One comment, I guess they had
their name, their, their hand
up, and we skip them, so I'm
gonna hear that one comment
only.
One minute, please.
Ismael, can you hear it? Can you
hear us?
Hi, good morning, Madam Chair,
committee members, excellent. uh
Ismael El Trejo executive
director of the New Mexico
Racing Commission. I'll be real
brief, appreciate the one minute
timeline, but, uh, uh, one thing
that we need to be assured of is
that we continue to have safe
racing in New Mexico two years
ago, we had a very rough year in
which uh the, the commission uh
experienced a high number of
catastrophic breakdowns, which
means horses that die because of
racing on the racetrack.
Uh, one thing is to point out
that's an important figure that
uh is the number of registered
uh Thoroughbreds in North
America in 1990 was 44,143 in
2023, that estimate or it's
estimated at 18,500. That is a
significant decrease in the
horse population. So uh that
spread amongst the whole
country.
In New Mexico, according to a
Dr. David Dixon of the
Department of Economics,
University of New Mexico.
Bulls bread in New Mexico have
declined 51% between 2008 and
2016, and since 2016, it's
declined even further by 31%.
Thank you. Thank you so much as
well. OK, we'll go to our vote.
We have a uh motion by
representative Zamora for DuP
pass, a second by a
representative Barrego please
call roll.
Yes.
Representative block? No.
Representative Borego.
Representative Wuhan.
Representative Mejia? Yes.
Madame Fourier
Representative Zamora.
Yes.
Madam Vice Chair. Madam Chair.
81.
OK, you have a you pass. Thank
you.
Madam Chair Committee.
