are also
Response.
So we're going to committee
members as well as the
presenters and then those that
will are here to up to 2 but
not.
Try to keep it under 2.
A full committee and
representatives thank you Madam
Chair. um, I'm here to present
House Bill, uh.
245, the compensation for
veterans benefits. I have an
expert witness, Bob Carroll, US
Marine Corps, you vet, um,
Cynthia Archuleta, USMC also
Veterans of Foreign Wars.
I am so sorry. I did a, uh, a
representative Elio Alcon Bubu.
I forgot to call roll.
And God rest his soul.
I didn't mean anything bad, but
anyway, go ahead and please call
roll.
Representative Anaya here.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Hall.
Representative Johnson?
Representative Mejia.
Here.
Representative Ortiz.
Representative Reed,
Representative Terazas.
Representative Torres Velasquez.
Vice Cha Chavez.
Chairwoman Royal Caballero.
All right, we may proceed. We
have corm. Sorry, keep going.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So
Cynthia Archuleta for USMC, um,
and she currently works with the
Veterans of Foreign Affairs.
Foreign wars, sorry.
And General Herrera, Cabinet
secretary of the Mexico, so I'll
keep it short, Madam Chair. This
legislation is to prohibit
individuals or entities from
receiving compensation
for helping someone obtain
veterans benefits unless allowed
under federal law.
Practice
Practices Act to prevent
deception or unauthorized
practices in assisting veterans
with their benefit claims. The
goal is to protect our veterans
from exploitation and ensure
that assistance is provided only
by qualified authorized parties
in accordance with federal
regulations. I'm gonna pass on
to my expert when this.
Uh, good afternoon, Madam Chair
and members of the committee. My
name is Bob Carroll, and I'm a
vice chair of the Veterans and
Military Families Caucus, HB 245
before you today is a bipartisan
veterans bill supported by
Democrats, Republicans, the
veterans of foreign wars, the
New Mexico Department of Veteran
Services and many others whose
goals.
Is to protect veterans and their
disability benefits.
Which, which had been earned in
the line of duty.
So right now there's a federal
statute prohibiting people from
acting as claim agents or
attorneys in the preparation
presentation or prosecution of
any claim under VA laws unless
they're duly accredited by the
VA.
Uh
With that accreditation comes
training guidelines and limited
fees. However, in 2006, the law
was revised to delete any
penalties for violation of the
law at that point, the
floodgates opened for
unaccredited actor actors who
offered to help veterans with
their VA disability claims in
exchange for a piece of the
veteran's disability benefits.
Uh, when the pack Act was
passed, and that's the bill we
may be familiar with where they
began covering people who were
uh
Got chronic diseases from burn
pits and other toxins, uh, then
the floodgates were open. It was
uh a lot of people jumped into
the game, estimate that there's
well over $100 million has gone
to unaccredited.
Actors
Money that should have gone to
the veterans themselves.
A federal statute was proposed
in 2023 to close the loopholes,
but it got bogged down and
didn't get a vote.
So the states have checked in.
If you have your uh handout, uh,
there's a map of the states who
have passed.
Laws they're very similar to the
one we have here. There's 9
states that have uh
Pass these
Laws that would prevent
Unaccredited actors from getting
paid, uh, they have to go
anybody who wants to be uh
helping a veteran has to be
accredited by the VA, so we
would be the 10th state, and I
think we're going to see more
and more after that as
As a
People get used to it.
Uh, so this, am I finished?
Yeah, I'm almost done. uh in
Mexico, we've got 65 reps.
Accredited representatives every
office you go to Department of
Veteran Services as an
accredited rep. They do
everything for free.
Um
And then we have veteran service
organizations that have been
accredited by the VA. They do
everything for free.
Uh, now you have some lawyers
who are also accredited. Now
they will handle some appeals
and they'll have their fees,
they'll be governed by the VA as
well as they they're required to
get the training and the uh
Uh
And the guidelines. So,
We have a pretty good situation
in here in New Mexico and we
don't want to open it up to
everybody and his brother to
come here and start uh.
Um
Steering veterans away from the
free service over to the paid
service.
And
I can just say this, there's a
couple of misconceptions. I'll
go real quick, but there's that,
you know, that it takes 3 years,
you know, because, uh,
Things are so bad in New Mexico
once did the pack that came out,
I filed the disability claim.
Uh, in June.
And I got a final.
Ruling at the end of December,
so that didn't take me 3 years
and I'm, you know, I'm not the
expert some of these others are.
I would just pass that on to
You know, we're, we're we're
we're doing well here in New
Mexico and we want to keep doing
well, and I will pass the baton
to Cynthia Archuleta, who
outranked me in the Marine Corps
by quite a bit and has more
experience, so, um,
Cynthia
Hi, uh, Madam Chair, members of
the committee, my name is uh
Cynthia Archuleta. I'm here.
I did 22 years in the Marine
Corps. I'm also an accredited
service officer and I have been
since 2014.
Um, I do not charge for my
services and never have. These
services are free from
accredited representatives like
myself.
We cannot accept gifts or money
from veterans ever.
Unaccredited claims consultants
continue to operate outside the
law because they do not want to
become accredited.
To be clear, there is nothing
stopping them from having their
employees accredited today.
Nobody is allowed to charge for
medical advice except licensed
medical practitioners. Nobody
can charge for legal advice
except for those admitted to
their respective bar
associations.
For tax preparation, you need to
get certified or be a licensed
CPA or enrolled agent with the
IRS.
Veterans' claims assistant
should be no different. VA
accreditation means the
individual working with the
veteran's medical information,
their social security number,
their bank account information
and other PII are vetted and
accredited.
They make excuses that it would
be too hard to get every
individual accredited. Don't
believe that. Attorneys are
admitted to the bar, not law
firms.
Doctors have a medical license,
not the hospital. The VFW is not
accredited, but our service
officers are.
These unaccredited claims
companies should be held to the
same standard and not allowed a
free pass simply because it's
too hard.
It should not matter whether
their clients willingly choose
to use these services, it should
not matter that some of their
clients are satisfied with the
results of those unaccredited
companies.
We do not legislate based on
Yelp reviews. Companies
operating outside the law must
be reined in.
It should be our responsibility
to require anyone who handles a
VA claim and all their personal
medical information to be
accredited and follow federal
laws and regulation. Anything
else is unacceptable.
Thank you.
Madam Chair I'll be brief. Uh,
thank you for the opportunity.
Um, under title under Title 38
under the Code of Federal
regulations. It's very clear
that only accredited persons may
entertain uh doing this, this
type of work.
And has has been seated already,
um, it's imperative that we hold
everybody to that minimum
standard on the on the code of
federal regulations. The state
of New Mexico we pride ourselves
as veterans helping veterans and
New Mexicans or New Mexicans and
a lot of these businesses that
are coming here, many people
that they may be assisting
aren't even in the state.
And I, I believe that it's
imperative that we put some
guardrails here for our
veterans. I believe in veterans
having a choice and that the
these uh businesses should
provide full disclosure that
everything that they're trying
to to charge a veteran for is
done for by free, by accredited
agents throughout our state.
Thank you
Santa
All right, so
Uh,
to hospitalrian M. Johnson.
Hi, can you all hear me?
Yes, please proceed.
Thank you. Uh, my name is Brian
Johnson. I am the executive vice
president of Veteran's Guardian.
Let me just touch on a few
things. Uh, first and foremost,
I want to read uh 38 USC code
5901 that says no individual may
act as an agent or attorney in
the preparation presentation or
prosecution of a claim under any
laws administered by the
secretary unless they've been
recognized for such purposes.
Uh, private claims companies do
not act as agents or attorneys.
We are
not operating illegally. That is
a blatant falsehood that is
being spread.
With all due respect, another
blatant falsehood is 9 states
have not passed similar laws.
Only 2, New Jersey and Maine,
and they're currently facing
federal litigation right now
because those laws are
unconstitutional. Um, you said
that it shouldn't matter that if
a veteran wants to use one of
these services. Well, that's
exactly what we're talking about
here is Veteran choice.
And veterans should choose how
they pursue their disability
claims. Now, we all want
regulations and guardrails to
protect against the bad actors.
But what you're talking about
here is going further and beyond
federal law and shutting down a
legal federally regulated
entity, and we want guardrails.
So let's work together and go
against the bad practices, let's
not shut down an entire
industry. And in 200
when the federal law was
changed, that's when the
attorneys were allowed to
operate in the space. And
they're charging 33.3% of entire
back pay.
Um, I did announce that if you
could keep it at one minute and
we've allowed a little over a
minute, so can you wrap up real
quickly? Finish your statement,
and then uh.
You'll need, we'll need to move
on, OK.
Any others than in opposition on
Zoom.
Seeing no others now we're.
Zoom those that wish to speak in
favor please raise your hand. So
for, if you miss the
instructions at the beginning, I
indicated that because we had
such a lot uh late date.
That we were today going to
accept comments and please have
them make your comments within
about one minute, and I won't
cut you off at the minute, but
if you proceed any.
Longer than that, finish your
statement, I will let you, I
will cut you off. Thank you.
Ashley Berry.
Hi, yes, thank you so much. Um,
I'm actually speaking in
opposition. My name is Ashley
Berry, senior vice president of
communications for the National
Association for Veteran Rights.
We are a national trade
association dedicated to
promoting ethical and
transparent business practices
among companies serving the
service disabled veteran
community. I'm also a former
television journalist, a federal
senior executive from the US
Department of Veterans Affairs.
I spent my career advocating for
veterans and exposing the
systemic
failures that too often leave
them struggling to access the
care and benefits they've
earned. That is why I'm here
today. Uh, House Bill 245, while
well intended as Brian said, uh,
threatens to further restrict
access to assistance for
veterans seeking help with their
claims, while never supports
measures to protect veterans
from bad actors. This bill, we
believe, places unnecessary
limits on their ability to
choose qualified professionals
who can guide them through an
already complicated and
au cra tic system. And I just
want to mention, uh, the reality
of wait times, just like in
Phoenix, where I was a reporter
for CBS News, remains dire in
New Mexico, the numbers I have
over 140,000 veterans, 44 VSO
representatives. And so that
means that there are more,
yes, massed almost 2 minutes
already.
OK, thank you very much.
All right, that was in
opposition. We're no longer
taking any other opposition.
Those in favor on Zoom.
who wish to speak in favor,
please, and then just remember,
try to keep your comments to one
minute.
I'll allow you to finish your.
All right.
So now there are no others. All
right, so you know the rule,
you've been sitting here. We're
gonna take Mike to you.
If you would, um, go ahead and
Come up and make your
statements. There's only one in
the audience.
Thank you
Yes, Chairwoman, members of the
committee, my name is Ray
Collis, and I'm here on behalf
of Veteran Benefits Guide to
speak in opposition to House
Bill 245 as currently written.
The gentleman in front of me, he
recited the federal law in which
we actually agree. Most of the
restrictions in this bill, we
actually agree with. And that is
in that you must be accredited
if you are going to operate as
uh um if you were going to
represent a veteran before the
VA or provide legal services. We
do not represent the veteran
before the VA. We do not provide
legal services and we do not act
as their agent on record. So I
want to make it very clear that
I think there's a misconception
between.
services we provide and the
services that are provided which
requires you to be accredited.
The biggest issue that we have
with accreditation has nothing
to do with the complexity of it,
but it has everything to do with
the fact that federal law says
if you are accredited and you're
providing such services that you
must do so for free.
So if we're being asked to
provide our services for free,
that essentially would put us
out of business. The only issue
that we have with this bill is
that that section. Thank you.
Thank you very much.
One more time, many others in
opposition. OK, seeing no others
in opposition. Those that are
here.
To speak in favor.
Uh, chairman and members of the
committee, thank you for letting
me speak. My name is Jim Haddix.
I'm here to represent the
Veterans Reformed Works
Department in New Mexico.
Um, on behalf of our state
commander, um, a statement, the
veteran of Forum were strongly
supports the bipartisan
bicameral legislation introduced
by New Mexico State Senator
Brandt and Representative
Sariano and Martinez that would
protect New Mexico veterans from
exploited unaccredited claims
agents, commonly known as claim
sharks. Their bill would prevent
unaccredited individuals and
companies from charging
unauthorized fees and deceiving
veterans with unsubstantiated
implications of specific benefit
awards. Alternatively, it would
require a written agreement in
specific situation in which an
accredited slaves claims agent.
They charge a fee for assistance
that here's to federal law.
Unaccredited claims agents got a
foot in the veteran community
after the 2006 recession of
criminal penalties against these
actors, absentees penalties,
only resource available to the
Department of Veteran Affairs as
a cease and desist letter
despite the claims agents
violating numerous laws and
regulations by using aggressive
bargaining techniques, charging
exorbitant fees typically 5 to
10 times the veterans' monthly
compensation be a complicated
contracts and illegally
obtaining veterans benefits
login credentials.
And that's my time up. I thank
you for that.
Thank you.
There's
In favor, all right, none other,
so, um.
Would you like any questions,
madam Chair.
you it's a committee, we have
representative Mejia.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
um, the veterans received the
benefit.
To receive the benefits they are
entitled to. Representative,
excuse me, can you pull your mic
this part and then there you go.
Let's see if that works and
maybe closer to you.
Yeah
Thank you. Can you hear me now?
OK
Thank you for bringing this bill
forward. Uh, I strongly agree
that, uh,
Veterans will receive 100% of
their benefits, they're entitled
to.
So, um
Madam.
Thank you. We're on committee
questions. Any others that wish
to um
Raise questions
Right, what is the wish of the
committee, Representative
Garcia.
I'm I'm sorry I was distracted.
I just had some questions.
First
Well, let's finish with the
motion, and then we'll come back
to you, um, Representative
Garcia.
it made the motion do pass
motion seconded by
Representative Chair Wanda
Johnson.
And we'll go ahead and go back
to excuse me for
being distracted. Just a couple
of quick questions, um.
I was kind of going through this
and, and, uh
Understanding that uh
You know, I, and I had a long
conversation with uh
Martinez over this and, and, and
trying to figure out.
If there are any delays, I mean,
because you hear
On one side there's delays, and
another side you hear there are
no delays.
My, my father's a
Uh
to veteran of Vietnam and, and
he's going through this and it's
taking a long time and my, my
concerns are, my question is,
What is the wait time right now?
And, and let's let me clarify my
question because it's kind of a
real.
To submit the applications is
one thing.
And when you submit them, then
the return, basically you're
putting it in the hands of the
VA to answer, which can delay
that process.
Is there delays?
In
Madam Chair Representative, are
there any delays?
Currently in submitting
applications.
answer
And
Um, Madam Chair, uh,
representative, uh, Terrazas.
So
Currently with the PAC Act, the,
the volume of claims that were
put into the the VA federal
system.
We're, we're astronomical and
those have been being worked
down considerably and obviously
and
Every time they come out with a
new, uh, presumptive condition,
there's another big push there.
giving
applications into the system is
a process between
Whoever is assisting with the
process and the veteran putting
together a viable claim that can
go forward.
So, if somebody wants to just
submit a claim and an intent to
file, I could go in today right
now online and I can do it and,
and take her.
Take care of that, and I have a
year then to submit all the
justification documents and
they'll they'll they'll work
that piece for me.
But to get it done properly, it
does take some time to get the,
the application in once it's in,
Then it's at the will of the VA
and the, the region of where
it's going to be adjudicated.
It's not a problem of the number
of VSOs or the number of people
processing within the state of
New Mexico because once it's in
the queue, it's in the queue.
Those adjudicators at the VA and
the federal level is where
there, there is a, a delay and,
and some backup. But currently
right now of a claim return is
about 139 days from
Being submitted and getting your
initial decision back.
There there's a lot of claims
that are people are are saying
that it's years and years that
you're waiting. Some of these,
if they're alluding to appeals.
That have been
Pushed back or adjudicated and
going through the lawyer.
Through the, the with lawyers
through processes that can
indeed take up to 3 years, some
4 years, we've had veterans that
have dealt with lawyers for 4
years on, on appeals that have
to go and and represent them
for, for the conditions and with
the VA so that is not out of
sorts, but on average, you're
looking at about 139 day return.
OK, Madam Chair Representative,
secretary, so what, what you're
telling me is there is no wait
time to file claims at this
point.
Madam Cherry represented us.
That's not what I said. I'm
sorry. I didn't get you then.
OK, so if you, if you walk into
our offices today, we would
take, do an intake form with
you, find out what
Exactly what you were trying to
claim, tell you what information
you need to show up with, and we
would set aside a time to, to do
that with, and that's probably
within the next week that we
would sit down to start that
process with you.
So, so if that indeed would be a
delay. It's not an immediate,
but it's not anything like
people are waiting months and
months trying to get an
appointment or that they're
unable to contact one of the
certified accredited VSOs in the
state.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. That's what I
was looking for. That, that was
the answer. Sorry. And so my
understanding from reading this,
reading this on page 2 section
B3 line 17 through 20, um.
The section would would only
allow compensation fee for uh to
be charged after the initial
claim has been denied, and I'm
assuming that's for appeals and
that's where a
Uh, attorney or accredited.
Individual could then.
Then, uh, charge for the
services that, do I have that
right? Let your uh
representative to us, that is
correct. Nobody is authorized to
charge on an initial claim for a
veteran.
And so, you know, I,
I.
Unfinished, but
I was still fumbling with my
words before, but Madam Chair,
thank you very much. And so, um
I'm sure Representative, so I
think what, what, what we're, we
were
I, we want to protect veterans
100% and so we, you know, we
hear things.
Uh, where there's lines and
there's, there's things that are
slowing things down. So, uh,
that, that's what made us get
some pause and and and hear it
from you that, you know, are
their lines, are they, or weak
times or not, you know, are
there no wait times, scheduling
an appointment in a week is not
to be something severe, so, uh,
that was good to hear. Thank you
very much, man.
So any others we're back on the
motion.
I'm gonna go in with um there is
a motion for a due pass but
Um, go ahead and ask your
question, representative.
Mm
So, um, Madam Chair, members of
the committee, and presenters,
thank you, um, for caring so
much about our veterans and
going to such detail in terms of
making sure that they get all of
their benefits. Um, I know that
sometimes it's very hard to deal
with the government. I, um, just
retired and had to deal with
Social Security and when I
could get through, they were so
very helpful but sometimes I was
on the phone for hours waiting,
just waiting to get through, and
I imagine that's a similar
situation with um the veterans
um benefit uh process, um, so
I'm just wondering, um, and, and
this may have just been
explained, but all of this is
new to me, so forgive me if this
was just explained to
Representative Razas, um, what
you're saying.
It sounds like, is it no one
can.
Or uh
Um, no one can get paid for
helping them with, with these
benefits.
Um, in this bill, is that
correct?
Or anybody filing an initial
claim may not get compensated
for doing so if after the
initial claim is done and it
comes back and they want to
appeal, they may pay for
services through a lawyer or
some of these agencies to
accomplish that and have them
represent them against the VA
for their, their, their appeals.
Um, and I'm
So we're back to the question.
One last time, no more.
Uh, we're closing the question,
so we're gonna call the question
now and um.
Go for a roll call vote.
I'm.
Representative Anaya.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Hall.
Yes
Representative Johnson?
Representative Mejia.
Yes.
Representative Ortiz.
Representative Reed,
Yes.
Representative Terazas.
Representative Torres Velasquez.
Yes.
Vice Cha Chavez.
Ballero.
of 10 to 0, you have a
duplication.
Thank you.
ify for your patience.
All right, so
We're gonna go through the
agenda real quickly because I
have
Is it correct representative
Hall you wish to.
Uh, role house Bill 299.
Yes, ma'am.
So I just want to remind
everybody on the on the
committee, all the members.
Um, that if you wish to make any
changes to the agenda, to please
notify me directly.
And that way I can ascertain.
Um, how we're gonna move with
the agenda and make that
announcement beforehand, because
what we do is anyone that's here
for those particular, so now we
have um.
Uh, Representative Hobb.
I think you're on for 2 House
Bill 2.
That's right.
And representative um Mirabal
Moya, will you be joining him?
If you can, I mean, you're
welcome in our committee.
You've been sitting patiently.
All right, you may begin at any
time a representative when
you're ready.
chair committee.
Good afternoon
I'm gonna be presenting House
Bill 251 today.
An act relating to educational
retirement.
Providing additional options to
change the beneficiary for
retired members.
Who have designated a spouse as
a beneficiary.
Short synopsis of this is.
The idea of the bill is, is to
Give people who have had one.
Beneficiary in the past, the
ability to change it.
I'm going to defer to my expert
witness to
Explain that a little further.
That helps
I
this, this would bring uh ERB's
statutes in, in line with uh
Perra's statutes. So they allow
for that one time changing of
the beneficiary, um, and this
would simply align that uh.
that allowance with uh the
public Employees Retirement
Association.
stand for questions, Madam
Chair. Thank you.
go to the um one.
On Zoom and all right, seeing
none, uh, anyone on Zoom wishing
to sun.
All right, we'll go to the
audience. Is there anyone in the
audience here in opposition to
House Bill 251, right?
Anyone in the audience in favor
of to house.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Stan
rounds for the school
superintendents. We're in full
support of this bill. Thank you
for bringing forward uh to the
sponsors.
Thank you.
All right. Seeing no other uh
others back to committee and
we're beginning to, um, a list
and a person on the list for
questions is Representative
Terazas. Madam,
uh, expert
Archuleta.
2
It seems that I'll start with
two questions. One is.
On page 6, line 8.
It says that they can exercise.
One time irrevocable option.
My question is, um, Madam Chair,
Representative, uh, expert.
Um
Is there a reason that it's
irrevocable and number 2 is
Um, can it be done more than
once? Why, why can't it be done
more than once?
Madam Chair, represents, the
reason that it can't be done
more than once is because once
the
Retiree selects the benefit.
There's an actuarial calculation
that's performed. So if we're
changing it and depending upon
the age of the beneficiary, it
would change the value of the
benefit that that member
receives. So upon the
retirement, that's what
I get that now, OK.
That makes sense. OK, Madam
Chair, Representative, um, the
second question that I have is
on the same page, uh, 6921 where
it
It, it's a retired member shall
pay $100 to the board.
Um
To change basically to to change
that for the. Can you help
explain that a little bit? So
Madam Chair Representative
Tarazas, so this is the new
language that's been proposed as
part of this bill and uh
consulting with our general
counsel, it's also referenced in
the original section of the
bill. So I believe it was
changed in 2011 at that point in
time.
I wasn't part of the
organization, but I suspect the
reason for the changes we were
probably having our actuary
perform the calculation of what
that value was going to be when
changed, uh, I believe that that
is now performed by staff
in-house, but at the time being,
as you can imagine, uh,
consulting actuary probably
charges a premium for uh the
calculation. So fast forward to
today, I believe that the system
uh completes that process, but
it is also referenced in the
original sections of the bill in
two other places.
That being said, Moamer
Representative, would, would you
consider
Uh, waving that fee, uh,
representative if.
If that was possible.
Be
chair and a representative
Terazos, we'd have to amend it
out of the different sections of
the D. Section D as well as E.
So it would need to be taken out
from those other places,
otherwise we'd only be charging.
Uh, those that aren't.
We're seeing that chair
representative CD.
Section D and
You, I'll be one section E.
I see it start on my 20 minute
chair representative.
Where, where does the eagle, I'm
sorry, I can't for some reason I
can't write it.
It it's stricken over here and.
too.
Madam Chair Representative Teraz
says they're both on page 4,
starting on line 4 and also on
line 23.
And and just to note that it
would result in a small uh
fiscal impact. I don't know if
that changes the trajectory of
the bill, but obviously we'd
have to go back and run the
calculation on what that
changes, but it would.
Translate to a small
Man representative sent me
trying to do this on a fly just
trying to, you know, make this
sufficient, um, would.
Would, uh
Madam Chair Representative and
expert be willing in Arleta be
willing to look at that and
maybe see if that that can be
minimized or or eliminated at
all.
all possibility
Through the next committee if
this passes.
That be friendly?
Madam Chair, represented us, uh,
yes.
Thank you man I'm sure that's
all. Anybody else wish to ask a
question?
Represented
Um, thank you, Madam Chair. I'm
not sure if you asked this
because I stepped out and use
the restroom, but.
Did we, do I understand you can
only do this one time. Um, did
you ask that? OK, then that was
my question.
Any other questions from the
committee?
Right. Would you like to say
anything, uh, representative of
the 2nd.
Madam Chair, I
Just a brief background I had
gotten a call from a constituent
who was a retired teacher.
And
I was
Since I, I am eligible for PA
and
I'm blessed to have been married
to the same woman forever, and
she puts up with me. Sometimes
it doesn't work out, and that's,
that's how this came about,
ma'am. So, I just appreciate the
time to present this, Madam
Chair. Thank you.
Your representative, what is the
will of the committee?
A due pass on HB 251.
The second
Second
So there's a motion for a due
pass made by Representative De
Rasa seconded by Representative
Mejia.
And um do I see any opposition?
In the opposition
None.
All right.
Uh, Representative Hall the 2nd,
you have a due pass, no
opposition.
Thank you, ma'am.
Representative, you're going to
stay put, I think, or no, yes.
Are you both gonna present a
house bill 254?
Oh, I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm
looking at the wrong Mirabal
Moya and Representative Garrett
OK.
All right, Mr.
Second, can you please make room
for a representative Mirabal.
Thank you.
Huh
Oh.
So representative, um, as we
discussed, do you have an
amendment?
All right. So we're gonna pass
out the amendment.
And while the amendment is being
passed out well.
So can someone just move the
amendment for discussion
purposes, please.
Madam, uh, Chair, I'd like to
move, uh,
Amendment on House Bill 254.
4, 13, strike.
Do, do you want me just to read
the 22 number?
Yes, just you're gonna move the
amendment, read the 2002, and
that's it. You don't have to do
anything further.
2305691
Anyway, go ahead and explain
the, um, thank you, Madam Chair.
Do you want me to, um, explain
the bill with the amendment
because it kind of just changes
a couple of words.
Just state for the record what
the amendment does. And then
after you sta that.
Then we will proceed to how it
relates to the bill.
OK, thank you, um, Madam Chair,
um, the, the, this amendment to
House Bill 254 is uh it just
strikes um 84 months on page 4
of line 3 on on line 3 uh 13,
sorry, and um it inserts 6
months, or actually just 84 and
60, so that's basically all it
does.
Page 4, line 13.
OK.
So you can go ahead now, um,
everybody noted the change on
the
Amendment
And it went from strike we
striking 84 and.
Moving to 60
All right.
So
go ahead and, and you had
requested that you would explain
the amendment with the bill
because it's within context and
I said earlier, you could do
that.
And then we'll go ahead and uh
do the um amendment because the
representative had asked me if
she could do it in context.
Thank you. Um, thank you, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
I am bringing forth a house bill
254. Um, the importance of this
bill goes beyond retirement and
speaks to preserving the
expertise in classrooms across
the state. Um, current law
allows educators who are
eligible to retire for 90 days
and then return to work for 36
consecutive or non-consecutive
months without forfeiting their
retirement benefits, um, with,
uh, House Bill 254.
With its amendment, um, that
changes the 36 months to now 60
months. Um, it is crucial for
our education system, um, as
there are hundreds of the
educators.
That, uh, who would join the 737
teacher vacancies vacancies, um,
if this change is not made.
So, um, I know from my own
school in Berlin High School.
Um, we are not ready to get rid
of the brilliant, uh, 30-year
veteran chemistry teacher mind
from our midst. Uh, he is in the
process right now of downloading
his, his brilliant mind to our
brand new chemistry teacher and
we need more time with him, and
I hear that from teachers and
schools across the state. So,
uh, we cannot afford to increase
the deficit in our currently um
in our current uh teacher
workforce, so.
I would like to introduce my
expert witnesses. Um, so, Mr.
Stan Rounds, who you uh
introduced himself a little bit
later, earlier, and then David,
I'm sorry, I don't, I can't
remember your last name.
Archuleta. OK, there you go.
And, um, and then I would, if
they would like to say anything,
um, regarding this.
Madam Chair and the members of
the committee, uh, again, my
name is David Arleta. I'm the
executive director at the
Educational Retirement Board. We
currently have about 560
authorized individuals under the
return to work 36 month program,
uh, originally passed back in
2022.
Uh, at the end of this year or
basically by the end of the
session, some of those
individuals that initially uh
got into the program will be
bumping up on them to work a
little bit beyond that. The only
thing I would note is that, you
know, the other option would be
there's uh there's a 0.25
program for those people that
want to work in a part-time
capacity along with
current program that allows for
you to work up and earn up to
$15,000 in actual amount of
money and it's not for someone
that's working full time. We
have those two other options
available.
Previous to that
There was a program in place
that had been in for nearly 20
years, and it allowed people to
return to work after one year
layout.
All those individuals after that
allowance grandfathered back in
2022 were grandfathered into the
program and we currently have
about 1500 people a year.
They bump up against that or
they participate in that
program, or at least we did.
So Madam chair.
Can you hear me now? Thank you.
Stan around for the school
superintendents Association.
This is a substantial issue that
we have to deal with in today's
field with fire if you will, for
employees.
We see the teachers who have
experience are of higher value
than alternative licenses.
people who were a great deal of
pressure from you as a, as a
legislature but also from our
communities to ensure the best.
Teachers are on board in the
classrooms.
That we can do we can bring up.
This is our tool.
When we removed the one year
out.
We have a number of people that
are sustaining, but they'll be
leaving in our midst, so the
options are, as David said,
Uh
Come in for a 25% of your salary
or $15,000 whichever is leased.
And you can then also come in
under this provision.
We have, as was said, we have a
number of teachers that have
already entered after the 90
days out.
They're coming up on the eclipse
of their time.
We're pushing us back 2
additional years.
And I'll state my intentionality
to you. We've talked, we want to
thank Mr. Archuleta and his
group for their accommodation of
our need. We work together.
Uh, we, we will continue to test
the actuarial efficiencies of
them my expectation is to
continue to push this.
Back every other year until we
find that actuarial.
Place where that's no longer
appropriate.
So, uh, Madam Chairman of the.
Representative, this complete
your relationship between the
Amen and the bill.
Yes, I will entertain a motion
to.
Adopt the amendment and with the
number.
So I, I move that um amended.
The amendment on Bill House Bill
254.230569.1 be adopted.
Thank you, is there a second?
Second.
A second.
Second, Oh, I'm sorry.
Right.
Um, is there any opposition to
the motion to adopt the
amendment.
All right, you have an amended
um 254. Thank you. So,
Um, are you stand for questions?
Um, Madam Chair, just really
quick, um, I wanted to just add
one more thing, um, just so that
everybody does understand those
that are, that are, are
currently taking advantage of
this. Um, they are, uh, yes,
they're, they're getting their
retirement, but they're still
getting their, the, the, the
same retirement benefit taken
out of their check, and it's not
going into their account, so
it's going into the ERB fund. So
just so you, so you're aware
that that is, that is part of
that also. But uh uh right now,
I
Did you wanna
that.
It's both the employee.
And the employer part is being
put into the ERB fund and does
not
Translated back to
Their benefit. They, they stay
at the benefit level.
Thank you.
to um Zoom.
Is there anyone?
On Zoom in opposition to house
Bill 25.
Please raise your hand. All
right. See men.
Anyone on Zoom wishing to speak
in favor of house bill to Fan.
We'll go to the audience. Is
there anyone here?
wishes to speak in opposition
to.
Right.
Anyone in the audience wishing
to speak in favor of House Bill
2. All right, any closing
statements or are you ready for
the committee?
All right, committee members,
questions? Anyone wanting to, do
you have your hand up, I did
have my question on my hand up,
but
When did they come up?
Those on Zoom, um.
down, please, and then I'm gonna
call again.
you wish to speak in opposition,
raise your hand. All right. If
you wish to speak in support,
raise your hand.
Right, this is the last time I'm
gonna ask, um, I'm not
There you go.
Oh, it's a delay then there's
some sort of delay. All right,
we'll call out your name and
when your name is called out,
please proceed. Thank you.
John
Dys?
Yes.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, uh, my
name is John Dich. I'm with the
American Federation of Teachers
in New Mexico, and we're here in
support of this bill, um, in
particular as it has been
amended, um, we have 3 areas
that we make us really like uh
this House bill, uh, one, we
like the approach of sort of
incrementally increasing the
amount of time folks can return
to work in order to um be able
to best evaluate the impacts on
the ERB fund.
Um, second, um, we really feel
that this is a powerful tool to
help fill some of the vacancies,
um, in our schools, as you know,
we are feel like we're
constantly digging out of a a
hole when it comes to filling
our vacancies in our schools,
and that's a segue to the third
point that we like this bill
for, and that's because this
isn't just limited to teachers,
although that's the vast
majority of folks who do return
to work under this program, but
this is for any ERB participants
so that when you think about
Occasional assistants and
vacancies or even other
classified roles, those folks
are eligible to utilize this
program and help fill those
roles um as veteran educators in
our schools. So we do urge your
support on this House bill.
Thank you.
Kevin Marks.
Yes, can you hear me?
you. Thank you.
All right, sorry, yeah, we must
be on a delay down here in Las
Cruces. So I did want to say um
thank you for bringing the bill
forward. I am one of those
retired teachers that returned
and and on the 3-year
limitation. So I look forward
to, to any addition.
I um
I do want to also mention the
fact that where I'm at, I do
have the choice of remaining in
New Mexico and contributing to
other people's retirements or
going to Texas, and I really
think it's a good idea for you
guys to extend the time so I can
remain in New Mexico and
contribute. It was one of the,
one of the big factors when I
started teaching.
You know, when it was 20,000 a
year, that was one of our, our
implied fringe benefits was that
we would be able to return to
work after retiring and continue
with the profession we love. So
I just wanted to say thank you
for, for bringing this bill
forward and I, I'm in full
support of it.
Thank you very much.
All right, see no other hands
will go back to representative
rasas.
I'm sure, I move, uh, do not
pass on House Bill 254 and a do
pass on the House Bill 54 as
amended.
Uh representative, we are not
doing a committee substitute,
we're doing an amendment to
pass as amended.
As Amanda, just say, you, yeah,
you're I move house Bill 254 as
amended.
Thank you and the second is my
representative Paul the 2,
you're never gonna forget that.
I'm never gonna forget that.
Thank you. Is there any
opposition to House Bill 254 as
amended.
Any opposition.
In the opposition all right
Representative, thank you for
presenting. You have a do
passes.
To um
Mention again that we have been
requested, uh, house bill 299 by
the sponsor.
And so if you're here for 2
night work.
Um, thank you for kind of bill
299.
So he'll let you know and we'll
let you know. Thank you so much.
All right, representative, um,
we are next on our final bill
for the day, House Bill 249.
whenever you're ready, you may
wish to proceed. Thank you,
Madam, and the bill.
So HB 249, this bill does one
thing on page two line 24 to
page 3, line 1, it allows
workforce solutions secretary.
Next to me
To wave the one week waiting
requirement to receive standard
unemployment benefits.
In the federally declared
emergency of the federal
government makes disaster
unemployment assistance
available.
Federal government requires
every applicant to first apply
for standard unemployment
insurance and then they can
receive disaster unemployment
only after they are denied or
standard unemployment.
However, this creates some
unfairness. People who are
getting standard unemployment
are required to go one week
without benefits before payments
begin.
People getting disaster.
Unemployment assistance must be
unemployed for at least one
week, but they get compensated
for that week. This bill would
end this unfairness by giving
the secretary the ability to
wave the waiting period.
To give you a sense of why this
is important during the Hermit's
peak in Calf Canyon fires.
83% of games and 86% of payments
went through standard
unemployment insurance.
These were the people who would
benefit.
From this small change.
And uh Madam tried like to
introduce my star witness to add
some additional costs.
Uh, Madam Chair members of the
committee, uh, I'll just add
that it's, it's pretty rare in
our highly regulated world of
unemployment that we can see
something that's unfair and just
fix it.
Um, but this is one of those
situations where, uh, with the
fires and floods in Riodoso and
Roswell this year, we noticed
this discrepancy, so I'm
grateful to Representative
Sanchez for um for sponsoring
this bill into this committee
for hearing it and happy to
answer any questions. Thank you.
OK.
Thank you. Um,
So we're gonna go to Zoom.
And we are in house bill 249.
Please raise your hands if you
wish to speak in opposition.
All right, seeing your hands.
We will proceed on.
Right. So, um,
Oh, we are.
Calling for, uh, whoever's on
for the Northern workforce
Development Board.
Good afternoon, everybody. Um,
I'm, my name is Lisa Ortiz. I'm
the executive director of the
Northern Area Local Workforce
Development Board in the
northern region, and we are in
full support of House Bill 249.
Thank you.
Anyone in the audience who
wishes to speak in oppo anyone
in the audience wishing to
speak, please come forward and
we will hold the.
We will no, no, we're gonna hold
the mic over here. Thank you,
Madam Chair, um.
Committe. My name is Ryan
Trosper. I'm the president of
Eastern New Mexico University at
Riodo, so, and we are also the
fiscal agent.
Over the eastern area Workforce
Board.
And so with that, um,
Thankful for the uh secretary
and
The senator for bringing this
forward today and um we're in
support of it. So thank you
again for caring about the
Riodoso community as we continue
to deal with
Uh, fire and floods disaster. So
thank you, Madam Chair.
Right
So we're going to committee
anyone wishing to ask questions,
I'd like to move do pass.
I'll suck in there.
ready to no other questions? All
right. There's a motion for a
due pass. I representative Wanda
Johnson, seconded by
Representative Terasas. Is there
any opposition? Any opposition,
any opposition. That's the
easiest bill you.
You're going to have for the
session represented Thank you
Madam Chair. Like I said, the
best.
Yeah
Thank you very much committee.
Thank you for your patience.
Be preferable they're taking
account.
We just need it by the 17th, so
you have some leeway.
All right. And you're welcome to
bring a guest. All right, thank
you.
2 for 1.
Oh, what are we?
Ah
I think that the delay has
turned me wacky.
