Yes.
Is open.
Maybe.
As for today's invitation
offered to us by the gentle lady
from McKinley and San Juan
Representative Johnson.
Representative Johnson with us.
Representative is a vacation.
Thank you.
Morning once again we give you
our hands to do your work.
Creator making your feet to go
your way.
Thank you our eyes is yes you
do.
Creator you can view our minds
in town to speak your holy
words.
Above all we give you our
hearts.
That you may love in us our
creator all mankind and our
purpose in life.
Thank you we think the thunder
beings Water beings.
Entities are sacred mountains.
For the and.
Blessing of the glistening snow.
May we be refreshed.
Fresher spirits with the living
holy water from the top of our
heads to the bottom of our feet
and all around us in beauty it
is finished amen.
The gentleman Representative
Hernandez would you please that
is in the pledge of allegiance.
Representative Stansbury would
you please let us and saluting
Mexico's flag.
I salute the flag of the state
of New Mexico is yes simple a
perfect friendship among native
cultures.
This.
School.
This
I move the next order of
business announcements and
miscellaneous business objection
the sort of.
Good morning everyone.
Representative the reports and.
Bill introduction messages so
plans if you're hearing my voice
and you have a billing one
instance but is not yet been
sent to the chief clerk please
do so because this is our last
opportunity the gentleman from
Chavis it in Ontario
Representative Townsend yes.
Of house bill two thirty six.
Consists of.
The state banking bill has a.
I think it's about a hundred
million dollars appropriation.
It's not presently ahead that
way.
For it to appropriations proof
Happy that mobile all of them
all of the body.
Thanks thank you.
Percent to.
Projection.
Okay gentlelady from Bernalillo.
This.
The next order of business
introduction of legislation
judgment is so ordered.
to make.
Two ninety one introduced by
Representative Martinez an act
relating to taxation adding
brackets to the income tax
increasing an indexing the
income comprehensive tax rebate
increasing the amount of the
working families tax credit
expanding the credit to certain
residents right.
To the for the federal earned
income tax credit on which the
working families tax credit is
based.
In the capital gains deduction
from income for certain
taxpayers allowing intentional
operation to elect to increase
the will of the fast factor went
up questioning business income
meeting a three percent
limitation on increases
evaluation of residential
property to property that is
occupied by the owner of the
owners principal place of
residence providing a ten
percent.
Xin'an increases in violation of
residential properties that is
not occupied by the owner and
the owners principal place of
residence House Bill to ninety
one.
The.
We'll do that.
Twenty spring title is.
Referred to the taxation and
revenue committee.
House Bill to ninety two
introduced by Representative
Cook and after education and
acting education freedom
accounts act providing for
education counts establishing
permanent Mrs providing
procedures and application
requirements to competency
hospital to to.
Dr.
To having been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the Education
Committee events appropriations
and finance.
House Bill to ninety three
introduced by representatives
from the.
About.
An act relating to criminal
sentencing increasing mandatory
minimum sentences for certain
criminal sexual offenses against
children increasing sentencing
enhancements for the two
offenders Hospital to ninety
three.
The chairman title is ordered
printed and referred to the
consumer Public Affairs
Committee intensive traditional
dance appropriations and
finance.
House Bill to ninety for
introduced by representative
Lente an act relating to revenue
distributing a portion of the
revenue to the latter tuition
fund making appropriation
house bill two nine four.
Having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Education Committee then
to appropriations and finance.
Husband to.
To do this by Representative
staff as an analyst Dixon and
black and act making
appropriation for a study on
economic and fiscal impact of
eliminating or reducing the
state income tax on military
retirement income hospital to I.
Having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the rules for veterans and
military affairs committee this
taxation and revenue.
House Bill to introduce by
Representative Martinez and
after capital expenditures we
often appropriate balances
expanding and changing purposes
extending expenditure plans
change and agencies and
establishing missions for the
version or transfer of
unexpended balances the proposed
appropriation of.
Legislature in prior years
declaring an emergency hospital
to effects.
Seven min read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the taxation and revenue
committee.
Two nine seven introduced by
representative of the actual
development enacting the
workforce and economic
prosperity Act creating
workforce and economic
prosperity Council require
development of the state welfare
to develop clean energy that for
first expand economic inclusion
and develop a sustainable
economy direct production of ROS
to foster inclusion and
workforce development and
procurement require.
Funding has been to ninety
seven.
Ninety seven having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the E.
commerce and economic
development committee.
Mentions of military affairs.
Introduced by representative
Stansbury an act of the state
engineer providing for.
Incentive or by video conference
declaring an emergency hospital
to.
The.
Having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the agriculture and water
resources committee.
Introduced by representative
from a.
To local governments and acting
program special assessment act
authorizing county counties to
impose administer this
profession of faith.
To encourage the development of
certain property improvements
Senator energy improvements
special assessment act hospital
to the line.
Nine having been read twice by
title is ordered.
In nineteen minutos by title is
ordered printed and referred to
local governments land grants
and cultural affairs committee.
Thence.
Taxation and revenue.
Three and three hundred into
despair Representative
Stansbury.
And natural into state employees
establishing a pilot leadership
management pipeline development
programme in the General
Services Department requiring
evaluation and development of
training for certain abilities
requiring a report making
appropriation House Bill three
hundred.
Senator entrance printables
order printed and referred to
the state government elections
in Indian Affairs Committee
Benson appropriation and
finance.
House Bill three engines by
Representative Rubio and act
relating to the legislature
creating the legislative process
resumed commission requiring the
legislative process review
commission to develop policy
proposals relating to improving
the legislative process
requiring a report by October
thirty first twenty twenty two
Representative husband thrill
one.
Having been read twice by title
one having been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the state government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee.
House Bill three two introduced
by representatives brown and
Gail Armstrong an act relating
to public education funding
graduation requirements
requiring one half of financial
literacy prior to graduation
House Bill three zero two.
Just having been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the commerce and
economic development committee
dense Education.
Three oh three entities
Representative Cook and act
relating to liquor control
specifying unlawful inducements
for certain licenses licensees
House Bill three of three.
Three.
Transportations were printed and
referred to the commerce and
economic development committee.
Three of the introduced by
representatives Cook Rod Montoya
and Townsend and potentially
leading to Spence enacting the
women's sports protection act
providing for designations of
athletic teams based on
biological sex requiring schools
to prohibit male participation
on female athletic teams
prohibiting adverse action
against schools complying with
the women's sports protection
act providing for civil causes
of action House Bill three four.
For
min read twice by title is
ordered for Jennifer
Amendment twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the health and Human Services
Committee against judiciary.
House resolution eleven
introduced by Representative
Cook.
Right resolution proposing to
amend article four section
thirty one article nine section
fourteen and article twelve
section three of the
constitution.
Sako to allow for the
appropriation of public funds
for private educational purposes
house joint resolution eleven.
The restaurant resolution eleven
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the education Ms staff of
Alexion's and.
There's.
House
the introduced by Representative
brown and Gail Armstrong.
Requesting the governor to issue
a proclamation recognizing
twenty twenty one as the
international year of king.
And cursed House.
Twelve.
Having been read twice by title
is ordered not printed and
placed on the speakers table.
House team introduced by
Representative Andrea Romero and
while requesting the secretary
of public safety to convene a
working group to discuss the
creation of a satellite law
enforcement and first responder
training center in northern New
Mexico House memorial thirteen.
Thirteen having been read twice
by title is ordered printed and
referred to the Judiciary
Committee.
House.
six introduced by
representatives of the facts and
how to grow and act relating to
law enforcement placing a ninety
day limit on decisions regarding
a concealed handgun license I
think the sixty day limit on a
concealed handgun license
renewal House Bill three of six.
Thanks having been read twice by
title is ordered printed and
referred to the consumer public
affairs committee against
Judiciary.
Introduced by Representative
learned and had a group.
And natural to tort claims no
exceptions to.
For law enforcement officers has
been three of seven.
Sentiment twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the concerned public affairs
committee and the Judiciary.
House Bill.
Three oh eight.
Three oh nine.
And three ten introduced by
speaker in the.
Hospitals three eleven.
Three twelve and three thirteen
introduced by Representative
Stapleton.
Hospitals three fourteen three
fifteen and three sixteen.
Introduced by Representative
Davis.
Hospitals three seventeen three
eighteen and three nineteen
introduced by Representative
Townsend.
House Bill three twenty.
Three twenty one and three
twenty two introduced by
Representative Rod Montoya.
House of three twenty three and
three twenty four introduced by
representative Lente House Bill
three twenty five and three
twenty six introduced by
Representative Lundstrom.
House Bill three.
Twenty seven and three twenty
eight introduced by
Representative by at the
hospital for three twenty nine
and three thirty introduced by
representative Thompson.
House Bill three thirty one and
three thirty two introduced by
Representative G. Andrés Romero.
House Bill three thirty three.
And three thirty four introduced
by Representative McQueen.
House Bill three thirty five.
And three thirty six introduced
by Deborah Representative
Armstrong.
Has the three thirty seven and
three thirty eight introduced by
Representative Chasey.
House Bill.
Thirty nine and three forty
introduced by Representative
Alcon.
House Bill three forty one and
three forty two introduced by
Representative Miguel P. Garcia.
Representative fighting has
built three fourteen fifteen and
three forty four introduced by
Representative Lewis.
House Bill three.
Five and three forty six
introduced by Representative
Martinez.
And hospitals three forty seven
and three forty eight introduced
by.
Representative Rubio.
An act relating to the public
peace health safety and welfare.
Has built a eight.
Through three in forty eight.
Three zero
three including House Bill three
forty eight having been read
twice by title is ordered or
would it not printed and
referred to the rules committee.
House
introduced by Representative
Stapleton insurance request New
Mexico Legislative Council to
install a plaque in the state
capital presented by the
daughters of the American
revolution to recognize the
significance of the one
hundredth anniversary of the
passage of the nineteenth
amendment to the United States
constitution given women the
right to vote House drive for.
Would have to have the work of
these.
Read twice by title is ordered
not printed and placed on the
speakers table.
This.
I'm.
Next order of business
committee.
Chairman.
Mr speaker the government land
grants and cultural affairs
committee to has been referred
house bill two sixty one has had
it under consideration part some
of recommendation that it to
pass as a member.
Thank you for the state
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee.
Two fifty.
One of the other reporter called
me thank.
Receive therefore it's been
received.
Mr speaker transportation public
works and capital improvements
committee to is been referred
house bill one twenty one and
had it under consideration for
some of the commission voted to
pass.
Mr speaker and transportation
public works and capital
improvements committee is been
referred house bill two seventy
one has had it under
consideration for some of
recommendation that do pass and
then for the taxation and
revenue committee.
One million four has been
received.
Mr speaker education has been
referred house bill one thirty
eight has had it under
consideration report same as
recommendation that two passed
and then referred to the local
government land grants and
cultural affairs committee.
For the nursing.
Mr speaker Education Committee
has been referred house bill one
eighty for has had it under
consideration and in person with
recommendations that it to pass
as amended and then for the
provisions of finance committee.
Mr speaker education has been
referred house bill two twenty
one has had it under
consideration for some of the
commission voted to pass and
then for the state government
elections Indian Affairs
Committee.
Reporter.
Mr speaker state government
elections Indian Affairs
Committee too has been referred
house bill sixty seven has had
it under consideration report
same with recommendation but it
did pass.
Mr speaker Mr government
elections first committed to
minister for House Bill one as
amended has had it under
consideration for some of the
condition that it to pass as
amended.
Mr speaker Mr government
elections and in the first
committed to me for hospitals
one fifty two has had it under
consideration for the same with
recommendation that do pass as
amended.
Representative.
Mr speaker transportation public
works and capital improvements
committee to the hospital three
has had it under consideration
for us to pass as amended answer
for the appropriation and
finance committee.
What is missing.
Services Committee too is been
referred house bill two zero
three has had it under
consideration percent of
recommendation that a do pass an
answer for to the provisions of
finance committee.
Four is been received.
Mr speaker services committee to
has been referred house bill two
of the has had it under
consideration for things but
mission that to pass as amended
and that's referred to the
Judiciary Committee respect.
Thank.
We're seeing.
Mr speaker your health services
community has been referred
house bill two fifteen has had
it under consideration for thing
with recommendation to due
process and answer for to the
Judiciary Committee.
Representative received.
Mr speaker services committed to
referred house bill two fifty
three has had it under
consideration for some of
recommendation that it to pass
an answer for to the Judiciary
Committee.
Reporting received.
The taxation and revenue
committee for constitutional
committee substitute for house
bill thirty six has had it under
consideration for some
information that I do not have
that house taxation revenue
Committee substitute for House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House but thirty six to
pass.
Mr speaker taxation revenue
to have been referred house bill
two fifty five as amended has
had it under consideration first
in the presentation but I do not
pass but that has taxation and
revenue committee substitute for
house bill two fifty five to
pass.
Receive.
Your question water resources
committee has been referred
house bill two forty three has
had it under consideration for
some of the commission voted to
pass as amended answer for to
the appropriations and finance
committee.
Forty percent.
Mr speaker the COVID nana
Development Committee too has
been referred house bill two
eighteen has had it under
consideration for same with
recommendation but it to pass
and that's referred to the
Judiciary Committee.
What is been received.
Mr speaker commented on a
development team has been for a
hospital to thirty five has had
it under consideration for some
of the commission voted to pass
as amended.
And referred to the Judiciary
Committee.
Reporter the nursing.
Mr speaker commerce and economic
development committee has been
referred house bill two thirty
six has had it under
consideration point some of the
condition but it to pass and
that's referred to the Judiciary
Committee.
Receive.
Mr.
Committed to is been referred
house bill one twenty three has
had it under consideration for
thing with recommendation of do
pass.
Report has been received.
Mr speaker in addition to his
benefit hospital one forty five
has had it under consideration
forcing recommendations to pass
an answer for to the provisions
of finance committee.
Move adoption.
Been receiving.
Mr speaker Judiciary Committee
has been referred house bill one
forty six has had it under
consideration point
recommendation but it to pass.
For dispensing.
Mr speaker tradition for House
Bill to seventy three.
Has had it under consideration
reports and recommendations to
do path and then see for the
appropriation and finance
committee.
Reporter received.
Question water resources
committee has been referred
house bill one ninety seven and
haven't consideration four some
of recommendation that do pass
and that's referred to the
Judiciary Committee.
Reporter menacing.
Mr speaker and a culture water
resources committee to resume
for House Bill to forty one has
had it under consideration for
the recommendation that I do not
have that health agriculture
water resources committee
substitute for house bill two
forty one do passed immense
for the taxation and revenue
committee.
Received.
Mr speaker.
Options Affairs Committee too is
been referred house bill one
twenty five.
Has had it under consideration
for some of the condition but I
do pass as amended.
Report it's been received.
General William this
makes this introduction of
legislation.
No objection it is so ordered.
Thirty three.
House Bill three oh eight
engines by Representative Lujan
and actually learning to staff
advertising including
unauthorized use of intellectual
property in a different
definition of fast advertising
House Bill three oh eight.
Okay.
This is the.
So this is just.
Restart House Bill three forty
nine.
Introduced by Representative
Lujan and action leading to both
advertising including
unauthorized use of intellectual
property and the definition of
advertising House Bill three
forty nine just having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
commerce and economic
development committee thence.
Judiciary.
Three fifty.
Introduced by Representative Dow
and act relating to taxation
providing a gross receipts tax
deduction for the sale of movie
tickets and concessions by the
movie theater House Bill three
fifty.
In a twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to converse
economic events taxation and
revenue.
House memorial fourteen
introduced by Representative
Townsend and memorial
celebrating the FF a youth
organization decrying February
twenty third twenty twenty one
FF a day in the house of
representatives House memorial
fourteen.
Ask fourteen having been read
twice by title is ordered not
printed and placed on the
speakers table.
Okay so we are done.
But I think there may be is one
more bill coming.
This is the day that we have
seven introduced is today that
I've been saying all week that
this is the number on the floor
we're not gonna reconvene later
so again I say we're we're at
the end we can stay for a few
more minutes to folks have bills
coming down.
We also do so please call if
you're listening to comments
from dancers please call your
drafters.
Thank you step down also if you
know of course if there's an
emergency we have the generic
bills that have already been
introduced today.
We're we're.
Representative taxed and
Representative Dow.
Requests numbers one through
seventy have been introduced.
Is if we could have unanimous
consent to suspend rules during
bill introduction to allow the
generated from the lines have
Representative Fajardo tells a
joke.
House Bill three fifty nine
entities Representative
Pettigrew and act relating to
elections prohibiting the
secretary of state from
certifying certain voting
machines House Bill three fifty
one.
Read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
state governmental actions and
the Indian Affairs Committee
thence judiciary.
Is that actually a cat.
This is an actual cat is
actually a cat Mr speaker.
She's the bill introduction
entertainment.
Yes Representative Fajardo we
still have the rules suspended
for details joke.
He usually has a lot of major
pocket.
Representative Townsend.
Representative Townsend one to
one crabs give money to charity.
Shellfish.
Mr speaker I object.
Representative Thomson.
Just when watch a fly fishing
tournament.
I don't know Mr speaker line
stream.
Are you could then.
Fifteen inches by Representative
Castellano
and question the governor to
declare may sixteenth twenty
twenty one as I.
Representative aka Gilbert day
in New Mexico House memorial
fifteen.
Read twice by title is ordered
not printed and placed on the
speakers table.
Representative Representative
Hernandez was two million to
tell a joke.
Mr speaker where do you find a
cow with no legs.
Where do you find the cow with
no legs.
Right where you left.
That
Gentleman was.
Rural dressed person on a
tricycle and a well dressed
person on a bicycle.
Entire.
Thank file of that in the back
fall over.
Mr tired.
Mr.
The very first time frame.
No lies that.
Nice guys.
Representative Figueroa with the
joke.
Mr speaker what does the
goldfish do all day.
That.
Not.
Mr speaker.
You can tell Representative
Representative Figueroa is a
Spanish teacher that was truly
bilingual.
And finally.
What's the best thing about
Switzerland.
And with that.
I don't know what the flag is a
big plus.
The very ability.
Mr speaker.
From country's currency.
What did the left side stay to
the right I.
With that between you and me
something smells.
As the most
favored generally.
Representative Garcia.
As the most Baker
Why do all Indians go to have
an.
Because they have reservations.
This is a cost for empowerment
in his ears pierced.
About a year.
Parents this pandemic stuck in
the freezer.
Members.
The scarecrow.
One.
Expanding in this field.
Mr speaker.
Gentlelady.
my daughter wants to know what
what do you call a sale on a
boat.
Originally with that a similar
as it turns out.
Mr speaker.
What does a nosey pepper do.
Meeting with the two.
His business.
That was excellent.
Mr speaker.
Travis.
Mr speaker do you know how many
reindeer Santa Claus has.
He has ten.
Dasher dancer Prancer vixen
comet Cupid Donner Blitzen
Rudolph and olive the other
reindeer.
Was a dollar.
House bill fifty two introduced
by Representative Linda Serrato
an afternoon to correctional
institutions and acting the
private detention facility
moratorium act moving
authorization to enter into
contracts or agreements with
private independent contractors
for the operation of detention
facilities.
Providing for recommended
termination of contracts for
operations of jails under
certain circumstances the
operation of a private detention
facility on raffle prohibiting
public funding of private
detention facilities the
detention facility economic
development assistance fund and
intentioned facility displaced
worker assistance fund requiring
annual reports confections
thirty three dash one dash
seventeen and thirty three dash
three dash twenty six and a
missing nineteen seventy eight.
As nineteen and I chapter one
forty nine section one and last
nineteen eighty four chapter
twenty two section seventeen as
amended declaring an emergency
House Bill three fifty two.
Having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the concerned public affairs
committee.
Appropriations and finance.
Fifty three.
Representative Dixon.
An afternoon just on property
providing that the failure to
verify that a fire arm was not
stolen is presumed to be
knowledge of the recipient of
the firearm that the firearm was
stolen House Bill three fifty
three.
Fifty three having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
consumer Public Affairs
Committee dense and judiciary.
Members of the
house bill's Representative Dow
leader Townsend is going to give
her what his generic bills so
the bill will be introduced in
adult and will refer to
committee
and the handles a committee said
that will allow us to wrap up.
So that is good for bill
introduction the gentle lady
from Bernalillo.
The next business announcements
and miscellaneous business.
Mr Warner.
House bill two three six.
Has three sacks Representative
Roybal Caballero Bill two three
six.
We're adding a referral on this
bill to the appropriations and
finance committee Bill two three
six will go to the
appropriations and finance
committee.
Four eight.
Forty eight.
Visit with the sponsoring are
dropping referred to the
Judiciary Committee a house with
two for dropping the Judiciary
Committee referral adding in
place there the referral to the
taxation and revenue committee.
As well to forty eight Dr
Judiciary at taxation revenue.
One forty four as one forty
four.
This is Representative Dixon.
And to drop the referral to the
appropriations and finance
committee house bill one four
four remove the referral to the
appropriations and finance
committee.
House bill one forty five this
is Representative Dixon and
rename.
House bill one forty five
Representative Dixon and rain.
To drop the referral to the
appropriations and finance
committee.
As soon.
Okay are there any
announcements.
Mr speaker.
that house consumer and public
affairs committee will meet at
one thirty.
Today.
Thank you Mr speaker members.
Mr speaker.
German firms and the committee
Representative Alcon thank you
Mr speaker members your house
labor and reference your house
they were Military and Veterans
Committee will meet at two
o'clock this afternoon three
bills we should be home the C.
L. very important in our thank
you Sir.
Announcements.
Since the.
Representative Rubio.
Three five.
You Representative small.
Thank you Mr speaker want to
announce a house appropriations
and finance committee meeting at
three the the.
Are there for instance.
Okay we're done for the day we
will
Communities afternoon and we
will be back here for a regular
floor session and third meeting.
Tomorrow morning starting at
nine AM I will provide you go
through the days will have a
lunch break.
And.
We will get the bills to the
floor leaders sometime later
today.
And are there anything else
before with the gentleman from
Chavis enter S. thank you.
We cover still third reading
every day nine to three correct
or that changed Mexico we're
planning to start a Monday with
third meeting from
eleven to three.
Thank you Sir.
I just started line will go
through the agenda into the
evening with the lunch break
next week we start on Monday and
go live into three each day on
the floor.
gentlelady from Bernalillo.
The house standing says until
nine AM tomorrow.
Thank goodness insurance into
the motion thank you everyone
for your work today folks
watching from home please.
And join us tomorrow at nine AM
back on the floor for third
reading have a good day.
