Talk about how we're going to
run meetings in the new virtual
world.
And I think it's a well get to
that so we're just gonna go off
basically first of
Representative Chandler.
Thank you Mr chair I'm
Representative Christine
Chandler I am from Los Alamos
and I represent all of Los
Alamos County parts of Rio
Arriba Sandoval in Santa Fe
counties and it's a pleasure to
be with all of you and looking
forward to working with you over
the course of the next sixty
days thank you.
Representative Dixon.
Morning I'm Representative
Meredith Dixon house district
twenty eight which is in
southeast Albuquerque and also
includes part of carnal while we
are right up against Sandia
national labs and part of the
foot hills and I am excited to
be here thank you.
Representative Ferrary.
Morning Representative joined
Ferrari and I'm from house
district thirty seven which is
kind of the northeast heights of
Los crucis and
Yes we have of.
A lot of our outdoor
environmental protection things
going on with our organ not
desert peaks which we are really
glad went through years ago and
continue to take that forward
good morning everyone.
Good morning.
Representative Ortez.
Thank you at chair queen my name
is Christine or tests I am the
our representative from house
district forty two inTaos County
and in my other life I am the
executive director of the taus
land trust so I'm really super
excited to be on this committee
on and on really thank you work
with you chairman queen.
Thank you Representative
Sarinana.
Just disappeared and she.
Welcome back to her
Representative Scott.
Thank you Mr chairman
of band with issues my
connection preclude audio and
video simultaneously so we'll
stick with audio for now
well Larry Scott state
representative from district
sixty two which is a Lee County
calls to the south east corner.
I've been on this committee
since I was first elected in
fifteen.
Welcome to all new members so
looking forward to the
conversation.
Thank you Sir.
Thank you representative
Representative Strickler.
Thank you Mr chairman J.
Strickler Rod Representative
district to.
For mostly State Farmington in
rural parts of San Juan County
I've served on this committee
since two thousand seven and
Representative to San Juan
basin.
In a.
What it one time was the largest
gas filling United States about
ten years ago which is not any
longer but to look forward to
serving on on the this year's
committee thank you.
Thank you Representative
Townsend.
Yes my name is Jim council I
represent district fifty four
southeast New Mexico which is
portions of any Otero in Travis
county
I look forward to serving thank
you very much Mr chairman.
I'm sorry that it appears to
help to get in the capitol
I am Debbie Syriana I represent
house district twenty one in
Albuquerque
I.
I've been on this committee
since I started this will be my
fifth year and I love it
and I we we just have a great
committee on both sides thank
you.
Thank you vice chair Stansbury.
Thank you Mr chairman and good
morning everyone it's so nice to
see everyone and our wonderful
staff and it looks like we have
some old friends and our
attendees as well am I Melanie
Stansbury represent house
district twenty eight and
Albuquerque but I'm actually
right on the edge of Albuquerque
so more than half of the
geography in my district is
actually National Forest in open
space so I am excited to be
serving as your vice chair in
here to assist and help everyone
on the committee and Mr chair so
thank you and it's wonderful to
see you.
Thank you all of the I'm
Representative Matthew McQueen I
represent house district fifty
which is portions of Santa Fe
Torrance Valencia and Bernalillo
county's that's an oddly shaped
district sort in the middle of
the state.
And I I also been on
This committee since I was first
elected and Representative
Strickler was our chairman.
And and I came in with
Representative Townsend and
Representative Scott
Representative Montoya it's
we're all the same.
I'm never gonna ask our the.
Staff here do some cells in.
Shelby was the first.
Hi I'm Shelby this is my first
year in the round house I'm very
excited to be here I just moved
to New Mexico back in August but
I previously worked in the
Oregon legislature and I'm so
excited to be here with you all
if you have any questions
comments concerns please
directed my way I'm happy to
help you in whichever way I
can't thank you.
Thank you Shibley and welcome
Gabby Schulz our committee
assistant last year is still
working for the clerk's office
is working for the court clerk's
office and she's working with
all the committee assistance so
you see her name there.
You probably all know Gabby and
we're we're grateful to have for
help us with the transition.
Allison Jones could you hear
just yourself.
Yes.
Allison Jones.
is my first year legislators
super excited to be here.
And I'm the committee floater so
whenever someone's on here and
the person who does it.
Thank you
Kirk Caroline's.
Good morning it's nice to to
meet many of you for the first
time I'm sorry that it's virtual
my name's Caroline Shaw I'm the
committee analyst serving for
Representative McQueen this is
my first our opportunity in this
position so I'm on a steep
learning curve but already
enjoying it and I look forward
to working with you.
Great thank you that.
Good morning everyone
my name is that's alright well
and I live in Los crucis and.
I've been a resident of New
Mexico more than twenty five
years I this is my second year
as a bill analyst for the major
office for this committee and
the I really enjoyed working
with many of the last year and
look forward to working with our
new members this year and
depreciated of Tony Dunstan's
assistance last year during my
my first year so I look forward
to working with all of the thank
you so much.
last not least Tony.
The morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is a
Tony delfi I'll be the analyst
for the minority this year on
the committee.
Again.
Welcome back to I think.
Shelly is there is there are
there any members of the public
who are interested in
introducing themselves we often
have some of the lobbyists and
advocates who we often see say
hello on the first day.
it looks like a Kerry Romero
there's a couple people here but
I'll just go ahead and do them
in order starting with a Kerry
Romero.
Sure you can go ahead.
Good morning Mr chairman and
good morning members of the
committee I just wanted to take
a moment to introduce myself my
name is Kerry Cork for marijuana
the executive director and
registered lobbyists from the
New Mexico council about
fighters and guides.
We advocate the interests of the
hunting and fishing industry
specifically the outfitted
segment our members disability
the tourism side of hunting and
fishing by providing non
resident hunters and anglers
with the opportunity to
experience New Mexico's vast
sportsmen activities our
organization represents the
interests of two hundred New
Mexico outfitting businesses
fifteen hundred registered
guides.
And roughly twenty five thousand
nonresident sportsmen who choose
recreation New Mexico annually
thank you Mr chairman and I look
forward to working with each of
you this session I'm sorry about
my dog in the background.
Thank you very much to see you.
Next okay.
I'm next I have a Gregg
ritually.
Good morning good morning Mr
chairman thank you for the
opportunity to see you all
today.
I'm Greg richly I'm the general
counsel for the New Mexico
office of the state engineer the
state engineer unfortunately
could not be with us he is on
another virtual meeting
organizational meeting of the
house ag committee but he would
wanted me to express our
appreciation for all the work
that you do it's good to see
many old faces we work with in
the past and new faces we look
forward to working with in this
coming session we appreciate
very much the work that this
important committee doesn't look
forward to working with you
thank you.
Thank you very Shelly next next
on the list I have Britney
Fallon.
Pretty.
Can you hear me yes.
Everyone I'm Britney Fallon most
of you know me as the registered
lobbyist for the Sierra Club but
I've made a transition this year
I am the policy director with
New Mexico wild so I'll be
focusing on lands water and
wildlife issue.
The the new faces on this
committee Representative
Strickler I love the beard thank
you.
I'll be joining at every meeting
like usual and I'm sad that I
can't be there in person as I'm
sure you all are to.
Thank you
Next.
Next I have Jonas and and CGA.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Jonas Maury I am the
executive director of the New
Mexico cattle growers
association the voice of the
cattle industry for New Mexico
for over a hundred years
thank you very much for a
inviting us all this morning in
the area look forward to hearing
the issues and bills that come
across the table and I just want
to introduce myself I my myself
and the team will be available
for any questions around
agriculture and anything that we
can help with would be more than
happy to thank you very much you
guys have a great morning.
Thank you Janice.
And last but not least I have
Gary Payton.
Yuri.
Good morning Mr chair good
morning committee members you
Mr.
The staff person for the
coalition of sustainable
communities New Mexico an
organization that is to consist
of the elected members of the
city's of Albuquerque Los crucis
Santa Fe and Santa Fe County
these elected members represent
approximately forty percent of
this population of the state of
New Mexico we look forward to
being able to provide comment on
bills as they move forward over
the course of the session thank
you very much.
We we have one more understand.
Yes one more our regulation of
this.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee thank you for
the opportunity to speak my name
is Ricky the chart.
And she's got.
Lost her.
If she comes back will give her
another
Another chance I think she was
last.
So about that she's it she's up
and running now okay Ricky.
Good morning Mr chairman can you
hear me OK yes.
Thank you good morning members
of the committee Mr chairman my
name's Rikki Lee Chavez capital
counsel and consulting the
client that I represent who will
most likely have issues before
your committee is Marathon Oil
if anybody has any questions
relevant to the industry I'm
always available to answer them
and I look forward to working
with all of you thank you so
much.
Thank you regulate.
I think that's it.
One.
Other three mortars sorry folks
keep popping up on my screen
here acceptance Martinez.
Good morning Mr chairman.
Members of the committee on
Vince Martinez I work for tri
state generation and
transmission association we
provide that energy to eleven
coops electric rural electric
cooperatives here in New Mexico
there are that too will be
before your committee most of
the time our members so once
again happy new year and look
forward to working with you.
Thank you next week.
Next we have someone named
Creech on on your is in screen.
Reach.
That rural sorry about each.
Figure out your technology and
my email but
I've been coming to this
committee thank you Mr chairman
for the last two years
representing conjure resources
and probably twenty years before
that word Representative energy
medicine actual resources
department I guess what I need
to check with our own gas
producer and last Friday the
company was acquired by Kanako
so sometime during this session
collect Concho will start being
rebranded as Kanako but will
still be here on the same issues
and we look forward to working
with you again this year thank
you.
Thank you kero.
Okay next we have Jessica
Johnson.
Discuss.
You are muted Jessica.
Good morning Mr.
And then she's gone.
We're losing members they're
losing their own connection.
Okay just because back but
muted.
Can you hear me now yes okay I'm
not touching any buttons.
Mr chair and committee members
I'm Jessica Johnson chief
government affairs officer for
animal protection voters we are
the legislative arm for animal
protection of New Mexico who has
been working statewide for the
past forty plus year as it's
been a very busy year helping to
respond to the impacts on
animals and because of the COVID
nineteen pandemic you know in
addition to all of the
experiences that as people have
been facing and it's a pleasure
to see you all glad and that you
want to continue your great work
and I wish you luck in
navigating this very unique
session thank you so much.
Thank you just got.
Okay and I believe this is the
last one but Gen Winchester.
Go ahead Jim good morning Mr
chairman members of the
committee my name is Jim
Winchester I'm the executive
director of the independent
petroleum association of New
Mexico and look forward to
working with you the session and
if there's any questions by any
of the committee members please
do not hesitate to ask thank
you.
Thank you.
And I think that's it right.
Okay.
Sorry Marco Gonzalez just raise
their hands okay.
Barca good morning Mr chairman
members of the committee this is
Marco Gonzales I'm very happy to
be with you here virtually
sporty thank you for allowing us
to introduce ourselves I have
several different kinds in in
the at in that would care before
the energy committee many of
them are renewable clients
pattern energy
Invenergy southwest a
transmission Facebook and Tesla
maybe I'll be talking to all you
all about I'm so very happy to.
be part of the virtual world
this year and see how it goes so
thanks so much to everybody this
morning for Linus to attend and
I look for to talking to
everybody thank you so much.
Okay
and the we Board comments so
exceptionally.
I'm Deborah Condit.
Good morning Deborah.
Good morning everyone a
different content I'm here to
represent Interwest Energy
Alliance Edward trade
association that works in six
states and we do wind solar
transmission and storage and
it's good to see you all I
really miss you have to seeing
you in person and Representative
Strickler I turn on the zoom and
I thought Dave letterman was
that on the.
You raise the to see you all and
I'm looking forward to working
with you thank you.
Thank you Deborah next up I'm
Rep Rebecca Rios.
Good morning can you hear me yes
good morning Mr chair members of
the committee my name's Rebecca
Roose I am the director of the
water protection division at the
New Mexico environment
department and it's a pleasure
to be able to continue to work
with all of you I in this
committee over the course of the
coming session thank you.
Judy common.
Do you think.
Hi everybody it's good to see
you I'm Judy comment on the New
Mexico policy director for the
Audubon society we work on all
the issues this committee works
on and we have about thirteen
thousand members around the
state I'm happy to help with
anything you all need I'm
looking forward to working with
you this session weirdly as it
is hi thanks.
Thank you thank you Judy.
And that looks like that was the
last one.
Okay.
So that one time.
Relatively smoothly.
But it could have been worse
maybe it could have been better
so that's I think our public
comment we'll go people who are
are you there online or on the
phone.
You want to
Want to make comments there are
certainly gonna be some bills
that will here during the course
of the session where we will
have a lot of public comment and
that's
yeah I'm gonna rely on and
Shelly to help manage that and
to to assure people through as
efficiently as possible Michael
for this committee is always to
be thorough but efficient
I'd not sure what our workloads
can be like this year you know
our workload tends to be lighter
insurance sessions because our
subject matter is not
automatically germane so we hear
fewer bills but the sixty day
session we get a lot of bills of
course the sixty day session is
gonna be unlike any other and
you know in the house we have
the five bill limit and in order
to see how that that impacts us
getting our work and that's
really just sort of my goal is
is to get to work I think bill
should get an up or down vote.
We help we hear bills
essentially in order that their
rights.
I I juggle them a little to to
group them appropriately but
mostly it's just order they
arrive amber usually are often I
would say a first committee.
So bills often come here before
heading to Judiciary or
probation or something like that
so I have an interest in getting
them on their way so they can.
Continue their journey
The virtual meeting is pretty
new we did do that interim.
Virtually I like this platforms
in platform a lot better than I
think we're using webex
I I can see more of you than
then I could see on whether
acts.
Speaking of seeing you you know
one thing I do is I checked to
see if we have a quorum.
It's I would prefer that you
leave your video cameras on if
you have that capacity very have
Representative Scott there is a
Sarinana with their cameras off
because it and with issues and I
get that
I will send everyone my cell
phone number so if you can get
up and leave the room like if I
gonna get the eight reminded
term term I can work off right
in you'll see my smiling face.
But if I'm here I'll keep the
camera on if I do have to leave
the room I will let our vice
chair now so she can take over
if you're if you have a meeting
or
need to be out of the room yeah
the room for any control period
I would ask that you let me know
I just I know we are.
In.
It's it's our practice to.
Try to have people in the room
when we take folks we will take
those people are out of the room
we will not take because if we
think the missing people are
gonna affect the outcome of the
you know we'll try to hold the
chill everyone is here but it's.
What for example your bill
clearly have support in two or
three people out of the room you
will just forward and take up
the.
The agendas will be emailed to
the committee members and posted
online.
I understand there's been a
request that we also closed.
amendments and committee steps
in we will try to do that I
don't know exactly how that's
going to work yet.
we will generally respect that
the twenty four hour rule for
substantial amendments written
amendments in committee serves
that is you have to get it to us
twenty four hours before the
meeting so we give our analysts
an opportunity to look at it and
we get the public the
opportunity to look at it I will
entertain amendments on the fly
which is sort of the judiciary
practice of you know typos
grammatical changes
strike this ad that.
Yes Sir some point you know for
marking up the bill in committee
we might rolled over and ask for
committee set up.
but we do do a members on the
flight it's okay.
I will continue to do that.
The public is welcome to
participate welcome and
encourage participate as always
I I honestly think this virtual
system will be easier for a lot
of people to participate because
they don't have to drive Santa
Fe incidents around all day
waiting for a bill to be heard
they can be in their own but if
they have the computer capacity
so I think they can actually be
a good thing.
I would generally ask.
that you keep yourself muted.
In.
I think there's a way if you're
muted I think you can push your
space bar you can temporarily
and yourself so like for taking
a vote you don't necessarily
have to click on the mute button
you just have that space are
I've already discovered that my
fancy ergonomic ergonomic
keyboard doesn't work that way
so I'm gonna be at thank you
have to click on and off
but you can try that.
If you wish to speak there is
the right hand function.
so hopefully everyone can use
that and see that.
And I will keep a running list
this is Gabby of course she's
due for me you get Gary's
attention and of on the list.
I will since I'm not sitting
Mexico you're Shelby health do
that for myself
I think.
Sometimes that that raised hand
thing shows up in the chat
function but it's our intention
to disable the tap function.
We did do it for this meeting.
The chat function presents
certain problems like what we
have there's some contact
information over there right now
for some of the some of that at
the kids and that's fine.
But it it raises the issue of.
Members making comments or
asking questions when they
haven't been recognized so to
maintain the flow of the the
meeting
The intent is to disable the
chat function.
I think we figured out how to do
that yeah I think that's going
to be the case for all the
committee meetings and also four
sessions for that matter.
Sh thank you to arrive early we
started a little late today
we we got it up and running a
little late we waited for my
Toyota who we haven't seen yet
but we'll try to have the zoom
session started about ten
minutes before the meeting so
everyone can can log in and get
comfortable.
it is it's a little weird
because.
Because of the set up but I do
still ask you to go through the
chair you know that that process
the you know thank you Mr chair
misters chair you know witness
L..
And to maintain that
The court if you will that we
try to do that during the
interim committee meetings and
people.
Each case you're looking right
at them and you don't really see
the chair is just a little
different so it's easy to slip
so I made a.
I may occasionally remind you.
we will generally
We're gonna try to start the
meetings at nine
we'll see how that goes we don't
have the time constraint on the
back in the game down to the
morning for session.
So we can go a little longer you
know I don't.
Like to make sure people
afternoon committees year have a
chance to break for lunch
and I will I will set the agenda
as with the vice chairs help
that I think are doable pieces
you know I I would like to get
what when we put something on
the agenda you know the public
will have notice of it.
People will turn out virtually
to tear of Bill I'd like to get
through the agendas that we sat
but I also try to keep it
manageable if it looks like
we're falling behind then we'll
start meeting earlier and if if
that doesn't help then we'll
start meeting on Saturdays in
it's sort of it's one of the
downsides of being a Tuesday
Thursday eight yeah committee
with we just don't get as many
meetings as a Monday Wednesday
Friday committee.
so we'll just try to keep tabs
on the work flow we have
The ten or so bills referred to
is already the it will get out
that Jennifer for Tuesday I
think we're gonna hear three
bills on Tuesday.
And we'll get that out
hopefully by tomorrow is it's
not today.
Yeah I think that's.
That's pretty much everything I
want your run on the virtual
aspect of it you know I will
say.
This is new for all of us.
It's maybe new work for some of
us others because we have some
with new members and some new
staff but this is this is a
different system.
and so I want just to be yeah
patient and flexible it will do
the best we can.
and I I expect that we will get
better at it as time goes on and
we may well
Make some changes to the
process.
As time goes on.
And that's that's my spiel this
is doing in the members of a
questions or comments.
Really.
Okay if you don't chair just
real quick I appreciate the
flexibility
you know I want to be in Santa
Fe most of the time and I know
this office flexibility where we
don't have today but I'll be
I'll be close at hand that's my
plan of of
Yeah right at the place I want
to utilize that so we come in
and work just like a I I
normally do and to say our
analysts and has some one on one
time and
this want to
I'm just appreciate to you're a
your approach and this will be a
good learning experience to for
all of us thank you Mr chair.
Representative Strickler.
Mr chair percent.
Thank you I'm.
For the bills that we may be
discussing next Tuesday do you
have a sense of one will get
the committee analyst reports to
review.
Not specific okay that's a good
question
my understanding is that the
built in all the reports that
FIR nails reports and things
like that are gonna be put in a
shared drive it's.
Run by Citrix Citrix is platform
I see Shelby shaking her head
yes
so they should be.
Much more I don't know what that
looks like I haven't tried that
yet a I would we hope to be like
a folder for each bill and like
all the different reports get
added in there as they become
available
certainly they should be
available twenty four hours in
advance near the sooner the
better the bills themselves are
already available first on the
NM Legislative site so I I think
you're just gonna have to check
in I think we're using that
shoot share drive things are not
you mailing things to members
necessarily we're putting in in
that share drive
shall be if we do get amendments
are committee says we should try
to email that to members in
addition to putting it on the
share drive just as a sort of
heads up but there's something
new.
In in we'll try to do it that
way.
The thing about this platform is
like sometimes the.
The tiles like shift.
Without.
So I'm sort of looking at
someone speak and then they're
not there anymore Representative
Chandler.
Thank you Mr chair.
With regard to the shared drive
for alarm provided assistance
have access to that I would
really appreciate if that could
be arranged so that they can
help me keep track of money
materials and so on thank you Mr
chair president Taylor I I
believe the answer is yes.
The share drive.
The public has access to those.
How does that work.
The public does not have access
to Citrix okay so this year
dryness well so how is the most
interested in seeing a.
Something figured out late so
we're gonna try that I guess
post amendments on our committee
page along with like agendas I
don't actually know to what the
tricky things about the
amendment is.
They're really not
Official until their move then
typically.
So.
Yes sometimes.
More amendments and you know
sometimes I'm amendments repair
that I don't and that they are
used.
Specialist for medicines like
that so
it's a little weird or and we're
just gonna have to certain level
for.
Any other questions.
Well I think you know I think
that's it for his initial
meeting so we will meet Tuesday
at nine AM.
I encourage everyone to be
prompt we were hoping
Representative Montoya would
join us this morning the usable
after time generally if we have
a quorum we will begin.
so I do encourage you to be
proper.
I'm gonna check the chat when
the last time.
some more contact information
over there for you.
like I said we're intending to
disable the chat.
In the with that I suppose
return help before we adjourn
I actually I've been trying to
figure out when we start
webcasting and how we turn the
on off and I really don't know
the answer to that yet.
You know I mean usually I gavel
the meeting and said okay let's
start and the committee
attendance turn on the cameras.
so I don't know what the
equivalent on the virtual
session is I find that.
So thank you all
I look forward to a good session
the and also you don't do that.
Good morning everyone.
Thanks you too.
Thank you.
