Morris various log in on thank
you.
Press.
Share this.
Here.
Madam chair we've reached a
quorum with H. present one
excuse.
Thank you sure As good morning
everyone welcome to the house
state government elections an
Indian Affairs Committee we have
two bills on the agenda today I
hope we can get through both of
them we also have a floor
session at eleven.
A lot of people are asking about
public comment so
we will be taking public
comment.
Similar to how we take it and
committees pre code that so we
will take opposition first and
then support next and we would
like to limited to thirty
minutes and give each side
fifteen so we ask that when you
are called upon by one of the
committee assistance that you
were concise with your either
support or opposition and we
expect that.
that would give plenty of time
for people to speak I know we've
had several individuals provide
us with their email comments as
well to committee members and
phone calls to committee members
as well so
That being said I am going to
turn over the chair two vice
chair now chair constant thank
you.
Thank you good morning everyone.
Thank you for going over the
time for the public comment and
I too would ask that you keep
your remarks concise and brief
we ask this all the time so with
that thank you madam chair Lewis
please present house bill four.
Thank you madam chair I thank
you committee members so
what I'm gonna do is I'm going
to explain the bill my co
sponsor speaker Egolf is also on
the panel and we have to expert
witnesses which will also have
opportunity to speak as well so
let me just go ahead and start
madam chair thank you.
So article two of the New Mexico
constitution recognizes
fundamental rights that protect
the public from government
overreach or abuse however at
the legislature has yet to enact
a statute to provide a remedy
when constitutional rights are
violated
what H. B. for does is that it
provides an individual to bring
a private cause of action in
state District Court.
What are your person acting on
behalf of the public body it is
establishes a three year statute
of limitations.
It provides that quality excuse
me qualified immunity can no
longer be a defence to the claim
brought under this act.
It provides for recovery of
compensatory I'm sorry Terry
damages and equitable relief
injunctive relief but does not
provide for punitive damages.
it also provides for recovery of
reasonable litigation and
attorney's fees that would be
paid by the public body.
so madam chair committee members
I know how if you haven't heard
from the opposition we're gonna
get a lot of the the sky is
falling scenarios I think this
was also evident in the hearing
that the and from courts
Fourteen Justice Committee
chairman cases during the
interim had when the commission
gave the report I'm so I just
want to remind everyone that
this bill is based on findings
Rubio recommendations of a
bipartisan and civil rights act
committee and that was
started by the legislature last
year so.
I know it's not always easy to
do the right thing but we do
want to have fair just and
equitable treatment under the
law regardless of class color or
background.
So.
A lot of people know that
dispute should be fought in the
streets they should be fought in
the courtroom and H. B. four
allows for people now to have a
way if this is an act that to
have his or her day in court.
So with that madam chair I'd
like to turn it over to speaker
Egolf to add anything more.
Thank you.
Thank you representative speaker
egolf.
Speaker a doctor we can't hear
you.
Good morning thank you madam
chair members of the committee
there is a.
A lawyer in Albuquerque need any
Schultz and he is widely
regarded as one of the.
Leaders in constitutional law
and civil rights especially as
it relates to the first
amendment of the US constitution
he has described the New Mexico
constitution as all shield no
stored and what he means by that
is that because we don't have a
state law cause of action to
enforce our state constitution.
The the paper of our
constitution.
The the rights protected by it
are largely unenforceable.
The US Congress recognized in
the eighteen seventies that
there needed to be away for
average people to bring a claim
when their rights are violated
by public.
Actor.
You're a public employee or
elected official.
That.
Cause of action which is
referred to in shorthand to
section nineteen eighty three
has been used to bring about
change of light brown versus
board of education the civil
rights victories of the sixties
and seventies relating to voting
rights it is an important tool
in the US constitution and it
has given rise to expansion of
protection for.
Constitutional rights and civil
rights of every American.
By bringing this bill forward.
Chair blue is attempting to give
the people of New Mexico.
The same.
Right that Americans have to
force the U. S. constitution by
doing so we will begin to make
the New Mexico constitution more
of a living document something
that has greater meaning to the
people of our state and will
also hold.
Public officials.
When public employees to commit
misconduct hold them accountable
this also this is about support
accountability for government
doing.
Everyone knows that if you
suffer a violation of your
rights or if you are the victim
of wrongdoing committed by a
public official you want your
day in court.
Right now New Mexico losses you
don't get what and the New
Mexico Civil Rights Act seeks to
change that by giving access to
the courts to average New
Mexicans who want to protect
their civil rights and their
constitutional rights notice the
members of the committee please
to support the bill and the
Senate to the governor for
signature so that we can.
More thoroughly and fully enjoy
the rights given to us recognize
rather I should say by the New
Mexico constitution thank you
madam chair.
Thank you speaker and
Representative Lewis now we will
go to public comment and we will
begin with the.
Yes before we go to a public
comment I just want to
ask mark Baker if he has
anything to add he was on the
Civil Rights Commission and he's
joining today as one of our
expert witnesses yes thank you
my apologies thank you madam
chair.
Mr Baker.
Madam chair thank you all the
very brief.
Justice Boston and was chair of
the city of the Civil Rights
Commission and I believe he was
also going to be available this
morning but I just want to
emphasize that the commission
dedicated a lot of time and work
hard to closely analyze this
issue and I would say that one
of the benefits of the proposed
act is that it is an incremental
solution to an important problem
as the law exist right now as
speaker Egolf and and
Representative Lewis a flag
there is a gap where the New
Mexico state constitutions
meaning in effect for our lives
is very limited naturally so and
the statute would allow people
access to vindicate their rights
in the New Mexico constitution
the rights that were important
enough to include their
I when I say it's incremental
there already other avenues for
relief around us that there is a
gap in the law that this would
fill a gap that Congress failed
for federal law over a hundred
years ago and that has been in
place in New Mexico law now
since statehood and I would
encourage the committee and the
legislature as a whole to step
in and and fill that gap with
the New Mexico Civil Rights Act.
Thank you madam representative
lowest you have for their.
Further.
Yes Sir witnesses.
At this point.
Madam chair we are looking on
the attendees list to see if we
need to promote another expert
so at this time I think we can
figure that out well we take
public comment.
Thank you Representative so now
we will move forward with
opposing comments and we will
give fifteen minutes and dad do
we have staff with that list of
Public comment.
In opposition.
Madam vice chair first on our
list is America came from our
team.
Hi thank you.
You all hear me.
Yes
thank you madam chair members of
the committee and thank you for
the opportunity to speak my name
is my aching for her team and
I'm with the Sierra Club Rio
Grande chapter and we represent
over two thousand members in New
Mexico on looks West Texas and
we fully support each before our
current legal system makes it
almost impossible to will public
bodies in including police
offices accountable when they
violate the rights of New
Mexicans this bill would allow
those whose rights have been
violated trucking justice and
hold those who violate these
rights to be held accountable
including eliminating young for
use qualified immunity under the
New Mexico constitution
qualified immunity contributes
to public mistrust in government
and law enforcement agencies
because it prevents justice for
victims from government
misconduct the New Mexico Civil
Rights Act is about fairness
justice equal treatment under
the law regardless of class or
background we fully support the
spelling issue thank you.
Next speaker please.
Next speaker is more.
My name is amber and I'm
speaking in support of age
before I believe in equal
protection under the law however
qualified immunity allows for
the over protection of people
who have committed what would be
considered illegal acts by other
citizens as a mother and
constituent of the state how can
I explain this to my children
why is disparate treatment
justified in this case this
qualified immunity law was
created by a system that is
designed to protect its own
regardless of wrongdoing.
How my supposed to talk to my
children about justice when they
see the law causing harm with no
repercussions this is not
justice thank you.
Thank you if we could hear the
opposing comments first I would
appreciate it thank you next
opposing comment.
Next on the list is J. and
Jennings and one finance your
names moving forward you will be
automatically and needed.
Thank you.
Hello.
We
measured using your this is more
again as I the city a lot of New
Mexico I'm speaking in
opposition to house bill work as
many of you are aware the former
law enforcement officer one more
years federal bureau of
investigation this year we will
and I served in the legislature
at eight shares yes.
Qualified immunity has not been
accurately Cruz right in this
discussion.
It pro I reasonable protection
for those who have acted
reasonably in difficult
situations.
I tell you when you're on the
street as I have been at and
you've got to make decisions in
a split second do not have the
luxury of twenty twenty
hindsight.
The concept of qualified
immunity is that the officers
involved are acting in good
faith and if it doesn't turn out
right.
Why Puneesh does version writing
to do the right thing.
Talk about.
Is.
Are impoverishes.
Taxpayers will the trial lawyers
this.
And I urge you to listen closely
to what Mr AJ four day but
usually with Representative
cities across the state.
Yes money these funds will be
paid for by taxpayers that means
that fewer resources will be
available for other needed
priorities.
So I urge you all to step back
from this this does not solve
the problem.
We need to address three we need
to address the backlog in
officer discipline along with
the cavity we need to make this
a better.
Saver place where people live I
enhancing how we deal with
serious criminals thank you.
Thank you next speaker please.
Next it is James Martin.
Sure we move to the next speaker
welcome back to Mister Martin
the next opposing.
Next at age fourteen from the
New Mexico municipal league.
Thank you thank you madam chair
members of the committee Madam
forty with the New Mexico
municipal league.
For for the new members a little
background on who we are we
represent all hundred six city
towns and villages in the state
of New Mexico from my
perspective I'm in the state
risk manager I'm in the state
budget director and now pulling
administrative executive
director of the leak so I've
seen these cases from inception.
Work through the system.
Our concern with this bill.
Is we desperately need reform.
We're the first ones to safety
with body cameras.
We are ready by them for are
insured members we see the
importance of the.
We desperately need reform in
law enforcement.
And none of that is in this bill
we're not banning chuckles we're
not banning no knock warrants
we're not mandating peer
intervention the escalation
reality based training mental
health everything laid out in
twenty first century policing of
the Obama administration.
These reforms we desperately
need not just another way to get
to.
It and as an insurer we get sued
every day there's no shortage of
ways for members of the public
when wrongdoing has occurred.
Just to our local governments.
What we're asking for it and I
hear this every day from all
levels of local government
whether it be our our
firefighters or police officers.
This is already hurting our our
retention and recruitment these
are concerned on how this is
going to affect the.
When we talk about an unlimited.
Damage amount Madam about right
yes we have that in nineteen
eighty three claim today and we
are constantly Sir with with
federal lawsuits with no cap but
there is a difference stand when
we talk about federal court
opposed the state court.
Whether it's our largest city or
smallest city.
Not one of them can afford a fed
ex judgments which came out of
the Senate majority a hundred
sixty five million dollars no
local government or the state
can afford that type of
settlement or judgment.
We don't have unlimited budget
authority.
So it comes down to cutting
services or raising taxes now is
not the time to raise taxes on
New Mexicans or ask them to do
more with less.
No amount of money will ever
bring back a bit.
In our point our ask is give us
the tools on the front end to
train and hold accountable our
officers.
Let's eliminate victims as best
we can.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee.
Thank you next speaker in
opposition please.
Madam vice chair next speaker is
we're going to go back to James
Martin and just for the others
who are waiting to talk I will
meet you from my end but you
also have to be from your end.
So Mister James Martin.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee I apologize for my
technical inability done mute
myself moment ago
I'm I'm a district judge down in
Las Cruces New Mexico and I'm
not against this bill in
principle however I'm opposed to
it in its current form.
I'm concerned that in its
current form it allows suits
against judges members of the
judiciary.
And
the New Mexico Supreme Court a
case that you're the attorney
should be familiar work with
college versus tablet the New
Mexico Supreme Court talked
about the principle of judicial
immunity.
And in that case they said.
Errors may be corrected on
appeal but the judge should not
have to fear that I'm satisfied
litigants.
May have been with litigation
charging malice or corruption
imposing such a burden on judges
would contribute not to
principled and fearless decision
making but to intimidation.
madam chair members of the
committee
I think it's fair to say that
about half the people that leave
my courtroom are dissatisfied.
Sometimes everyone is
dissatisfied and if every
defendant in a criminal case
we're to sue me for my decisions
I thank the judiciary would be
paralyzed
not to mention the amount of
litigation cost to defend judges
around the state so.
We're not trying to you know get
some sort of special immunity we
just want immunity for our
judicial decision making and so
in my opinion
the bill needs to be amended to
exempt the judiciary from these
types this type of litigation so
madam chair members committee
thank you very much for the
opportunity.
Thank you next week here in
opposition.
Next beaker is grace Phillips.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is grace
Phillips I'm general counsel for
New Mexico counties we represent
all thirty three counties and we
also administer self insurance
pools including a pool that
insurance twenty nine of the
thirty three counties with
respect to civil rights
liability and I I heard some of
the speaker is in support as
well as some into opposing it
was a little bit was useful
because what what we have heard
this since the beginning of this
dialogue is a real focus on law
enforcement and a foot and a
concerned about ensuring that
people can hold law enforcement
accountable and I think that
that is critically important
because some of the the press
around this case and some of the
statements that have been made
about the ability to vindicate
one's rights in New Mexico
really haven't been accurate
under current law under tort
claims act which is the state
law that creates a cause of
action pursuing government in
New Mexico it waves what would
otherwise be immunity from
liability under section forty
one for twelve which is called
the law enforcement waiver under
today anyone can sue law
enforcement in New Mexico for
violation of the state
constitution.
That is in the law it's it's
waived you can stay in state
court there is no availability
of the defense of qualified
immunity for state law claims
that is a federal concept and so
to the extent you think that
this law is necessary to create
a cause of action to under the
state cause of action for for
actions of law enforcement that
is not true it exists today and
in fact this legislature just
last year twice further expanded
that law enforcement waiver and
actually created a new
definition for law enforcement
officer and so under the under
the law today law enforcement
officer doesn't just mean police
officer the weight the way we
commonly think about it it
includes in the definition
anyone with the power to
maintain order and that is new
law we don't know how how
sweeping that will be but
there's no question that
traditional police officers
people who work in jails and
prisons and now anybody with the
authority to maintain order
falls within that that brought
that brought waiver so all this
bill would do with respect to
claims against law enforcement
would be to remove the caps
which there are there's there's
a cap of one million fifty
thousand dollars and it would
add attorney's fees on to what
can already be obtained in terms
of damages.
So I think that's an important
thing to consider in terms of
what the bill will and will not
do the other thing is to say
that there is no recourse for
somebody under the state
constitution.
Really is that accurate
statement even outside the
context of law enforcement what
what I think people mean is
there's no recourse for money
damages in other areas of the
law and I say that because
today one can sue for violations
of the state constitution to get
other relief than money damages
a couple examples of cases that
have been brought for that
purpose include the Griego
verses all uppercase it's gotten
a little bit older now it was
two thousand fourteen that was
the case actually that New
Mexico counties took on appeal
it is established the the right
to marriage equality to to same
sex marriage in the state under
our state constitution another
case that I think you're all
very familiar with or if you're
new to the legislature you will
be familiar with is that
consolidated Yazzie Martinez
case which is a case brought to
to challenge whether the state
you New Mexico eight would you
please wrap up we have other
speakers thank you thank you I
I'll just end by saying the
commission was divided they had
some good suggestions I think
they were unanimous in their
view about what could be done to
reform law enforcement and we
would urge you to to consider
those as alternatives to this
legislation.
Thank you ladies and gentlemen
and committee members we are
going to extend our time for six
more minutes.
Of please be courteous and be
concise so that we can afford as
many people to speak moving
forward so we're going to hear
the last of the opposing
comments raise your hand
injuries will call on you please
be concise thank you.
Victor Rodriguez.
Good morning nearly.
This morning committee members
the madam chair my name is
Victor Regus I was a
commissioner on the New Mexico
Civil Rights Commission and I
will tell you that this bill
does absolutely nothing to
address any of the problems that
were presented to the commission
the majority of the of testimony
that the commission took from
expert witnesses involved law
enforcement this have absolutely
these recommendations do nothing
for law enforcement
I will tell you that I do I have
each had a huge issue with the
fact that qualified immunity was
brought up over and over as this
that's the idea for law
enforcement getting away with
bad behavior so I'll be the
first one to tell you that law
enforcement needs to be held
accountable but this is this
bill actually does nothing for
that it doesn't address any of
that matter of fact it does the
opposite of that by it
Requiring the employer to
identify the officer's behavior
the bad employee behavior and so
it does it it makes absolutely
no sense and so as you well I
would really encourage you to
read the dissenting
commissioners report and how
misinformed the community is and
other government employees have
no idea that what this bill will
do for them and what what's on
the line I really appreciate
your time let's and I really
encourage you to please read the
dissenting commissioners
reporter goes into further
detail.
Thank you Mr Jack Thomas.
Thank you good morning madam
chair members of the commission
my name is Jack Torrez I'm more
the tower Bernalillo
and we strongly oppose H. bill
for
we want and need.
Civil rights reform in our state
there's no question
and our concern is is this
legislation does not do that
What we see from our perspective
our.
The need to address bad
behaviour
when it happens at the root
cause.
It's important for us to add
additional training specifically
at the OAG and other training
academies.
and it's important that we
provide best practices we need
support dealing with mental
health issues are staff to this
we also need to hold people
accountable for their bad
actions.
When I look at this bill what it
does is
Cost dollars are creates an
Avenue for people to sue of
which perhaps might be part of
the answer but it certainly Mrs
dealing with the root issues of
the problems that all of our
communities must deal with so
for that reason we want reform
we would support it but we just
don't see it in this bill and
hope that to get changes to
really address those issues
plaguing many of our communities
thanks very much.
Mr Burciaga.
Mother checked can you hear me.
Madam chair Chris both down on
the registered lobbyists for Los
crucis by public schools we
standing opposition office based
off legislation at this moment
and the reason is just because
as we all know says the District
Court has ruled and Yazzie
Martinez case that New Mexico
students are not be provide
sufficient education under the
state constitution we feel that
coming from the perspective off
the funding for the schools we
we are a big concern on this as
you know could prevent families
from suing school districts are
for monetary damages something
that we look forward to work
with the Sanchez R. as this
bills continues to move through
communities so we can take a
look on that and see how we can
make sure that the schools
districts this is quoted from
this piece of legislation thank
you madam chair.
I'm not sure I'm saying this
correctly heads.
Hi chief Steve having.
And I'm the police chief here in
Farmington can you all hear me.
I'm here to speak in opposition
to this bill for some of the
reasons that you've heard
previously in for some others
first this does not do anything
to achieve true police reform
this presents to the public that
there is going to be some
revolution in improve policing
if we take qualified immunity
and hold officers more
accountable and and it just will
not occur this is a sanctions
bill on the back and it does not
prevent trouble on the front
end.
What what we've talked about and
I testified in front of this
committee of this this fall
we've talked about is are very
significant need for improved
training for better policies and
for more accountability much of
which can be done at the state
level and through you guys the
first is for for training the
law enforcement academy is
funded at about thirty five to
forty percent of their staffing
they are not doing an adequate
job and they're not attracting
the best and the brightest to be
parameters down there and we
have we have ways that we can
talk and we can improve the
training but if we're bringing
officers and on the front end
and they're not getting the best
training possible then you were
not going to prevent problems on
the back and with qualified
immunity Rimmel second policies
there are policies which we
brought in up here in anchorage
in which I know and in
Farmington and I know his
happened in other places across
New Mexico with people like Eric
Dale who's a use of force expert
but those policies to all the
smaller agencies across our
state is is very expensive for
them to get and many of them
don't have that that's something
that the state could help to
provide the best practice
policies on how officers use
force and how that forces
investigated.
And and that's just one example
on use of force but we've we've
seen the same thing on body worn
cameras with the chiefs of
legislative best practice
policies on body worn camera
policies this should be done
with use of force and then
finally on on accountability on
the back end of it again the law
enforcement academy board is
funded it at such a critically
low level that they have a
backlog of by their admission a
hundred thirty officer cases
where officers have been sent
down referred to have their
decertification of happened and
it is not occurred yet so we had
an officer and it's about
fifteen months ago now he still
has a certification.
So these are concrete problems
that will improve policing we
can do a better job of training
we can do a better job of
providing policies and we can do
a better job of holding officers
accountable that will make a
difference in policing here in
New Mexico thank you for your
time.
Thank you for your public
comments we will now move to we
will and the opposition of
public comments and we will now
move to supporting comments and
please once again I ask that you
be courteous and be concise
thank you.
Sure you want to start with that
supporting comments please.
Thank you madam vice chair
Stephanie maze.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Stephanie my as and I'm here to
stand in strong support of this
bill my son
he was accused of murder at
eighteen years old and he spent
a year in jail nearly a year in
jail for this tragic crime that
he did not commit.
I can remember the arraignment
hearing in.
Seeing him walk by and shackles
in his face just full of terror
and fear and as a mom being
powerless knowing the moment
that I found out that he was
accused of this crime that he
was innocent my side even as a
headstrong teenager he would
give the shirt off his back to a
homeless person and often did
and I knew that he was innocent
and this has been a life
altering experience for him he
suffers greatly from PTSD and
from a severe drug addiction and
altered the lives of our
families and ultimately even
though he was released and
vindicated and the real murders
were caught and are serving
their.
There has been no accountability
and the detective who is
responsible for this has seen
no.
There's been no accountability
so I'm so grateful for the
Sanchez and I'm grateful for
this body and thank you for the
opportunity to share my story
thank you madam chair.
Yes does.
Hello.
Yes please proceed.
Hi is so my name's Elaine my
Estes and I am the sister of a
leash of those Cerro
Alicia was the young woman whose
life was needlessly taken from
her after a call.
For help
Alicia was in the middle of a
mental health crisis at the time
and the responding deputies who
answer that call and did it with
my sister being shot twenty one
times.
so for me it's unbelievable that
police are entrusted with the
power to make life and death
decisions yet they're held to
some of the lowest standards.
When it comes to accountability
you have doctors lawyers farmers
construction workers and all of
them are expected to follow the
law in can be sued for serious
misconduct but qualified
immunity is really a shield
when it comes to misconduct and
it gives police officers the get
out of court free card which is
completely not right those who
are entrusted with the greatest
power in society should not be
held to some of the lowest
standards and my hope is that
you should you would acknowledge
that we need that change and I
have heard many of the comments
from the opposition and and many
of them say you know reform is
needed and accountability at
this bill is a step towards
creating that accountability and
reform it's good to hear them
acknowledge the desperate need
for that
but.
As many of you know our state
has one of the highest ratings
of police shootings in the
country that that should speak
to the value of.
Problem that we have and how it
has gone unaddressed for so long
this bill is a vital step in
creating that change that needs
to be created to create that
accountability and that reform
the New Mexico Civil Rights Act
is about fairness justice and
equal treatment under the law
regardless of the class or
background of the person.
I'm hoping that you Tribune will
It knowledge that thank you.
Rikki Lee Chavez hello.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee a thumbs up if you
can hear me.
Great thank you thank you for
the time this morning again my
name is Rikki Lee Chavez for our
new members I represented New
Mexico criminal defense lawyers.
Our.
We are a statewide organization
of public and private defense
attorney fees we supported the
initiatives taken on by the
Civil Rights Commission over the
interim and we encourage that
the commission put for a bill
proposal that addresses the
concerns that we had we believe
that the bill before you
addresses those concerns I want
to be respectful of other people
on would like to make comment
but I would like the committee
to know that we specifically
Aid and providing justice for
all of our citizens especially
in a system that
disproportionately affects
people of color thank you so
much for your support thank you
on to the Sanchez for your work
on this important matter.
Thank you Marshall Martinez.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee
Marshall Martinez and the
executive director of equality
New Mexico the state's LGBTQ
civil rights organization LGBTQ
people in this country have had
a decades long fight to achieve
basic civil rights and we're not
quite there yet well we have had
great friends the New Mexico
legislature have done good work
to achieve some basic policy
protections are protections of
always hinged on the fact that
our government would step in to
protect us if we've learned
anything over the years
especially the last four it is
that we cannot rely on the
goodness and inherent fairness
of governments or individuals
national or local to protect us
from basic violations violations
of our hard earned Civil Rights
queer and trans New Mexicans
across the state have stories
about our basic rights being
violated by law enforcement
officials and local government
officials and a myriad of ways
the New Mexico Civil Rights Act
would be one more tool in the
toolbox we have to dismantle
systemic homophobia transphobia
and racism allowing us to
continue our journey toward full
liberation as LGBTQ New Mexicans
we approach this legislation not
from a place of hostility but
one of harm reduction and we are
clear we must prioritize
reducing harm to those who are
most vulnerable especially LGBTQ
people of color all New Mexico
especially LGBTQ New Mexicans
deserve access to basic remedies
when and if our civil rights
have been violated thank you.
Thank you so much madam chair
and the rest of the you amazing
committee members for your
continued work as you Mexico
house representatives my name is
Rebecca Davis and I appreciate
this opportunity to speak with
you all now about H. before
which I fully support the New
Mexico Civil Rights Act is
critical for ensuring fairness
and justice to all New Mexicans
for many reasons one of them
being its ban on the use of
qualified immunity as a defense
the use of this Judiciary action
even one time in our state is
too much though the use of
qualified immunity is not
allowed under New Mexico tort
claims act there is still a cap
on the amount of financial
compensation a person could
receive under this act and I
wonder why if we have already
amended this twice it hasn't
been fixed what I hear the
opposition might be saying is
that they all agree law
enforcement is really needing to
be held accountable so if this
statement is heartfelt why not
support the New Mexico Civil
Rights Act that could be one of
the many steps needed to be
taken in order to fix this I
think everyone here is well
aware that the New Mexico Civil
Rights Act is not the only thing
that needs to be done but it is
one step that'll starburst or in
faith in state agents.
Qualified immunity allow state
actors to get away with
constitutional violations
because they can claim that
nothing had been clearly
established in previously
documented cases for them to
have known better so basically
because of qualified immunity
grown adults who are working for
state agencies still need to be
told that something is wrong
ahead of time or else they
cannot be held accountable for
their actions as a second grade
teacher myself I can tell you
that humans have a very in a
sense of right and wrong from a
young age and if someone that
maybe as far as being employed
by the state cannot make
decisions about such rudimentary
things such as constitutional
rights of others they should not
be employed in the first place
of course we hate to think that
state agents such as teachers
are foster parents we need to be
held accountable for civil
rights violations but
unfortunately we know the truth
is depressingly apparent I want
to be respectful of others
trying to make comments towards
the support of this bill but we
know that even now with the
death of an eleven month old
baby girl in the care of a state
approved foster agent Stephanie
Crownover they are using the
defense of qualified immunity
right now any and all bad actors
need to be held accountable no
matter the price or the
consequences to follow and maybe
with the threat of expensive
lawsuits employers would be
encouraged to do better at
dating I'm state candidates
before offering them the
position I hope you will all
support the New Mexico Civil
Rights Act as one important step
for bringing justice to the
people of the state thank you so
much for your time.
The next speaker we will
conclude public comment.
James.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee my name is Barron
Jones ACLU of New Mexico in the
interest of time we stand as
strong supporters legislation
for all the reasons stated here
today and I encourage you all to
support this.
Common sense life saving piece
legislation thank you much.
Thank you for at public comment
now we will go to committee
members and dicey at I the chair
will call on Representative
Chasey.
Thank you madam chair I
appreciate you're answering my
questions I I guess what we're
what I have heard from many of
the opponents is that this bill
doesn't address our concerns
about
overall it.
Reform for law enforcement I
guess what I want to ask the
Sanchez is.
Is this is this what you
contemplate as as the way to
address it or is this just one
part of the law enforcement
reform.
Representative Lewis.
Thank you madam chair I'm gonna
defer to either speaker or mark
Baker please.
Thank you madam chair I and I
would like Mr Baker to.
Make a few comments but I think
this is part of an effort to.
Given average New Mexicans and
ability to.
Hi.
Obtain justice when they've
suffered wrongdoing.
Certainly you know we heard from
members of law enforcement and
just this morning talking about
the need for changing our need
for changes in policing in New
Mexico.
That is addressed in other
legislation and I think they all
come together to create a whole
but the the efforts at reform
that have been undertaken.
Clearly showed that.
Was been done up to this point
hasn't been enough and there
needs to be training and approve
it at the front end then there
needs to be a mechanism for
accountability at the back end
when.
Officers don't follow their
training or act outside of the
constitution.
It.
Clearly happens and that means
that we need to have both tools
in the toolbox
better training.
Better.
Awareness among law enforcement
of.
How to address certain volatile
situations but then when things
go wrong accountability for the
victims of wrongdoing is
capability the bride's justice
to the victim of wrongdoing is
an important part of
accountability so I think the
big go hand in hand and.
Give Mister Baker may have some
additional comments chair.
Madam chair representative
Chasey dove tailing off of the
the comments so far I would just
add that
of I don't I don't see how
making the state constitution a
more meaningful document that
can be enforced readily through
a something that's been in
federal law for over a century
would not be a deterrent against
government misconduct and so I I
agree that this isn't the end
all be all answered all problems
the to suggested that doesn't
deter bad conduct I I find very
hard to believe.
Representative Chasey so thank
you very much
madam chair and members.
And I don't know if.
Well perhaps will address a
couple of the other issues
We were told that there are
already avenues through the tort
claims act to
Litigate our rights our state
constitutional rights.
But what often happens now is
that we have to go if we
actually have a a civil rights
claim you have to go to federal
court and
Just if you want to I'd like to
give perhaps the speaker an
opportunity to mention how long
we've had the section nineteen
eighty three and then
federal statutes and how its
utilized in.
And addressing matters of
justice.
Madam chair representative E..
I believe section ninety three
was enacted in the eighteen
seventies
Mr Baker will.
Correct me if I'm wrong yes so
this was done because the
federal government recognized
that without it bility for
citizens to seek justice
inducing enforcement of their
rights under the constitution
that justice would not just as
would in effect be do not.
The six ninety three statute
has.
The driver behind every.
Major civil rights development
in the history of this country
and all of the major
developments all of the progress
that has been obtained
institute in civil rights
advancement in United States has
been when average Americans.
I went to court.
To see to make their country a
more perfect union by force in
the constitution.
Without nineteen eighty three in
federal law we would not have
brown versus board of education.
We would not of had progress in
civil rights throughout the
south in the nineteen sixties
and nineteen seventies.
It is been the case.
That governments don't change
themselves that practices don't
magically improve themselves
without citizens.
Forcing the change without
citizens.
Testing to make sure that their
first amendment rights to speak
their second amendment right to
keep and bear arms.
Are projected for those on the
conservative side of the aisle
madam chair.
I would refer you to the DC
versus Heller case the
recognized on the second
amendment.
Thank you very arms is an
individual right.
That was a case brought by the
citizen to enforce the second
amendment.
There are myriad opportunities
The New Mexico constitution for.
The rights of New Mexicans to
be.
Clarifying protected and having
in New Mexico Civil Rights Act
will get that opportunity there
is a lot of focus in the
comments today.
I'm on forces but this is not
this this bill is not targeting
or or solely focused on law
enforcement we heard mention of
a.
A foster family.
Foster child to die in in the
infrastructure.
My law partner.
Representative so a young boy
very tender age who was in a
foster home eastern New Mexico
who was the victim of horrific
sexual abuse at the hands of
foster parents over many many
months.
And.
My partner Representative this
little boy sought justice sought
compensation for having been
repeatedly victimized in
indescribably horrible ways.
And lost the case in federal
court because of qualified
immunity.
Because there wasn't at the time
a reported decision for the
tenth circuit informing foster
parents that it violated the
rights of the child to rape the
child into abuse that child
while in foster care.
It is B. is an unimaginably I'm
just result but it was the
result.
And.
We have the power to fix that
type of injustice in New Mexico
and we need to do it.
Thank you I was going to bring
up the issue of the foster
Parents which one of the
speakers in favor of the bill
raised because we have been
focusing on law enforcement but
it has a much broader
impact than that so my last
question would be do you want to
try to address what judge
Martin's objections were one of
the experts or the bill Sanchez.
Madam chair and I I'd like to
ask Mister Baker to address that
he's
completed yes say research on
that.
We.
If I may.
Madam chair representative
Chasey I appreciate the
opportunity to address that
because I can tell you that I
don't recall any moment where
anyone on the commission and
approached this from the
perspective of trying to alter
Judicial or legislative immunity
and I don't.
I understand the judiciary's
concern and I and certainly
would be supportive of anything
that needs to be done to clarify
that but I can tell you that I I
think the laws as proposed
I think you can end up at the
same place either by amending at
are going forward with the bill
as it is and if the judiciary
would prefer to have a that
specified I think that's not a
bad idea at all the reason I say
that I believe it would stay the
way it is without a changes only
because the United States
Supreme Court took a similar
look at.
The federal statutes section
nineteen eighty three that we've
been talking about in two cases
and and both said well yes
section nineteen three has
brought language but
if Congress was going to get rid
of something as basic as
judicial immunity it would have
come out and said so
specifically and here contrary
to that we've only expressed in
the in the recommended bill and
HB for getting rid of qualified
immunity which is a completely
different animal that serves
completely different purposes
under the law and so I I am in
favor of making sure that it's
clear but also confident that we
didn't take any steps that would
have been intended to get rid of
those important and distinct
Community doctrines.
Okay that was my last question
but finally I just want to close
in saying you know I actually
contemplated doing mass and
Fifteen or twenty years ago
myself and we had a hearing in
interim committee.
And all anyone could talk about
is how much money it's going to
cost I just want to point out
that as long as people's rights
are being violated it's not
going to cost money it's only
going to cost money if there are
violations of one's
constitutional rights so thank
you very much you madam chair
and thank you madam chair the
sponsor of Mr speaker Mr Baker.
Thank you Representative Chasey
chair recognizes Representative
Eli Eli.
Thank you madam chair yeah I
just to follow up on what sure
Chasey was just talking about
with mark Baker because I heard
judge Martin talk about.
Ensuring about the judiciary
madam chair mark I the way I
understand that and correct me
if I'm wrong is that what you're
trying to accomplish in this
bill is member of the Judiciary
we could shoot not for their
opinions but for things like
administrative things like let's
say and I couldn't imagine this
happening but just by way of
example that
one of the judicial districts
decided they were going to have
an announced policy that they
were no longer going to hire
native Americans and they put
that in writing that you want a
remedy for that is that what
we're talking about when we're
within the judiciary in this
bill.
Representative Louis speaker you
got.
madam chair I think you have
what Mr Baker once you take that
one.
Yes Mister speaker Madam chair
representative it you I hadn't
thought of that particular
hypothetical example but.
Absolute judicial immunity
protects all acts of the judge
and perform their role as judge
and so I think that to the
extent any clarification needed
to be made to specify that this
would change the law as it
exists in those areas and wasn't
intended to I think it's a
pretty straightforward solution
because the the example I used
was starker than what you've put
forward as if the judge rules
one way you can't sue the judge
for a ruling that way for that
purpose you have an appeal for
that if a judge just comes off
the bench walks out from the
courthouse and punches someone
in the face that's a that's a
different animal completely and
so the the the law already kind
of draws that line and I would
not support upending.
All right madam chair mark
thanks I are let me look at that
language before goes Judiciary
but I'm fine with the bill I
just wanted to when judge Martin
raise that issue I just want to
see maybe what maybe that need
some clarification so I
appreciate it thank you madam
chair thank you mark.
Thank you representative Ely now
the chair recognizes
Representative Ortiz.
Good morning and thank you madam
chair Representative Louis
speaker egolf I've received.
Hundreds of emails and calls in
support of this bill I've also
received a number of calls were
with regard to opposition the
biggest concern that have that's
that was addressed was the the
cost the potential of bankruptcy
to local government public
schools I think yes and I'm
inTaos so there are lots of a
second here who are very
concerned because of the lack of
cap and the and the inability to
get insurance could could that
be addressed.
You madam chair I'm happy to
address that
Right now.
Every public official in New
Mexico.
Legislators public employees.
More normal mistake yet.
Is subject to being sued in
federal court under section
nineteen eighty three.
if there is a valid claim of a
civil rights violation.
The H. three could award to a
plaintiff.
A judgment in and on limited
amount.
Plus punitive damages so
whatever monetary damages were
suffered would be compensated.
The attorney's fee reasonable
Tracy would be paid and if in
federal court there could be
awarded punitive damages in an
unlimited amount over and above
whatever that judge would be
that's the current law right
now.
The case would be in federal
court.
The New Mexico Civil Rights Act
proposes to allow those cases
instead of being brought in
federal court.
To be brought in state court.
And the bill takes away the risk
of punitive damages so if the
same cases brought in federal
court as brought course brought
state court if this bill were to
become law.
The.
Exposure to liability is lower
in state court in terms of
dollars and cents.
The issue qualified immunity
is also you the bears mention
I'm using federal court.
Public actors may assert the
defense of qualified immunity in
certain cases where there's a
personal injury.
This so Rights Act would bar
that defense of being raised in
state court.
The Civil Rights Commission had
an analysis done of the use of
qualified immunity in federal
court.
The analysis showed I'm gonna
bring this up said I am.
Getting the numbers correct.
This for those following homes
on page twenty six of the report
of the Civil Rights Commission.
the commission had an analysis
done one thousand six hundred
ninety one federal civil rights
cases filed in the federal court
for the district of New Mexico.
The report says.
That qualified immunity was
asserted in two hundred fifty
seven of the sixteen hundred
ninety one basis which is
sixteen percent of the total.
The analysis further showed the
qualified immunity was granted
in one hundred forty seven of
those cases which was nine
percent of the total number of
cases.
And a basis were qualified
immunity was granted in only
eighty five of them
That work was qualified immunity
the sole reason for the
dismissal which is five percent
so if with thousand six hundred
ninety one federal civil rights
cases that were filed in New
Mexico
from twenty fifteen in the year
twenty twenty I just I would
estimate five percent were
dismissed based on qualified
immunity so it's it is fairly
limited application.
in.
It is chairwoman Chasey said.
If if people aren't out
violating constitutional rights
of New Mexicans there really
isn't anything to be.
Concerned about and.
You if anything the this the New
Mexico Civil Rights Act.
Reduces the exposure in dollars
and cents to local governments
in it with regard to insurance.
At any public body in New Mexico
has insurance has that insurance
today with the potential
unlimited exposure in federal
court plus punitive damages in
ninety five percent of the cases
if files were qualified immunity
is not granted.
Thank you madam speaker speaker
Egolf and Representative Lewis I
have one more question do we
know if there are other if
there's any other legislation
that would provide training for
for law enforcement and other
public services to ensure that
they are good actors.
Madam chair Representative
Ortez.
I.
I'm not sure whether other
legislation currently pending we
are talking about
it in the budget looking at.
The funding to the law
enforcement academy
also training and.
Preventive measures are often
put in place by.
as companies or.
The agency will be hopefully or
the association counties as part
of the risk management efforts
and then of course there also
are the.
Cases in for example Albuquerque
that it resulted in a justice
department.
Consent decrees that then
forcing reform of the
Albuquerque police department
those efforts are ongoing we may
look at expanded use of the law
enforcement academy funds.
To allow for.
Enhanced.
Training.
Those measures are are pending.
Thank you madam chair Mr speaker
Representative Lewis and that
concludes my questions.
Thank you representative Ortiz
now we will call on
Representative Rehm.
Thank you madam chair
before we begin one of the
things that I'd like to do is
before we get another piece of
legislation based on improper
information.
New Mexico for search warrants
is what's termed a knock and
announce say it does not you are
not allowed in state court to
obtain a not no knock warrant.
That is of federal court that
you could do that anyway let's
move on.
Mr madam chair Mister speaker.
In the one of the things that
has been pointed out.
Descending so it's.
In the commission noted that
this does nothing to go ahead
and address deficiencies in the
government or the government
training.
I think that is very important
and I think we should be looking
more in that area.
One of the things I wanted to
ask you Mr speaker is.
I am a person if this bill
passed can a person file a case
in federal court and also file a
case in this in state court
based on the same incident.
Madam chair no.
Madam chair and of.
Mr speaker what is the current
statute of limitations for
filing a tort claim and why are
you increasing that through the
years.
Madam chair Representative Rehm
the this bill is not changing
the statute of limitations for
filing it for quite.
Madam chair and Mister speaker
don't you have to give notice to
the government entity of intent
to file a tort claim.
Madam chair representative yes.
And madam chair and Mr speaker
what is that time period that
you must notify the government
entity.
madam chair representing if it
is.
If there is a case if it's an
adult not involving death you
have ninety days to give a tort
claim.
If the victim of the tort is
under eighteen you have until
their eighteenth birthday plus
this year nine year hundred
eighty days I believe if the
death is involved Madam chair
representative hundred eighty
days to give notice are under
the tort claims.
I think that those that are
doing this off the top of my
head so I think that's I think
that's correct I don't have to
say.
Madam chair and Mr speaker but
this bill will that you're
proposing just.
Doesn't have those limitations
and that it goes straight three
years is that correct.
I'm not Madam chair
representative I'm not.
Clearly certain I understand the
question the state it goes
straight three years but.
There is a proposed three years
statutory cations are contained
in this bill.
Okay.
Madam speaker are madam chair
and Mister speaker right now a.
A person could sue law
enforcement or any state
government or a violation of
civil rights in state court is
that correct.
You could the the tort claims
act as modified by the extreme
risk protection order bill to
allow.
For.
To expand the tort claims act so
if you are so members of law
enforcement maybe sued under
that act for constitutional.
Madam chair and Mr speaker if we
look at the FIR under
significant issues one of the
things that it speaks about is
that the
precise calculation of the
increased cost is impossible to
calculate.
There's a reference in there
that'll that'll increase the.
The court or the claims by about
sixty six percent.
Our that is troubling if we if
we increase at that much
whether the.
Entities can obtain insurance
and in fact I received a phone
call yesterday from one of the
elected officials in Bernalillo
county.
And she went ahead and told me
that in a meeting that she had
with this social edition the
counties that if this passes the
umbrella insurance would not be
able to be obtained.
That is very troubling because
you take small.
Mr pallipes or say kia's or
school districts or whatever
clean light of of this nature
could bankrupt.
So I I don't know how you'd go
ahead and respond to that but I
think this piece of legislation
must go to appropriations to
understand what the fiscal cost
is and probably have an
appropriation with that.
Madam chair representative I can
say is that our I think that the
sky is falling.
creative red herrings that has
been put out.
by some of those in opposition
Are completely nonsensical.
I mentioned earlier that right
now.
If you want I will Bernalillo
county earlier counties subject
to being sued in federal court
with unlimited damages plus
punitive damages in spite of
that on limited liability in
federal court.
They have insurance for the
reinsurance any any any
governmental entity in the state
it has insurance has that
insurance today in spite of the
fact.
They face.
On limited exposure plus
punitive damages in federal
court.
By creating an identical state
law cause of action.
I I I I logic would tell us.
That.
Cases might move likely very
likely will move from federal to
state court.
But it's it's it's less exposure
in state court under this bill
that in federal court because
punitive damages aren't
available.
So it is it's an argument that
makes no sense.
The the argument against the
bill it is so you folks throw
out.
you know throughout this
argument they're not getting
insurance yet when the Civil
Rights Commission asked.
Governmental entities for
something to substantiate their
worry or their claim of the
Civil Rights Commission got
absolutely nothing to support.
These the sky is falling type
arguments.
And in one would think that if
this is a real concern there
would be something that they
could point to by way of
evidence.
In support of their of their
concern but nothing was provided
and madam chair you know if I
could maybe ask Justice Boston
or or Mr Baker to to comment on
on that because you know they
they went through months of work
on this issue and
Representative speak a little
more directly to this issue
insurance.
Mr Baker would you like to
provide a comment.
Madam chair I'm happy to speak
to that but I believe Justice
Boston is now on and he chaired
the commission so I would defer
to him to speak first if he's
he's available to speak if not
I'll pick it up.
Thank you justice.
Can you hear me.
Yes please proceed all right.
Single difficulties getting into
the meeting I apologize for that
but I have heard the entire
meeting.
The discussions been very
illuminating.
One bank this commission
for its time and all the
presenters
and I welcome comments from Rick
Rodriguez who was a member of my
commission we didn't agree on
the outcome he was very
productive.
And active participants the
question here relates to the
cost is not insurance.
Yes yes.
we had to go.
More than one meeting on the
element of cost we had to
presentations not just one from
the association counties and all
the other entities risk
management innocently schools.
Anyone else who had something to
say about because they were all
concerned about the possibility
of increased costs but no one
could committed definitively say
there would be increased because
particularly many great
significance.
I think the speaker is
absolutely right in his comment
that.
Right now you can see one of the
federal Civil Rights Act you can
get attorney's fees you can get
unlimited damages there is no
cap and unlike the bill we
propose you can get punitive
damages which can be a huge sum
of money that's the low right
now that's a law that every city
county and school district in
the state operates under right
now.
And they have insurance to cover
that.
One type or another.
And all right in my judgment
they're going to be able to have
insurance to cover similar
actions under the state.
civil rights act it makes no
sense that they would not.
So that that's my reaction.
Two and I understand their
concerns if I were in their
shoes I'd be concerned too what.
When the rubber hits the road in
terms of real numbers I I don't
think it's there at least for
now.
Thank you.
Madam chair in Mr speaker what
removing the cap or the
qualified immunity.
I foresee that there will be
more cases filed in state court
you have any estimate of how
many more judges or perhaps how
many.
Current cases are filed in
federal court where there is
qualified immunity.
Madam chair Representative Rehm
I touched on it briefly in.
My comments that we were where
we were looking at the analysis
of federal cases involving
qualified immunity.
I'm from the year twenty fifteen
to twenty twenty there are one
thousand six hundred ninety one.
Federal civil rights cases filed
in New Mexico.
That was over a five year period
so a little more than an average
of three hundred a year.
If one hundred percent of those
were filed in state court.
It would be a small drop in the
bucket overall caseload.
In the state court system.
Thank you Mr speaker up.
What I'd like to do is.
I ask you a couple different
shouldn't be you know of
scenarios and see if they would
occur so.
Madam chair and Mr speaker can a
medical malpractice let's say it
against UNM can the planning the
plaintiffs allege a civil rights
violation.
A. M. best removes the medical
malpractice women.
Madam chair representative.
Almost certainly not.
I mean it I'm gonna find it.
If it.
Maybe Mr Baker would have an
answer on this but.
You have to put them and then
I'll.
Claim in the context of the
violation of a right and to the
constitution.
And.
It.
I mean there's no claim to make.
Madam chair and Mr speaker what
if the individual was under
police custody and he was
handcuffed to a bed in the
hospital at UNM.
and later he alleged a civil
rights violation with that then
bring in U. N. M. hospital.
Madam chair representative.
I mean you do it you know it
you've got the basics of you
know what is a lawsuit right you
have to show a duty owed
to a person the breach of that
duty in the year to show that
that breach caused some sort of
damage.
To a plaintive.
So if a person is handcuffed to
a.
You know something say a fixed
object at the hospital.
In less the physician.
Did the handcuffing I don't know
how you would hold physicians
liable for for that.
I I'm I'm not I don't really
know how to address your headset
ical no a lot more facts but you
certainly anything I suppose you
I I just don't know.
Maybe Mr madam chair perhaps
Mister Baker would have a.
A better answer to this.
Madam chair speaker what Egolf
Representative Rehm
so the only thought in addition
I have is that if it was argued
that that was somehow the
equivalent of a Fourth Amendment
violation which is what would
govern a police misconduct case
then you have to show that
whatever happened to the to the
patient was objectively
unreasonable View from the
circumstances facing the the
decision makers at the time
without the benefit of twenty
twenty hindsight and I think
this is come up a lot in the
context of the the idea that
this will lower the bar for
recovery against police officers
the standards that govern
constitutional claims are among
the highest recognized under the
law and so for example in a in a
jail setting if you have a
health care problem you have to
you're proceeding under the
eighth amendment you have to
show the equivalent of malice in
the decision making instead of
just a breach of the
professional standard of care
that would government drive and
so I find it unlikely that it
would make recovery any
different or more likely for a
patient in the circumstances
described then exist some of a
lot of day I could be mistaken
but I don't believe what.
And madam chair I could add this
is Representative Eli.
Yes Representative.
Yeah if we're talking about UNM
just to be clear as a technical
point we're not talking about
the medical malpractice act
we're talking about strictly
reject their government actors
so they're covered by the tort
claims act I just wanna make
sure that point is made clear
thank you madam chair.
Madam chair and Mister speaker
what about tribal.
Police officers who are
enforcing traffic laws out on
the interstate if they have
let's say an excessive force
claim with that then open up the
police agency for this type of
claim.
Madam chair representative it
would depend on what is
contained in the.
Ross deputies ation agreement
between tribal government and
a governmental instrumentality
of the state of New Mexico so.
It it would depend on what's.
What they contain
You're right now local
governments that cross deputize
with tribal law enforcement take
on the liability for actions.
Of the tribal police enforcing
New Mexico or a political
subdivision of the state.
So it would be yes your question
but what what's in the agreement
between.
The two governments involved.
Madam chair all right.
Thank you for the time I think
that this was pointed out that
there are a lot of unknowns and
I think a lot of possibility
that we haven't really
considered an at.
anyway thank you that's all my
questions at this time.
Thank you Representative Rehm
and the last but not least we
will call on Representative
night for.
Your P. configure out how do on
mute.
thank you madam chair just a few
questions are trying not to
repeat what the other
representatives already gone
over but
My understanding is that the
counties did provide some
testimony during the commission
hearings and part of that was
the.
Loss of reinsurance if a bill
like this go went through was
that testimony provided for
those of you that were on that
the commission.
Madam chair
Representative Nibert I
apologize if I'm mispronouncing
your last name there there was
testimony from an insurance
agent for public entities I
believe the counties name Mr
Chino and where the the
information received fell short
was there was a discussion that
if the statute included getting
rid of qualified immunity and
senator damages and kind of
everything that the commission
considered
Okay.
Representative we have trouble
hearing.
Can you hear me now Sir.
I for okay so what I was saying
is that I.
An insurance representative by
the name of Mr Chino presented
it to meetings.
And.
The state was that it would be
difficult to reinsure if the
proposed legislation included
punitive damages getting rid of
qualified immunity compensatory
damages and attorneys fees.
But when federal questions were
asked by the commissioners both
times he spoke it became clear
that if one of those was not
included in the statute
he was unable to make the kind
of flat declaration that that
we're starting to hear about
concerns about reinsurance and
specifically the commission then
did not approve punitive damages
which is from an insurance
standpoint by far the most
difficult to include in your
calculations of what premium
should be because what a jury
will determine is necessary to
defend deter to deter future
misconduct is in the eyes of
whatever jurors you have in
front of you whereas what the
budget provides for is
compensatory damages which of
the measurement of the damages
that would be recoverable to
make the person quote unquote
hole and you never really make
someone whole by giving them
money if their rights have been
violated or if they've been
harmed by government misconduct
but it's the best of the civil
system offers and so without
getting too far into it our take
away from the commission was we
understood that there were
concerns the barrel by not
including a recommendation for
punitive damages mitigated those
and by the time we were done and
submitted a report we certainly
had seen nothing that indicated
that with that change there
would be no reinsurance.
Or
not madam chair following up on
that the Mr Baker.
I.
I'd read something that the
issue for reinsurance was
focused on the caps and
returnees researchers but you're
saying that it was much broader
all I understood your testimony
one.
Madam chair representative
number it was the context was if
the bill included everything
that have been under discussion
including punitive damages
attorney's fees and caps on
liability then the agent was
willing to say that reinsurance
would be difficult when follow
up was asked about if it didn't
include all of those things it
became immediately equivocal as
to what impact it would have.
And madam chair Mister Mister
Baker I think this is an
important point because yes the
counties cities other government
entities cannot get reinsurance
then you're going to have a
substantial.
Less amount of money available
to pay out awards than you would
otherwise and that may may
defeat the whole purpose of this
exercise of and so well follow
up with the association counties
in the next week on this point
and and see because I think that
may be an important factor your
love in moving forward.
Madam chair and.
This may be for the chair or for
the speaker on page two.
Representative B. well basically
lines thirteen through twenty.
We are putting on the law.
If this gets passed a bill that
would encourage forum shopping
is that am I reading that
correctly online banking.
Chair representative are you.
Very very we have.
All all
wall wall they can
so there's there's a there's
rancher reserve there's a by
nineteen on every page what page
are you.
While back in any New Mexico
District Court what was that.
Well.
One or two is it your fault.
All have some connection to the
District Court in which the
action arises.
Madam chair representative the
there is a statue General after
applicability dealing with venue
that would.
Lie to these cases so New
Mexico's.
You've been you statute would
apply to claims brought into the
Civil Rights Act.
Madam chair Mister speaker you
would agree that that people
have used that thank you to
bring actions in counties and
which is the cause of action
arose war there's any connection
to the people involved in that
action.
I'm not sure I would agree with
that.
What.
Very few Oil Field
While the affected additional
district we have to go up to of
the first or or some of the
other judicial districts to
spend those.
And it seems to me that that the
we ought to have a provision
that the the give us the ability
file such actions but they're
all based on nexus to the to the
District Court which.
Action hello.
The.
What is.
We had substantial discussion on
Qualified immunity and.
I think there's a disconnect
between.
The.
Language employed and people's
general understanding and so
Madam chair madam chair Mister
speaker could someone quickly
summarize what qualified
immunity is and it extends to.
Madam chair and like if I may to
ask Mister Baker.
Mr.
Madam chair representative
number
qualified immunity is a judicial
doctrine that allows a defense
where.
that puts the burden on the
plaintiff to show both of their
rights were violated and that
the law governing that claim was
clearly established which
requires in federal court that
there be a decision from the
United States Supreme Court.
A federal court of appeals.
Establishing that the violation
occurred under what are judges
in New Mexico judges across the
country of recognized now
requires almost identical facts
and that's where the doctrine
really ends up doing its work
because they're already defenses
on the first prong if you of the
of the standard if you can't
show your rights were violated
you're gonna lose your case
anyway but the net result of the
doctrine is that in cases where
people have had their rights
violated a judge finds that
their rights have been violated
they have evidence to support
their claims they're still
losing because someone hasn't
violated those rights in exactly
the same way before and had a
ruling from either the United
States Supreme Court or the
tenth circuit court of appeals
recognizing the violation.
And so that that's a pretty big
disconnect between the merits of
the case and the
And the law that results in a
plane of losing it's supposed to
be a good faith defense of it
started that way but instructed
quite a bit and it's strong
criticism across the ideological
spectrum from justices Thomas
and Scalia two justices so to my
R. and Ginsburg
from the Wall Street journal to
The New York Times and from the
ACLU to the Cato Institute and
Americans for prosperity there's
widespread concern about its
current application and this
doesn't deal with how it's
applied in federal court that's
an issue for federal courts but
it means that it would not
become an issue in New Mexico
state court under the act.
Madam chair that you know we
hear a lot about.
Yeah activist judges or you
know.
Judges that supposedly make law.
This Dr qualified immunity is
literally the best example in
the entire history of the law of
judicial activism in judge made
law there is no statute anywhere
that creates qualified immunity
it was invented out of whole
cloth by the Supreme Court in
the nineteen sixties it was
invented.
To provide a block against civil
rights cases that we're dealing
with police abuse
Dominantly in the southern
states where African Americans
were bringing claims against law
enforcement that was doing
things like the attack the
Edmund Pettus bridge in these
this drive off item unity rose
to shield police officers that
were.
Engaged in racially biased
policing.
It is more into.
You much much broader
application then certainly I
think was a revision and it
renders tremendous injustice.
It is essentially tells every
government actor.
You're free to flagrantly
violates the right it's if you
you should feel you're fine
you're go forth.
Commit flagrant violations.
Of the rights of the citizens of
the state of New Mexico.
And you get no accountability as
long as you're the first person
to violate those rights in that
particular way.
That's it that is exactly
request frontier communities
says is that you are not
accountable for a flagrant
violation of a person's civil
rights as long as you're the
first person to violate them in
that manner.
It is is the opposite of justice
it in the the example that we
gave earlier of the foster
child.
Repeatedly brutally raped.
Over and over and over again my
foster parents.
No.
Justice for that little boy
because there wasn't an extra
cream court or tensor good
decision telling foster parents
that it's a constitutional
rights violation when you rape a
child under your care and
custody.
It's not it's not it's not a at
a drive that should be defended
is one that should be eliminated
Mr Baker's correct this is use
spans the ideological spectrum
from ACLU to the Cato Institute.
It's time for it to go.
Madam chair and all Mr.
Why.
All.
For for for for for for.
Maybe I just don't understand it
but it it seems to me.
Right now if I'm wrong.
That qualified immunity is
really the mechanism by which
blocked the state.
For the community is held.
What's more for damages for such
violations yes the individual.
State actor.
Scapes personal liability for
such action through this drive
news is that not an accurate the
trial of qualified immunity I'm
Madam chair representative for
it is not so
under New Mexico law currently
the state is required and does
a judgments rendered against
individual state actors if there
is an award not just under.
Six nineteen eighty three but
under any statute the government
pays those.
Damages to the
prevailing party in the case.
Individuals are not held liable
for people.
In in in the the exactly I think
you just gave her a question is
asked.
You you said to the governments
have to pay but the individuals
is held protect Iraq offering
unity that is not the case.
Qualified immunity if it is
applied.
Any case is dismissed there's no
second by the apple for the
government employer on the basis
the case is lost.
I guess we're looking at the
news and saying all cases that
you're filed against New Mexico
governmental entities over the
years it seems that there's
recorders and significant
recourse against the of those
entities of the sort of person
that comprise of the centerpiece
on a regular basis and it's
because of the poor claims act
is that correct.
Your.
Madam chair representative Rick.
Totally different things so a
violation of civil rights is not
towards.
So madam chair Representative
Robert.
You towards our slip and fall.
Negligent maintenance of
building the results in someone
getting injured in the
stairwell.
Negligent design of a highway
those are their personal
injuries.
Violation of civil rights is not
at toward so they don't come
under the tort claims act.
I Representative client against
it instrumentality of state
government two years ago under a
first amendment claim right it
was a six ninety three case from
the federal court
there is no personal injury
right there's no damages there's
no money damages costs but it
was found by a judge Parker the
state had violated the first
amendment rights of speech
of our client.
It was not issued that case
could not have been brought
under the tort claims act it had
to be brought in federal court
under section.
I guess I'm.
Still confused as to what causes
of action could be brought
against a local governmental
entity under this bill verses
what is already provided in the
tort claims act and you say that
it's violation of constitutional
rights but it seems to me that
when we have our governmental
entities that.
Have.
There are employees or whatever
that would result in deprivation
of constitutional rights they
get sued and they're paying
substantial drugs but they're
they're limited by the tort
claims act but thank you know
madam chair representative right
now Kate so if there is an
allegation that a plan that the
state or a political
subdivisions there up.
As an employee she was violated
a person's civil rights.
That claim cannot be brought
under the tort claims act.
Period and less it is a law
enforcement officer so if you're
if you are not a law enforcement
officer and you work for the
state work but subdivision there
and someone alleges a violation.
By that employee of their civil
rights or rights under the
constitution.
There is it is impossible to
bring bring that claim under the
tort claims act because of
sovereign immunity.
The tort claims act contains a
list of areas in which the state
of New Mexicos waived sovereign
immunity to allow itself to be
sued.
Civil rights violations are not
in the area in which the state
is waive sovereign immunity for
students in state court.
So.
That's the that's it that's why
all of the Civil Rights claims
right now are brought under
section ninety three of the
Civil Rights Act in federal
court.
In the limits of the tort claims
act apply and they're completely
separate things chair.
Representative Rehm to have on
that point.
I see your hand up.
I don't think you ever keep it
down.
Well.
Madam chair and.
The.
I think everyone here wants to
make sure that government
actors.
Do not violate civil rights of
the citizens of the state.
I think we're in agreement with
that I'm tremendously concerned
with the impact of the bill on
local governments their ability
to seek reinsurance our ability
maybe get insurance of everyone
brought up.
With the bows of the complaints
of accuracy
and I think I think we need to
address that in fact the we got
some information that the it's
going to substantially point
going to result in a substantial
increase in insurance premiums
through the to the counties and
I would expect we are municipal
governments as well and so I I
do think that those are are
things that that that need to be
looked at we've been provided
with a number of examples of.
That state actors.
And every one of those instances
are they're not mechanisms to
hold those bad state actors
accountable through.
I don't know proceedings or
other proceedings that there
could be instituted.
Madam chair representative.
the answer is usually not.
You know it's it's rare that a
civil rights violation is also a
crime.
So you know in in in in a
criminal prosecution.
Eight.
You provides societal justice
against
the criminal defendant.
But it doesn't provide
justice restitution.
To the victims of the criminal
conduct.
In a in a I'll go back to the
foster child example that I've
I've mentioned several times
today.
It there is a horrific.
Situation with this little boy.
Are in foster children being
abused in unspeakable ways for
years.
The foster parents were
prosecuted.
And the went to jail to prison.
That doesn't pay for the decades
of treatment that this little
boy and and the other foster
children according eight I have
a shot in the.
A life.
And in that case there was
basically no mechanism to
provide justice to the victims
of the abuse.
And those are real examples that
happened in New Mexico.
And they happen.
Unfortunately in too often.
Madam chair in that regard the
there still is a mechanism to
try to deal with bad actors in
New.
We.
Very event you talked about.
Or rific as it is that's a crime
and.
We've seen well I guess a number
of things recently that the.
We.
Walls with criminal laws of the
state ought to be engage against
these these bad actors and and I
think what what your bill is
doing is.
On yes giving another
alternative the filing of the
nineteen ninety three action
state court and allow them to
proceed to all our state courts
many of the judicial districts
and try to work in in force that
there weren't most things are
enforceable
through through the federal
nineteen eighty three options.
But we have madam chair we had
some testimony from a school
teacher.
And.
More and more concerned with or
another one of my concerns with
the bill is the breath of the
bill.
This is centrally makes
virtually every state employee
county employee city employee.
subject to personal liability
for their actions in their
course and conduct of their.
The duties of my reading that
correctly for madam chair.
Representative madam chair
representative you're not.
so when you say that it makes
the person liable that is
explicitly addressed
For.
Winds five to nine.
Has the public employer
indemnify the individual fully
for any damages to there's no
personal.
Madam chair of the the prior
statements were to try to hold
the actor accountable.
That I misinterpret the prior
statement.
The first David was yours.
Requires about in our statement
second ago prior statement
earlier in this debate was that
that there are or maybe it was
one of the people that was in
favor of it that it would hold
the but St bad actors
accountable for their actions
and so we're not if if if we're
not doing that then.
Why the guests are and your
second statement was was not not
correct the the employee would
continue to be absolved of of
any personal responsibility for
their bad action and I guess
we'd still have to leave it up
to the criminal courts as to
whether or not
That action rose to the level of
reaching out for.
Being criminally liable.
You know I.
I I guess I.
I will.
Not be likely supporting us when
when it comes to a vote but I am
interested in this are.
From.
Standpoint of trying to
understand the very law that
that I don't understand the and
I come to it with with the real
curiosity
I I am concerned about the cost
that we're the worst one
counties and cities are that's
always been a primary concern of
mine and somehow I I need to get
a better handle that the you're
moving forward so as I
understand it madam chair this
bill will we'll go to Judiciary
if it passes this committee is
that correct.
Yes Representative number.
thank you madam chair that's all
the questions I have the store
thank you.
Thank you this concludes that
committee discussion and before
I go on to Representative Eli I
would just like to thank the
work of the commission and
speaker Egolf and Representative
Louis and at note that these are
findings and recommendations by
the bipartisan New Mexico Civil
Rights Commission and I think
that speaks the importance and
the costs of the bill so with
that I would like to call on
representative Ely.
I can't hear you.
Sorry I forgot to you could
share with the past.
A second.
We have a motion for add to pass
and a second by Representative
Chasey it is move to pass house
bill four with the clerk please
take role thank you madam vice
chair.
Representative Chasey yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Gaydos.
Who is excuse.
Representative night Burt.
Though.
Representative Ortez yes.
Representative Rehm.
Matt.
Representative is.
No.
Okay.
Yes.
Yes.
Johnson.
Yes.
Okay with that
We have a motion that passes
with a vote of five to three we
have a due pass.
I have so far.
Madam chair chair and members of
the committee thank you very
much.
Thank you madam chair thank you
members.
Thank you members as
Representative Eli you still
have your hand up.
Sorry chair wanted.
Representative Lewis I will read
for three D. for back to you
madam chair.
Thank you madam chair we are
next going to hear house bill
fifty five so we just need to
get Representative McQueen moved
over from the attendees list to
the panelists.
You madam chair.
Great thank you Representative
do you have any experts or or
are you flying solo this morning
flying solo madam chair great
thank you go ahead and again
when you're ready.
Madam chair members of the
committee of I think all of you
except perhaps Representative
Ortez that she is billable for
this bill is passed the house of
representatives unanimously
twice and I believe this is the
year we're also can get past the
Senate this is a bill that takes
our individual capital outlay
allocations which previously had
been kept confidential and makes
them public.
The vast majority of our members
when asked have released that
information this just makes it
automatically and streams lined
stream why did for the for the
press and the Legislative
Council Service will publish a
searchable database of all of
our individual allocations of
capital outlay funds and with
that manager I'd be happy to
answer any questions.
Thank you representative I know
we have some folks that want to
speak in public comment so we
have hand race but before if I
just want to tell the public
let's go ahead and start with
opposition.
So if you want to speak it for
opposition please raise your
hand or continue to have your
hand race.
And it looks like that has
eliminated all of the hands for
opposition so those that are in
support please raise your hand.
They do polling Gen.
Thank you thank you madam chair
for allowing me the opportunity
to speak this is JD pulling ten
and you can hear me okay.
Yes.
And you can't see me is that
correct.
Okay.
Thank you this is JD Bullington
on the register lobbyist for the
American institute of architects
The New Mexico chapter and also
for the greater Albuquerque
chamber of commerce which I
believe has already submit and
some excellent written comments
on on this legislation speaking
on behalf of the architects they
have long supported capital
outlay reform for two major
reasons they believe that this
money is probably best used if
it is more if it is prioritize
better for statewide uses a
relating to our our major
infrastructure projects the
needs that we have and the
second reason they support
reform in a support
representative please
legislation is that this is
public money and as we know the
process is not as transparent as
you would expect it to be when
you're appropriating public
money and so it's for those two
main reasons that the architects
and also the chamber of commerce
support this legislation thank
you.
I'm not going.
And Burling.
Hello can you hear me yes madam
chair members of the committee
my name is Hannah Burling.
And I'm speaking for the league
of women voters of New Mexico.
Eight believes that democratic
government depends upon informed
and active participation at all
levels of government we support
the use of the government
website research will budget and
financial records to maximize
the public's ability to download
and analyze data we support this
bill strongly thank you.
Thank you for that night.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee I'm Fred Nathan
I'm executive director of think
New Mexico
we support this bill thank you
Mexico produced a report in two
thousand fifteen about New
Mexico's capital outlay system
and how to fix it we documented
the near total lack of
transparency and accountability
with taxpayer dollars which is
one of the ways the system
breaks down we support
representative maclean's bill
because it would bring greater
accountability and transparency
to a system that desperately
needs both those things so that
they can operate more
effectively going forward and
finally I would just say this
reform bills on many steps the
legislature's taken to increase
the transparency of state
government and make it more
accessible to New Mexico
taxpayers from creating the
sunshine portal to webcasting
committee hearings and floor
sessions to opening up
conference committees so this is
the next step in the movie thank
you very much.
Thank you heather addition.
Madam chair members of the
committee heather Ferguson here
in common cause New Mexico we
would like to see thank
Representative between for
bringing this bill forward again
this year we think that it is an
integral part of helping to
rebuild and restore the public's
trust with the increased
transparency into a capital
outlay projects it's one of the
consistent calls that our office
received from members of the
public who have questions or
issues and have remained curious
as to why they can't access some
of the details of it and we feel
that using some of the current
software systems available to
the state government that
hopefully this would be an easy
addition to include so we
strongly support this bill thank
you.
Thank you.
Hi my name's Jason Espinoza the
lobbyist with the New Mexico
foundation for open government
and we do strongly support house
bill fifty five this reform
really does build on many steps
that the legislature has taken
to increase the transparency of
state government and making a
capital outlay funding process
more transparent is the logical
next step in this positive trend
we urge the committee to vote in
favor of house bill fifty five
thank you.
So we don't have any other
attendees willing to our excuse
me wanting to.
Speak on behalf of public
comment so Representative McLean
I believe you wanted to ask the
committee a question as well
before we go to the public
excuse me to committee Madam.
thank you madam chair chair
members of the committee this
bill is retained to apply
prospectively that it would it
would take effect next year and
one thing that I had considered
because of the strong support in
the of the bill in the house is
possibly running a four
amendment to make it effective
this year and add emergency
clause so it would cover of this
year's capital outlay
allocations but if there is
capital outlay money which I
guess we sort of think there
might be some.
and that amendment is not before
this committee of senior running
that as a for amendment but I
did want to raise that to the
committee and if anyone had any
thoughts about whether or not
that was a good idea I would
certainly appreciate the input.
Thank Representative we will
first go to Representative
Nibert.
Thank you thank you madam chair.
Just one comment not really a
question.
Even while I was asking
questions on the last bill I got
a phone call from a lady from
policy does telling me to vote
for this bill because it deals
with libraries and I want
everyone to understand this bill
has nothing to do with libraries
unless an individual puts it
into their own capital outlay of
thing this bill has everything
to do with with the showing what
capital outlays each legislator
and the governor supports are in
the final
in the final analysis and and so
the folks in Mexico City this
can can find another bill to be
worried about but it's not this
one thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative and I
know that I've also received.
Emails about house bill fifty
five that people think pertains
to tribal libraries that's a
different bill so this bill is
about disclosing capital outlay
projects
that will make be made available
to the public so thank you for
pointing that out Representative
Ortiz.
Thank you madam chair
representative McQueen it does
does the data that will be
published by the Legislative
Council Service also include the
capital outlay requests.
So what they asked for.
And what they were awarded.
Madam chair representative as
then the data published will be
the final allocations the
requests or billable elsewhere
but that would be it I don't
recall exactly how those are
available they are available
though and that is something
that
You know sometimes leads to
confusion and I think it is
another good reason to to
disclose our allocations because
you know I I guess you know
thirty or forty million dollars
a request you know for six
hundred thousand or maybe a
million dollars capital outlay
in some people say oh will
increasing signed a request for
ten million dollars for the
building in Albuquerque and is
like the air that's not really
the same thing that's what the
allocation so that information
is publicly available I could
not tell you exactly how they
get to it.
Thank you madam chair
Representative McQueen.
Your representative
Representative Eli.
Madam chair I move in the past
thank you madam chair.
Thank Representative we have a
dip has motion by Representative
Eli and a second by
Representative Johnson and
before we go on the question
Representative McQueen and I
wouldn't be opposed to for a
moment just throwing that out
there but I know you don't want
to do it now and it looks like
folks are not in their hands and
agreements so
yeah that's that's the input
from this committee so we will
now go to the committee
assistant to.
Roll call vote thank you madam
chair Representative Chasey.
Representative Chasey.
Yes did you hear me thank you
know you're on mute thank you
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Gallegos.
Is excused.
Representative my part yes.
Representative Ortez yes.
Representative Rehm.
Representative.
Yes yes.
Vice chair Johnson yes.
Yes.
Yes.
So by a vote of eight in the
affirmative and one excuse do
you have a do pass
Representative McLean thank you
thank you.
Thank you to the committee
members and to the public that
joined us today we don't have
any other bills and it looks
like we finish right in time to
go to the floors session that's
going to began at eleven AM so
it just for the the information
of the committee members zoom
link that you use today to sign
an as a panelist will be the
same zoom link for every meeting
so you can set that aside and
and notes in whatever device
that your using that would be
extremely helpful so that you're
not looking for the emails on a
continuous basis whenever our
meetings are occurring so just
cut or copy the link into a
document that you have saved for
years in length and I believe
that's going to be the same for
every committee so
just wanted out yes
Representative I actually think
if you reply yes to the
invitation that sure Reese
because this census it populates
your calendar.
With the links I could be wrong
it is certainly populated my
calendar with the committee
meeting so
That's correct.
You don't have to copy cut and
paste in your calendar.
I'm useful for those folks that
use their calendar because I
know sure Reese is trying to
reach everyone by provided email
as well as personal calendars so
it kind of also depends on the
settings in your calendar so if
that's not happening please
reach out to the tech folks that
are available to assist us in
that but otherwise that's
another simple way to do it is
by stating that link.
So thank you committee members
that concludes our meeting and
thanks for your tenants and your
participation thanks to the
public for your participation
and we'll see you in our next
committee meeting at eight
thirty AM on Wednesday morning
and we are now adjourned thank
you.
