Today's invitation offered to us
by the gentleman from Chavis
Representative Nibert.
then as a microphone since I'm
not logged in thank you so.
Approach.
This.
As for now.
I have done Ms.
The state.
There are many suffering of this
time.
Nine Santos man's.
In
to help our fellow man.
Thank you.
Well.
The.
Them.
Enforcement and our first
responders and campus Senator.
Incentives that are Maez.
Public servants.
The local level.
Us and governor.
At the state level.
Cameras of this.
Senator.
A time of growth.
Transaction Mr Anas.
As and how are.
Contact.
The protect.
Return home safely and that one
can draw on a long period of
of peace in this world.
Representative since then and
then.
Representative Powdrell Culbert
with the furnace maintenance in
the pledge of allegiance.
Salinas and cementing in New
Mexico's flag.
I salute the flag Mexico is the
symbol of perfects and should
unite cultures.
The next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
Sanitation so.
Everyone.
yesterday.
Past requests that milestone
with the five hundred thousand
deaths due to COVID nineteen.
Been lost to the disease are in.
Members loved ones and friends
of members of this house and
families all over this country
it is a very sad moment to see
half million.
Of our fellow Americans dead due
to this pandemic event asked.
The house to please rise to.
Those lost to the pandemic to
COVID nineteen.
two it is I have proof that is
your tradition for those they
have left behind and I thought
and prayer for those who have
been lost.
In whatever way your tradition.
dictate.
Thank you members.
and since this morning.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
The next order of business
committee.
Clear to me.
Mr speaker education is been
referred house bill one thirty
one has had it under
consideration present
recommendation that do pass an
answer for the appropriations
and finance committee
Representative G. Andr√©s Romero
to.
The speaker move adoption of the
new report.
Forward on house bill one thirty
one all those in favor please
signify by saying aye.
This was made before the doctor.
Mr speaker issue.
House bill thirty eight as
amended has had it under
consideration point
recommendation that do pass as
amended.
Respectfully submitted Gail
Chasey chair.
Senator the committee point read
together acted upon in a single
vote and reflected in the
journal as the the acted upon
individually interjection so
we're going to meet.
House bill one twenty eight as
amended.
Do not pass but Hastert issue
committee substitute for house
bill one twenty eight due
process.
Two hundred.
To pass.
House sixteen as amended to
pass.
House bill one twenty for as.
Do not pass the house Judiciary
Committee September house bill
one twenty for the to pass.
How.
Twenty nine as amended to pass.
House committee substitute for
House Bill three don't pass
this.
House joint resolution.
Do not pass the house Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
straight resolution nine to pass
Representative get chance to to.
Mr speaker move adoption
adoption committee report on
house bill thirty eight is
amended an unfavorable credit
report house bill one twenty
eight has been a bit of
favorable committee report on
house Judiciary Committee
substance Russell one twenty
and.
Bill two hundred house bill
sixty as amended and I'm going
to report on house bill one
twenty fourth minute favorable
committee report on house
Judiciary Committee sister rose
to one twenty four federal
committee report on house.
Senate has consumer public
affairs we September after one
thirty nine and then report
house joint resolution of
ephemeral careful and Judiciary
Committee sister for House
joint resolution analyst four
percent from.
I
think.
Can you point it out to.
Mr speaker taxation and revenue
committee two budget Senate
finance committees up to ten
percent of three has had it
under consideration and the
process of recognition that it
did pass respect was about
nineteen is to.
Option a favorable can import
and Senate finance committee
September Senator three all
those in favor please signify by
saying hi.
As a three four.
Mr speaker Energy Environment
and natural resources committee
terms been referred house bill
two sixteen to have had it under
consideration for the same
recommendation that it do not
pass that House Energy
Environment and natural
resources committee substitute
for House Bill to sixty to to
pass an answer for the taxation
revenue committee Representative
Matthew McQueen checked.
The option.
The option of an unfavorable
committee report on house bill
two six hundred federal
committee report.
Natural resource consumption for
hospitals two sixty two of those
in favor please signify by
saying aye.
One of the main point about
that.
Mr speaker services committee
for hospital to twenty four has
had no consideration present
recommendation that it to pass.
And then send them to friends
and the local government land
grants and cultural affairs
committee Representative
Armstrong chair.
Move adoption.
Bill two twenty four of those in
favor please signify by saying
aye.
Thank on the server's name
committee for is about to.
The government land grants and
cultural affairs continues been
referred house bill one thirty
eight has had it under
consideration persons
recommendation that it did pass
respectfully submitted their
signature.
The committee that.
For the in hospital when they're
done with the work because he.
Hey.
The
Clinton no.
And reporting a staff of the
federal.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
I'm.
The next order of business.
Legislation.
Russian this order.
Members restaurant item twenty
six House Bill Clinton I I.
Rating and so on items twenty
three and I.
Gentleman from
nine twenty six.
Action necessary for placing
House taxation and revenue
committee substitute for us will
to five five on final passage
has been taking the gentleman to
explain the bill.
Okay thank you for the thank you
Mr speaker thank you audible
members this is house bill two
hundred fifty five it deals with
the liquor control act and it is
meant to save our restaurants
save our tourism industry a
boost
are present with agonising ahead
said we can't we there's too
much
To have one we can we.
Our office has some if we can
get.
Mr speaker.
And.
Yes yes.
Thank you of.
Mr speaker my proceed.
A much better job thank you.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
audible members once again house
bill two hundred fifty five
deals with the liquor control
act it is meant to save our
restaurant industry to boost our
tourism industry enhance our
hospitality industry and get our
economy moving again as quickly
as possible
with your permission Mister
speaker I'll make a few remarks
always yield to the gentle lady
from Bernalillo Representative
Hochman Vigil the gentleman from
our.
San Juan
Minority whip Rod Montoya and
then the gentleman from Santa
representative Adam on this but
thank you Mr speaker is want to
thank all the the mines and and
and conversations that have gone
into this bill the the
governor's office and her staff
Representative Hochman Vigil as
you recall introduced house bill
eight we will be really good
language from not bill in the
house bill two fifty I had two
of those had three robust
hearings on those two different
bills with over six hours of
public comment.
Numerous amendments to make it
the best bill possible and
here's what it does essentially
for five or six major things
number one it allows alcohol
delivery and all that
Representative Hochman Vigil
elaborate on that but we join
the modern world with regards to
alcohol delivery so folks who've
had one or two drinks do not
have to drive to the liquor
store they can have it delivered
number two we create.
We we create our our a change to
the beer and wine restaurant
license under this bill we
create what we call a restaurant
the license which will allow the
sale of spirits liquors under
the same conditions in the same
confines and restrictions of a
very one license and this would
have enhanced responsibility to
compete homegrown entrepreneurs
to compete with the chili's and
Applebee's of the world so they
can offer a full array of beer
wine and spirits with with folks
meals
also Mr speaker it
it joins the distillers wineries
and breweries and makes
reciprocity so they can have
each other's products at their
various wine tastings whether
local wine tasting celebration
or a regional wine tasting
celebration.
The the addition of the
restaurant be license may
fluctuate the market value of
the interlocal dispensary
licenses I'm against and get
into that during the debate but
as you know Mr speaker honorable
members over the course of sixty
years of of law on economic
activity a state issued license
if a state permission to sell a
particular commodity in this
case spiritus liquors has become
a commodity as becoming
marketable product we do not
mess with that marketability we
do not.
Diminish that marketability
whatsoever will study a year
from now to see if in fact there
was the valuation in the in the
in the in our local dispensary
license I don't believe there
will be but but to show respect
and to show
comments cognition with regards
to the folks who have licenses
either for a year or for decades
they each get a two hundred
thousand dollar tax deduction
over four years I am with the
package with the folks are what
is known in law as the
retailer's license or kind of a
licensed a one hundred thousand
dollar tax deduction over four
years that will hopefully help
these businesses get back in
action after COVID.
To pay for the tax deductions
and for the the social cost of
alcohol there is a minimal and
conservative two percent
consumer tax at the point of
sale
and the bill does a lot of other
clean up to the liquor control
act with that it's I wanted to
pass through to yield to the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative a day Hochman
Vigil.
The general.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
this is my first time presenting
from the force I hope everybody
can hear me through my
headphones
it is our my pleasure to
introduce house bill two fifty
five Representative Maestas Mr
speaker are this bill has been
over for years in the making and
what it does is it brings in New
the state of New Mexico and
twenty first century for alcohol
licensing and our regulations so
first I want to thank my co
sponsors for this bill Mr
speaker Representative Maestas
and representative of on twenty
are Martinez and Hernandez this
is a bipartisan effort and has
been nothing less than a
herculean effort by my co
sponsors to bring together
legislators stakeholders
government entities regulators
and members of the public to
craft a bill that we think is
equitable.
And will really help New Mexico
in assisting those businesses
that have been hard hardest hit
during this one hundred year
pandemic it's been my pleasure
to bring a specially elements
into this bill for alcohol
delivery which was important our
priority identified by by this
legislature and the governor's
office coming into the twenty
twenty one legislative session
what we're doing with alcohol
delivering this bill Mister
speaker R. as we are allowing
for the establishment of an
alcohol delivery license either
or by a third party our by our
in house delivery.
Deliver which will allow the
regulation and licensing
department to I will to permits
or delivery by restaurants and
package retailers or anybody
processing and dispensary
license with specific
limitations for restaurants
delivery can only happen if are
at least ten dollars for the
students purchase and there will
be quantity limitations are of
beer and wine only it's will not
be allowed to be delivered
through this bill.
And are we are also requiring
that this license is
nontransferable and it will be
applicable for your.
So at this time Mr speaker again
I want to thank the sponsors of
this bill is for the the
incredible collaborative effort
and we're really going to be for
calling New Mexico into the
twenty first century it's been a
long time coming thank you Mr
speaker I'm about I will yield
to my co sponsor the gentleman
Bernalillo Representative I just
of.
Thank you Mr speaker gently from
Bernalillo at this time of with
with the body's permission I
yield to the gentleman from San
Juan Representative Montoya.
Thank you Mr gentleman from
Santo Santo.
Thank you Mr speaker in
membership
this bill has been a long term
and in making this problem has
been that's been created has
been a really long time in the
making.
what this bill is intending to
address
here are a couple of things
first off the the idea of of
having a liquor sales that
can end up in restaurants and
small towns again in our old
downtowns that have a shut down
to allow for a delivery along
with the food from some of our
restaurants to help them get
back on their feet but the real
problem that this bill is
addressing is
the idea that so many people
have been locked out of the
market.
small towns
and
entrepreneurs all across the
state I have
been locked out from the fund
not only that we have created
and and the way we created this
monopoly is allowing
because of limiting the liquor
licenses what we fully go out
for is the monetizing of the
state license.
we've allowed
a state license to become a
commodity and that is that is
very unfortunate and I just
think of if you would if if I
can raise rents my.
Driver's license or a contractor
could rent his contractor's
license or if they doctor could
lease his
license the these are problems
this is something that that
should have never been and what
we're trying to do is the state
created this problem.
prior legislatures have.
In this problem.
what we're trying to do is do
this problem with as little.
Harm to the people no fault of
their own who have
The cost of these licenses and
become so restrictive that
they.
You have to pay an exorbitant of
money to buy into this monopoly.
And we should not have anomalies
when it comes to free enterprise
so
this.
This is an answer that has been
a long time in the making
I think a long way we found is
not a it is not the perfect
answer but unfortunately what
the license current license
holders would think is a is a
perfect
answer is not legal we cannot
purchase back these licenses so
what we all we can do is try and
help keep the value in place for
the people who have
borrowed money against their
license or have have their
license we stated earlier
monetized so I'm gonna go ahead
and.
In my comments here with the
shout out to all of the
legislators before those of us
who have signed on to this
particular piece of legislation
and who have tried throughout
the years to come up with an
answer there are several others
even during this legislature
senator Ron Griggs compass
bispecific money I know since
I've been here he's been
carrying a legislation year
after year I think that carries
legislation for six years in a
row so with that Mr speaker I
would like your lower back to
the lead sponsor Representative
Maestas from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker to other
from San Juan at this time
Mister speaker I yield to the
local sponsor as well
gentleman from Santa
Representative on the.
Thank you Mr speaker and
representative from Bernalillo
I'm happy to join in my fellow
reps my S. as Hochman Vigil
Montoya to take on this
herculean efforts to reform the
collections in our state.
I.
For for.
I I have been a restaurant
industry employee from being a
server running restaurants for a
good portion of
not having a clue to the
capital.
And it's just fine I just there
we go.
We got.
Okay
I've been restaurant industry
employee for a good portion of
my life from being a service
running restaurants and I bring
my unique experience of living
in this monopoly of our state of
our current liquor licenses
regulations reform one of the
by.
Top priorities coming in to the
session and to make licenses
available to all of those who
have been shut out.
and to increase economic
development in our state this
bill will allow for a much
needed change in alcohol
Providing alcohol delivery which
will make us more competitive in
the states around us I want to
thank all of my co sponsors on
both sides of the bipartisan
bill to allow me to be part of
this great team thank you Mr
speaker I yield my back back to
my co sponsor from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker at this
time of in the north
conversations we've had we have
a.
I'd like to move foreman the
number one.
House taxation and revenue
committee substitute for house
bill two fifty five.
And it's nine seven seven.
Dot to.
has been scanned it is on the
website it has been instrumental
magenta explained.
And.
Thank you Mr speaker honorable
members the amendment deals with
that modification of the beer
and wine license the restaurant
the license which is the new
license
that we're a putting that we're
hoping to put in statute
currently of beer and wine
license has to cease selling
beer and wine at eleven o'clock.
But we want to do is that and
currently in the bill the rest
on the tracks the beer and wine
we want to make to slight
modifications from the
restaurant eight of the
restaurant be the restaurant the
license shall cease at the time
food sales and services sees or
at ten PM.
Whichever times earlier in other
words.
Lower the bill from eleven to
ten restaurant fees and then
instituting three drink maximum
of spiritus maker during one
visit to the rest of.
That is a friendly amendment.
I would also gentleman.
It
is there objection to it.
He has one to house taxation
revenue committee sensitive
wrestled to I I is it up.
We have a a second amendment
which.
Hopefully we can all support the
second amendment I yield to the
gentle lady from Bernalillo.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Very much Mr speaker thank you
for amendment that you would
like to move forward to if you
two numbers point two two zero
zero one nine point two.
What this does is to speaker is
that actually requires an
emergency server and as an
emergency point of this piece of
legislation applicable only to
the alcohol delivery questions
and the application for tax
credit.
And this is the from the
amendment.
In general please is the.
To to number two two zero zero
one nine point two.
It is Mr speaker that amendment
has been distributed is on line
is there debate on the
amendment.
Is there objection to it.
And then house floor amendment
number two to house taxation and
revenue committee substitute for
House will to I I just adopted.
Gentleman generating any any
further comments before we
proceed to debate on the bill.
No specific area before.
Thank you Mr speaker with that
will stand for questions.
Gentleman from Bernalillo Santa
Fe Torrance and Valencia
Representative McQueen.
Eight.
You Mr speaker the speaker
gentleman does the gentleman
yield.
Mr speaker yes.
Mr speaker German.
Was for someone those
legislators to
try to address this and some
small way before your effort so
I do appreciate your efforts I
do have some questions first of
all Mr speaker down and on the
restaurant license the
restaurant the license can you
explain to me how one gets a
restaurant license to begin with
is that all the licenses were
you can simply apply for you
have to purchase that right from
someone else.
In order to obtain one.
Thank you Mr speaker John from
Bernalillo Santa Fe Torrance
Valencia.
The current restaurant license
which is also known as a beer
and wine license is strictly
from the state that license does
not have a market value you
don't cannot be transferred or
sold or leased and you qualify
given certain requirements for
example your location or your
business rather has to have
sixty percent of food sales you
have to close at eleven.
you cannot serve.
very wind before eleven o'clock
on a Sunday.
And of course all your our
servers have to be licensed.
Mr Chairman thanks for that
specifically I'm interested in
it's it's it's a license that
anyone can get right so for
example the speaker Tallman if I
were to open a small restaurant
in statements more and I promise
you I will not do that I'm not
the restaurant business but if I
were I could simply apply to the
state and get a beer and wine
license in under your bill I can
help I for a restaurant the
license and also served mixtrax
thank you Mr speaker gentleman
from Bernalillo Santa Fe
appointments at yes only after
the second half your question
and answer the first so the
restaurant be license under this
statute will become available
A July first.
And those restaurants that sell
sixty percent of their our
revenue food can apply for a
restaurant be license it would
be with the Senate bill two
actually waves of liquor license
fees for twenty twenty one so
there's a six month window to
get this license for free but
there is a a ten thousand dollar
annual
application fee and renewal fee
to have the restaurant be
licensed for your correct liquor
director and through that
offices rules determine who's
eligible
And there's certain requirements
you know you can't be a fellow
and things like that it's very
strict it's highly regulated but
but to answer question any
entrepreneur
for ten thousand dollars to get
a restaurant be license and
succeed in opening up a
restaurant here in New Mexico.
Mr chairman thank you for that
and that's
That's I think really important
and that's something this bill I
like among other things that I
might not be as happy about so I
feel like I'm so kind of on the
fence on this bill but I do
appreciate the provision.
Mr speaker Tallman you mentioned
that this would allow our our
local restaurants to compete
against.
A large chain restaurants who
have the deep pockets have been
necessary to purchase the full
license the transferable
licenses.
Mr Chairman do you think those
chain restaurants will now as
they continue to open more
locations do you expect them to
opt for restaurants the license
and said continuing to purchase
those licenses.
Thank you Mr speaker gentleman
from Bernalillo Santa Fe towards
but I think that's a great
question and that's a great
question we'll keep our eye on
this throughout the year and
have good stats this time next
year when we convene.
What are I don't believe they
will for the following reasons
one is you you you if they have
a physical bar.
I will you know you sit on a
stool in across the table as a
bartender then there they're not
eligible for the restaurant be
license and a lot of the the the
Applebee's chili's places have a
like either a square bar or of
for a long bar and also under
this bill that up to close at
ten o'clock and so that's a
choice that entrepreneurs will
have to make
if I own a restaurant and I use
what what's in laws in our local
dispensary license or
essentially of beer by of liquor
by the drink license but I have
a choice another great choice I
can keep my license still pirtle
to.
And folks who come to my steak
also but not at midnight or if I
want to close at ten I can then
get a restaurant be license my
restaurant remains the same.
And I have an inner local
dispensary license that I can
then utilize at another location
or place on the market so it's a
win win for those entrepreneurs.
Mr speaker gentleman thank you
for that different line of
questioning can you explain the
the rationale for the the tax
deductions.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman from Bernalillo Santa
Fe twenty Valencia.
The
that was the trickiest part of
drafting the bill
Is that there is a tremendous
anxiety.
My liquor license holders that
they will lose the expected
future income of their license.
You know they plan on retiring
and and and selling at all for
those folks that have just
purchased one these licenses
sometimes sell for five hundred
thousand dollars package up to
seven hundred thousand dollars
the inner locals that we spoke
about average around three
hundred fifty thousand dollars.
This is not right you should
have to.
Your phone a drive to Denver I
shouldn't have to lease your
driver's license so I can drive
it's a state issued license but
it's just.
You know it's gone that way the
last fifty sixty years
So anyway the first of the first
of.
Draft of the bill four of five
years of economic.
I forgot what it was called in
the nineteen eighty one act but
it created a five year window to
force legislators and policy
makers and license holders to to
undo that system.
And so we had a five year in on
July first twenty twenty six you
can no longer sell lease or
transfer your license.
So in order to offset that cost
for that that loss of expected
future income we have the tax
deduction the that the sunset
has been removed.
You know that the people
demanded that that be removed it
was creating too much anxiety
and stress
now that there is not that fun
said we still believe that the
deductions are just and fair
they're not a lot it's not a
credit this is the deduction and
it'll help these businesses over
the course of the next two three
four years
All and then if we ever do an
evaluation of the license and
try to compensate them that will
be factored in but it's to allow
local entrepreneurs who
currently have licenses to
indicate the stress of what they
anticipated the loss of the
value of the license they have a
really articulated how that
would happen but they're just.
They're really stressed out so
so we like the provision.
Mr speaker gentleman
You know I I I think I
appreciate what you're trying to
do is a bit of a carrot and
stick approach.
But we got read the stick.
So it sounds to me like we're
still given a pretty big carrot.
But we're not fixing the system
that we were trying to fix so
why if we cover the state could
recover the sunset.
Why are they still doing that
pretty significant financial
benefits in this bill.
Thank you Mr speaker gentleman
from Bernalillo Santa Fe towards
funds I think combination
reasons one is.
We don't know how the restaurant
the license will.
Fluctuate the market of the
inner locals number two is a lot
of these businesses if not all
of them were closed.
We're close as a result of the
pandemic and the tough decisions
that that that we had to make to
you know to protect ourselves
and protect our citizens a lot
of these businesses
may not come back.
So so we believe the deduction
this is reasonable and if it's
lawful and we think it will
incentivize economic growth.
Mr speaker and gentleman
I'm certainly sympathetic to
businesses but we we had some of
those
discussion in
your committee yesterday
recurring Senate bill two and
it's but it's my belief and I
think this was confirmed by the
director
the name is agency of that I'll
call I got the runs the licenses
over are all the
that.
The business is that really hurt
and suffered in the once in fact
close like bars and restaurants.
Mr speaker and gentleman and and
this is a legitimate question I
don't know the answer to these
tax deductions just apply to
those kind of licenses or do
they also apply to people
approval of licenses that allow
them to to package sales thank
you Mr speaker drone from
Bernalillo Santa Fe towards but
it's just that it's a two tier
if you have a liquor by the
drink license.
Or what's in law you know what
dispensers license it's a two
hundred thousand dollar tax
deduction over four years you're
correct for those package folks
who are not affected by any
market fluctuations in this
building factor businesses are
enhanced because they cannot do
delivery.
those folks in this bill get a
hundred thousand dollar tax
deduction over four years.
Mr speaker gentleman that
That is quite care.
Mr speaker German wanting us to
a different question I I was I
was looking at the amendment
This it's number six it's on the
amendment limiting to the
consumption the three drinks
Mr speaker Tallman if if I go to
the bar and I have three
spiritus drinks and I think it
cut off can I switch over to
your money.
Mr speaker John from Bernalillo
Santa Fe towards but it's a if
you're in a bar you're going to
go and that's between you and
the bartender but but great
question
Here.
At the restaurant B. we do a
three three maximum.
We we think that's reasonable
because if you want to go to a
bar go to a bar restaurant has
the authority to not serve you
at any time for any reason so so
I would imagine
if you're cut off your cut off.
Mr chairman there is I ask is
because you know we have that.
That standard that understand
the understanding that
restaurants or bars yeah anyone
serving I'll call one Sir people
who have had too much it's
unusual as far as I know that we
had specify the number during.
And I haven't I haven't seen
that before and so I was curious
that a we specify the number of
drinks in the we only specify
the number trains as it applies
to the liquor.
Mr speaker gentleman did just
any further explanation of that
thank you very much and I
enjoyed.
Watching on the big screen out
Representative settlement Mr
speaker Dennis Miller Santa Fe
towards but it's a that's a
great question and there's going
to be marvelous policy decisions
we make this year and the next
couple three years as a result
of of modernizing the liquor
control act it's it was dusty
when we when we look at it this
summer.
But the policy is we don't want
to do anything to change the
current during one likes.
The current return one license
has no maximum.
What what what this new proposal
this new proposal that is the
furthest any similar proposal
has gone in forty years to make
it on this floor.
because it's so new
and because it's
It's it's.
It's so unusual you know.
That we think it's reasonable to
restrict that aspect of the
restaurant be license and so
that's what was agreed to by
many stakeholders to.
Ten o'clock close at ten and
three drink maximum I think what
that does is it'll create this
really cool culture that you
were gonna have a awesome
restaurant culture New Mexico
you know awesome nightlife
entertainment culture.
But that the that they are local
that you spoke of the value of
the in our local.
will not fluctuate as a result
of its differentiation of the
rest of the license that was
kind of the thought process
behind.
thank you Mr speaker German Mr
speaker Tallman.
Yeah and and other other people
have questions this is a big
bill
has a lot of moving parts.
there are parts I like there are
parts I very much still like
Senator yeah listen to the state
think about how much of
Mr speaker gentle in our current
system.
Is broken.
I think we all recognize that.
I personally would be in favor
of tearing it all down building
a system that works it Mr
speaker German.
Well I certainly appreciate that
you're trying to to fix aspects
of the system I I still think
we're building on top of a
broken system.
And and we haven't fixed this
problem of these.
Licenses being transferable
cussing Penders of thousands of
dollars which of course is our
things fix when people invest
that kind of money so.
It is a difficult proposition I
percent just not sure.
In some L. still fund some ways
this bill goes too far in other
ways because it doesn't go far
enough so Mr speaker German
thank you for a thank you for
bringing this stuff.
Gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from Bernalillo yield
Mister speaker yes.
Mr speaker first are you can get
the second floor amendment on
the website.
Do we could you tell me.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
from Bernalillo so we want to
delivery is a key is that one
aspect of this bill is delivery
for our restaurant tours
If I have to do is is close to
my house there on course in
Albuquerque I can order a
wonderful meal from a two cheese
But I can't have a bottle of
wine
They can put in the mail and we
get to the next day but so
anyway delivery is a key
component of this bill amendment
to proffered by co sponsor
Representative Hochman Vigil as
an emergency clause to that
aspect of the bill so if all
things go go well the governor
could get this bill.
You know in Google three weeks
or so and and when that the day
she signs at restaurants commend
to deliver.
Okay.
As to the delivery aspect of the
bill.
Thank you very much
I hope you're not hearing any
background noise in my house.
All.
I apologize.
The bad time here I'm.
Mr speaker.
I think Mr speaker delivered I
think she's excited about this
bill.
The dog is practicing for
chasing the liquor delivery man.
Mr speaker and gentleman I think
that's what I I'm looking for in
the bill.
And I and I I did hear you talk
about
tax credits and.
You mentioned that you want to
provide our local restaurants in
and so forth.
With the ability to compete with
Applebee's and
Those kinds of.
Out of state to establishments.
I was contacted very early on
before you make any changes
about what the devastation might
be to.
Our local restaurants the ones
that are full service
restaurants but state the
artichoke seasons.
Restaurants when the two threes
is a local restaurant actually
I'm not sure if they have a full
license because I've only gotten
them
I believe the.
Whether refer chair in the
Senate.
By.
What are you I'm told is that
there are about four hundred and
twenty of those licenses in the
state and most of them are close
by the restaurant bar owners.
And a very small minority here
on five people who Senator bars
and restaurants very small.
So.
What.
Some of the restaurant owners
are not opposed to.
Allow issuing new licenses they
have actually paid anywhere from
three hundred twenty thousand.
The sixty thousand.
For their licenses now those are
commodities and that's not
wrong.
That's how they.
The ability.
To earn a living and create jobs
for other people so I guess what
I want to know is.
There really.
Concerned that their investments
of three hundred thousand
dollars plus are gonna be wiped
out it's like.
I don't know no no restaurant
owner told me this but the
the cavs in New York City when
they they buy a Galion then
they've
Because of the gave a kind of a
are are finding that the values
are less valuable in fact
sometimes work with.
I'm just wondering
I think this issue.
To be able to support these
restaurants that we cherish not
so much the apple user that with
Donald I'm not the doubles as a.
Seller of alcohol but the ones
that are our neighborhood
landmarks and and where we
gather and that means so much to
us and that have struggled that
they've really really struggled
during the pandemic so if you
could explain that to me in our
the very grateful.
No thank you Mr speaker gently
from Bernalillo that's that's
really the crux of what we're
doing here as leaders we have to
explain it to our restaurateurs.
And I've met with the
A wonderful couple Mr Mrs king
won the article cafe.
for both out of town if their
downtown on a central in the but
anyway there's a lot of stress
because of the pandemic there's
a lot of stress because of the
closures that that needed to
happen there's just tremendous
stress in our economy right now
amongst our families and so to
do something like this is
stressing people out more.
and so they're told incorrectly
that they're gonna lose the
value of their license that's
incorrect.
And I don't think I'm gonna be
able to persuade the banquet but
what you're from now they'll.
I'm confident that this will be
true one is they don't lose
their license.
They still have the permission.
They still have the permission
to sell liquor by the drink
until two o'clock at night.
These restaurant bees have to
close at ten.
Secondly if you're a new if you
have a liquor license.
And you don't stay open past ten
it is as if this bill is giving
you.
The equivalent of a three
hundred fifty thousand dollar
license.
Because you could purchase the
restaurant the license.
Free this year next year
actually fees are waived for
five years for these folks you
have to purchase the restaurant
be it's free for five years and
then.
Ten thousand injured after that
so you get a free rest from the
license.
Your restaurant remains the
exact same if in fact you close
before ten.
And then you have this in our
local license that you no longer
need for your particular
restaurant.
You can then market you can
lease it to a new entertainment
venue
a bar tavern
whomever you know and so you may
come out ahead now with regards
to the the marketing about
license that's yet to be
determined.
It's based on supply and demand
and it once again like
Representative a from San Juan
mentioned Representative some of
the it's just bizarre.
That a state issued permission
slip.
Can be bought and sold from one
person to another.
we don't create you know ten
thousand driver licenses and
those ten thousand people get at
least about
To make money off of it's no
one's fault and we're we're
really appreciative of investors
these folks have made.
We're gonna do everything in our
power to ensure that their
investments are made whole but
we cannot buy them.
Because that they're not.
They're not a property right
under New Mexico law.
so this is like of a lawsuit
stream to do up a law review
article on this but anyway
supplant Amanda let's say
there's forty new licenses fifty
devices on the market as a
result of this bill of those
folks who no longer need them.
there's going to be at the mat
if our economy balances back the
way we wanted to the way we
think it's going to bounce back
if capital investment comes to
our our state.
We can compete because we have
the culture the tourism
hospitality maybe some hotels
will obtain these lines as new
entertainment venues will twenty
eight is
so they'll be able to lease them
sell them or transfer them just
like before.
So Mister speaker.
Gentleman what you're saying is
that these.
Restaurants and bars it don't
serve past ten PM now.
Can.
Get
The other type of license the
three thousand dollar license
and then these.
Or sell.
Their current.
License is that what you're
saying Mr speaker delay from
below yes yes it is as if
they're gaining a second in our
local dispensary license if the
restaurant they utilize today
there in our local dispensary
license similar to a restaurant
be license closing at ten then
they can get the restaurant be
for free for five years and then
there are the license they can
open up a second restaurant or
put on the market.
I'm Mr speaker and gentleman.
I guess I'm a little confused
because it seems that one of
your co sponsors was.
Propose opposed to the idea of
leasing.
licenses and I thought maybe
this was ending that practice.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
dollars Melissa let me reiterate
and and thank you for reminding
me I gotta say this like five
times the next hour this bill
does not prohibit in any way.
License holders to sell lease or
transfer their license.
This bill does not do that tell
us as policy makers know that is
horrible public policy to have
a.
What economists refer to as a
barrier of entry that local
entrepreneur that wants to
compete with the Applebee's.
Has the purchase for three
hundred thirty four thousand
dollars before he can get to
first base.
That's horrible for our economy
there's a reason the status for.
Because of poor economic policy
through the years in my opinion
we have the entrepreneurs if
Europe you know culinary artist
and your dealership for you want
open restaurant.
You go to a Durango and get a
license for twelve dollars.
The New Mexico you you need
three and fifty to even start.
And then another you know half a
mil to.
To upgrade the rest fired a
million dollars in the hole
before you open your doors that
that's horrible for our economy
that's based on food services
tourism hospitality I think
that's where the gentleman Mr
speaker delayed from early the
gentleman from someone was
coming from.
Is he with is who just
pontificating of what needs to
happen down the road but we do
not want to travel down that
road to withstand extensive
studies extensive conversations
and extensive leadership
From both chambers in the
executive this bill doesn't do
that the initial draft tried to.
Create a five years sunset to
force our hand I think our hand
will remain forced to solve this
problem May license holders hold
and lower barriers to entry to
grow our economy.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you for answering my questions
gentleman I will listen to the
debate and
Reserving judgment right.
The act because I have done
I have been contacted by some
very worried people about this
essentially a taking of our
license thank you very much Mr
speaker and gentleman.
Gentleman from Colfax more a Rio
Arriba and Senegal.
Representative Montoya Roger.
I am so sorry.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
better Leo will you yield Mister
speaker yes.
Wonderful thank you Mr speaker
and.
Gentleman from.
Some one been a Leo and gentle
lady from that on the I know
that there are other.
Representative is that a co
sponsoring I really want to
comment more on the process that
I'm seen as a freshman it has
been rare to see bipartisan
collaboration.
I've been watching closely and
you know as we emerge from the
cloak of COVID nineteen.
From the last four years no
blame on any side but this
severe divisiveness that we are
struggling to serve our people
of the state of New Mexico under
it gives me hope.
It's inspiring to see that these
critical issues are being worked
out in a bipartisan manner so I
yield back I just I'm watching
closely on this vote but mostly
and commending the process which
address yes you'll back Mr
speaker.
There's further debate the
gentleman from San Juan
Representative Strickler.
We can hear you now.
In your mail Mr speaker.
As.
Okay so or that that
Mr speaker and gentleman consent
of all from Bernalillo
Representative biases.
We have thirty thirty posted on
the phone scared to death of
this bill
from the accounts to the license
holders.
And and I think they the
committee approved the of this
further study and and my concern
is that something needs to be
done there's no there's no doubt
about it.
And and you guys are making a
good good stab at it.
But the people that I know that
on these licenses.
Are worried about the the
valuation and if you wish
mention Mr speaker and gentleman
you do have a tax deduction.
That tries to to limit that
exposure
which is a step in the right
direction it is one of the
film's mentioned in the in the
in the testimony opposing this
bill bang for further study.
Is an induction is is great
you know if your tax tax years
twenty five percent
you're able to the Spanish
twenty five percent of that
fifty thousand dollar reduction
and with these questions is
Speaker and gentleman cost three
hundred fifty thousand dollars.
The average license these these
folks are petrified of no fault
of their own they didn't create
this monopoly
And and we all agree that
something needs to be done and
so.
The issue Mr speaker in in
general would you explain the
tax deductions a little bit
is I understand it's not you
know you're
You're very good at explaining
things.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle from
San Juan so the tax deductions
are sections one sections two
and sections three and they
capture.
All of those licenses that have
been purchased through the years
so section one is a two hundred
dollar tax deduction from income
from leasing the license.
That's a peculiar thing about
this.
Phenomenon of of New Mexico
liquor licenses is I can own a
license a state issued
permission slip.
To sell spirits.
And Lisa to you as long as you
have that same permission so us
all making money for doing
nothing off of a state license
and good good for that person
their entrepreneurial and they
deserve it they've made that
investment so I have a section
one is a two hundred thousand
we're tax deduction for those
who are currently leasing their
liquor license.
section two.
On page four.
Is a two hundred dollar tax
deduction for those who are.
Using their license who are
using their license as a as a
dispensary so they're using our
license to sell spirits and then
section three on the bottom of
page six.
Is.
Is from the for the retailers
and the dispenser license
holder.
Also section two I believe is
for the in our locals section
three is for the retailers and
dispensers so it captures all
scenarios of current license
holders that have.
That a purchase that license
that that phone so to speak that
license so it it collected the
but the gentleman from Santa Fe
you know Bernalillo towards but
it's a some people are against
the direction some people wish
they were tax credits.
We're just doing everything we
can to eliminate the stress
these folks try to make a whole
we have next to three four years
we can come up with some.
Creative legal ways to make them
whole and get and get our state
out from under this mass in
terms of bad public policy but
here's the catch Mr speaker John
from San Juan.
We can give them a credit.
We can just give them a credit a
friend of the bills on the
credit for the next ten years by
mouth the tax credit would be
unlawful.
That's what the legislature try
to do in nineteen eighty one
given the tax credit and the
court stated unlawful and.
The legislature back in nineteen
eighty one.
Pride what we're trying to do
today and it just all came down
like a house of cards and here
we are forty years later.
Forty years for and this barrier
to entry still exists.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen
I realize you have to structure
this we're in would not be
beneficial.
to the licensees and the local
licensing money my neighborhood
in and so madam unable to
these are just having a lot of
hard.
this is a mechanism doesn't
really help so I guess the
bottom line is they're they're
fearful.
no fault of their own.
No one over restaurant owner the
model license last year amid
talk about bad timing
the use these all the.
Three hundred fifty thousand
dollars in the bars the only
bars.
money to pay for so that's
that's the big concern we have
also so then that these these
license owners have.
And I know expand licenses out
there how many current licenses
to we have liquor by the drink
wine to see that we have that
the government is created this
monopoly.
In our state I know it's a
vision of.
Thank you Mr speaker gentleman
from San Juan.
He turned on my volume.
Thank you Mr speaker from San
Juan
And I know what's going with the
last state to kinda.
Put a crack in this damn so to
speak for the last state to
really deal with as we would
have been one of the first back
in nineteen eighty one and hats
off to our predecessors but
there's a currently eighty seven
what we call cannot be licenses
which of the pre nineteen eighty
one.
Full service licenses where you
can sell liquor by the drink and
liquor by package there's seven
hundred ninety eight dispenser
licenses which is by the drink.
And I believe packages well
there's four hundred and seven
in our local dispensers those
are the the licenses that have
been purchased and moved across
the county line and are strictly
liquor by the drink there's
eighteen lottery licenses I
think the legislature.
Open it up and a team of you
folks got to obtain these these
licenses are seventy one to
strictly retailer licenses what
are your strictly package.
There's twenty six rural
dispensaries is there should be
a lot more
the rural areas and all the
lights has moved to Santa Fe
Albuquerque over the years
twenty six rural dispenser eight
is and for rural the terror
license.
Read about fourteen hundred.
Thank you gentleman from
Bernalillo and so your
estimation
since this is a a thanks market
demands state created this
your estimation would double the
current licenses we have now to
open up you know the market.
Thank you Mr speaker generals on
one of these are the questions
will ask ourselves the next
couple three years
will be working with the
economist said at UNM and New
Mexico state hopefully we have
some really robust interim
committee meetings I don't
believe this state needs any
more package license my personal
opinion we do not need any more
liquor stores but we do need
more restaurants we have less
restaurants.
Three comment we have less
stress funds the day before
comment and we do do do do
twenty years ago.
restaurants and food services in
the cultural aspects of New
Mexico B. to expand for our
economy to grow for our tourism
industry to grow.
And then with regards to
entertainment venues.
No there's a movie theater where
you can buy a beer.
It's a really weird thing.
But it's actually safe because
you drink beer and watch the
movie and hours later you're.
You know you're you're okay to
drive or whatnot and now with
uber and lift now that we've
modernized our transportation
system we've.
In my opinion will grow as a
community with our.
Respect for not driving drunk
and things that nature we need
to expand but we need to expand.
Responsibly because there is a
social cost which is that if my
last thought on that Mr speaker
for someone eighty percent to
eighty five percent of the
liquor New Mexico is purchased
at a liquor store.
Only provide the drink is so
small in more modern societies
or.
and frankly advanced societies
communities
that have less domestic violence
less child abuse less violence
in general there are liquor by
the drink culture for a.
The Christian culture so I think
we'll net because of our rural
nature will never be like Boston
seventy three percent liquor by
the drink.
the pharmacist goes New York
seventy five eighty percent
twelve separate it's really
fascinating from a policy
standpoint but I do not believe
the state needs any more liquor
stores but I believe.
If various communities want to
open up there should be
unlimited amount of.
Of of restaurant the licenses
and things of that nature.
It adds to economic growth
You know it's what we believe in
as Americans competition.
And low barriers to entry no
competition and entrepreneurship
will grow our economy.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen from Bernalillo
how how does this affect the
package licenses.
Mr speaker to come up with
someone
It affects them.
In a positive way actually the
the package liquor community is
the most.
Or at least was the most against
this bill and historically has
fought similar bills
successfully for thirty nine
consecutive years but the
package liquor folks actually
budget because now they have
delivered.
So it allows delivery if you're
twenty one years or older have a
server's license you can send
your.
You know you're you're you're a
employee to go deliver or to
make it easier you can hire a
third party delivery company
which will emerge as a result of
this bill.
Also what I failed to mention is
that to help the mom and pops we
put a ten thousand square foot
half on who's eligible to
deliver.
So the walmarts of the world
will not be able to dominate the
delivery business
so the the the package guys
actually make a lot about it and
the and they get a hundred
dollar tax the.
Thank you thank you Mr speaker
thank you hello from Bernalillo
I do have I do have a sense of
constituents that would provide
a lot you know liquor by the
drink licenses and also package
liquor licenses so I've got I've
got to make sure above and the
selected by the jury you know
licenses that are you know have
an having some serious concerns
now.
Mr speaker and gentleman
thanks for the tax increase no
our taxes on on alcohol or more
the highest in our region our
surrounding states and
I know that she had a
five percent increase and and
certain taxes and that was lower
than committee the two percent
still pretty significant
increase we need to go over that
of.
With my sure thank you Mr
speaker John from San Juan so
this institutes a two percent
consumer tax on alcohol at the
point of sale.
Also for package or by the drink
it'll be reflected in your
received and it'll be calculated
and documented by the liquor.
Senator division and the tax and
Representative sold all annually
what the what the revenue
where's it all going to the
general fund will know my no one
will know much how it is and
that's because there's a social
cost it these restaurant these.
Increase the amount of spirit
soul The New Mexico there's a
social costs that we have to
acknowledge.
number two this the S. I used to
call these called S. I. D. Mr
speaker John from someone but
the special investigations unit
and state police that it's a
division within state police
that's strictly liquor.
liquor confidentially the their
job is to enforce the liquor
control act so there FIR maybe
about maybe eight or ten more
folks
I think of the liquor
beverage control division may
need one or two more folks are
more important is to pay for
these deductions or to give us
the moral authority to try to
keep these folks whole.
Through the revenue that we've
raised over the next couple
three years we have to make that
revenue and use it because the
average Joe doesn't want to pay.
For these licenses but we could
have alcohol drinkers.
Hey the two percent knowing that
it's going to open up the system
and.
And your economy so that's kind
of a plus we find that the
provide a modest tax of two
percent.
Currently we do not have a
liquor tax are all contacts
rather at the points and other
than a year to.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
very much
I think that's that's that's
pretty much my concerns
I I've never had so many folks
reach out to me on this issue.
I think they all agree something
needs to be done but the
currently includes license
holders they're kind of in a
pickle
they the the ball these licenses
and good thing this bill this is
risk associated with this
because that's what that was
with the rules and regulations.
Requirement and it is this is a
we got in a box and so I I've
used
open money will take the
consideration
These folks were pretty.
There there are their heartfelt
concern was was moving in in the
tax committee yeah I know you've
been listening to their concerns
they're not satisfied white yet
with this with this fix so with
that a close thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentlemen.
Thank.
From the well the down from
Bernalillo Sandoval
Representative arise not any
chamber next we'll go to the
gentleman from Lee
Representative Scott.
Not paying attention so.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from Bernalillo you
please.
Mr speaker
Our system your.
Eighteen hundred total licenses
in service of the state can you
tell me Sir.
Eight were.
In the hands of restaurants
would be eligible.
For these new licenses.
Thank you Mr chairman that's a
great question I that's what's
frustrating we don't have the
answer to that they're not
documented that way.
The stats that the liquor
control of beverage control
division has is based on the the
name of the license we have
these archaic names of a
licensed but they don't document
what they're used for because
you could use in a bar tavern
still open till.
To use in a restaurant in
theoretically USM at a bowling
alley or.
Movie theater whatever so we
don't have those stats right
now.
but those lucky folks who use
them for a restaurant that
closed just before ten.
Will essentially get a different
license not granted them the
market value of that air local
license.
may fluctuate but the demand is
there and allow me to reiterate
the the desprendieron retailer
licenses.
The
The the rural dispenser the
rural we tailor the old school
canopy and dispensaries this
they're not affected by this
bill.
the only ones that may be
affected is the inner local
licenses.
if if they choose to put those
on the market in the next year.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
I also have had a tremendous
amount of correspondence from.
Existing holders constituents.
Mr concern the this legislation.
Will.
Severely affect the value of
those permits to support
Ramprasad.
Prone to to.
And.
Yes.
Please.
Existing licenses or
The hands of restaurants.
That would be eligible for the
new.
License.
Representative since you to
those existing license holders
from about two hundred billion
dollars.
Mr speaker and gentleman what
this that you is purely
artificial.
Was created by the state.
But
All.
Work.
We're in perfect conformity and
in many cases.
Of bills quickly over the course
of many many years.
And these folks.
I have serious concerns Mr
speaker and gentleman.
A lot of that two hundred
million dollars is going to be
destroyed with the addition of
please the series licenses.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
I believe no limit on the number
of licenses.
That can be issued in this
process.
Legislation in fact Kamal.
Thank you Mr speaker generally
correct there's no limit on the
beer and wine license and so
this modification of the very my
license would track that and so
each restaurant will ask
themselves do I want the
restaurant B. or just I go with
the restaurant a some folks
don't want to deal with spirits
some folks may with those folks
that you mentioned
There is a high anxiety with
those restaurateurs that use in
our local.
They're worried that that in our
local results on a go to zero
that's that's that's actually a
misnomer it's a positive thing
that these folks to believe for
forty years this argument has
prohibit us from opening up this
market for thirty nine years.
Here's a list of all the liquor
laws at the library and
You don't give me a list of all
the liquor laws in the past
forty years.
That have failed to open up this
market.
And so it is
It's a lot of stress because
it's so new in the midst of a
pandemic in a whole in a year in
which they were forced to close.
But they actually.
Can gain a restaurant be license
for free in other words a second
in our local license for free.
And use their existing license.
Put put it on the market either
now or three years from now or
ten years from now or whenever.
And so
the anxiety is way higher than
the.
Then the actual of reality of
those licenses and will come
back next year will come back
the following year
and we'll do everything in our
legal authority to to make those
folks call if and when we decide
to end this crisis as a
commodity but.
But I would hope that we as
policymakers think of the
greater.
Sorry Mr to the greater.
The greater economy
Rather than the anxiety of.
All of these folks who will
actually possibly benefit.
Mr speaker gentleman from
Bernalillo are perfectly
hopeful.
The.
Economic development.
Budget the current accrued to
this.
Legislation I believe.
Apartment six or seven Bill
trade restaurants and bars the
ready to present a more
community yes this wall is
cursed can you see.
We're for example four hundred
locations is coming onto the
market over the next year or
two.
Given these existing license
holders pause thank the perhaps
due to the laws of supply and
demand.
Could be severely diminished.
Thank you Mr speaker John from
Lee and that's a that's a
reasonable calculation both that
goes for folks that you
described we don't know if
there's four hundred that's a
reasonable calculation everybody
that doesn't fit into that.
they're like this is on affected
but you're right there's
tremendous apprehension.
We.
Because the we don't keep stats
on what they're used for we
don't know how many lives will
go on the market now it takes
like a year two years even if
you have the money to purchase
these licenses I think the
licenses will remain high
nothing prohibits these for
folks from on a green to a price
and not going below what
I think that the price will
remain relatively the same folks
will simply be able to purchase
some in two three months as
opposed to two three years.
Mr speaker and gentleman living
term Alice Parker.
Is a two hundred thousand two
dollars two hundred thousand
dollar deduction.
Over the four year period that
would be with respect to the
state taxes only as with the
correct.
Thank you Mr speaker John from
the correct.
So with a.
With a of five percent tax rate.
The total value to the existing
license holder would be.
That's a question thank you Mr
trump will depending on up on
their income and things of that
nature.
It's probably.
Around fifteen to twenty five
thousand dollars.
On depending on what they're
here is whether the you know
what you're they use it but
you're correct it is a tax
deduction it is not a credit a
credit would be preferable.
I think we would have the
political will to do credits but
it's illegal we can't so we have
to get creative so what we got
creative with Mr speaker general
from the is the twenty thousand
dollar tax deduction or four
years.
We waive fees for five years on
any license that they choose to
purchase even the restaurant
means.
And then with the folks who
purchased the license in the
last five years about seventy
seventy one folks of purchase
licenses recently even up to the
last three to six months knowing
this bill was
was being drafted of those folks
get a waiver of fees for ten
years.
So we're just trying to be as
creative as we can with regards
to the offsetting of this.
Market value by this time next
year we'll know what the value
of folks licenses are what the
fluctuation in the market is and
we can come back with with
legislation to address that.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Bernalillo understand.
From.
correspondence received for many
of these licenses are used as
collateral can you tell Mr
speaker Joe what were the thanks
came down with respect to
support for our position on this
legislation.
Thank you Mr speaker generally
publicly the banks have not
spoken in support or opposition
I would imagine are watching
this closely.
There is folks take out a loan
could you imagine me taking out
a loan on my driver's but people
take out a loan.
On to purchase the license to
open up the business.
And then you know then the
business succeeds in the pay off
a license and a business
continues to.
To succeed so those folks are
worried the worry is is that if
there collateral if the market
value of the license diminishes
to a particular point relative
to their to the money that they
still all.
That the banks will be forced to
forclose that makes no sense to
me for the following reason one
is thanks a to propose on
property because they're not
they're not really they're not
real through their banks to as
long as the person has a
successful business and it's
paying off the loan.
He can then negotiate with the
bank and and maintain that that
loan so banks.
Would love four hundred new
restaurants to be in the state I
think that the overall health
and wealth of our economy
benefits the banks but there is
some concern no question about
it we're.
Are you aware of that concern
doing everything I can to
alleviate that concern and
ensure that.
develop ever happen to a local
business person here in New
Mexico.
So Mr speaker and gentleman you
would agree that there is the
potential at least.
For the need for these business
owners to come up with perhaps
substantial addition will
collaborate and for some of
these existing loan.
Thank you Mr John from the of
possibly possibly not I would be
up to them in their bank the
level of their loans and how
successful their businesses if
we can get our economy growing
again
everyone gets vaccinated I think
that will see unprecedented
economic growth here in New
Mexico and these folks will be
at the forefront.
Mr speaker and gentleman on my
folks for this all.
On the basis.
The economic development of
positives but I'm certainly
sensitive.
To those existing license
holders thanks for holding each.
How are you.
In a piece of paper create of
the state.
And to serve a cloud passed
Representative.
With respect to the value of
that slip of paper thank you Mr
speaker thank you to table from
Bernalillo for your very
thorough answers.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
Sandoval Representative Ely.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman yield Mister speaker
yes so.
Mr speaker and gentleman I I do
understand this is been a you
know forty year monopoly.
And that what we're tempting to
do.
Mr create economic growth but I
have a bar restaurant in my
district.
And I want to know if I'm
explaining this to him correctly
if this bill becomes law.
That you will get to keep his
license.
And sell his license and a
license will basically give him
the same rights and privileges
why does he deserve the same
rights and privileges of a
competitive advantage you would
have.
Is that he would be able to
operate a bar dependent of the
restaurant with the restaurant.
We would be able to stay open
past ten o'clock and for more
than three grams.
And he would get a tax deduction
for the next four years.
Is that the explanation that's
what I need to find out.
Mr speaker gentle from Santa
but you're explaining it to your
constituents.
Thank you that's all I have
thank you Mr speaker thank you
so much and I was forced to
build.
The bank and inject insulin
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you Mr speaker the gentle
from Bernalillo you.
Mr speaker yes.
Thank you.
I apologize my nose for you for
gonna be scrambled.
This is on the list before today
I I miss that somewhere and so
Mr speaker and I understand from
your comments earlier I believe
that Senate Bill to waive fees
for licenses for twenty twenty
one is that correct.
Mr speaker generals believe
correct.
This is also correct Mr speaker
and gentleman the.
This is been waived for the next
five years as well.
Mr speaker and gentleman for me
in this bill to fifty five we
waive all license fees for those
license holders that are paid
for their license for five years
correct and then the folks who
recently purchased the licenses
in the last five years those
folks get their fees waived for
ten.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
John.
Of.
So those I want to go
specifically how does this
affect
Existing airline licenses issued
the results of a local of local
out from like from.
Thank you Mr speaker John from
it all that's a great point I
refer to them as counties or
municipalities but they're
they're in law there in our in
our local option districts that
the magic word in statute.
So we do not have state
preemption on alcohol laws I
think that's good economic
policy to some they have that
but Senator the status policy
counties have the legal right to
be a dry county.
Or to not allow.
In line or to adjust the times
what where alcohol is sold.
So the way this is written is
and it makes it easier for these
restaurants to get a jump start
the way the bill is written is
that if the local option
district has allowed a parent
one license.
That it is deemed to have
approved the restaurant the
license and us of course they do
an ordinance to opt out so it's
a opt out rather than opt in but
it let's folks hit the ground
running and
And and open up the restaurants
all of our new restaurants with
a restaurant B. as quickly as
possible.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
so with the opt out option does
that mean that.
The existing options stays the
way that it is we're.
You know whatever the city or
municipality would have for
their fees and.
Normal two hundred dollar
application and one thousand and
fifty dollar license in North.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
so the the state won't charge
fees I'm not sure what the fees
are the local option districts
what you're you're correct from
from the moment this bill.
That's fine.
The delivery will start right
away if we get enough votes for
emergency clause but between now
and July first a local local
officers can opt out.
If they do not opt out that by
on July first the state cannot
issue and start issuing the rest
of the licenses.
I don't think I quite answer
your question but if you could
pass a second time what we're
getting out.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
John.
Specifically.
And eight years ago.
one of one of the areas that I
represent.
Took to the took to the systems.
The what we call the shores of
the country.
And allow your local optional
lection it was voted in.
And we have.
Restaurants within our area the
the users so they paid two
hundred fifty dollars sitting
fee that was designed by the
city commission.
The state charges an application
fee of two hundred dollars.
And the initial licenses one
thousand and fifty.
And then the renewal is one
thousand and fifty and if you
want to serve on Sundays in the
fall under dollars well.
What I'm trying to get
specifically at will that if
this bill passes the wrong way
the governor's staff in a sign
well that option still exists
and it's not.
What's the replacement.
Thank you Mr speaker John from
me that same exact option will
exist
The restaurateur who qualifies
for a very wine also qualifies
for a restaurant B..
They can have the rest on a
vision of the restaurant the and
the state fees will be waived.
So still have to pay those local
fees that you mentioned but
Eddie's these in state statute
will be waived.
For those folks.
Thank you Mr speaker thank
don't.
One of the other things that I
believe I heard you mention and
like I said I was scrambling.
The the get notes in your
comments back from people
because.
I didn't know we were doing this
for the
You Mr speaker no you talk about
our system itself.
Because that's often the
debatable.
Item especially in rural
following guests were so is
taxes with that tax warning to
the.
At the person's house were
delivered or is this going to
be.
Where where the actual exchange
happens for is that going to be
at the retail location affected
focus.
Thank you Mr speaker simple the
all three of the delivery I
would imagine would be
transactional.
would be cash at the door would
be through a credit card with
the phone it in or you do for
your phone app or whatnot but it
would be at the point of sale.
Former that point of sale is
so two percent at the liquor
store two percent at the bar or
restaurant.
Two percent.
When you when you pay for the
delivery it's it's it's a very
powerful
The two percent tax of the six
hours of public comment that we
heard.
I think only two people
mentioned that one of on one of
the gentleman represents the.
The national
Huge national corporation but I
think folks are comfortable with
the three percent that's what it
would be at the point of sale on
to offset
Some of these costs of it
particularly the tax deduction.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
no with over
Thank.
So some of the other questions
are received in the last twenty
minutes
For clarification impacted
stores deliver alcohol beer and
wine without food for.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Lee with this bill yes.
Thank you.
Mr speaker and gentleman does
the bill eliminates the
opportunity for.
And enter local license to pay a
fee and regain the practice for
us.
Mr speaker gentle lady that's
not contained in the bill
and
That's that is not part of the
bill.
This bill would does not expand.
Our package liquor stores in the
state of New Mexico of those
liquor stores maintain their
their market share.
And their license the value of
the license is not affected.
So this is for for current
Benjamin thank you so the inner
local license would wouldn't.
Would not be allowed for
somebody to regain a path for
life that correct Mr speaker
generally I don't use the term
regained but I hear what you're
saying.
That is correct if you have any
in our local
you cannot.
Change that to an old school
kind of a licensed on old school
districts are since it remains
under its current
Our restrictions on and off.
An update.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
can gentleman.
Yes.
And I'm not all the way through
all of this information does the
bill Representative Lester's of
the liquor licenses and tax to
the.
Thank you Mr speaker
gentleman from the the.
My brain is was when you say
lessor lessee the person who
holds the license the person who
Who holds the license is
entitled to that tax deduction
so the person who leases it to
the other person.
Lessor I guess.
Thank you and then there's Mr
speaker no there's a similar tax
the.
Or just for correct.
Mr speaker for me that's
correct.
one of the COVID Mr speaker and
gentleman I the
The opinion of of of this one is
the.
They should be full tax programs
offering a fifty thousand
dollars affects Mr speaker and
gentleman equates roughly the
forty five hundred in the actual
tax credit.
In this case my big those the.
Liquor license impacted by the
they pay over six hundred
thousand dollars for this
license.
As far as the grant.
Wineries breweries and
restaurants continue to reduce
the value of that license.
Current appraised appraiser he
said for his license would be
worth only three hundred twenty
five thousand of this bill.
Woods was enacted Mr speaker
condom use on that please Mr
speaker for me I for the first
part of what the gentleman said.
He's a DJ is a genius he's
correct.
The best way to do this is with
a tax credit.
We simply are not allow under
New Mexico law to do a tax
credit because of the license is
not a property right it is a
permission slip from the
government.
However it this price this
permission slip has.
Has evolved into a marketable
commodity as you mentioned
upwards of six hundred thousand
dollars the package liquor guys.
Benefit from this bill.
Because number one there's no
package licenses issued only a
modification of the van one
license to add spirits for
restaurants that stayed open
before ten.
And they now can deliver.
So there's a new opportunity a
new business model to out
license if this bill were to
pass.
But
So the the valuation I don't
know where he's getting out of
there will be more competition
and I would hope that this body
supports competition and free
markets there's a lot of
apprehension and anxiety.
But I but the apprehension and
anxiety
I believe is stronger than the
the reality of any potential
devaluation.
But with the fact that Mr
speaker generally I can say this
to a blue in the face.
The package liquor license is
not affected in any way
negatively by this bill it is in
fact affected positively because
of the delivery aspect of
there's a person in New Mexico
the fact is that for license it
is it is worry about this bill
does those words are not based
in reality with all due respect
to the.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
can Joan.
I have another come from from
one responded that says the
yes the two this bill will limit
our ability to sell or transfer
our licenses after June two
thousand twenty six that actor
thank you Mr Jones have
generally thank you Mr gentleman
from the.
Thank you for asking that of we
have to get the word out that is
incorrect that is incorrect that
person that what he was
referring to the bill as
introduced.
I introduced a bill to create
this period of economic
transition
that would essentially force our
hand as policy makers to deal
with this issue and make people
whole but that was such a
nightmare for these folks that
that that was stripped out in
the very first hearing we have
the house commerce strip that
out unanimously that provision
is not included in the taxation
and revenue committee
substitute.
In perpetuity under this bill
license holders Spence Ezzell
transfer or lease their licenses
nothing in this bill changes
that opportunity for existing
license holders thank you for
asking that question Mr speaker.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentleman.
I appreciate the opportunity
get clarification on your back.
The gentle lady from Catasauqua
and Valencia Representative
Armstrong.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
kind gentleman yield Mister
speaker yes.
Thank you so much Mr speaker
thank you kind gentleman of this
the this is a herculean left I I
agree with you on that and
I do have some concerns
constituents in rural New Mexico
that have have a liquor license
and package license for years
and so I wanted to know how this
affects.
Mr speaker kind gentleman the
rule dispensing license and if
there are any
anything is there anything in
the bill Mr speaker kind
gentleman that says so many if
they're within so many feet of
another on any of asked the
civic language that would deter
someone from opening opening a
business state and Dowdell New
Mexico our reserve New Mexico
thank you so much Mr speaker
gentle lady from catch in
support of a let's see
Whatever the existing law is
that's what it will remain for
the rest on the for the rest of
the very one lives as in the
rest on the licenses
The what there is restrictions
on those old old old school
rural districts are licenses.
I don't recall off hand I think
in statute.
There's one provision is like
ten miles is one of the units
one but we don't deal with those
we do remove some local
the restrictions that the local
option district can deal with
themselves but you're but I
think the point you're making we
do not as in statute one of
prohibit
these entrepreneurs from from
for for for example the speaker
gentleman budget only from the
Cathrynn apartments at nothing
in this bill would prohibit of
these wonderful historic
districts from having two or
three restaurants next door to
each other in that wonderful of
walking District.
Okay thank you Mr speaker and
kind gentleman
that so I I have a lot of other
questions I I understand that
thank you we are trying to fix
something and I appreciate that
but I'm a little concerned that
out this point in time.
where most restaurants.
Are to vote more than twenty
five percent of vote at all
how this is going to work and
why you think it would create
economic development I also
understand Mr speaker and
gentleman from Bernalillo that
there are.
State support County for
entrance instance has lost a lot
of their full liquor license
because they've been moved out
of the county into the urban
areas so they are very expensive
in support all County.
And
I believe there is one rule
dispensing license and the so
with that dispensing the rule
dispensing license it's not
going to prohibit someone from
being right next door opening a
restaurant is that correct.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
catches part of that that would
be determined by the local
zoning folks are the local
zoning folks in some situations
that would be good if you want
to create that tourism center
in some situations that may be
unfair for that person it's been
there forever but that's
nothing this bill would prohibit
that to answer your question the
bill would prohibit that
but that would be up to the
local up to how they want to own
a restaurant the licenses but if
you're correct many of the small
towns
All the small towns folk from
Backes would love to bring their
families to.
but there the.
They're they're used to a there
used to a lifestyle they're
accustomed to the checking all
tell it and aposs a.
I want to tell the to serve on
the jury for what it what I
think it'll
Question what are just kind of
goes on but this next year is.
of all these questions will be
answered over the next year but
I realize there's a lot of.
What a stress amongst.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman thank you on the.
The bank then Germany a symbol
in the counties of coral San
Juan and of the Nancy a
Representative Harry Garcia.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
young gentleman from Bernalillo
PGO Mr speaker yes.
And we.
Thank you Mr speaker a.
Bernalillo why why two hundred
thousand what what what brought
that number up from two hundred
thousand affected.
Thank you Mr speaker telephone
below sea level can the subtotal
San Juan and Balenciaga great
question I think that's that's a
good start.
I think the two percent tax pays
for it and it remains revenue
neutral.
And it allows folks of you know
it's about how the tax reduction
in over the next four years to I
think I'll get their business
you know back up close.
the average of cost of the in
our locals average market value
is approximately three hundred
fifty thousand dollars.
So
You know gentleman from R. Lee
believes will be four hundred
new in our local on the market I
think the by the about forty or
fifty.
They may go down to three
hundred they may remain at three
fifty may go up but to our south
seem fair to seeing something
that we can all agree on some
folks want to hire some folks
want lower but
That was that was in the bill
and no one's really.
The question that higher or
lower that's actually
in the in the six hours of
debate of public debate rather
no.
Three hours of committee debate
no one's really everyone seems
to be really comfortable with a
two hundred thousand.
And it was just it was just what
the and the other stakeholders
came up with only dropped when
we drafted the bill.
Thank you.
and gentleman the mobile but the
reality of the four thousand
natural dollars mall the whole
bunch of money and Mister
speaker no gentleman and you
know I have some people would
have would be commissioned my
district the new really
consider.
Of the trade off on
taxadvantaged value of the
actual liquor license.
The end of the day all the new
licenses are coming now going to
effect and benefits to income
ninety eight percent from the
able to manage and and and why
over four year that's another
question why and for your view
in one of the two.
Thank you Mr speaker a gentleman
on the big screen from
participants can suppose I
wanted to be on.
Great question some people are
saying that the fifty dollar tax
deduction is on to help them
because they're they're G. R. T.
are for their whatever is not
going to Kate is not gonna get
the fifty thousand.
so I I would imagine anyone
would just it next year but
But we we actually wanted to
start it this year and people
said we're not making any money
this year so what about the
deduction till next year and
folks said will because we had
one of the original draft before
introduction Mr speaker
gentleman from the committee
I think it was a hundred
thousand one year five thousand
the next one was fifty thousand
this year hundred thousand extra
than fifty fifty it's on.
But we think that this this this
is good it shows some love
frankly from state government
and and here's kind of a
contradiction the.
The commerce committee which I
have the privilege of chairing
with we're we're committed to
opening up markets to lowering
barriers to entry to expand
economic growth creating
competition.
But we're also committed to
ensuring that investments are
secure their stability within
state government policy to spur
economic growth and that the
government keeps if we're.
That the government created
this.
Is to make crazy commodity
a reality amongst the colitis
and I in my opinion and this is
not necessarily a majority
opinion but my opinion we were
obligated to make these phone
calls for some folks who are
like of the opinion that there
is an investment of on the road
But like I said Mr speaker
Jennifer McKinley we can give
them a tax credit you can't just
give them a tax credit and buy
out the licenses because the.
That would be contrary to the
nineteen eighty one court case
so we forty so I look at about
to the license holders even
those license holders who are
not affected by this bill would
be showing some love and hundred
and we
so some more appreciation for
brain devaluation and Kerr in
the coming years and months but
I don't believe.
There will be a devaluation but
that's what people believe in us
that's why the tax deduction
from for New Mexico.
Thank you.
From the mobile
at one point I used to have re
record licenses Senator do have
the right now Mr speaker thank
you of the regulated industry
in nineteen ninety one thousand
dollars for license maybe one
fifty dollars no we were taken
care of by more means of what
happened.
All the men of the end of the
and you know and I don't want to
see Mr speaker and gentleman for
this to happen the people do
have information you know a lot
of people Mr speaker and
gentleman this is a retirement.
We four hundred dollars a lot of
that fact this is not a whole
bunch of money the show up to to
four hundred thousand from the
column help people out.
Anyway that's just my thought I
have one what question Mr
speaker for renewable
Bernalillo.
On the on the delivery all
delivery of delivery beer one
was very.
How are you going to control the
people receiving this is the
other end are you gonna pool
that they are we would need to
be useful but that's a big.
Thank you Mr speaker general
from our participation in
support of someone but that's a
great question the of the the
liquor beverage control division
of requests these these permits
these licenses to either the
restaurant owner or the third
party delivers they have after
the twenty one.
So it doesn't apply to all of
those not to be twenty one it's
the same criteria as a
bartender.
Barton is in Mexico you know as
you know Mr speaker going out to
be twenty one so the deliver
close to the door at three
twenty one I have a feeling over
time
you know you'll be your local
restaurant or your local liquor
store will know who you are have
your credit card on file will
know your age what not
but but the
the deliver shall shall verify
through a non identity documents
that the person is twenty one
four four.
thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman who I'd be talking
about the person delivering that
we talked about to see more.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Bernalillo Representative
delivery of the person like the
bartender when you look to the
bar show your ideas the same
process they'll be trained.
I'll be the protocols and
training to to receive a our
delivery of license.
And they'll be trained on how to
do that and like I said I think
over time they'll get to know
their customers very well in a
particular committee but they
have to verify the buyer does
have to be the buyer has to
verify that he's twenty one of
your she's twenty one and the
seller has to verify about buyer
is twenty one or older it's
gonna be very very strict and
that's why Mr speaker German
from committee we.
The restricted that delivery
maybe I just a modest in a
modest change to the liquor
control act so if you call the
one bottle of wine a six pack or
a growler with your meal and it
has to come with some.
Mr speaker volume Gilman
the committee to mention very
here in the last the license
restaurant delivers there is no
word public fears can never you
consider well your wife is very
would you consider.
Hardaker.
the spirit all thank you Mr
speaker gentle from McKinley no
beer and wine is not a spirits
liquor on under New Mexico law
liquor what what I refer to as
the group is is in statute
spiritus
very slippers alcoholic
beverages is the SB a compass
thing word that captures all
your one is very so the the but
the restricted to a bottle of
wine a six pack or a growler
the restaurant be license would
allow them to sell in their
restaurant up to three spirited
strings in till ten o'clock.
Thank you Mr speaker another
word of the license could not
deliver.
Are all all I know that of the
staff metric Mr speaker German
thanks for asking that we we
were going to amend that on the
floor what we but.
But we want to focus on the.
On the emergency clause and
stuff but I believe in the next
the next with the motion while
stakeholders currently under
this bill right now.
They could deliver a six pack of
what any further a six pack of.
Julie's of friends that have you
know eight or twelve percent
alcohol well we're gonna amend
that to remove that we're going
to remove that would permit the
liquor director wants to.
You'll be responsible we want to
train the officers trying to
deliver so when the bill reaches
the governor's desk it will not
include spirits on the.
Thank you but mmhm from all of
you Mr speaker
That was concerning Committee.
You know the people that have
the the liquor license knowledge
in order and this will deviate
the the pay a little bit but not
a model we people to deliver
hard all fall because that'll be
they're still The Little noted
from the from the bar a beard I
mean restaurant doing that too
if you know the big concern and
I'm so concerned you know and I
and I'm all for to the
development of both in the state
we needed Mr speaker one item
gentleman thank you my phone my
phone City of drugs we will not
have one more to build on.
You know for might be a good
thing for them speaker by the
middle of thank you for you and
to me and that's all the
questions.
Jennifer L. read the Santa and
San Juan Representative Lente.
Thank you Mr speaker Mr speaker
will the gentleman Bernalillo
county yield Mister speaker yes.
Thank you very much Mr the
gentleman you know I don't even
know where to start on this
debate at this point seems like
everyone has shared a little bit
about something in regards to
their district and those that
potentially maybe impacted from
within their district and and I
can do anything but share
another story about the concern
that I have from folks in my
district I represent of a rural
district and it seems like
that's where many of these
concerns are coming from in
regards to do how will this
affect those.
Last few standing of bars within
rural district or rural
communities in New Mexico and so
we when I think of things
matters like this Mr speaker and
gentleman I I I think of the
silver saloon in in Bernalillo
New Mexico so with the still a
saloon Mr speaker and gentleman
has been in existence since
nineteen thirty three to have a
really old bigger license plate
by the rules did what they had
to do and and now
as I watch Felix Silva who is
now eighty seven years old
over his house to his bark is
serve alcohol when it was not
COVID times obviously
to do just to spend the day
there and and that that's
business that's as livelihood
and I see his daughter now and
the niece and his other son
Felix Silva it was the third
I think about them and and and
really what type of a family
establishment that is Mr speaker
and gentleman when I think about
the potential impacts that they
could face as a family knowing
that they put their lives into
this knowing that they put their
heart into this knowing that
they don't have no pension to
fall back on knowing that they
really trusted the system and
that is at no fault of their own
that this is the system that
they were dealt with but they
feel the play within the rules
so Mister speaker gentleman what
do you say to a Felix Silva
we're still a saloon or another
establishment like that in New
Mexico that may be you know
looking at the statistics in the
data that a two hundred thousand
dollar tax deduction not twelve
acted Dustin fifty thousand per
year tax deduction will make
them whole
At the end of the day Mr speaker
phone.
Thank you Mr speaker gentleman
from Rio Arriba Sandoval so what
what what a what a wonderful
question to ask.
There's about two hundred four
hundred.
similarly situated folks like
Mike Mr sober so as soon as an
institution.
I don't think anyone would.
No my reply my or try to compete
with it so that we kind of walk
you through what I think will
transpire the restaurant the
licenses.
Hi this bill rather does not add
another new car lines
on another dispensary license
and other retail license another
license.
Similar to the one that Mr so
all.
What it does is merely modifies
the existing beer and wine
license.
The spirits to that beer and
wine so a restaurant that house
to serve sixty percent who it
has a three three maximum and it
has to close at ten o'clock.
Is distinctly different.
In my opinion than the silver
saloon which has a bar which has
history and which can stay open
until two and may or may not
serve food.
We are and whether they want to
or not does not have a maximum
three Clemente and has a no
decades of clientele.
So but what this
So I don't I don't think he's
going to be affected that much
however he will still be able to
transfer his license to his
heirs you will be able to sell
his license if he so chooses he
can leases license if you so
choose is or he can simply
maintain his existing license
knowing that another similar
license will not be issued to
compete with him at the salone
so I believe in the overall
scheme of things this will help
the rural areas it will bolster
the economy Burnell and and
other small towns and rural you
know as our economy grows as our
young people stay home
instructional businesses and
whatnot it'll just maintain are
the customers that he's
accumulated throughout the years
I think that by lowering the
cost of entry for restaurant
only.
I think it'll bring more
tourists and I think I think Mr
Stewart was going to be in a
good spot.
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentleman for that answer and
you know at the end of the day I
don't think that anyone of us in
the house or in the legislature
that is against progress comes
to the economic benefit of our
state especially coming after
here like comment and what
that's done to our our small
communities rural or urban and
so at the end of the day though
I I I guess what what I'm more
concerned about Mr speaker and
gentleman is is I don't want to
see the transition from the
state Bernalillo for instance of
it being a small town rural town
in New Mexico now we have an
Applebee's that's fantastic but
then what what happens to the
souls of little women Applebee's
has more exposure has more money
than the than the sole saloon
and other competing with the
sickle saloon at the end of the
day of yes we want to expand
economic development and
economic gains within our state
I I I I don't want to do it at
the expense of good hard working
families like this bill was it
internally and many others
throughout the state and so
Mister speaker gentleman you
know all continue to listen to
the debate but
really really am thankful for
this debate because helping me
things very to this issue and Mr
speaker and gentleman I will
yield back my time thank you.
Mr speaker gentleman from
representative of someone I know
you don't ask the question
believe provision of what I
failed to mention during the
previous question was at a
restaurant the license.
Similar to the very one license
does not allow a ball.
It does not allow a bar.
the Applebee's that you
mentioned has a full dispensary
license and therefore has a bar
that can compete with the silver
saloon but that that's really
not affected by this bill the
new restaurant these do not have
a physical bar that competes
with the bar and tavern.
market and I think just by
growing our economy by going a
population.
And by increasing our tourism I
think of those far tavern
license holders will benefits
also be sure to tell Mr Silva.
That if we get the urgency
because on this bill he can then
deliver and open up that market
for for for this of course
customer number.
Thank you a gentleman from
through the some of.
Thank you Jim thank you Mr
speaker of course the leverage
and and again I I I yield back
thank you.
That generation granted this
year Representative Dow.
Thank you Mr speaker with the
gentleman from Bernalillo please
feel.
To speaker yes.
You Mr speaker and I I and
gentleman from Bernalillo I do
you want to
acknowledge the work of the
commerce committee over the
years that I served in trying to
find a solution to our
complicated for the year
delivery environment that has
been so prohibitive to so many
people
and I this is a seventy page
bill comprised of thirty five
sections of which I've done my
best to understand and we have
heard this twice and commerce
committee and I just had a few
questions that are still
remaining Mr speaker your
gentleman from Bernalillo.
And it's interesting to me
because mine.
Freshman year folks from rural
areas The New Mexico were
calling us and asking us to find
a solution.
And Mr speaker and gentleman
from Bernalillo since then in
nineteen and twenty nineteen
we've added at some small
reforms and I'm wondering Mr
speaker gentleman from
Bernalillo if you can talk about
some of the work that has been
previously done in the last
couple of years.
Mr speaker of gentle lady.
From the beautiful grant hi
dollars and Sierra County I'm
not sure of the month the
measure what you're getting out
but we are there has been minor
adjustments in the control act
With the expansion of breweries
local distilleries are wineries
are blowing up with.
New Mexicans do wine before
Californians evergreen line back
in the way back in the day so
we've made some tweaks and and
and changes to that but we
haven't done delivery
and we haven't really done
anything aggressively to boost
our restaurant industry but if
you could elaborate on.
Yeah Mr speaker seven for early
I think what was weird to me
about this time with that folks
for my district I have three
districts in southern New Mexico
and some have very limited
access to our and so my freshman
year margaritas were issued can
go to Mexico dress on the market
and have a Margarita.
And so and this time thanks for
calling me from my district ask
you to support the bill and when
I asked what was different a lot
of it was around the small
reforms for breweries and
distilleries an increasing
amount that they could produce
and I feel like from solution
had been maybe we didn't
celebrate as much as we should
of as.
Maybe that's why but it's so
Mister speaker gentleman from
Bernalillo is this bill
targeting the issues in rural
New Mexico that so many of the
questions before me have you
have similar issues in rural New
Mexico is a still targeted to
rural New Mexico.
Thank you Mr speaker of Delhi
funded I'll go requests here I
believe so I believe this is
specifically targeted towards
rural New Mexico has what we
haven't talked about is
Is.
You know what I would like to
have is a interactive map of
where these licenses are or and
and show where they are not you
know requests as mentioned by
the gentleman is not have a bar
You know tier C. are marvelous
restaurant and bar
But should have like four five
you know and so so if each small
town if you stay out of trouble
folks had three or four I
restaurants that tourists
regularly went to I mean it
could.
One restaurant in small town
make all the difference in the
fed three or four I think we
have like fifteen you
restaurants in Albuquerque as a
result of this bill but I think
it's mainly targeted to the
rules because.
A market value in Santa Fe
or rather the market value of
the license if you put it in
Santa Fe or put in Albuquerque
is greater and so what happens
is you have these small one part
of the course tors in which the
license itself is worth more
than the business and so even
though you love your town and
whatever you do to sell the
license you retire and then that
licensed leave this town.
That leaves the council some of
these towns in these counties
are under
quarter if you will and so then
I think this this will help the
rules tremendously this this
frankly as a.
Is.
Targeting to to rural New Mexico
and and Avid tourism
capabilities.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentlemen from Bernalillo
and.
That could be so perhaps people
are not.
Jumping up and.
Calling me and that that they
have a passed out with report
because it's not it's just such
a hard time for businesses right
now it may not be that you ideal
time to buy a liquor license or
for a seller's market
necessarily no one market with
uncertainty and then they would
be able to vote and Mr speaker
and gentleman from Bernalillo I
think my.
With interesting commune
Committee was we've heard that
there's been a forty percent
increase in liquor sales New
Mexico during the COVID.
Do we know Mr speaker gentleman
from Bernalillo who has seen
that that.
Growth.
Who's making money off of.
It's forty percent increase in
sales.
Thank you Mr speaker tonight
from granted although we are are
I'm sorry grant he dog once in a
I don't know for a fact but I
would imagine it is the
Those folks who who hold a
package liquor licenses.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen from Bernalillo so
they have seen increased
revenues will they also receive
the waiver of the licensees.
Thank you Mr speaker the lady
yes even though the practice
folks are not affected by the
bill in its current form.
They will receive the five year
waiver on on on also the fees at
all we see the hundred thousand
dollars a tax deduction over for
you both of those cities for tax
deduction
I believe there.
There are the value of the Lexus
will increase with the pin
number to access the.
Of this bill.
Thank thank you Mr speaker thank
you gentleman from Bernalillo
and I'm not fifty thousand that
the tax.
Credit tax deduction do you need
a tax liability in order to get
the deduction.
Thank you Mr speaker delay
programs that it although you do
you do and that's that's why in
answering the Germans question
of the canister speaker that's
why we kept at fifty thousand
four years instead of just a big
one in one year you have to have
that liability to benefit from
the deduction.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman earlier so we can
assume that the big box stores
that we all saw on the news with
winds wrapped around their store
who were selling.
Probably have experienced that
forty percent increase in
revenue and probably have a tax
liability well our small
businesses are restaurants and
bars that have remain closed
will have no liability how will
they receive the tax deduction
to be compensated for the value
of their license if they have no
liability.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle
gentle lady from friends here
Hidalgo that's why we stretched
out over four years we stretched
out over four years and then we
can adjusted next year as well
we don't need a.
A message for that that would be
impacted but that's what we did
over four years
so that you know because by next
year hopefully they will have
the liability.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentleman from Bernalillo.
In their.
So I'm I'm I'm processes in my
mind the different bills that we
heard in commerce and we've
heard.
and even in in the war on the
COVID a them for trying to get
to businesses where.
Certain things are considered
anti donation clause therefore
if the tax deduction instead of
a tax credit or give away could
this somehow and I'm not
suggesting I want to do this
right now that could somehow
fall under economic development
so that there's a way to work
around the institution because
of the folks within a have a
liability or not would disagree
the thing not only now but also
if there is a the valuation of
the liquor license.
Thank you Mister speaker July
from the Dallas your a grant
You cannot do the tax for the
normal
What is that.
For the for like this type thing
you simply have to get creative
directly the state could buy a
phone license back which might
be the way to go in a couple
years
if we can harness the political
will because once again in law
and in statute and at least
three strong court cases right
on point these liquor licenses
it is not a property right.
if if these devices were to be
devalued the state would not
that person anything the state
would be under no legal
obligation it's like that the
state major part of the bill the
rules the government has to pay
you for that property as it is a
property right it is a I think
this this would not be a taking
sort of out of unemployment
benefits of that so that's why
we're.
About the substance use and make
sure that that these folks do
not lose a dime of their best.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Bernalillo and I I get their
media there may be a loss of
investment and we all that's
kind of part of the American
dream that there's risk and
there's three words this one
however has the government
influence in regulatory
environment that that created
the opportunity and now creates
the risk and so trying to decide
if we're providing a soft
landing or if everyone can feel
the pain you know we talk about
both in committee and so trying
to figure I land on that but I I
guess on the.
Help if you're talking about I
agree with that you're saying
it's not property and if someone
were to see that we do value
their liquor like they probably
wouldn't have standing based on
other cases but our intent is to
make them whole our intent is to
make it a fascinating if
possible so I don't understand I
do need to understand how the
tax the action is different than
a tax credit because the Supreme
Court did roll in like the early
eighties that the Supreme Court
ruled that a tax credit violated
the integrity from because
they're both tax exemption
they're both somewhat a giveaway
by the state.
And so why does one violate the
inauguration and other doesn't.
Thank you of Mr speaker gentle
lady from grant Hidalgo Sierra.
The state of the results of the
quarter to flesh that out the
court date in you know answer
your question what the court did
and once again this is before
the the film tax credit before
lead a of the four other
modernization as we used to
build our economy under the
exact same constitution the
court in a in the province K.
very said that tax credits.
Given to
existing liquor license holders
was unconstitutional.
The tax so that's why you all of
the tax deductions the tax
credit is you know Mr speaker
deleted if I will twenty
thousand dollars in taxes.
And I have a twenty five
thousand dollar tax credit I get
five thousand dollars.
So it's after no but with the
deduction if I open a hundred
thousand dollars in taxes with a
twenty five thousand dollar
deduction than I do Dr the
twenty five.
And only pay taxes on the
seventy five thousand so it does
help and nobody is going to give
away a tax deduction on it is
legal
and and the original people.
Created this five year.
This five year economic urgency
to deal with.
To deal with the deregulation of
the of these licenses that
provision is now gone and so
there's no landing.
Because nobody's always
following.
On the package that provides
benefits.
Those that use in our locals for
restaurants benefit.
The bars and taverns now have
delivery the budget so so there
is no.
Need for a supplement because
nobody's following.
like they were in the.
That they want to argue with the
original draft of the bill.
Thank you thank you Mr speaker
thank you Representative I just
the so you're saying that the
court I thought that the court
held that the tax credit
violated the anti donation
clause tax credit.
Thank you Mr speaker gently from
credit this year you're correct
I said it violated constitution
but your corrective violated the
anti donation clause of the
constitution.
Thank thank you Mr speaker and
thank you to my but no one's
rule because there's been no
case as to whether a tax
deduction.
Violate the consideration I.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Sierra Hidalgo grant yeah that
wouldn't I didn't think anyone
would argue that but you're
correct there is no case law
that would prohibit this bill
there is nothing that suggests
in state law that this bill is
not a hundred percent
constitution thank you Mr
speaker and thank you gentlemen
and if someone if the staff and
someone were to challenge it.
Then it wouldn't be who.
The the liquor license holders
to say that the tax credit would
violate because they may be
losing their tax credit.
But.
But they wouldn't but the courts
also ruled that it's not real
property.
Mr speaker delay from vented
August here
You use the term tax credit so I
kind of threw me up but only
that you're correct the okay
yeah they.
They would lose a what's called
summary judgment one as their
lawyer would tell in another
case but if the LAR did file it
they would lose based on summary
judgment and the first to get
they would have to prove that
they somehow lost the value of
their license
And I don't believe that these
licenses will be the value there
still a market for these
licenses they're still a high
cost being paid for these
licenses a modification very
want to arrest on the will not
change the market that much.
Thank thank you Mr speaker and
thank you Representative and
you're certain that a tax credit
and a tax deduction those are
different types the giveaways.
They're not the thing.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
I would love to defer to the
gentleman from Santa Fe to but
all of you I'm sorry with the
liability I was teasing the
gentleman from Santa Rosa Harper
but they are what is there not
it depends they're not giveaways
in this.
I know everybody has their own
definition go with but they are
distinct the tax credit is
only the for the tax deduction
and that's why we went with the
tax deduction in this bill thank
thank you Mr speaker thank you
Mr speaker thank you gentleman
from Bernalillo I guess where
I'm at if we think the small
businesses that are community
particularly the restaurants
that are hardest hit.
And the sticking point for me
remains to two percent tax.
So the new retailers taxes
imposed on all retailers to sell
alcohol in the state whether
they're close vote whether in
recovery or the last for the
have a profit no matter what
that two percent retailer tax is
there.
And we hear a lot.
You know it is it feels weird to
impose a new tax all of our
restaurants and our businesses
status within.
Are struggling I think I heard
eighty eight hundred jobs from
the that is supported by the
beer industry
And prior to COVID we had over
thirty five hundred eating and
drinking establishments.
And many of those jobs are gone
or we hear that we have with
their within months of closing I
mean I I love the range hotel
restaurant in Albuquerque New
you know for three locations in
Albuquerque ones already closed
and when a innovative
entrepreneur here says I need to
tell my liquor license and I'm
calling because major three
months I'm I'm paying attention
and so I.
I'm I.
And I can't guarantee that
someone's going to question
whether that tax credit makes it
to the business idea tax
deduction if they don't have a
liability it's not but what's
certain is that two percent that
retailers taxes real whether
they're going to get this action
or not.
Mr speaker representative from
Bernalillo am I wrong I'm not
that everyone can pay ten
percent retailers tax.
Mr speaker delay from set a
granted although the consumer
will pay every consumer will
path it's directly passed on to
the consumer.
Consumers.
Are going to be so darn happy to
walk into a bar tab in a
restaurant in the spring and the
summer is directly passed on to
the consumer it will not affect
the elasticity so to speak of
the industry and will pay for
the tax deductions that these
license holders so desperately
want the bill is rose to the
revenue neutral so it is a very
tax but it's not a.
Revenue game necessarily it's
that it's to make it's to help
make the license holders whole
which is our primary concern.
Mr speaker gentleman from
Bernalillo I do believe that
intense and that's the primary
concern but if those liquor
holders who think that the
deductions that aired me in the
house of dollar deduction is a
deduction based on your net
income and based on your net
income your taxable income it'll
be pro rated so we are hearing
time and time again for folks
that it'll probably closer to
twelve thousand a year it's not
dollar for dollar Senator tax
deductions but if those license
holders who think that the
deductions that air brought the
challenge.
The deduction could go away or
they may not qualify for it but
the two percent retail taxes
there the retail tax is to the
consumer how is that different
than the G. R. T..
Mr speaker LED it's different
because it's it's new it's it's
it's distinct on the receipt
and it goes to offset the
deductions the.
The G. R. T. is so high in some
of these towns that it does
affect commerce we believe that
alcohol consumers should be
responsible for paying back the
alcohol the liquor license
holders not just the are not the
average Joes with kombucha user
user taxed away and as I said
before in six hours of public
testimony only two people made
mention of it one in passing and
one was a multinational
corporation.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman from Bernalillo.
If we were to strike the
retailer Tax that is on section
five and six on page thirteen
through fourteen what would that
do to the bill.
So page.
Thirteen.
It's just it's the three percent
retailers tax thank you Mr
speaker gentle lady
We would have to come up with
the money are supposed to to pay
for the deductions but we did
have a good hearing and house
tax.
and the one of the co sponsors
both one of the co sponsors reps
about on this
up at the five percent was was
too high there was really no
argument that the tech should be
there but we did lower it to to
and and as I said until this
debate here today no one's
really the concerned with that I
think everybody gets it.
Thank you thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentleman from
Bernalillo and I guess it really
comes down to each member of
this body listening to their
constituents their district and
voting what they believe is is
relevant to their communities
thank you thank you Mr speaker
thank you
the gentleman from Travis Lee
and Roosevelt Representative
Anderson.
Thank thank you Mr speaker.
Mr speaker I've enjoyed the
debate I've not heard this bill
in committee at yes I'm going to
ask the gentleman in from
Bernalillo if you lose yield for
a few questions Mr speaker yes.
gentleman
I read the paper that our bill
is is have been described as
modern by New Mexicos liquor
laws.
and I think will point nobody's
against modernizing what a what
a nifty term.
But nonetheless I hear about
The the two hundred thousand
dollars hacks.
Exemption and I said whoa wait a
minute we do tax credits there's
a film production tax credit
don't tell me that's not of that
violates the anti I don't know
if you can tell me that
gentleman or not but you know
what point is how come we can do
it for the film industry we
can't do it for the liquor
industry wide strip thank you so
much Mr speaker gentleman from
Travis the result because we do
it for all filmmakers.
We don't say we're gonna give
the tax credit to these
filmmakers and not give a tax
credit to those filmmakers.
What the what the court Acronis
said is that you cannot give a
tax credit to these folks
selling liquor and not could
give the same tax credit to
those folks selling liquor the
statutory scheme that that so
the wisdom of the nineteen
eighty one legislature came up
with was I believe it was a.
If the thirty five thousand or
maybe a fifty thousand dollar
tax I think was three for the
lower tax rate over ten years.
And then after those ten years
then you can no longer sell
lease or sale or transfer your
license.
so it was higher than the than
market value
but I think that the folks who
sued we're more concerned about
competition than the devaluation
of their license so they filed a
lawsuit in here we are four
years later so a court in Kronos
said it's unconstitutional tax
policy not the tax credit itself
but the discrimination of the
amendment license holders versus
our competitors.
Well thank you very much for
that and and I look forward to
exploring that further with you
because it makes me worry that
pornographic film making may not
be exempted under the film
production fact but that's for
another day Sir are we talked
about the two hundred thousand
dollar exemption and I hear
about a sort of
Acceptance of that arbitrary
number two hundred thousand
dollars tax deduction and I
center myself okay there's seven
hundred ninety eight dispensers
license that's that's roughly a
little over half of all the
licenses in New Mexico in any of
those seven hundred ninety eight
agree to the two hundred
thousand question.
Thank you Mr speaker gentleman
from Chavis the result but I
spoke to as many license holders
has occurred over the past year
did a series of zoom calls in
December January with.
With folks were able to join
That was what we came up with
because we can't do tax credits
and so the arguments being made
that to one thousand dollars
does not give me the full value
of my license.
But the counter argument is
that.
How I have not heard a.
Just a plain simple coach an
argument as to how a license
will be devalued.
If you're a package liquor store
owner your license will not be
devalued of panic.
And in fact it may increase in
value because you now have
delivery and so this notion of
that that that this you know
with all due respect to these
folks that this guy's gonna fall
is is simply incorrect the but
you're correct Mr speaker John
from Travis he was well up to a
thousand is not enough.
to offset
the the market value of the
license but the market value the
license may or may not fluctuate
Any uncertainty would fluctuate
to zero
they still have permission they
still have no competition
but to answer your question if
if all seventy of us were to put
numbers and a hat with rest
would deduction I have seventy
different numbers but.
But the conversations kind of
put us at two hundred thousand.
Thank you for that answer Mr
speaker Representative I do kind
of under one of three hundred
fifty thousand for a liquor
license seems on the.
I suppose
you can buy one for that but the
numbers I've always heard seem
to be north of there so if a two
hundred thousand dollar tax
deduction doesn't get you hold
on three hundred and fifty
thousand
I I'm I'm really perplexed why
the seven hundred ninety eight.
Dispensers license holders
or that excited about home
delivery of of alcohol.
moving along if I could
I think to myself okay we're
gonna deliver liquor to two
homes.
and I think okay do does the
link is there any liability that
the delivery person Kerry spent
is above and beyond.
Operating an automobile question
thank you Mr speaker thank you
for that question yes they have
to I am This bill they have to
have a I believe a million
dollar policy.
Thank you very much Sir I
appreciate that answer because
it only confirms that my reading
of the seventy pages has not
been that sufficient.
On the the tax deduction back to
that to a hundred thousand
dollar four year tax deduction
which appears to me to be a
division of recovering valuable
license key but if there's a
hiccup in price for home
delivery addition
I thank you bye so choose
transferable can I sell my tax
deduction to somebody else who
really needs question thank you
Mr speaker gentleman from
tapestry was what no
unfortunately no the tax
deduction in this bill is not
transferable you can't transfer.
A tax deduction like you kind of
credit so.
in a perfect world we we do a
tax credit that's that's
transferable with the license
yeah this is a tax deduction it
attach is to the current license
holder whoever holds the license
on June thirtieth twenty twenty
one that person will be entitled
to this deduction and
you're correct it does not pay
for the current market value of
the license.
But once again the current
market value of the license is
not changed by the by simply
adjusting the beer and wine
statute to to add spirits to
restaurants
So that's the.
Thank you for that I'm
fashion on on the price and and
see it is sort of a supply and
demand and so.
The price of a liquor license
rises when demand is greater
than supply and if we bring four
hundred new licenses on to the
market it is very difficult for
me to see how that would
because.
Would cause with the but the
price to go down in classic
economic theory would you have a
comment Mr speaker
Representative.
Thank you Mr speaker gentleman
from Chavis the result no you're
you're hitting on the crux of
the problem you know how do we
on do this statutory scheme and
keep these folks whole given the
the confines of our of our
constitution.
Once again I think I've said
this like six times.
If you have a package liquor
license this bill does not
affect you in terms of the
market value of your license the
the package liquor licenses.
The last of a one of them sold
October eighth twenty twenty for
seven hundred twenty thousand
dollars.
Another one sold on that same
day for seven hundred fifty
thousand dollars on that same
day a circle Kate brought the
prices for seven hundred
thousand dollars those licenses
are distinct those are senses
are the full retail dispensary
licenses that are not affected
by the restaurant bees who may
be affected by the restaurant
these are these in our local
these in our local licenses that
moved across county lines and
one of them was sold on November
thirteenth for three hundred
thou.
One was sold October eighth for
three and a thou.
The next almost sold September
seventeenth for three or twenty
five thousand those folks were
aware of this bill.
And still
Felt felt it was in their
interest to purchase some for
three hundred twenty five south.
So we'll see this time next
year.
I agree with you if four hundred
in our locals went on the market
in less these these license
holders formed a.
Like OPEC cartel and committed
to not going below three
thousand that they may dip.
below three thousand but I
believe they'll be about forty
or fifty two licenses and I
believe with our economic growth
with Albuquerque New and folks
in the Permian building the new
face and economic growth in this
country I think the demand will
equal a supply.
Thank you thank you gentlemen
if I could I want to touch
change the subject Mr speaker
and gentleman of let's talk
about taxation of New Mexico and
you know is one of the highest
taxing states for liquor in the
United States would you agree
with that statement Sir
question.
Mr speaker a gentleman I am not
research that I would think not
because every time somebody
tries to tackle occurred the
liquor lobby says don't taxes we
just paid three hundred thousand
dollars for a license I have not
seen any liquor tax bills.
being successful in my tenure
here so I don't know that I have
not reached I have not research
that but.
I would.
I would find it hard to believe
but I'm I don't have a research
that but the taxes are Mr
speaker gentleman from Travis
the results as you know the
taxes are assessed at the
wholesaler level and they're in
pints and quarts and.
And not gallons in old school
taxing taxation and and it has
been changed for decades as far
as I recall.
Thank you for that a gentleman I
did have a chance to do a little
research on that in New Mexico's
fourth highest in one six I just
in our hard alcohol and I think
we're somewhere between on beer
I
six in the United six out of out
of fifty states
for that fifty states makes me
think we are one of the higher
taxing authorities so when we
add this to percent tax
gentleman Mr speaker when we add
this to percent tax who's going
to pay that tax think question.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle who
covers the rules of this
consumer the alcohol consumers
so if you do not drink alcohol
this tax will not affect you
it's a essentially a user Tax to
undo this this a lot liquor
license statute but it's it's at
the point of sale I don't
believe it will affect the
volume of sales and it's a it's
completely passed on directly to
the consumer paid by the
consumer.
Thank you.
Thank you gentleman not.
More questions one is in your
consideration director Eldon
Dever come up that you might
just say you know one thing
we're going to tack on to this
gentleman is that in fifty
years.
It's over.
In fifteen years every liquor
license belongs to the state of
New Mexico and you must talk to
the state of New Mexico in fifty
years about that so
my mic my question is had we
done that forty per to go in the
last with her reform
which was I think supposed to
modernize it forty years ago
here we go so it just seems to
me that you're it it banks for a
hundred years or fifty years of
sort of no matter what we do to
these law abiding tax paying
citizens who operate the seven
hundred ninety eight dispensers
license who are trying hard
under the current circumstances
we're we're we are we are levy a
higher tax we are reducing their
radically the value of their
license.
At the very time when many of
them are closed by do material
medical orders and the ones that
are open and we heard from them
Sir are you they are really
excited about home delivery
because when I noticed it comes
to Walmart where people are
buying liquor all through this
pandemic.
They seem to be doing quite well
with the selection and the
prices but you know who's not
doing well or the men and women
in the state whose businesses
are closed and have been closed
for funds so if you have a
comment on that Sir I'm again
I'm sort of concluding out but I
really am concerned about the
fairness and equity of this bill
thank you Mr.
Thank you Mr speaker gentleman
for a allowed me the opportunity
to comment on that on that your
comment thank you a gentleman
from Chavis the Roosevelt.
So we just kind of be Frank but
the package liquor industry.
In this state is booming.
The package liquor industry in
the state as we discussed is
booming.
At upwards of forty percent in
sales so those folks that you
were talking about their license
is not going to be valued.
We're not opening up a single
new liquor store in the state.
And their sales in twenty twenty
have increased forty percent
who's getting crushed and was
getting killed and who needs
this bill desperately with its
emergency clause is our
restaurants.
Is our restaurants on premise
liquor sales is down seventy
percent and so this bill does
not harm the package liquor
dollars it helps them but who
this bill really really helps is
the restaurant industry to allow
them to get a class B. license
for ten thousand instead of
three and fifty thousand and
allows them to compete and grow
those economies without
taking up market space from the
inner locals which get to stay
open until two so this is really
really geared specifically to
To those folks that you and I
are concerned about those folks
that were close to the COVID no
question about it thank you Sir.
Thank you Mr speaker I'm gonna
wrap up in just
point out the obvious that yes
package sales were up forty
percent New Mexico but that's
forty percent is built on top of
the small business men and women
in New Mexico whose businesses
or package sales have been
closed now for many many months
and so their sales are zero
percent zero percent while there
businesses grown forty percent
and I don't believe Sir in your
bill we're we're addressing
that adequately with the two
hundred thousand dollars legal
tax deduction
in and so I suspect I will not
be able to support your bill
thank you gentlemen thank you Mr
speaker that concludes my
remarks
thanks for the debate the
gentleman from Chavis and he and
Carroll County Representative
Townsend.
Thank you.
Fran from members of the guild.
Mr speaker yes.
Representative.
I think I have a person.
And yes the.
This
There's a problem that needs to
be fixed I think we all agree on
that.
The question is.
Is half.
I guess.
Philosophically I have a couple
of.
Questions.
This will spur economic
development.
Mr speaker gentleman.
From Travis Eddie Otero
absolutely.
No question about it nobody
disputes that.
And
I agree with you.
My next question is if we are
going to spur economic
development.
Tax.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
That's a whole nother
conversation.
But I'm not hung up on the tax
up until the last forty but
nobody was concerned about the
tax except for one of the
transnational corporations.
What I was told by certain occur
license holders is that in a
perfect world the perfect world
we tax package to percent the
tax the legislative three four
percent we put into a fund that
purchases back the license.
That's in a perfect world.
Our constitution does not allow
that perfect we'll.
but the two percent tax I
believe is reasonable because
eight
allow for the social cost and so
so the arguments from both sides
right there's one argument that
we're gonna flood the streets
with alcohol there's other
arguments that it's not gonna
help the restaurants that March.
So it's just it's simply to.
Right revenue to offset the tax
deductions and and and justify
the.
Paying for the market value the
licenses which I hope to do in
the next couple three years but.
Address your question if if the
tax is not
affect economic decision making
then it's better tax policy then
if it did.
This I believe is good tax
policy because it will not
affect
the commerce of.
About Kahn said in Mexico I
think that people who drink I am
the sole happy to grow
restaurant or bar it's going to
be on the receipt and they they
know that the two percent is is
in their interest.
I.
I think that's part of the.
Personally that's a problem
with.
Our.
I think that's problematic the
economic development is to
figure out a better mouse trap
and to tax so I I just from I
think that's.
That's problematic second
question.
I have received one from the
bankers.
That they had great concern is
was that not expressed in
committee of.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Thank you thank you Mr speaker
gentle from Travis yield total
it was actually not the bankers
did not speak during public
comment
none of the banks it was a
concern by some of the folks who
have had.
Out loans but I received a
communicate earlier during the
debate Mr speaker gentleman from
Travis yield federal.
The New Mexico independent
bankers passed a resolution not
to oppose this bill so the New
Mexico and bankers are not
opposed to this bill but there
are a few licenses that are used
as collateral and the banker is
to say that they will work with
our borrowers to ensure that
That that that need additional
collateral is one of the
maintain their payments.
The drive the machine because
that's not the word I was that I
was given but so.
That.
I need a white board.
To figure out what's right and
wrong on this
In my own life cell for.
A full license.
In New Mexico today that I
thought.
Twenty years ago for.
And fifty or ten thousand
dollars.
It is very important that I have
enjoyed the benefits of that
license.
Years.
And that that has value.
That we can't forget this
conversation.
Yes.
You cannot forget.
That.
That license.
When we look at
the value of in the state they
say well.
That licenses were.
Six or seven hundred thousand
dollars not.
Returned fifty thousand dollars.
Certainly have not.
I don't think.
We have addressed that.
Degradation of value.
That and so I'm looking for
right
Mr speaker.
To address that because I think
that's the only thing more
medicine and.
That
is the.
Those that the license today.
I'm gonna take it shorts.
Because
that job years ago we had
something the state as a whole
did a bad job of setting this
up.
Have you.
Through that.
Is there another way you think
we should look at addressing
that Mr speaker and gentleman.
Thank you Mr speaker that are
from Travis city that I've
thought of that.
Most every night the past two
years.
yes I believe that because the
state created this situation the
state is.
Obligating what's crazy what's
on what's on portion as the
state is not legally obligated.
And is prohibited.
to to solve it in the in the in
the best easiest way because tax
deductions are unconstitutional.
But to do that but but three
quick comments one is the
license holders are not included
in the shorts that is a lie.
That is incorrect I I hate to be
rude Mr leader gentleman from
Travis yield fell in and talk to
these terms but no they've been
saying that for thirty nine
years they have kids similar
bills for thirty nine years we
have to modernize and open up
these this this market for
tourism industry if you and also
this is the eighth time upset
this.
If you have a package liquor
license your license the market
value of your license does not
diminish dime that is that is
god's honest truth.
The license that may fluctuate
is these in our local licenses
that don't use of for a
restaurant if you haven't are
local and you choose for
restaurant you essentially get a
second in our local.
But those in our locals
so it may affect the market
value if you put on the market
but it wasn't on the market
before so it's a windfall for
the market may fluctuate is with
the in our local the market
value of into locals but we
don't know if that's going to
happen and so when we do do this
creative legal scheme to quote
by back the license the market
value eight as we first have to
determine what market value
fluctuation of Kerr and so we
could come back next year.
Look at the deductions look at
the waiver of fees look at the
market these licenses and act
accordingly at that time and I
believe we're all committed to
doing that I truly believe we
are.
I appreciate that.
And so.
accepted by those that see a
lower cost of entering the
business that might get it
That's what we're all about but
I keep thinking of the.
The four hundred million dollars
of equity that went just wide
open now.
And business owners and I just.
I thank you so that they're not
gonna lose value.
But I just can't figure out how
they're not losing value
because.
It would seem that.
This past and the value.
Existing license brought my
medicine of.
Sir thank you Mr speaker thank
you so much gentleman from
Travis city auto thank you
your your analysis is correct
but here's the thing these
licenses are all different.
These licenses are all different
and they do different things
they're they're they're in
different markets.
So if the restaurant is able to
add spirits to its menu.
It how does it affect of the
liquor store it just affects
what restaurant you go to.
and so the liquor stores their
market value remains the same
because their market remains the
same for the following reasons
what is there's not any new
liquor for.
At all in this bill.
at all they still have their
current market share
on the in the midst of the of
the great pandemic rate increase
sales forty percent.
their economy start growing.
That's what small businesses
need as customers people
economic activity so to answer
your question the package liquor
license folks are not harmed by
this bill.
If you're a restaurant owner
that uses an in our local that
uses a liquor license in your
restaurant and you don't stay
open past ten o'clock.
I believe you benefit from this
bill.
I believe you benefit from this
bill.
Now granted there's going to be
competition amongst restaurants
but if you're an established
restaurant here.
You're still awesome in our
community you've got to purchase
a new or or or apply for and
obtain a restaurant be licensed
for free.
You're a you're a competitor has
to pay ten thousand dollars for
it.
And then you got to put your in
our local on the market whereas
before this bill you needed it
for your restaurant.
So so to answer your question Mr
John from Travis city although
it's it's it's all different
markets all different set of
circumstances that's why we
lowered the restaurant the to
ten o'clock that's why we put
the free drink maximum on the
restaurant the that's why we
locked it into restaurants that
are sixty percent of food or
more so that those beer and
tabard folks.
Have a distinct market away from
the restaurant folks
and so that's going to be what
we need to keep our eye on these
folks have been closed to the
COVID the prior to be the last
vote but I believe because there
will be an extra thirty forty of
Senator locals on the market
that it will spur economic
growth in terms of night clubs
night life dancing comedy shows
I mean I think that it will lead
to the resurgence quicker
because the thirty or forty
eight as we have become
available to us so I I I see it
coming down.
Thank you for that.
Mr speaker
Question if I am the
license in New Mexico today.
Passes will I still be paying an
annual fee going forward.
Thank you Mr speaker of German
no no John from Travis yield to
the if you purchase your
localizes in the past five years
your fees are waived for the
next ten.
If you purchased your license
prior to five years ago you are.
Beyond five years rather your
your your fees are waived for
the next five years so it's not
a law but it's just that
knowledge in that these folks
need some help and that we were
very concerned about any
fluctuation in the value their
license and we're doing
everything to do with the stress
of that anxiety.
What is that the if you would
please or that person.
Thank you Mr speaker gentleman
from Chavis at any part of the
restaurant the license will be
ten thousand dollars unless you
have a smaller restaurant it's.
Five thousand or or less.
The fees for the current
licenses hover around for two
hundred dollars so it's not a
significant but it's it's just
acknowledging everything we can
do within the law to to offset
any fluctuations in the market.
Would that be some place that we
could.
This piece of legislation.
With those current owners.
Where they could literally.
Look and saying that they were
going to reduce our operating
costs for.
No years for a number of years
where they can capture some of
the value of with that would
that be something you'd be
interested in no.
thank you Mr speaker John from
Travis yield to know that those
are great ideas that's a
fantastic idea we've started
with the idea of a lifetime
and I think that that would be
amenable to talking about that
the only thing is there's
different interests there's just
with with Senate B. Senate bill
to.
Right now it's if you suffered a
fifty percent loss you get your
license fee waived if you did
and you just have to pay for
your license I'm of the opinion
that we don't we should just
treat everybody the same and
move forward yeah that's that's
a great idea work any idea we
can come up with to get around
the nineteen eighty one court
case
I think is beneficial to these
license holders and for the new
folks who bought recently
brought.
Mr speaker and gentleman
I don't know that I'm gonna try
to propose amendments that.
That right now I would appear
whether I should vote for this
or not.
If that.
For those people could capture
that thank okay I'm gonna get to
fifty thousand dollars over the
next known for so many years
where.
That's value.
I can see it.
It.
The table and I think.
Changer for me to support it.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle from
Travis yield throw at and it's
legal and it's legal so we're
going to have to you know
possibly we pass it on the house
hopefully with emergency clause
for the delivery of the
restaurant we have to robust
hearings in the Senate we can I
can talk to you about how you
want to address that and I will
propose that in the next
committee
as as you wish.
Unless you have an amendment now
but what I'd like to do frankly
there's a lot of ways we can
craft Mr speaker John from
Travis yield that was that the
inner locals.
that that the inner locals get a
longer relief there's.
There's some folks that are more
sympathetic to the fifty year
license holder and their
expected future income there's
folks that are more sympathetic
to the folks who recently bought
these licenses but I think we
can meet in the middle but.
But yeah we're gonna make this
bill better along the way I know
that's not very reassuring
you're on the floor but.
But that's a good idea.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Travis yield total for the folks
are keeping score at home we're
here in a.
And as the debate here on the
house floor the leader of
minority floor leader Townsend
from Travis city official has in
a proposed amendment but under
our rules it has to be written
up but the proposed amendment is
that those folks who hold in in
our local license on June
thirtieth twenty twenty one get
a life time waiver of fees so
that their license fees are
waived for life for those
holding in our local so we'll
get that right not but I would
ask Mr speaker gentleman from
Chavis Eddie Lee is that we role
the bill and we.
Pick up debate maybe ability to.
Down the road here in about a
half an hour or an hour gets
tacked up.
Thank you Mr speaker.
The.
We'll bring it back.
Hopefully this will work out I
will go to the next I mean just
a minute we're going to figure
out who's reading give me just a
minute.
All right.
We're going to go to the next
item on the third reading
calendar item number twenty
five.
house bill one fifty two
Representative Barreras are you
ready on your first bill.
Yes Mr speaker can you please
get me to that point.
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
House Bill one fifty two as
amended on final passage and
taken and that is now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
gentlelady to explain the bill.
Thank you Mr speaker and members
of the body our house bill one
fifty to amend the chiropractic
physician.
it changes how agencies on the
board are filled and it also
provides exemption from
examination for licensure in
certain circumstances such as
natural disasters.
Shortens we built if you want we
don't even have to debate at
this time Mister speaker hi I'd
like to move house floor
amendment number one our house
bill one fifty two if if it's
appropriate.
John Wayne reduce the number.
Yes Mr speaker.
Your member ID number is two two
excuse me point two two zero
zero eight four point one.
Two two zero zero eight four
point one has been passed out Is
there debate on the amendment.
Is there any opposition to the
amendment.
House bill one fifty two as
amended is now amended on the
floor.
Families have the amendment
is there any discussion.
On the bill as amended house one
fifty two is amended.
The representative that.
Recognizes the gentleman from
Chavis and Lincoln County
representative number.
where.
Speaker.
With the gentle lady yield.
yes Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman from Travis county.
Thank you gentle lady thank you
speaker Mr speaker.
With respect to the member and
as I recall this amendment deals
with the issue that we discussed
Committee regarding.
Trying to.
Limit the duration of the.
A provisional license if you
will for the duration of the
emergency is that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman that
is.
Mr speaker gentle lady I think
without a member of I think
there's a dresses the concern
that I raise them and I'm.
Please that we reach some
accommodation to allow these
chiropractors to come to New
Mexico to receive a license to
practice without having to go
through the formal process
during these periods of time of
emergency either in their home
state or within our state and be
able to
provide their services to our
students and so we have a I
certainly will support this
legislation thank you Mr speaker
thank you to all is.
Gentlelady from Santa
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Thank you Mr speaker with the
leading from Santa Fe yield.
Mr speaker yes I will provide we
feel for the gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentle lady on
the amendment.
I see here for a
for.
Seven at the bottom of the up
here for a.
You have the boat has declared
natural or man made disasters
can you please tell me what is a
man made disaster.
Mr speaker Mr speaker and gentle
lady thank you I have an expert
on the phone here Dr Roger this
if I can just the converse with
him briefly and I'll be right.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
it would include our nuclear
disasters and also shares Act
the
the best example that that I can
think of would be like nine
eleven that would be a mandate
disaster.
Okay this gentle lady with the
same direction as far as
separation.
As we have for natural disaster.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
believe so but let me let me
just get clarification for you
thank you.
Mr speaker and gentle lady that
is correct with the same
duration okay thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentle lady.
Thank you.
Representative Garcia.
Thank you as the model of
speaker a.
Well the gentle lady from
Bernalillo you'll.
Mr speaker I will yield to the
gentleman from Bernalillo.
Is the most speaker this is too
much.
As the most bigger ID then as it
is paying.
For these
First bills that are rookies are
forty nine I've never seen so
many doctor first it was in my
twenty four years up here
usually it takes a rookie two
years and and Representative
renters that's a good three.
So so estimates speaker
hazardous pay from now on in
terms of
some director.
And
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
you know the routine.
And
No we any song thank
Representative Serrato with two
two lines.
And no we need some on the
second our concern is.
Representative Anderson doing a.
Under bottles of beer on the
wall and Spanish all right was
a.
We want a full song start to
finish.
In line with what some of our
your colleagues in the past.
If I.
States on beautiful states are
represented understand.
Rock and roll are rock.
Member did this song start to
finish.
spenders and Jenna manage or you
know one hundred trials
and not from beautiful off from.
Maybe at a two but beautiful.
sports anthem Rodgers and
Hammerstein.
An incredible no hello by.
Song by Representative Allison
so you've got to go up against
these.
Performers and not do that.
And of the one where you get a
meal are for it.
So.
A one in the two and the three
it.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen I will I will do my
best here I wish I was more
prepared.
Southwest part of Albuquerque
born and raised some of the
things that most of my days
vision for waxing old for the
next few from the fall out from
my screen went a couple of gals
that were up to no good
Representative Nibert many of
our I called my phone to.
The New Mexico legislature
working on.
I was four when he came near the
license plate was registered
twelve year if anything in my
district and rare we lack a
couple things like funding in
clean air.
Our tools up to nine inches in
the idea of the speaker what.
Chamber finally there with my
mask in my life on that right in
here.
He's on the road all you.
Mr speaker as long as she's not
on the road to hauling the wood
the.
That was.
Appreciate the first the first
impressions on page use trying
to find present that.
Once.
Mr speaker this time I have
house bill one fifty two as
amended do now pass.
It has been sent to
as amended the vote is now open.
When was.
Fifteen seconds to close.
Without a recorded vote.
Yes Representative.
Sixty.
Is it is.
Yes Representative has duly
wrapped this house.
Adam Levin and gentleman of SMS
is we are we are waiting on an
amendment to take two fifty five
back up this afternoon is that
correct.
Mr speaker that is correct so
drafters
Senate approving as.
Very good so we'll continue to
take up some bills.
Eleven house bill one five seven
Germany and are you ready on
that item.
Sorry Mr speaker.
With the record reflect all
action necessary for placing
House Bill one five seven on
final passage has been taken
general to explain bill.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
body house bill one fifty seven
creates the the mining act fund
within the state treasury Mr
speaker body this bill was built
with at industries and with our
agencies to ensure that in the
most unfortunate cases the state
will be protected and we will be
able to reclaim former mining
sites Mr speaker body this does
not increase fees and again was
worked on extensively with our
mining industry who perform such
important services and agreed to
buy them.
Mr speaker body with that I
would stand for questions.
Okay there is.
And.
Representative Scott.
Thank you Mr speaker will jump
you Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman from the.
Mr Chairman.
I don't have any issues with
this bill with one exception
and would like to introduce
health for member number one
house bill one fifty seven for
consideration and I believe that
has been passed.
Two numbers two zero zero nine
point one.
And.
Mr was the madam number for your
business
German would you please excuse
the fact that I did not hear you
do that.
Transplanted.
Mr speaker you or excuse this
very simple amendment simply
remove server requirements the
independent investment officer
hired energy minerals and
natural resources department
administers these funds and
leisure centre in the hands of
the in the US but council.
Is this an incident.
Thank you Mr speaker can I ask a
couple of questions from the of
the gentleman from the wall
certainly working through thank
you Mr speaker
thank you gentleman from eighty
can I ask you gentleman what the
purpose of your amendment is
please.
Mr speaker and gentleman it
appears as though you Original
Bill for a separate individual
would be required to manage
these funds and all this
amendment does is limited to
requirements portion one
specifically hard by energy
minerals and waste management of
those funds and I was.
Okay investment counsel.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen and gentlemen
The leaving the reclamation in
the hands of the investment
counsel Mister speaker gentleman
is there any concern that you
might have that the investment
council is familiar on the with
the investment
portfolio but is not Mr speaker
gentleman familiar with
The
the articular is in the
technical particulates of the
reclamation.
Mr speaker.
Mr speaker and gentleman hope
the overall goal of the
management of these reclamation
funds would be to maximize the
return consistent with safety
and I believe that is exactly
what the investment council
charged with there
other investment decisions.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen Mr speaker and
gentleman to your understanding
what this amendment prohibit the
investment council at their
discretion from
contracting with experts as they
see fit in order to insure that
that reclamation would be
administered correctly.
Mr speaker and gentleman to the
extent that I already consult
with experts with respect to
returns on these investments I
would say no appropriation
correct.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen
At your we've we've had a great
deal of input and collaboration
Mr speaker and gentleman with
industry in the crafting of this
legislation
In so I'm hesitant Mr speaker
gentleman without without being
you know not having seen this
ammendment until just now in not
having consulted with any of the
stakeholders Mr speaker
gentleman to understand
potentially some of the
ramifications
Mr speaker gentleman is there
Did you consult me as that Mr
speaker gentleman did you
consult with whom did you
consult with and in constructing
the amendment if I might ask
that Mr speaker gentleman.
Okay Mr speaker and gentleman
of course.
As a consequence of our review
the bill and I would want to
point out that we spend.
Fifty two million dollars each
hear all sides see your breasts
are requires and this amendment
was very simple and then to save
money I don't requiring an
additional investment adviser
attached to the energy medical
department this spurs simply
lays the management of these
funds at the discretion of the
ASIC reinvested along with all
of her response.
Mr.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
and gentleman
Mr speaker gentleman I'm afraid
and I'll continue in dialogue
with stakeholders but Mr speaker
gentleman these are highly
technical important
considerations and as you know
Mr speaker gentleman this
legislation is only
In consideration of kind of a
worst case circumstance so at
this point Mr speaker and
gentleman I am hesitant to stay
without consultation with
stakeholders namely Mr speaker
gentleman
with the energy minerals and
natural resources department.
And with
with industry stakeholders.
That fit to determine I I can't
at this point Mr speaker
gentleman determine if it's
friendly so I think
If there are other questions we
Mr speaker gentleman I I think
those might be helpful as we go
through this to determine but
again Mr speaker gentleman this
bill is crafted with industry
and with agencies and I am very
hesitant to adopt an amendment
that is separate from those
stakeholders.
Okay
there is debate on the amendment
the gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln Representative Nibert.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from eight year old.
Yes Sir the shield.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
When I first read the bill.
I understood the need for babies
securing investment advice but
what I heard you state Mr
speaker and gentleman is the
state investment council already
spends.
Tens of millions of dollars
securing that advice.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Travis sentences are concurrent
this.
Find
a treatment.
Fortune.
If.
As.
So Mister speaker and gentleman
the real only changes that
they're not securing investment
by which just who would be
paying for that investment
advice of our read it correctly
there bill as written says
energy minerals and natural
resources department shall
higher that investment adviser
whereas if your amendment is
adopted yes I see will simply
rely upon its own investment
advisors that it already has
contracted with and is paying
for is that correct.
Mr speaker gentleman from Chavis
your exactly correct.
And so Mister speaker and
gentleman I hope the the
representative from the Yemen
county will see the our cost
savings that this will provide
you in the funding of this
investment by not requiring an
additional pull money be going
to investment advisers that are
by the the further by one state
stating that mining forfeiture
Act and the Republicans are
trying to amend on the floor yes
we are.
Okay.
Mr speaker and gentleman of and
I hope the representative from
Bernalillo county recognizes
that the state investment
council already paying for this
investment advice there's no
need for.
Securing investment adviser by
another advisor whose rate I
energy minerals and natural
resources department is
duplicative it would be the
tracking from was very fun
that's being created at and it
seems to me that this amendment
should be recognized as friendly
on the part of the sponsor Mr
speaker and.
You for second I'm just confirm
with our rules chair and we are
getting a just a tremendous
amount of feedback in New Mexico
because the two of you were so
close.
So I think we're gonna try.
You're gonna check me out.
We're going to suggest that we
try.
In suggesting to try to I thank
you both manager hand makes
because you're so close to each
other.
but I want to make sure that if
we do this that is audible on
soon as one of the comments that
we've been hearing is that.
Matter Townsend when he uses the
money can be heard on soon so
would you please you try that
and see how it works you know
because.
Thank you Mr speaker I hope this
works.
Okay.
I got a thumbs up.
Try to.
Spencer of this legislation of
the representative from dynamic
counting one except on this from
women because.
Of the.
As
a.
of censuring investment advice.
Investment counsel already paid
tens of millions of that is
important to us and that is.
The provision that and.
The investment adviser.
By the Energy memos and natural
resources department.
That is investment council for
direction investment funds and.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Since that time is correct and
then it says a Senator just
takes that that application of
that for them having a higher.
Investment adviser and best of
the best and then the second set
of this is that correct.
This.
This.
Information so.
For.
For this.
Thanks
for.
I guess those technical from the
Energy mentors and natural
resources department present
government hi there that
investment adviser with.
One of the state investment
council.
Representative advise
legislation about correctly.
Transition to.
The state investment council and
I'm used to dealing with.
Investment advisors that are
consoles right now in.
Another investment advisors
probably not going to add much
when to my.
Level performance and nine
normal.
Jones and investing funds of the
state of New Mexico
The.
Which
doesn't.
So this.
It's of.
Responsibility.
I hope that.
Spence.
kind gentleman from Dona Ana
County.
Right after consultation centers
as modern family but actually.
in class and also having an
impact.
Subs impact
By the actual.
Of federal and in making
investment decisions that is the
most and council so with that Mr
speaker and gentleman thanks for
the debate and I hope and
gentleman from dynamic Senator.
Except.
As family.
Speaker
thank you for the debate thank
you gentlemen from Lee just a
couple other quick questions
again though Mr speaker and
gentleman from only Mr speaker
and gentleman from Lee is it
your understanding that this the
bill as written requires the
energy minerals natural
resources department to hire an
independent adviser.
This.
Thank thank you Mr speaker thank
you gentleman from Lee and I
think it's in that plane reading
perhaps Mr speaker and gentleman
where when I read this Mr
speaker and gentleman and I'll
read some of those lines
starting on the current bill
Page three line thirteen.
where is explaining that these
funds can only be used solely
for the reclamation project and
for nothing else so beginning
Three words from the and line
thirteen.
I have read I quote Mr speaker
gentleman the so benefit of that
reclamation project or close out
land and may be invested by the
state in caps as we council with
the advice and and and
independent investment advisor
hired by the energy minerals and
natural resources department Mr
speaker gentleman.
I don't read that in what I'm
being told from the agency Mr
speaker and gentleman is that.
If they don't need to hire an
outside independent adviser they
won't.
They don't feel Mr speaker and
gentleman that
That that this forces them to do
that hiring right now.
so I I think.
That that's why struggle Mr
speaker gentleman that that base
that this is unnecessary if they
don't need to hire an adviser
they won't Mr speaker gentleman
this legislation is tried very
hard in creating this forfeiture
fund
is that we we do not Domingo
these funds anywhere else in the
state treasury that this
envisions a worst case scenario
but that Mr speaker and
gentleman we don't want to
We don't want to mingle these
funds with any other funds in
the state treasury these are
funds from that will that are
based upon private investments
from the private sector
stakeholders and so preserving
the ability for them to remain
independent Mr speaker gentleman
and if it's needed to have an
independent adviser continues to
keep that space and that
independence which is something
Mr speaker and gentleman I think
was very much sought
inappropriately so by industry
to ensure that these monies are
are not mingled with others in
the treasury so it just seems Mr
speaker and gentleman that
I I don't think it's friendly at
this point although I deeply
appreciate the conversation in
the room the rationale behind
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen.
These are for the debate on the
amendment.
Gentleman from San Juan.
The only please she'll.
Gentleman from I'm sorry but we.
That calls and emails as soon as
we switch to the mikes.
The audio on the webcast.
When away or was very very low
for some reason something is
changed when we use the hand
Mike's the public watching the
webcast can't hear you.
So I I understand see kind of a.
Difficult situation if you
switch back to the zoom until we
can figure out the other issue I
would appreciate it thank you
Madam.
Jennifer San Juan you have the
four.
This is down from meals on your
amendment.
Mr speaker I'm unable to hear
sturgeon went from San Juan.
Thank you.
Okay.
All right.
I can hear the German leader
Saddam Hussein's filters and.
We'll go back to when maybe
needs to give you some help.
Hi John Representative Crowder.
Thank you Mr speaker with the
gentleman from you to please
you.
Mr speaker I would you know but
us from the to yield.
Thank you Mr speaker of the
General Assembly please a
gentleman from Lee will will
certainly yield from.
Thank you gentleman I I have.
Appreciate your amendment.
What I read in this bill.
Is that it seems to be that
there are.
forcing a new player on the
state investment council team.
And I and I don't.
I don't know that I believe
that's a good process.
they have experts they have a
system they have a methodology.
Very successful but as I read
this the if the money is put
into the state investment
council then it is worth the
advice of the independent
investment advisor hard but you
need minerals.
And so the bill as written to me
could be a little bit cumbersome
for the state investment council
that they make it up an opinion
is quite different than some of
the other council
Just wanted to make a comment
the.
As I read the bill is forces
another player on the state
investment council team I'm not
sure it's a very good things are
very much appreciate your
members look forward to
supporting thank you Mr speaker.
Amendment Jennifer San Juan
Representative Strickler.
You hear me now.
Speaker gentle from San Juan
just barely yes with help I
needed myself I apologize Madam
speaker.
I was thinking about this bill
orders you know or even.
You know because this bill is
carefully worked out well.
It always was please the sh with
the sponsor of the did.
The industry and I work at a
deal with this is a good catch
in the state investment council
they considering segregate funds
they have to do it all on
so I figure maybe a Mr
misinterpretation of the the
amendment
and I'm I'm concerned
the higher branded basically I
threw of the Energy mental form
they don't have those for.
What do you think.
The.
Gentleman from late.
Gentleman from Sam warm high
true return true else
discovered this appear to
require additional.
With a plain language reading
does require the energy minerals
and natural resources department
to hire an investment.
The state investment council
manages a number of funds should
be no problem keeping please
segregated from anything else.
At the same time.
Thank you use investment advice
that is already thanks for all
we're trying to do here is save.
The.
Hiring and utilization of
another individual specifically
tasked with managing the funds.
Managing these reclamation
that's it.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen
another course investment
council which is like having a
separate checking accounts a
they don't have to manage
segregate the funds so I think
this is a good catch thank you
makes a little better
yeah I wish I had more time to.
visit with the
with the money folks but this is
would save energy and natural
resources valuable resource you
know valuable funds to have a
higher somebody branded
that makes sense to me so thank
you Mr thank you Mr speaker
thank you John Blake.
On the amendment.
Okay.
Gentleman from Bernalillo
Sandoval.
Motions to table the amendment.
Yes.
No the back to debate on the
amendment.
Thirty seconds to close.
Without a reported.
Representative Anderson.
No Representative Anderson
Phelps Representative Harper.
Forty five minutes twenty two
negative the amendment has been
tabled.
Jones Lang still on the floor.
Mr speaker excuse me
disappointed affects this
ammendment what made the funding
more economical to administer.
To the taxpayers of New Mexico
Mr chair are you.
Sierra Representative Powdrell
Culbert.
Thank you.
Thank you for I think I.
I yield to the gentle lady from
Santa.
Well I was getting to that point
that would allow us to.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Santa.
Would you please.
I yield to the gentle lady from
Santa thank you my question was
I think it's already been a but
with the regulations have some
mines that were in the ignition
in reference.
But.
So month the so lack of a better
word with the money then after
the purchase of the bio still
responsible for the clean up for
the money.
Mr speaker gentlelady yes.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Generated from captions court in
Valencia Representative
Armstrong.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from Dona Ana.
I yield to the gentle lady from
those beautiful County.
Thank you Mr speaker and kind
gentleman so the fund already
exists is that correct.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
this is creating a new fund that
would be specific to this kind
of worst case scenario Mr
speaker gentle lady the funds
that are put up by these large
mining companies those
absolutely do currently and that
existed just considers Mr
speaker gentle lady if those
companies by in a very
unfortunate event.
If those companies were to go
away then this fund would exist
within the state treasury in
order to ensure that the
Planned mine reclamation would
continue with the monies that
have already been set aside for
that purpose.
Thank you Mr speaker and kind
gentleman so where do the funds
go now.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady these funds now are
in
Invested in a number of
different instruments Mr speaker
gentle lady.
That are held by these large
mining come.
But Mr speaker gentle lady the
the funds have been set aside
for the reclamation purpose they
reside right now outside of the
state treasurer.
In a number of different
financial and.
Okay thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman and was the state mine
inspector involved in any of
this at all.
Mr speaker gentle lady I can't
speak specifically to the state
mine inspector but Mr speaker
gentle lady I can speak to
the energy minerals natural
resources division and the many
of the mines would only apply Mr
speaker gentle lady to some of
the largest mines that are
currently operating in doing
work here in our state including
those like Freeport mac Moran
international and they were
involved Mr speaker gentle lady
in helping to craft this line.
Okay I'm thank you Mr speaker
and kind gentleman so.
There's a mining act fund and
then there's the mining act or
or furniture Fund are they two
different things or are they one
inside the other.
Mr speaker gentle lady and I
I'm relying upon a couple of
experts I guess all of them by
one Mr speaker gentle lady is or
the the expert is Mr Gerald
Schaffner.
And Mr speaker gentle lady the
would be a fun within a fund.
Okay thank you Mr speaker kind
gentleman that's kind of what I
thought from that and with non
reverting language
so it could never be swept if we
needed to sweep it is that
correct Mr speaker and gentleman
Mr speaker gentle lady yes.
Okay thank you Mr speaker kind
gentleman I'm I I am in favor of
your bill I just have those few
questions Mr speaker kind
gentleman and
You know we keep creating more
and more of these funds that are
not able to be swept and it's
it's a concern for me
as it should be for for all of
us in the legislature Mr speaker
kind gentleman and specifically
I believe energy and natural
resources is
Charging more for the water I
mean I'm hearing a lot about
these funds that are and are
building going to be building up
an energy and natural resources
so I just hope Mr speaker and
gentleman that we
are careful our in our funding
to them because this
I just want to become a habit to
build these funds and keep them
for themselves in case of
emergencies so with that Mr
speaker and gentlemen ideal.
Gentleman from San Juan
Representative Strickler.
German leaders and editor.
The John Chavis Lee Vigil
Representative Anderson.
Thank you Mr speaker Mr speaker
will the sponsor yes
Representative Representative
Kenyatta county yield I yield to
the gentleman from Travis.
Representative which figure my
question is is sort of a simple
one and it goes like this I
believe in your introduction you
said there was no if I did it
correctly no fee increase Care
with this legislation is that
correct Mr speaker and gentleman
yes.
That I then I heard about the
need to provide investment fund
manager and I thought will if
there's no money in the fund so
it's really simple question
Representative Mr speaker.
Where does the money come from
that will need to be managed at
a future date question.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen these funds that would
only go into the mining
forfeiture fund upon a cat on a
very negative event for one of
these companies those are.
There would be no taxpayer funds
that would be part of that fund
Mr speaker gentleman those funds
if it's for a mine reclamation
time period greater than five
years where in it makes sense to
be actively investing the funds
in a way that continues to build
them to to
finish that reclamation that is
longer than five years.
What we've been told is that the
The state investment council
would require that outside
advice Mr speaker gentleman very
clearly.
The only way any of this happens
is if there is a forfeiture in
one of these very large mines
was really a worst case scenario
we all hope never happens but
this simply makes in the case of
that course case scenario
gets us ready to accept those
funds into the treasury if it's
a mining reclamation time of
longer than five years to help
invest them so we get the best
bang for the Buck
but even that then would be paid
for out of these funds and would
not cost any taxpayer.
Mr speaker thank you thank you
very much for that answer and Mr
speaker that concludes my
questions thank you.
Gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative Lewis.
Thank you Mr speaker sorry I
accidentally put my hand up so I
just lowered it.
Gentleman from Chavis
Representative Ezzell.
Mr.
Gentleman.
I yield to the gentle lady from
Travis.
Mr speaker and gentleman on that
that we have lost the.
Money that we do need to clean
that I know that many many years
ago there was one in particular.
Property for wholesaler to
committee probably fifteen years
ago because there was a problem
with.
Contamination of groundwater
looking at.
And so Mister speaker and
gentleman.
You mentioned one particular.
entity.
That with all everything else is
there any other mines right at
the top of your head that.
Need to be brought to the
public's attention and the
reason I'm asking that Mr
speaker and gentleman from
Daniela.
there is.
During World War two there was.
There was an effort by the
Holocaust thing I can't remember
the in state where they did a
lot of potash mining down there
for.
Very things regarding our.
Is anything being done in that
particular area.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady
first we're grateful for our
minds Mr speaker gentle lady the
rising price of copper is good
news for New Mexico.
And Mr speaker gentle lady this
would only apply to the very
largest of mines that would have
Mister speaker gentle lady that
hunger than I reclamation fund
and it doesn't Mr speaker gentle
lady it doesn't considered
there's no money in New Mexico
currently in this state in this
state of forfeiture and so this
is an.
Testing an issue or a problem
that exists now is putting in
place a system.
Based upon a worst case
scenario.
And all Mr speaker gentle lady
all mine all permitted mines
currently have the financial
assurances or reclamation that
are in place I am Mr speaker
gentle lady I'm getting this
from my for excuse my rattling
on that currently Mr speaker
gentle lady the money to mention
specifically I asked in the
southeastern part of the state
are exempt from the mining.
And Mr speaker that is what I
was going to bring get because
the bill under federal
jurisdiction right now the play
is that were created out there
Nothing is happening.
Mr speaker yes I do fully
understand for.
For more more in those over
there in that part of the world
as far as mining offer.
Because you know what it does
still takes it is extraction
industry to get winter opens up
in first solar panels is deal
the thank you direction industry
to be able to get those things
that.
That everybody's three.
Wanting to be renewable Mr
speaker the only exception I
have but increases I know
taxpayers are.
The taxpayers is not totally off
the hook because now you're
going to be instead of
management.
Presented by Representative
Scott had been accepted.
There would not be this calls to
the taxpayers of the state of
New Mexico for the end of
outside independent contractor
so Mister speaker gentleman with
that will yield before thank you
very much for your answers.
Grant and this year.
Thank you Mr speaker the kind
gentleman one out of you'll.
I yield to the gentleman from
those three County.
Mr speaker I just want to think
up.
I.
Representative this represents
kind gentleman for bringing up
this
This legislation also want to
think of Secretary props we're
working along with them to to
protect our mining jobs down
and.
In my neck of the woods and I
appreciate it very much and
I look forward to supporting
your legislation.
I yield.
Gentleman to close.
Mr speaker I move that house
bill one fifty seven do now
pass.
On final passage of house bill
one five seven the vote is now
open.
When we need to close.
The critical that a record of
of.
Representative Lara.
Representative Rod Montoya.
Representative Rod Montoya votes
yes.
Valued at sixty seven from zero
to negative house bill one five
seven has duly passed the house.
And thank you.
Mention like to present item
number eight.
I am ready to present the item
number a
for action necessary for placing
House Bill Clinton is amended on
final passage has been taken
gentleman to explain the.
Thank you Mr speaker and members
of the house house bill one
ninety.
Changes in traffic citation
browses I having all traffic
citations filed with the court
instead of the leading the this
site chase is between the chords
and motor vehicle department
with that Mr speaker I stand for
questions Sen.
Gentleman close.
Thank you Mr speaker and I
simply house bill one nineteen
as amended I now move that house
bill one nineteen as amended
basses house.
A passenger house bill one
nineteen is amended the vote is
now open.
When it's a close.
Ten seconds.
Is that a recorded vote.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Representative Trujillo.
I voted yes Representative.
Yes.
In the sixty seven permanent
hearing house bill one nineteen
as amended has duly passed the
house.
Gentlelady from Luna.
Representative Sweetser are you
ready on item number ten.
Mr speaker I ask unanimous
consent of the health of the
rules be suspended in the record
show that all action for placing
House Bill one fifty five on
final passage has been taken and
it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution.
Generations Plainville.
Mr speaker house bill one fifty
five does one thing it removes
the sunset provision for the
reduced residency requirement
under GHS the job training
incentive program when the
training is provided for high
skill high wage jobs and I now
stand for questions.
Close.
Mr speaker I move that house
bill one fifty I do now pass.
It has four one five five.
The vote is now open.
In seconds to close.
Sixteen in the affirmative zero
negative house one I I has duly
passed the house.
Okay we're waiting on an
amendment on to fifty five.
I really think of two more bills
while we wait for the amendment
on number.
Two fifty five so incentive item
eighteen generated from captions
record influencia are you
ready on house bill sixty seven.
I'm sorry.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
the other Representative
Armstrong are you ready on house
bill sixty seven.
if you get if you get to that
point I will be.
Action necessary for placing
House Bill sixty seven on final
passage has been taken
gentlelady to explain a little.
Thank you Mr speaker house bill
sixty seven creates a primary
care council.
Human Services Department to
focus on primary care and what
we can do to improve increase
the number of providers in
primary care to expand our focus
on on primary care and hopefully
lead to better health outcomes
by
intervention further upstream
and this is supported by the
Human Services Department they
can do it with their existing
funds and with that Mr speaker I
stand for questions.
Close.
Thank you I now move that house
bill sixty seven to pass.
It has been sixty seven the vote
is now open.
Thirty seconds.
Representative close.
The reporting.
Representative Chandler.
Yes Representative votes yes
Representative Pettigrew.
The revenue sixty seven from
zero to negative house bill
sixty seven has duly passed the
house
members run and take up some
those are final order item
twenty one.
And I am thirteen for
Representative and then does is
first bill.
Those vocal chords warmed up
ready.
The item number twelve to twenty
thirteen and twelve.
I'm generally familiar
Representative Hochman Vigil
with the record reflect election
necessary for placing House for
one twenty five submitted a
final passage has been taken.
Gentlelady to explain the bill.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
our house bill one twenty one
deals with specific changes to
our the psychologist.
Social workers and mental
behavioural health.
Counselors
it also allows for changes and
mentorship to utilize
telemedicine these resources and
what kind of connections that
also
changes the psychologists and
counseling and social workers
board make up.
And with Alice in the questions.
Gentleman from Catherine Sikora
and Valencia.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
kind gentle lady yield.
I thank you Mr speaker I yield
to the kinds only from all those
counties Microsoft.
Thank you Mr speaker and kind
lady just wanted to mention that
yes I am in school support of
this bill this makes the
reciprocity in those categories
a lot better and enough for
regulations and licensing and
appreciate you bringing this
bill forward thank you Mr
speaker.
Thank you for the debate gentle
lady to close.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
at this time of that house bill
one twenty five as amended do
now pass.
On final passage of house bill
one twenty five is amended the
vote is now open.
Twenty seconds to close.
The number with a recorded the.
Representative Roger Montoya.
Yes.
Levels yes.
Development of sixteen nineteen
from zero to negative house bill
one twenty five as it has duly
passed the house.
Gentleman from Santa.
Representative Hernandez are you
ready to present your first
bill.
If you are making it so dramatic
Mr speaker getting mail nervous.
Hi this is a for placing House
will to sixteen final passage is
been taken the gentleman to
explain his personal.
Thank you Mr speaker
House Bill to sixty will require
the Energy federal disaster
resources department to provide
you Mexico residents for
veterans for members of gold
star families would pay use
passes for unlimited entry to
state parks or other recreation
areas operated by the state
parks division of the EMNRD the
free access to New Mexico state
parks with a small way to thank
American veterans and gold star
families for their support of
our country and to encourage
them to explore recreational
opportunities on our public
lands and waters.
I now stand for questions Mr
speaker.
Debate the gentle lady from
McKinley and to settle.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman yield.
Mr speaker and Representative
and you know.
A gentleman Mr speaker gentleman
can you tell me how many state
parks we have in the state of
New Mexico.
Thirty Mr speaker Representative
thirty six if I remember
correctly.
All right well thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentlemen.
Thank you Mr speaker
Representative.
From San Juan.
us right now that's it.
Not that easy.
I I I thought about it but we
let it go this time Mr speaker
thank you.
Hi there was no we've grown
first first presenters we'll
have to wait until the next
opportunity presents itself to
seen here give a full
performance.
Maintenance for the generator
from Bernalillo Representative
Matthews.
Mr speaker with the gentleman
yield please.
Mr speaker and representative I
yield.
Thank you
Mr speaker Representative of the
gentleman is the bio park in
Albuquerque
included in your bill.
Mr speaker Representative no
ma'am it is not it is not a
state park if I remember
correctly.
Mr Mr speaker gentlemen are
there parks are the state parts
of pre widely distributed
geographically.
Mr speaker Representative they
are spread pretty equally
throughout the state.
And Mrs Mr speaker and gentleman
are the veterans and those are
families also distributed pre
koly throughout the state.
Mr speaker and representative
about fifty percent of the
veterans and gold star families
are in Bernalillo county the
remaining fifty percent are
pretty
Pretty well Representative
throughout the rest of the
counties in the state.
In Mr speaker a gentleman
when you do come back the next
session to add to this bill I
hope that you'll be able to say
you for creating the City of
Albuquerque and added to
beautiful file park to your bill
thank you hi you Mr speaker and
Representative thank you so much
for that I will absolutely do
that.
The debate the gentleman from
land representative Scott.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker Representative I
yield.
Speaker
and ask if you need us to the
gentleman from Bernalillo kids.
Earlier.
This was a gentleman from Santa
you.
Mr speaker Representative I
yield.
Speaker gentle witcher
legislation.
Include.
Veterans revolutionary war war
of eighteen twelve.
More.
Ward.
As thanks for access to these
parks.
Mr speaker and representative if
you can find the one that is
living from most of those point
I would welcome them to our
state parks.
This
this does not apply to veterans
to Senators roads have to be
poor.
Mr speaker and representative
that is correct unless they are
gold star family.
Part of a gold star family.
Thank you Mr speaker the
descendants of stores.
Mr speaker gentle one.
Would be eligible for example
the.
Soldier.
World for one.
Mr speaker and Representative
act.
It is a to repeat offenders and.
Parent spouse or child of that
consent and who are still living
and they are absolutely welcome
in our state parks under this
bill.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
to everyone that was all part
question.
Gentleman from.
The gentleman from the missing
woman Committee Sikora San Juan
and Financiera Representative
Garcia.
Thank you Mr speaker within the
government one moment while I
get.
Mr speaker and representative
yield.
Thank you Mr speaker in the in
the Santa that that just a few
questions the goal for mothers.
Choose to be seized they are not
qualified.
The people of all women of the
wall I could move for the that
people are Mr speaker and
gentleman the available for
mothers are mother your father
loves you determines how that
will work of.
Mr speaker Representative so
fair.
If the.
The soldier that was killed in
action if his parents.
Spouse children are still living
than they would be given access
under this bill to any of our
state parks.
But the.
Are you.
Thank thank you
when you.
Another question at one in June
Santa Fe County.
Of the national but
or international guard qualify
for this.
Mr speaker Representative I
believe that they are.
Mr speaker Benjamin from Santa
the reason I brought that a
number of aware of that or not
but National Guard.
The National Guard are not in
the room.
The agency said been deployed.
For a hundred eighty consecutive
days other than that
multi garden Mr speaker fine
gentleman a bit and they could
be in the National Guard for
twenty years and if you had not
been deployed with the military
branch of the government you're
not considering federal.
Mr speaker and representative I
was unaware of that
we care and if you'd like I
would love to work with you on a
bill to make sure that they are
covered under this.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Santa that that will I would
appreciate that they introduce a
bill on discrimination against
veterans and I included National
Guard and Air National Guard you
know there there there the need
be they will going action for us
you see there on the capital now
with this issue session and you
know much concern of mine now I
would love for you it'll get
together would be in that and we
do need to support the malls
will be built and one more thing
Mr speaker and gentleman.
There are a discussion that
allow veterans community park
was a Vietnam veteran and I got
a card and I would do in the
state park with the National I.
Mr speaker Representative that's
true but the current law is that
you must be at least fifty
percent disabled veteran in
order to catch her past this
opens it up to all veterans and
the addition of the gold star
families.
Mr speaker and gentleman that
work on the I appreciate that of
the money I'm in full support of
your bill
but you brought it up because
it's you know it's going to be
fair for everybody and I do
negative speaker pointed woman
we do need to improve the
National Guard and Air National
Guard and that a one time thank
you that's all percentage.
Generated from Santa Fe New yes
Representative Herrerra.
Thank you Mr speaker with the
kind gentleman from Santa yield.
Mr speaker Representative.
kind gentleman what does your
favorite state park and that's
state of New Mexico.
Mr speaker and representative of
the top one
but I think element used to be
my favorite one.
Gentleman.
Brought the springs are also
good one of of hearing from the.
From the representatives behind
the.
thank you kind gentleman I
yield.
Representative for her to.
Thank you Mr speaker with a kind
gentleman from Santa yield.
Mr speaker Representative I
yield.
Thank you that that Mr speaker
and gentleman just curious how
how does this bill come come to
fruition how did you come up
with this idea.
Mr speaker Representative in
November of twenty twenty the
federal government
allow our.
program that allows all veterans
of free access to the national
parks and the I think it's a
great program I'm and I'm a big
supporter of that so we need to
add the state to.
Follow their lead without one
and allow our state veterans and
all of our state parks.
Thank you for that Mr speaker
thank you fundamental how do
they have any veterans get these
passes.
What's the process they need to
go through.
Mr speaker Representative the we
actually made the process easier
so currently you have to fill
out a form and send it in to get
your your past this will make it
so that you can our come to any
state park shows the air
identification that they are a
veteran or a gold star family
and be let into the park.
And Mr speaker kind gentle and
why that just thank you what
happens to a veteran family if
they want to go camping for the
weekend.
Mr speaker Representative
currently this this bill does
not
cover the multi IDA uses
you know we can absolutely come
back and make that a portion of
the bill in the next session.
And included in a other groups
that we see necessary under the
under this bill.
thank you for that Mr speaker
kinda meant and why do you not
include state museum and your
legislation.
Mr speaker Representative
you gotta start somewhere and
this is this is the first part I
actually have had that question
a few times and I plan on adding
to this bill as we go along.
Thank you for that thank you Mr
speaker thank you kind of a no I
appreciate this bill
your your coach down on the
floor but Representative Dow and
I did a bill for a few years ago
to do this for our foster
families given day use the state
parks and so it's great that
state New Mexico we have a
responsibility to make sure our
state park to taking care of
that they're well funded but we
also want to make sure their
accessible and to get the news
that that we want out of them
and that anytime that we can get
people
people into our state parks is
always a good thing and
hopefully we can get them back
over a hundred percent so that
my bill and your bill can be
used thank you Mr speaker kind
gentleman and I yield.
Thank you for the debate the
gentleman from civil and thank
you Representative Alcon.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from Santa yield.
Mr speaker Representative I
yield.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman I was just going to
add.
The gentleman from all the
others from similar.
Just a question about the
reserve and National Guard
and things two of your meal.
starting from nine thirteen all
the way through eight twenty
four in the financial literacy
is and it does include Army
Reserve and Army National Guard
and their new environment and
everybody else as long as they
have committed.
That since your commitment that
everybody.
There we that are in goes
through in order to get that
honorable discharge so all of
these regs are covered in your
meal so when there is no need
the middle man or change the
bill is already in there.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Thank.
Representative Garcia.
Speaker will the
Gentleman from send a lot yield.
Mr speaker Representative I
yield.
Thank you.
Well it's it's currying time
again the meeting
What time is the most beaker a
I'm a lot happier on this one
because I got my hazardous pay.
Road just called from
Legislative Council and said I'm
on board he just told me not to
tell anybody so I figured not to
tell anybody meant the I. R. S.
is the most because so so I'm
happy that those first bills
roll line.
is the most because we've got a
good catch here.
Us on the line here in Santa Fe
County can and I want to let the
gentleman know.
At the sun though one kids.
Always do a hard rock yes file.
I want you to pull up yours your
your guess mask what are on and
that's your one of those hard
rock funk rock and hits.
And if that doesn't do it while
you're gonna get Dr a couple of
points on your song was for.
And and you know the routine
you've got a whole different
genres that your colleagues of
kind of a discount throughout
the years and again like the
thank the Representative before
you buy read us no we need
songs.
Representative Serrato
streamliner.
Representative Anderson's
a Spanish version of a hundred
years on the wall no no go.
No way Jose so get ready.
No follow that plan.
In that those longer expand and
that's your job one in a two and
a three.
Mr speaker and representative I
will not be doing kiss song I
just can't compete with the time
we.
I will be doing
what's a better song for a
veteran bills and I'm proud to
be an American.
And I'm sorry in advance this is
probably gonna be terrible.
I'm proud to be an American
we're eight one three.
I won't forget the men.
The for two million.
And I put the please stand up
and do the vote and defend her
still today is there any.
Love this and got the.
As for the.
He.
One.
It will take you on the road to
Hollywood
thank.
But it'll pass.
Mr speaker I think that's the
first time we had a back up
singer.
We we actually had with the for
you are here with the senator
from San Juan we had the the
little student as a state
representative from district
fifteen performed on the floor
of the house with six back up
singers and choreographed
routine the headlines from coast
to coast.
And as we we have backups
vigilance right job so.
Gentleman close.
Mr speaker.
I do not.
I do math now move educators
sixty to pass.
You're on final passage of house
bill two six zero the vote is
now open.
Of.
Thirty seconds to close.
Representative unfortunately
pursuant to rule thirty six dash
seven subsection.
Chairman this bill needed a vote
of seventy to zero in order to
pass the bills failed.
Just kidding.
This is their house bill two six
zero has duly passed the house.
Three.
Twelve twenty four and hopefully
we'll have an amendment on to
fifty five.
Gentlelady from Diana the rating
on item twelve.
Just
getting to that point.
Sorry for placing House Bill one
seven one on final passage is
been taken the gentleman to
explain.
Thank you Mr speaker house bill
one seventy one changes language
in the existing area state law
which governs I am the
eligibility for educators with
national board for professional
teaching standards certification
and the current law allows is
striving for teachers only and
HB seventy one seven one changes
that section of language to read
license a little employees and
HB one seventy one also ensures
that spiders are provided to all
current the National Board
professionals
certificates
holders who are not in the
administrative role.
With that I in I can request as.
The gentle lady to close.
Thank you Mr speaker I now move
that H. B. one seventy one do
now pass.
House bill one seventy one the
vote is now open.
When it comes.
Twenty seconds to close.
The critical those without a
recorded vote.
Representative black.
Yes Representative.
Representative Lord.
Voted.
How do you help.
Yes I thought I click the button
sorry about that.
Both yes.
Sixteen affirmative zero
negative house bill one seventy
one has duly passed the house.
Representative are you ready on
item twenty four.
Representative contentimage to
present item twenty four.
Yes Mr speaker
But I don't seem to have enough
and the to turn on my camera.
But I would like to.
Which means.
Representative all action
necessary for replacing house
bill one forty six on final
passage has been taken
gentlelady to explain it all.
Thank you Mr speaker I'm proud
to be bringing for H. B. one
forty six incrimination with the
administrative office of the
courts otherwise known as AOC.
what this bill does is
consolidate and clarify do some
cleanup on statutes that matched
the Supreme Court decision in
April of twenty nineteen which
move the magistrates under the
authority and dated a management
of the District Court.
So with that Mr speaker I'll
stand for questions.
Gentlelady to close.
Mr speaker I move the age being
one forty six do now pass.
On final passage of house bill
one forty six the vote is now
open.
When was.
Representative Cruz.
Call the number without a
recorded vote.
Representative del.
Value of sixty four in the
affirmative.
Three negative house bill one
forty six is duly passed the
house.
Okay we can go back to.
Item twenty six generally
represented by this I believe we
have our mental.
We do Mr speaker and I believe
the.
The gentleman from so.
Gentleman from Chavis of total
has the floor on this bill.
Representative Lujan yes Mr
speaker of.
I'd like to move house for
amendment one that has taxation
and revenue committee substitute
for house bill two fifty five.
The
terms of maintenance for the
board this actually has formed a
number three.
Thank you Sir.
Thank.
one six ten point one thank you
for that clarification.
gentleman from.
Go through their there are three
of them they're pretty simple
on page forty three.
Eighteen.
And.
Thank.
Close attention that and.
The.
The.
And.
And engine.
And.
After trying.
Start the fact subsection.
That subsection.
For individuals.
Held and dispensers license
transparent percent to
subsection C. of section sixteen
dash six dash one to.
Of the nineteen seventy eight
statute on.
Thirtieth twenty twenty.
The director showing all
license.
These for the lives of for the
life of the license holder.
And.
For successors in interest of
the license holder if they have
this bass a sibling.
Chairman of the license holder.
The gentleman from Bernalillo is
just a friendly amendment.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Chavis ability might be the most
from the moment forty years.
In four years is there a
discussion on the amendment the
gentleman from San Juan
Representative Strickler.
Thank you Mr.
Gentleman so what this does
gentleman the the annual middle
the annual renewal for the start
the hundred dollars a year
that's what I understand.
My license.
In their May.
The movie is all.
I'm sorry Mrs.
I need some technical help Mr
speaker on.
I just think I'm missing a
headset so it.
Okay.
Okay thank you.
The gentleman from Lee please
yield.
I would.
Story at the or may or may
Representative Townsend the
gentleman from many please
yield.
Mr.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you gentleman
My understanding is the the
annual fees for existing
licensee is thirteen hundred
dollars a year set the stage
your understanding gentleman Mr
speaker.
I believe it will.
It will.
All fees of that license holder.
For that class of license for
that life of that person.
Their spouse or their sibling
and that is always a flat fee I
would referred to the
representative Bernalillo to
make sure that we're on the
right track there.
The gentleman from Bernalillo.
Supplementals on one gentleman
from Travis at the ready I I
believe that our local license
annual fee is thirteen hundred
dollars.
Thank you thank you Mr speaker
thank you Jim that's what I was
told so
In the in the case of a local
one of my local
The restaurant.
Purchase for these licenses
about three hundred fifty
thousand dollars he closed on it
last.
In the middle of the pandemic.
And so this thirteen hundred
dollars very helpful.
but it'll take you about two
hundred sixty nine years the
rich pay out all this Michelin
best obviously is going to be is
going to be thank you the other
revenues and this sort of thing
so this this certainly helps
but it's kind of a drop in the
bucket is forces investments
concern and Mr speaker and
gentleman and also on on your
amendment.
this is limited
I mean when you do a transfer
this is limited to family
members so this would not apply
Mr speaker and gentleman to the
third party approach.
This is the gentleman.
John I've I'm sorry I cannot
understand you madam on the and
I'm compensated for the
plexiglass and gentleman Jim
from someone Madam chair for
like so that we can see if you
can be heard by the my
Representative Townsend.
Thank you thank you chairman
Well I think
there's.
to pay out so.
Question I have.
Transformational license to.
For a party purchaser.
So I was just there it is
back to fourteen hundred
dollars.
That's exactly right okay.
mass adoration I'm sure
supports.
Problems with the.
Thank you Sir thank you Mr
speaker.
Is there further debate on the
amendment is generated from
Chavis.
This.
On the gentleman from New York
thanks to be happy to.
Mr speaker gentleman from anti I
have.
All right.
Your members to have opposed to
this I have taken a picture of
it Mr speaker I just want to
make sure that it is available
for everybody to look at on the
website is that correct.
Website.
Okay I I just want everybody to
be able to have the opportunity
to look at it to see where they
fit with.
I think my question here Mr
speaker and gentleman from Eddie
Chavis and terrible.
Will there be a problem.
With the anti defamation.
Part of our.
The lady it's my understanding
that there will not be.
There will not be.
We all yes.
Alleviate Mr speaker and
gentleman what this lady they
did a lot of concerns that some
of these people are having.
With fear as well as the
devaluation of the line.
John John R. gentle lady it's
not not only the eight all of
them and it's not nearly as far
as I would prefer to go
But it was something that would
from multiple years and have
some value and it was better
than what I thought we were
going to get if we didn't do it.
And Mr speaker gentleman from.
At eight Chavis terrified to
agree with you that.
It's not.
The one size fits all their
bodies can be.
Please get this done.
But you will it is better than
what was proposed in the bill.
And I think Mr speaker and
gentle lady
given
The name.
To make a change in New Mexico.
Given the opportunity to do it.
as best we can
as you know there have been very
few bills that this body has
passed that kept everyone happy.
Mr speaker that is K. anything
we do up here some people are
going to be too is implicated by
and and chrisley criticism hits
from the.
I don't like it at all from
seems like we really can't win
from.
Four one seven Mr speaker and
gentleman I I do agree that
something needs to be done I
still have concerns with the
bill of sale.
Think this amendment does go a
long way from repeating some of
the concerns that I have been
with receiving from my
constituents and my family has
been blowing at.
I'm surprised that they did not
have any notices we did not even
have any medicine for for fiscal
bill was gonna be heard until
ten forty nine this morning they
were unprepared for quite the
least whenever the first bill
that was drugs.
They were scrambling at that
point so I hope that what I have
sent out to the fact that in my
area.
Waiting for all the concerns to
come back in on on your
amendment
Right now we're about fifty
fifty.
So like I said if we can't win
for losing your.
Mr speaker and gentleman thank
you very much for your
responses.
Thank you
Thank.
Is there further debate on the
amendment.
Mr Johnson Representative Scott.
Thank you Mr speaker will.
Gentleman from Travis city
Terrel and great friends yield.
Happy to.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Sure only going to support.
This man walked.
I still.
Some fairly serious questions
about whether it goes for about
program.
Representative used to
discounted five percent.
All those on what
we waivers or work today ten
years there were thirteen fails
dollars fifteen years.
Excuse me no workaround to ten
yours are worth ten thousand.
Fifteen years thirteen thousand
four hundred and as you get
farther into the future to
discount rates.
Level of the the present you.
Waivers.
I think
to use rural leaves the horrors
of those current licenses.
She waited on hold would you
agree with the statement Sir.
John it's it is not.
I and I don't have a hold on
hold
because.
It's a complicated
Process if you think of I
believe the name of the.
The bar was the center of I
never been in that one.
Any of this but I've never been
in that one
But.
You take take someone that has
had a license for twenty five or
thirty years.
you have the value of that
ownership.
And
then try to play with thank you.
The equity that has grown in the
value of that license.
It's not just to get us out of I
I
That I believe.
That will.
Has Economic Development in New
Mexico.
And I believe.
That we have tried to do it for.
six or seven years that I know
of and.
Several years that I was sent
upstairs what's in this body
work and I think it's time we do
something.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
I cannot agree with you more.
And again approach to support
the amendment.
I'm just not sure produce
overall bill is where we need.
To solve the problem thank you
Mr speaker thank you Jim.
On the amendment I see hands up
in the chat.
I don't know who wants to speak
on the amendment so
Representative Montoya Jr with
San Juan are you on the
amendment.
Yes Mr speaker and we have that
six minutes left on the clock
for the for the bill by the way
to San Juan Representative
Montoya.
Thank you Mr speaker
as the gentleman from a.
Be happy.
Thank you speaker and gentleman
the.
There are already several pieces
to this bill prior to your
amendment that go to trying to
provides some level of equity
four four the current license
holders
as we talked earlier as was
mentioned earlier was the tax
deduction on the front end but
Mr speaker and gentleman one of
the things that I envision
happening here and with this and
with your amendment is on the
secondary market if someone has
a license right now that they're
not using and I'm selling it
right now might not be the best
idea but if they turn around and
raced to Mr speaker and
gentleman
thank you the just go under what
the state license would cost.
And for ten years that would be
one hundred percent profit so if
they have a restaurant and they
were in the class B. license
with the spirits
Mr speaker and gentleman of the
restaurant the license
if that's what they were going
for.
They.
Compared to ten thousand dollars
annually or they could go
through to someone who currently
has a license and we set for
nine thousand ninety five
hundred dollars a year and they
also would not have the
restriction Mr speaker and
gentleman.
The time limit Mr speaker and
gentleman they they could that
go beyond the ten o'clock
closing our they could
potentially have a seated bar in
there
restaurants and the speaker
shall not I would go a long way
towards and if they can read it
for thank you Lisa for ninety
five
hundred a year that would be
I ninety five thousand dollars
in in ten years so once again
this is not nothing in this is
going to make the film home all
of the speaker and gentleman if
you
as a realtor I have to drive a
vehicle show people homes and
without my driver's license.
And without my vehicle I would
be able to sell those homes and
Mr speaker and gentleman I drive
I that vehicle for ten years as
I'm making money as my business
plan shows
I them would not expect to be
able to sell my vehicle for a
hundred percent of what I pay
for nationally unfortunately
that's the situation that many
of the current license holders
you as they've been able to find
our license they've been able to
have a monopoly in selling
liquor and them.
After using it baby to been able
to get their full dollar value
back out of it for.
maybe an increase some of these
folks have their licenses for
four years no it isn't a four
hundred thousand dollars for it
four years ago so the speaker
John this is a very unique
situation that would cause them
I don't believe we'll be able
to.
Keep everyone.
Completely home that's that's
not gonna happen I think this
along with your amendment which
I plan to support for a long way
to helping folks recruit so
their investment so thank you
I'm speaking from.
These are for the debate on the
amendment.
The.
And then of okay cool yeah the
gentleman from Rio Arriba
Sandoval and San Juan
Representative Lente.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from H. as in a rural
counties you.
I'm happy to yield.
Thank you Sir of the one you're
referring to earlier is the
still the saloon Bernalillo New
Mexico you're welcome to come
down anytime you want to.
Mr speaker and gentleman the the
clarification that I'd like on
your amendment is here then
specific to a full license or to
a dispensers by.
I think the full license.
gentleman.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman Mr speaker gentleman
the to the point that was
brought up earlier is
nontransferable the budget that
you're you're ushering in to
your amendment correct.
Just wanted your amendment
refers to dispensers license
which is the term of art in the
code for restaurants they can
sell liquor by the drink so
those are the restaurants that
have both physical bars and the
restaurants and answer look by
the drink that's that's was
referencing here to spend your
amendment.
Corrected Representative it is
four dispensers license by
definition.
Thank you thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentlemen and and
again to my second question at
the be more specific it is
non transferable to anyone that
wants to purchase the license
outside of your family correct
that is correct.
Okay thank you Mr chairman.
you know.
Representative I'm sorry but.
Your is not restricted
transferability of the license
it restricts and maybe I
misunderstood I'm trying to
listen and under and that the
same time.
It does not restrict you from
the from the sale of the
transfer it would restrict that.
tax exemption going forward
under those conditions outside
of that building and to just
pass a sibling or child.
And.
Hello I thank the gentleman from
I think members of introduce us.
Then proposed applies the
dispensers license that is
standalone bars and restaurants
that sell liquor by the drink.
Your name as I understand it
Representative Townsend says the
current holder the dispensers
license no longer has to pay
fees to the state for the
license.
And that they won't be in the
know fans will be charged to the
license.
Until a license is transferred
to someone outside of the
license holders family.
So if the license holder the
dispenser permit.
The dispenser permitting is that
permit I think is that licensed
to.
Son daughter spouse sibling then
the prohibition on fees will
continue.
So if it's if it's passed down
through the generations there's
no fees charged if the licenses
transferred outside of the
family then the fees would
reserve the right to the
quickly.
I.
I thought I did I did and I
apologize.
Mr speaker and gentleman you
probably did Representative and
gentleman and and I appreciate
as want to clarify that simply
because Mr speaker and gentleman
going back to the point I made
earlier it's a step in the right
direction but I still feel that
it's going to willfully
not enough when you think about
the potential unintended
consequences in respects to to
those like again still the
saloon remembers echo with that
Mr speaker and gentleman thank
you for your time.
Okay the gentle lady.
From.
Bernalillo.
Right before the gentle lady for
from Bernalillo close debate.
is there objection to adoption
of the amendment.
Hearing on house three house
bill two fifty five is amended
with an emergency clause is
adopted.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo this.
Thanks
motion dated for three.
That seems.
Junction and someone.
Gentleman and gentle lady from
Bernalillo to close.
Thank.
All members for this story
debate.
As we cast this vote I I think
of my district immigrate
Montecarlo restaurant is there
as a full package liquor license
I think of Dixon Vegas.
So with the low number Leo
Chavez down south of beautiful
historic location actual best.
Those locations.
All still have the reform
package liquor license.
They still have their physical
bar.
They can still stay open till
two o'clock in the morning.
We have the waiver of the fees.
they they can play music and
have entertainment the
modification of the beer and
wine license to add spirits is
among the restaurants that now
have to close at ten and will
create competition and markets
among the restaurants.
That.
Of.
I could provides as well
maintain their value can be
transferred over to their
children or spouse and with this
wonderful amended by the
gentleman from Chavis of federal
Eddy even those children will
benefit from the waiver of the
fees which possibly could
increase down the road.
I think everybody now.
I now move.
That house
this is generated from
Bernalillo but we should make a
all forgiving others there's
gentlelady from Bernalillo
Representative part of a liberal
please.
Thank you Mr speaker and and and
thank you just a quick word on
to in all the very Sanchez of
those he's legislation this is a
monumental moment in the state
of New Mexico we have been
working towards liquor license
performed for over forty years
and I'm sure as many sought to
the debate tonight liquor
license reform is not a are
easy.
Goal.
Thank you no matter what happens
today we have learned a very
important lesson which is the
power of bipartisanship and what
all of us can accomplish if we
get together and talk about it
and so I think that we can
actually two hundred people in
Washington DC a lesson that this
bill I just want to underline
that you know our constituents
centers here in Santa Fe our
with the mandate and that is the
promulgate smart public policy
it's free to the five is smart
public policy it is the
beginning of a very long road to
correct of regulatory wrong but
are states took many many years
ago.
But it takes courage to do the
work that we're doing here today
and I think it's really
important to remind everybody
that we can't allow perfect be
the enemy of the good.
What we're doing today with this
bill is beginning are many
future steps to correcting this
wrong we cannot guarantee that
people will not be affected but
we can't guarantee that we will
continue to listen to the needs
of those that will be affected
this is just the beginning step
of that so I want to think again
by our prime response of this
bill Representative my office
and also Representative Montoya
Martinez and Hernandez and that
Mr speaker I now move that house
bill two fifty are the.
The house taxation substitute
for house bill two fifty five
and a stress amended do now pass
with you but
I very important.
Passage of house taxation and
revenue committee substitute for
house bill two fifty five as
amended with an emergency clause
the vote is now open.
One minute to close.
The clerk to call the members is
not have the recorded the.
Both men
is closed by a vote
Forty one in the affirmative
twenty seven negative house
taxation and revenue committee
system for us we'll to fifty
five as amended has duly passed
the house without an emergency
clause.
Two million.
Is.
The next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
Transaction this order.
Are there any lessons.
Mr speaker I want a house bill
seven.
Seven and is removed from the.
Counter and plans to fund the
speakers table.
Representative Martinez.
Thank you Mr speaker of the
house taxation revenue committee
will meet tomorrow notes the new
start time will be eight thirty
tomorrow eight thirty thank you
Mr.
Members
Representative Gaydos.
Thank you Mr speaker of the
Danny Danon delegation will be
meeting five minutes after the
floor to talk about capital
outlay.
Thank you.
If you don't intend.
from civil and Representative
Alcon.
Thank you Mr speaker I know the
members of the committee will be
very happy to hear this Nibert
veterans and military affairs
will not need to nine but we
will be busy Thursday thank you
Mr speaker members and.
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you Mr speaker house
health and Human Services
Committee will meet tomorrow at
eight thirty we will finish
hearing house bill two thirty
seven and then move on to the
rest of our agenda.
Representative.
Representative Thomson.
Thank you Mr speaker I think
it's going to personal privilege
thank you.
My my my baby turns thirty years
old today his name is Eric and
he's the one you all hear about
the one with he's in a group
home and we haven't been able to
see him for several months so
I'm missing him terribly and
wishing him a Happy Birthday.
And Mister speaker your consumer
and public affairs committee
will meet ten minutes after we
leave the floor.
For instance.
I am not hearing.
Representative Lewis.
How state government elections
and Indian Affairs Committee
will meet tomorrow morning at
eight AM sharp thank you.
Members
and assets.
From Bernalillo.
Incentive
will cease distracting the
foreigner.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
I move.
This is on live in their.
