Present.
Representative Eli your.
Representative Gallegos air.
Representative night Burt.
I'm here and we are ready for
house joint resolution six.
Representative Ortez.
I came here.
Representative Rehm error.
Representative Zamora here.
Madam vice chair.
Madam chair.
There.
Madam chair with that we have
eight to members present we have
a quorum.
Thank you I'm Representative Ely
and neighbors Health resolution
six base began.
Madam chair no got go ahead Greg
I'm sorry please okay.
Thank you madam chair house
joint resolution six is and that
is a very similar piece of
legislation to house bill one
thirty nine that was passed
three weeks ago by this
committee.
Calls for a constitutional
amendment.
To.
Because the governor to bring us
and the special session in the
of that she desires to extend
emergency beyond ninety days.
This provision is a
constitutional amendment because
it requires a three fifths
majority to modify alter or
terminate the order other than
that it is identical to house
bill one thirty nine and with
that I'll turn it over there by
co sponsor Representative what.
I'm madam chair the the only
thing that I would add is is
that's correct I I've talked
about doing amendment before
Judiciary on the time limit but
Representative divers absolutely
correct what what I am going to
suggest a little unusual but
madam chair I would suggest we
not to go to public comment on
this because we've already had
public comment on the bills and
in the interest of time we're
not gonna really learn anything
from public comment at this
point we kind of know where the
positions are both sides but
obviously madam chair that's up
to you but I want you to know
that from our point of view and
I've talked to representative
Nibert about it we just like to
see this get out of this
committee and go to Judiciary so
with that madam chair I'll turn
it back to Representative night
for.
Madam chair I I think we can go
straight straight to about
census matters already been
handled completely by this
committee other than the
constitutional
aspect of it and put it before
the voters.
Thank you Representative says so
I I I don't mind not taking
public comment but let's at
least get the pole going and
we'll keep that open for fifteen
seconds and then we can go to
the committee so I sure recent
we can get the pull up.
Since we're talking about voting
here let's give our audience a
chance to tell us whether they
are in support or opposition of
house joint resolution six
always open.
Okay great so we have at nine
folks in favor and I against and
so back to our committee members
Representative Chasey.
Thank you madam chair.
Let me start the video it if if
my band with is a problem and it
turned my video back on.
Okay thank you.
So I'm.
Madam chair and representative.
You know I didn't vote for house
bill one thirty nine.
Because I don't believe this
legislature has the structure.
To.
Act.
In a manner that is.
In addition to and.
Responsive enough because of the
way we are structured we have a
part time legislature we have
No staff.
Except when we're in session.
We we simply we simply don't
have what we need to be able to
weigh in on a public health
emergency.
And you don't we're not unless
we're following the news and
reading with the
the scientific reports we don't
have staff analyzing science.
For us and.
I know that Representative.
Ely has proposed.
Solution and wants to look at
all things together but I fear
that what we're going to have
these things are on the floor
it's just a free for all about
everybody's complaints about
everything that has happened
during the pandemic.
No there was.
There was congratulatory
dialogue last night about the
state of Texas opening up.
Well you know I hope it works
out better for them their power
grid.
I do think we.
Legitimately state legislatures
have a role as a as an equal
branch of government but I am
really
I'm very I'm.
I'm doing this right now when
people are still
Quite frankly suffering pandemic
fatigue which I am also I
appreciate that.
And every time it seems to me
the but we have a bill to help
people who suffered during the
pandemic all we hear is how
business offered and I think
it's wrong not to have
recognized the efforts of the
legislature and the governor and
even the courts to try to
mitigate those effects to
provide relief.
So I I just.
That's my two cents worth and
I I would like some kind of
insurance at some point in time
at the debates going to be
about.
Principal and not by tax.
Actions that the governor we
felt compelled to take based on
sorry thank you madam chair
madam chair back COVID.
Thank you Representative yes
Representative Nibert you may
comment.
Madam chair I'd responded in two
ways number one for me this is a
very principled measure
It was highlighted maybe by this
pandemic but certainly why
effort moving forward is not to
look in the rearview mirror it's
certainly not to cast any
dispersions on in eight
decisions are made it's simply a
recognition that I believe.
But the legislative branch of
government as a constitutional
role to play.
It.
It it good times at bat at one
of those is we are the only body
in government.
And.
Access to treasury.
And.
We have that constitutional role
to play we also have an
important role of bringing the
voices from each of our
districts to this capital and
express the concerns the desires
the fact of the infants in our
communities lives M. and try to
see if there's some common
ground to build upon the next
thing I would say is this
measure.
If we're still in this pandemic.
Two years from now we got much
greater problems and and.
I IT it's my hope that neither
the bill nor this constitutional
amendment will have anything to
do.
With any orders that have been
issued by this current
administration impact I hope
that so we don't see another
emergency that last beyond
ninety days of for the rest of
my life and maybe I hope for for
our children and grandchildren
slides but but
I think that when we have one of
these does occur.
The legislative branch of
government has a duty to the
citizens of New Mexico to
fulfill and.
In my mind we have
delegated too much authority to
the executive with the
emergencies others for emergency
acts.
We've delegated too much
authority to the executive yeah
and in that regard yeah some of
this is following some of that
back I know it's a.
But more importantly we hold the
purse strings and we have not
done any.
In my part of the past the
general budget we've not done
anything to specifically look at
the
issue of appropriated monies to
deal with the emergency.
And so that that would be by
response and it is my hope and I
will use whatever tools I have
in my office to make sure that
they're focused on the what on
the constitutional issue and not
on looking in the rearview
mirror as I would call.
Madam chair that those a bit by
response to Representative
comments of the madam chair and
judiciary.
Representative Representative
right.
Thank you madam chair I move a
do pass on house joint
resolution six.
Thank you we have a motion for a
day pass by Representative Rehm
and a second by Representative
Eli well madam chair before we
get to session okay do we have a
second.
All make the second madam chair
but I'd like to make a comment
okay so we have a motion and a
second back to discussion
Representative Eli I'll be very
brief and I appreciate the
motion from Representative green
because I do want to respond to
this is I hear too thanks and
they're both legitimate on the
part of Madam chair
representative Chasey the first
is is that the legislature you
know.
Isn't
in a position where you know
we're professionalizing we're
staff to be able to do that I'm
hearing that concern which is
why I think it be valuable have
the discussion along with the
house joint resolution that
relates to a commission that
would set provided showers
because I do think that's a fair
criticism that the legislature
has to be in a position to be
professionals to do it so I hear
that.
But I also agree and I just want
to say I I forcefully very with
Representative Nighbor that we
have three branches of
government.
And that we have them for a
reason this was in no way to
fall to the governor's this was
our fault we gave this proper
way and I agree with
Representative Nyberg madam
chair that if we're going to
have the system of government
with three equal branches of
government we got act like.
The legislature fills the role
of not just oversight of all the
finances obviously but also as a
safety valve for our
constituents Representative
Nibert alluded to this that
You know when we get calls now
from constituents there's not
much we can do we just have to
turn it over to the governor's
office.
With no input on that we had a
session there would be a
mechanism from which
constituents would be able to
complain rightly or wrongly and
I want to make the assurance to
our Representative Chasey.
That if this becomes a debate
over you know what's happening
or what's going on on the floor
I'll be ready we'll all be ready
and we will you know will have
factual figures will be ready to
go I'm hoping like
representative Nibert that we're
not gonna have to do that this
gonna be a limited debate to
having are equal powers and
climbed back our authority in a
responsible way and I'm with
Representative divert that I
don't think it's going to come
up during this pandemic but if
it ever happens again the
legislature will be in a
position of having to be called
back in and more so I think it
is a sensible compromise and I
want to say that madam chair and
and and Representative to all of
you that Representative Nibert
and I have worked in a very I
think bipartisan fashion to
Taylor something that meets kind
of both of our needs but it's
both based on a similar
principle that has nothing to do
with who's governor it has to do
with the legislature and the
fact that we're legislators and
have that responsibility so
thank you madam chair and I
appreciate you letting me talk.
Thank you Representative and
like George K. also voted
against the prior bill that you
had for several reasons not only
because we're part time
legislature or but because
sometimes decisions have to be
made
You know just and.
Instances and I I mean I know
this deals with you know
something going over ninety days
but I think.
Us being not fully equipped to
learn about the issues I mean
right now we're happily the
sixty day session
because we don't always have
that capacity to get educated on
every single thing and when we
yes so I'm just gonna and there
but I will be voting for this
but I appreciate your intent and
the clerk to call the roll.
Representative Chasey.
Now what I'd like to explain my
vote at the end.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Gallegos know
what I like to expand my vote.
Representative night birch yes.
Representative Ortez no.
Representative Rehm yes and I'd
like to explain more about.
Representative Zamora.
Yes and I'd like to explain
level.
Madam vice chair.
Madam vice chair Johnson.
Madam chair.
No.
Madam chair with that we have
one excused for in the
affirmative and for in the
negative.
Great thank you before we call
the vote Representative Chasey
to explain your vote.
I'm not sure what I was going to
say is I I figured this was
going pastor Judiciary because
house bill one thirty nine did
I'm I.
I would reserve judgment
ultimately on this measure.
Based on the outcome of the
joint resolution looking at a
professional legislature so.
That's what I wanted to say
madam chair.
Thank you Representative
Representative with bankers
thank you madam chair you know
I'm very conflicted because
I do feel that
since we are not in in that
session but sixty or thirty days
it's hard to make those hard
decisions and we need somebody
who is you know leading the
charge and it isn't it and is in
charge that you will are not are
here but I also believe that we
we need some accountability to
our constituents as to what's
going on we need to have a
dialogue and as Representative
Chasey said we just don't have
the means right now would not
having ongoing staff of just not
having that information readily
available to make some of those
decisions and so I think we need
to move forward with getting a
some type of commission and I am
not usually I'm not somebody
that wants more more boards and
commissions but I really do
think that this could this
conversation needs to continue
and we have it set up correctly
so we can move forward I think
that's a really important pieces
that we we've got to start
getting into that place where we
are but we're accountable to our
constituents but we don't have
the tools are always readily
available to be making those
decisions so at this time I'm
holding back but I would like to
see the concept move forward so
thank you.
Thank you representative
Representative Rehm.
The chair you know when we look
at these emergency statutes and
their need to you know I'm I'm
not being critical of the
governor
when you look at these statutes
what you see is a mention like
riots and forest fires and when
it's it was originated I think
the legislature.
Looked at short term and didn't
envision a long term
of problems such as we have now
and certainly the governor needs
to have the authority to act
quickly on an emergency.
We always get called back into
special sessions are you know
we'll we'll have one at least
this year or on redistricting.
But last year we had to do so
that goes with the job of being
a legislators so I don't think
it's.
No reasonable to go ahead and
say you're going to involve the
the legislature because they
have the purse strings in the
decisions anyway that's why I
voted yes thank you madam chair.
You madam chair.
Because I'm hearing the
discussion maybe one more I'm
want to make another attempt I I
would like to make a motion that
we move this out of committee
with a no recommendation rather
than to do pass and all sectors
Judiciary.
Let's go ahead and let
Representative Zamora explained
his vote and and go to that
Representative Zamora.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee this is the first.
Emergency that I've seen like
this hopefully it'll be the
last.
But my concerns and it our that
we we weren't given a chance to
even take.
Some kind of answers backed our
constituents and and I've heard
some of the prior testimony that
that we don't have the tools but
we are the tools for our
constituents.
And one when the phones are
being answered in Santa Fe.
The people were getting answers
and they would call us.
And we couldn't we can explain
anything so it was what the
governor's doing period and the
governor would still be involved
in all these decisions but we
would have some answers and some
input.
And and the debate is different
than than than the scientific
facts that come to the
governor's so I think the debate
would be good to help with the
facts.
And and move forward in in a
good way for the the
legislature's involved in it and
then our people that we
represent what.
Would feel better about it I I
think everybody I know everybody
for sure across my district
wasn't happy with the way.
Thanks move forward with this
pandemic and I would I would
like to see it a little
different where we could at
least get some answers directly
from the governor and stuff we
met in Santa Fe.
Thank you.
Thank you so we have a motion or
a did you pass with no
recommendation by Representative
Eli and a second by
Representative Rehm I believe
and for discussion on that
motion Representative Chasey.
Thank you madam chair what
representatives of more I just
that is what I
Was exactly expressing this is
what it's going to turn into the
governor did this without any
New Mexico.
And we want to go to Santa Fe
and we want to vote on it but we
don't have all the information
that the governor has.
So that is I'm I'm I was going
to vote for the without
recommendations we can have that
discuss the three matches and
judiciaire.
But I'm not happy with this
because I'm afraid this is what
we're talking about but let let
me just say that.
because Representative Rehm
brought up what maybe that
intent was in creating that
bills Senator Feldman was one of
the sponsors of the emergency
powers act she.
I actually can't remember what
Worked on it they went to every
corner of the state.
I'm hearing now mind you I can
understand that.
My I'm getting a message my
internet's unstable so I'm
turning off my camera thank you
understand.
I can understand that
We could not foresee this kind
of emergency because none of us
has ever seen anything like.
But.
They went to every quadrant of
the state and had public
hearings this was not
constructed up here in Santa Fe
on a theoretical level there's
certain theoretical level of
discussion in that we didn't
imagine anything up this.
Magnitudes and devastation I.
They went to every part of the
state and said what do we do now
they were talking about the
structure and function we have
now of the state legislature and
people all over the state
recognized that the legislature.
Was gonna have to invest the
executive with a certain level
of authority to respond and
that's what we do it so but I
just want to caution you about
How it's interpreted because it
happened right here in this
committee thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative and I
think.
Price because I was actually
thinking the same thing so that
And so with that is there
further discussion on the
motion.
Madam chair I would like to
point out that article four
section two does our require us
to come into special session
where martial laws to where and
that we are to remain in session
for the duration of that vent.
As a legislative body to deal
with our insurrections if you
will when we are attacked and we
can not recess for more than
three days under the terms of
article four section two of our
constitutional right I also you
know the the framers of our
constitution by the the people
that that put that.
In their recognize the role of
the legislative branch
I don't think they they
recognize that the state would
be declared emergencies for
other things are which would
which we did statutory here and
so.
I I again I just think that we
have very and legislative rules
apply are in.
Emergencies that are long
duration and it's up to us to
step up to the plate and put so
level thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative I don't
see any others and so now they
clerk to call the roll.
Representative Chasey.
Yes No rack.
Representative Eli.
I'm sorry yes.
Representative Gallegos yes.
Representative my part yes.
Representative Ortez yes.
Representative Rehm yes.
Representative some are.
Yes.
Madam vice chair.
Madam vice chair Johnson.
Madam chair.
No.
Madam chair with that we have
one excused seven in the
affirmative one of the negative.
So with that you have a due pass
with a no recommendation on to
Judiciary representatives.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you.
So next we have house bill two
sixty six we have Representative
Figueroa and her expert on
Representative please again.
You madam chair and thank you
committee.
as the chair said I am Natalie
Figueroa I am bringing to house
bill two sixty six I think it
might be slightly less
contentious than your first bill
this morning it is a teacher
recruitment and retention Paul
essentially and the core of it
came out of interim committee
information about how teachers
in New Mexico are prepared.
Madam chair sixty percent of our
teachers who got new teachers
who got licences in the last
year.
Attain their license through the
alternative pathway licensure
system in New Mexico and
apparently that has been the
trend the growing trend for the
last ten years and is expected
to continue into the future so
the alternative licensure
pathway is now are major way of
training teachers in New Mexico
and because of that.
Needs to be.
Programs that strongly prepares
teachers it needs to be
strengthened it was created as
an emergency measure it by its
title you can tell it is the
alternative pathway.
In traditional pathway of
teacher preparation that we are
most familiar with is that
student who does four years of
college in education there last
year involved extensive student
teaching.
That's how we change teachers
are prepared well now in the
state of New Mexico the majority
of teachers are being prepared
in the alternative pathway
licensure and that is a student
who has a student an adult who
has a college degree average age
is in the forties these are
often people who are coming into
their second career as teachers
and we want.
We need.
They are put into a classroom if
they have a college degree they
are hired as teacher of record
they are put in a classroom from
day one and.
They figure out how to teach
they take classes in the
evening.
In education or on the weekends
or in the summer couple years to
complete twelve hours of
classwork and that will
hopefully teach them how to make
a lesson plan.
How to manage student behavior.
Hello to assess what students
really understood and did not
understand the crucial core
pieces of teaching.
And districts are bending over
backwards to try and support
alternative licensure teachers
as best they can because we need
them.
Well and the they provide
mentoring intensive mentoring
mentoring how was after the
school day.
most of the time it might
involve a mentor coming in and
observing.
And then giving feedback later.
What the alternative licensure
pathway is missing.
The one thing that we can
identify and discussion to
strengthen it and support these
teachers.
Is a practicum an opportunity to
practice side by side with an
experienced expert teacher to
watch them do this and to
gradually take control under
that teacher supervision.
In the classroom.
So we bring this bill madam
chair because the students of
New Mexico deserve well prepared
teachers these are going to be
our teachers going forward.
We have to make sure there as
well prepared as we can make
that.
It's.
Our feeling called to education
at the mid point in their lives
many of them.
They deserve to be set up for
success they deserve an
opportunity to practice before
they're thrown in the deep and
cold.
In our school districts across
the state deserve stability in
the work force.
We call it teacher churn in the
Education Committee and then the
education world teacher churn
can cost a district about twenty
thousand dollars is the constant
turnover of teachers.
We have.
We know that we lose fifty
percent of our teachers and
their first five years because
difficult feels.
We know that New Mexico has a
shortage of teachers locally
this year it's a little better
than last year but the teacher
vacancy report for New Mexico
says that this year we still
have a five hundred and seventy
one classrooms of no teachers.
So we have to address teacher
retention and teacher
preparation.
In teacher recruitment.
How is this a recruitment bill.
Well.
If you cannot as an option.
Teach on your own cold go in
that first day and run that
world.
Or you give them the option.
Fifteen weeks you can practice
with an expert.
And then you can run your world.
No shoes the practice.
So the bill before you add that
component a fifteen week
supervised teaching experience
to the alternative licensure
pathway in New Mexico you will
notice that it is directed
towards the special education
teachers in particular and that
grew out of the desire to rather
than change the system for
everyone all at once to pilot
figure out how to work this.
With one group why special ed.
Because it's our second highest
shortage in the state because it
is a very vulnerable group of
students that require X. tends
to knowledge.
Special education.
Cover such a broad range of a
session allergies that teachers
have to be able to handle.
Because it's a group that was
named in the Yazzie.
This group named in the Yazzie
K..
That is getting sufficient
education according to that
judgment.
For for for for pilot purposes
we're focusing on special
education.
Lastly you madam chair
As a teacher myself I am very
hesitant about mandates from the
state that are handed down.
And.
Has to work in all eighty nine
school districts of the state
because they are so so
different.
And one of my concerns is funds
are for this bill was how could
it work in tiny districts that
don't have the resources.
I teach in a yes we have a lot
of resources comparatively and a
lot of flexibility in how we can
move staff around.
So I reached out to a couple
superintendents madam chair
superintendent maryann in lake
Arthur where they have a total
of one hundred ten students K.
twelve and asked how could you
do this.
And I reached out to
superintendent Sam Sierra Sierra
who has five hundred fifty
students herself said how how
could you do this how can we
ensure that.
I want to be special education
teachers can get this
opportunity to practice.
Between us we generated four or
five different ways it could
work in those districts so I'm
confident that this bill can
work across the state of New
Mexico and I ask for your
support.
Madam chair Ellen burns dean is
not expert witness who is here
and can answer questions and I
would give her a moment now to
add anything issue things are
forgotten something thank you.
I'm just printing.
Madam.
Thank.
Yeah well madam chair members of
the committee I think
Representative Figueroa was
incredibly thorough I just will
make a couple of comments one is
that we can have alternative
pathways to teacher licensure
but they do not have to be
sub standard alternative means
we're we're creatively engaging
people who want to become
teachers and in order to set
them up for success as the
representative mentioned we need
to make sure they have some
practical experience my
background I have a masters in
special education I can tell you
learning how to teach.
Kids is very lax you need to
understand all of the
disabilities you have.
How to.
Appropriately and modified for
the different needs of every
single kid and I thank you at
this point because so many of
our special ed teachers are
going through alternative
licensure without any modeling
and preparation before they're
in charge of the learning of
some of our most I'd say
fragile and yet deserving
students I think it's a service
to them that we would add some
practicum to this and I've just
been so impressed with the
representatives
working really hard to do her
due diligence to make sure this
would work in all eighty nine of
our districts thank you very
much.
Thank you now let's go ahead and
get some feedback from the
audience and we will start the
pool.
If you would like to vote in
favor opposition of house bill
two sixty six as amended will
keep it open for another ten
seconds.
Okay great so we have I members
of the audience in favor and
zero against.
So if you would like to speak in
favor of the bill please raise
your hand.
Like to speak in opposition
please raise your hand.
Okay we'll go to the committee
now Representative Chasey.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Figueroa.
I I really like your bill I.
I I did start out as a high
school teacher and.
One of the things.
I would have of course I I
actually I have had traditional
licensure I what I'm training
and support I did student
teaching for a whole semester
and at the university of
Arizona.
But
I would have liked to have more
mentoring as I was.
In my first couple of years then
I went into special education I
got a masters in special at but
I have to tell you I don't even
think I was well prepared with
that in fact I think it would be
helpful frankly
No I've never talked to doctor
Grinstein about this but I think
also Michelin teacher should
have to learn to teach reading.
Because what what saved me was
actually finding a resource
specialist at in Albuquerque
public schools and she operated
a resource library and she gave
me a whole.
Wonderful set of materials
developed by the speech
colleges.
And
that was how I was able to begin
to help my students with their
work in other classes so
I I just think this is a
fantastic idea I I understand
why we did the emergency as it
were provisional licensing at
the time but that's really not
enough and I honestly think if
you want to retain teachers have
to feel confident.
If they don't feel confident
they're going to keep doing it.
So I really really like the idea
that's all manager thank you
very much ma'am.
Representative Figueroa.
Thank you representative
Representative Rehm.
Thank you madam I move it to
pass.
We have a deep has motion by
Representative Rehm says.
And we have a second by
Representative guy acres.
Is there further discussion.
Is there any objection to the do
passed motion.
Okay seeing none we will
Grant your do pass with all
members present voting in the
affirmative thank you
Representative.
Thank you committee.
Thank you very much thank you
next we're going to whatever own
Representative org has with
house bill one sixty eight.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I have to experts
like to bring over on Matthew
Stackpole red hatch great we
have Matthew there and I believe
Loretta is.
There is well.
Yes.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I promise there
will be no singing at the
conclusion of my comments.
this bill will will bring the
state of New Mexico in
compliance with the national
flood insurance program through
FEMA that program is really
important because that provides
subsidized flood insurance to
property owners renters
businesses in return for a
community adopting minimum
building standards inside
special flood hazard areas a
couple years ago two years ago
the national flood insurance
program talk to a many states
including New Mexico let them
know that we would lose our
eligibility for flood insurance
and other types of federal
assistance if we didn't bring
our flood plain management
standards up to the federal
standard will beyond so that the
need for compliance is not just
at the state level other local
participating communities who
rely on that national flood
insurance program
you know that if they're in
their twenties worst
noncompliant state development
occurs they could be placed on
probation or suspended from the
program if we don't bring our
standards up to that to the
federal level this you know this
is really challenging for
communities because but
insurance if they're not
eligible for that flood
insurance they may be subject to
extra charges they may find
themselves in eligible for other
types of assistance assist
federal assistance in areas of
identified flood risk that would
be financially disastrous the
state of New Mexico is
considered a community for the
national flood insurance program
at the national flood insurance
program purposes so we have to
adopt and enforce adequate land
use and development criteria
that are consistent with the
minimum standards we we put our
communities at risk if we if we
don't do this if we build in if
we build out of compliance with
the federal requirements
this bill brings our state up to
those federal flood plain
management standards and
continues our eligibility the
department of homeland security
and emergency management will be
responsible for.
The compliance oversight
adoption of rules and
regulations to implement that
minimum standards and the New
Mexico construction industry
division will have the authority
to review of permit and enforce
floodplain management
regulations on public buildings
with that I stand for questions
along with my expert witnesses
Matthew Steckel hatch.
Great thank you Representative
so let's go ahead and go to the
audience and if you would like
to vote in favor or opposition
to house bill one sixty eight we
will keep that open for fifteen
seconds and it's now open.
Okay great so we have seven in
favor and zero opposed if you
would like to speak in favor of
the bill please raise your hand.
The cold rich you are now admit
it.
I thank you madam chair
Representative I'm here on
behalf of the New Mexico
floodplain managers association
I am the chair of the board of
directors for that organization
we representative all of the New
Mexico local floodplain
administrators who are tasked
with administering the program
and making sure that development
conforms to those requirements
that were mentioned
One of the benefits of this bill
will help to close a loophole in
the development review process
that is currently occurring a
lot of the
Development that goes through
the state organizations and
under that construction industry
supervision doesn't necessarily
have to coordinate and perform
the requirements of their local
community.
However these local communities
are the ones who are being held
responsible for the development
in their communities and if
there is violations they are the
ones that are being held
accountable and also feeling and
suffering the consequences of of
that development and so the the
purpose of this bill and the
benefit of this bill is that it
will again allow for the
development to conform to those
requirements that are mandated
and it will empower the local
floodplain administrators to
better ensure that the
development that is currently in
their communities meets those
requirements and protects and
reduces flood risk in their
communities.
Thank you.
Thank you Michelle Kirby
Thailand you are now and made
it.
We'll have to and then on your
end thank you for giving us this
time and I'm a local community
representative I'm also a member
of the New Nash there the state
floodplain managers association
board of directors and I just
wanted to let you know that from
the community standpoint at this
point I don't even know when the
federal or state project is
managed by the state occurs I
have no input whatsoever in it
and then whenever I get audited
by the federal government on my
program they're like what why is
this the structure built here
what's going on with this I have
I have nothing to say I have no
control over it yes I so for all
of the consequences which
trickles into my community with
higher insurance rates lack of
access to insurance which means
lack of access to mortgages it
can become extremely
detrimental to a community
whenever you don't have the
ability to even do what what the
state itself is telling you you
have to do so this is a very
beneficial bill I hope you will
vote in favor of it thank you.
Thank you is there anyone else
that would like to speak in
support.
Is there anyone that would like
to speak in opposition.
Okay seeing none Representative
Rehm.
Thank you madam chair M.
Representative Ortez thank I am
and maybe I missed that there's
got to be a specific example
that brought this legislation
and I don't understand what the
problem is because when you
obtain a building permit the
first step is a hydrology report
and that tells you whether
you're in a flood plain or not
and if the drainage isn't
correct then you can't move to
the next step so I'm I'm not
sure where the disconnect is.
Madam chair representative ring
there there is a very big
example of the problem.
In I'd I'd love for my witness
Loretta at hatch to to to talk
about that.
Yes.
Madam chair of the members of
the committee.
Representative right you are
correct whenever eight.
Development of receives its
permit part of that process is
to go through a flood plain
review
but currently it is having to go
through the local jurisdiction
for that review of there is not
the process in place currently
at the state level to capture
state development that would.
Not necessarily go through the
local jurisdiction we have a
hundred and four participating
communicate NFIP participating
communities in the state.
That does not
cover all of the special flood
hazard areas in the state of New
Mexico what this is going to do
is this is going to help close
that loophole that gap in in
making sure that these projects
are getting reviewed properly
there's there's also been a.
You know it is a situation
where.
Terminating go to C. ID and
receive its building permit
without having gone through the
proper local channels because
it's just
Not the process in place to make
sure that that that box is
checked off and that's what we
want to make sure is happening
that we have a process in place
at the state level to make sure
that none of these are slipping
through the cracks and that our
buildings are built safe for the
public
so I hope I answered your
question Representative right
and it's not please allow me to
do so.
Experts.
Earlier County the first step
this is you've got to get a mask
of the sign off on it.
And.
Is so what a mask is Sarinana
for on it and then the state
would sign off on it.
Madam chair representative we.
Bernalillo county has a
wonderful process in place and
so that's how they're able to do
that and yes you are correct
they would get it signed off by
the local jurisdiction with
ministers that programs and then
it would go to the state the
state would see that it's
received that flood plain review
and then they would be given
their permit to build.
Yes if the local jurisdiction is
allowed to see those permits
prior to going to an NCAA ID and
date of our lab to do that
review that it would work the
same way as what you just
described Bernalillo county
however there are instances
where the local jurisdiction
never sees these development
plans and so that's the process
that we want to capture now on
top of that if you would be one
or the other Representative
right it would be if this
development receives is review
at the local jurisdiction what's
that got to the state to see ID
they would see that it received
the review it would meet that
staff mark it would go for
permitting.
If it did not receive that local
jurisdictions what plan review
then yes Sir that's where it
would.
J. it's review they would make
sure either got its review from
send it back to the local
jurisdiction or make sure that
maybe the contractor maybe the
engineer the developer hired of
certified floodplain manager to
do the review on that project
that taxed the box we just want
to make sure that that box is
getting tax for that review.
Does support all program or just
a bill.
Madam chair and Representative
Rehm.
This would apply to us any
development that is funded in
whole or in part we state funds
that is the the gap that we're
trying to close everything else
really does go through the local
jurisdiction is just legislative
agencies sometimes goes straight
to see ID.
And again Sir that's that's what
we're trying to capture here.
and expert.
One of the.
It's about a man after is that.
They are now I can't remember
not the number one or number two
landowner in Bernalillo county
because what they do is they try
to go ahead and find a flood
plain and then you have to
dedicate that easement over to
them is that kind of the plan
for the state on this or.
But.
It Representative Ortez of if I
may madam chair that is not the
plan Sir this is just making
sure that any development is
going to meet those minimum
floodplain standards they're not
trying to take over any of that
property.
Madam chair in experts.
A private individual who's going
to build something build a
business or a home he's going to
go to a mask and he doesn't have
any state funding and and then
he moves on the process you have
to come see you at the state
correct.
Madam chair representative right
you're you're correct this has
nothing to do with private
individuals that is already
there's already process in place
for that at the local level and
there's a whole other statute
that and gives municipalities
and counties the authority by
state statute to administer
their own program and that's
where they would come in and get
their review.
You're in expert if they are in
a flood plain and they have to
get clean and terms you're gonna
send them to the feds to go get
that as opposed to the state.
Are offering flood insurance.
Madam chair members of.
For clarification for this
particular legislation we are
only talking about a state
funded development what this is
but what this language would do
with the statute would do is
make sure that we are in
compliance with the minimum
standards of the national flood
insurance program which helps
the state to test be able to be
eligible to get an NFIP policy
or to certify that they are
eligible to self insure.
Thank you representative
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair
Madam chair and representative
do you think that's a.
Good.
Public policy measure for the
state to ceded sovereignty to
local governments.
Madam chair and representative
Nibert
I don't know what in particular
that's relating to at as far as
this bill is is concern can you
elaborate a little bit.
Well it looks to me like the
page two lines sixteen and
seventeen and.
Nineteen through twenty eight to
do exactly that.
I'm madam chair and
representative Nibert I'm.
I'd like to open this up to the
experts if they think that's the
case but I want to before I do
that
you know there are local
governments that have stronger
floodplain management
regulations on that and and then
then the state so we know what
this what this bill does it it
just it brings up the state
standards to meet the federal
requirements for the for the
flood insurance program
that's that's what that's what I
understand from this bill
but I I'd I'd like to to open
this up to you as to the experts
on the call on on the same with
me.
To address that.
Madam chair.
Committee members.
This legislation will not take
any of forty away from the local
jurisdiction
Representative Ortez is correct
in stating that yes a local
jurisdiction has.
There are higher standards than
the minimum then those will take
precedence over the minimum
standards that the state has
adopted.
And so madam chair and mismatch
you think that it's good public
policy for the state to see that
sovereignty to the local
entities.
That's what you just answered.
I apologize I I must not be
understanding the question.
Bester the staff will can help
with that.
And madam chair Representative I
I was actually going to miss
hatch there there's specific
examples of sort of where this
would apply and sort of feeling
that stop gap and I was
wondering if if you might be
able to to cite an example like
that for example.
We're like this legislation
would apply and for where state
buildings state funded building
is being built to perhaps in a
local flood plain and that the
local.
The current local standards
wouldn't apply to it and that's
the situation we're trying to
avoid for the future.
One example madam chair and
committee members state of I can
think of is that.
Recently
An elementary school was up
built in a local distinction
inside of us special flood
hazard area.
Without having gone to the local
jurisdiction first for
floodplain of review.
We in the local entities found
out about it they did try to
Coordinate with the developers
and the state on that and.
We did not get any cooperation
and it winds us through with
developments without needing
those minimum floodplain
regulations for that
jurisdiction.
But currently this is an issue
of female has come and seen that
this is out of compliance and it
is causing an issue for that
local jurisdiction and they're
asking why they did not
enforce their local floodplain
ordinances
and it was basically
Not that they didn't want to
they were given the opportunity
to.
It seems that the answer might
be that they don't have
jurisdiction
Madam chair representative.
I think.
That.
All right knowledge the desire.
For there to be some cooperation
between the state and the local
entities.
But I am.
Be a medley of close to the
state seating that sovereignty
over to local jurisdictions and.
I can see.
For instance in in
Representative C. L. page two.
You know.
That Representative.
Sure your baby take out those
subsection to.
Because the state if it wants to
build something I don't think
the local governmental entity
okay I'm or should be able to
impose its will on the state the
state can impose its will on the
local government but it doesn't
go in reverse.
And then paragraph the.
Madam says the state shall
comply with the most stringent
criteria of locally about the
community floodplain management
regulations basically the state
saying.
We're going to allow the local
governments to impose on us
whatever restrictions I want
that's not how it works and and
should work that way so I think
what the goal of this
legislation is is and what I'm
hearing it is a the floodplain
managers want to be part of the
process now this stuff's coming
but I would tell you that if the
state wants to build in the
middle of a flood plain the
state ought to have the
authority to do so even though
there may be some some
consequences of that and and so
I I think.
The state needs to be revised a
little bit just to include the
that subsection one but we to I
think subsection the base be
revised to say that the velvet
is owned or funded at all or
part by the state shop comply
with.
What when management rules
adopted by the homeland security
and emergency management
department and shall consider
the criteria of locally adopted
community floodplain management
regulations.
That way you're not forcing the
state doctor Allen to the local
governments but you're getting
what I think you want and that
is you you want some cooperation
between the state and local
entities and of the state.
Besides it's going to do
whatever it's going to do that
amendment and so yes but but the
they do so with with knowledge
and and you were cited some
examples of it strikes me as odd
because as I recall the tiles
county courthouse or at least
where the clerk's office says
there's a basement in that
building that's been flooded
time and again.
This bill right next to a little
stream up but if I recall
correctly Representative
basements below the crowd water
level and occasionally what's
more the county clerk at record
stacked up in in the basement at
all those books were ruined
because of the periodic flooding
and you know I certainly see the
need
for some cooperation but all
right I do not see how the state
it's I do not see how it's good
public policy for the state to
see that sovereignty to local
Jr local jurisdictions and so I
wish to take a look at those two
paragraphs maybe maybe do some
revision Strom thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Representative any
other members.
Is there a motion on the table.
I'll make a do pass motion.
Sorry I'm late second.
Great we have a deep has to and
a second is there further
discussion.
The clerk to call the roll
please.
Representative Chasey yes.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Gallegos yes.
Representative night Burt.
No.
Representative Ortez.
Yes I like to spend my vote.
Representative Rehm.
Yes I'd like to explain my vote.
Representative Zamora no.
Madam vice chair Johnson.
Madam vice chair.
Madam chair.
Yes.
Madam chair with that we have
one excused I in the affirmative
and three in the negative.
And Representative Ortez to
explain your vote.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I just wanted to
let Representative Nibert no
that I I I'd like to chat with
you shortly to discuss ways in
which we can you know make this
make this better so thank you
for your your comments are
appreciate them.
Representative Rehm.
my comment was one of the lines
of
Representative Ortez I think you
put in a clause in there that
the.
you know the local jurisdiction
can't veto the state's actions
thank you madam chair.
Thank you so Representative
Ortez by a vote of five in the
affirmative and three in the
negative you have a do pass.
Thank you next we have house
bill one fifty four
Representative Rubio we are
getting your experts on as we
speak so thank you for providing
that list in advance and please
begin.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Committee members of house bill
one fifty four is a a piece of
legislation that would create a
prescription drug affordability
board it's an independent body
with the authority to evaluate
high cost drugs and set
reasonable rates for consumers
to pay just like the state
regulates the cost of health
insurance electricity and other
critical services and utilities
the mission of the board is to
balance consumer affordability
with revenue needs of supplies
revenues that allow service
improvements just like utilities
my experts Is Serra man's and
and I believe she's already on
as well as Jane or about and all
handed off to to Serra first and
then and then to Jane and then
we can open it up to questions.
Great thank you welcome.
Thank you
I'm I'm sorry Maez I am an
advocate with Health Action New
Mexico and of I'm talk a little
about why are we why we
advocating for a prescription
that drug affordability board
the answer is because New
Mexicans are about twice as
likely the average Americans not
be able to afford the
medication.
Problem affects almost half of
our families with forty four
percent of New Mexicans stating
that they have faced at the at
the drugs at the pharmacy
counter at at the drug store
having to decide what to put
back a which prescription to
fill or perhaps not be able to
pay other bills because the cost
of the drugs so everyone knows
this is a big problem I think
The reason that a prescription
drug affordability for it is the
right fix for rising drug costs
for consumers lives in the cause
of the problem.
Your system drug pricing
manufactures the only cost that
that isn't regulated given
twenty years of federal efforts
to regulate and may have made
impact prices on your your
prescription drugs just seem to
go up and up.
Because the entire supply chain
is complicated and complicated
on purpose are many hands
touching medication from the
pharmacists to actually Hammond
the pharmacy benefit management
Representative manufacturers
wholesalers Holly from the
factory on to your pharmacy
counter so reforms that touch
only one part of the supply
chain don't really seem to work
that well we tried a lot of
policies to help people get
their medications at cost they
can afford it ranging from
insurance plans mandating
generics requiring mill order
refills limiting the co pays
monthly benefit manager model
where middle litigation for bulk
pricing for some patients
coupons rebate patient access
line when you were approach to
get a life and drugs people need
in their hands because drugs
just don't work if people can't.
This policy addresses the
problem without getting bogged
down in finger pointing along
the supply chain.
The pharmacist and prescribing
providers know their patients
are going to get better if they
can take all the prescriptions
just schedule but they can't fix
the system pharmacy benefit
managers can't fix at the plant
can't fix that the hospital
can't fix it.
Under the portability boards
approach to taken back to other
states and it doesn't outlaw
innovation outlaw profit for the
drug companies it's simply
regulates what consumers
suppliers government.
And the health plan.
Can charge for certain high cost
drugs medications evaluated by
the prescription drug
affordability board will meet
certain criteria for price
increases every entity involved
in getting directing customers
in New Mexico will have to sell
the drugs under that the payment
when the valuation process by
the board's requirements bill to
incorporate industry data the
cost of manufacture to make a
particular drug and to focus on
certain high cost drugs
for payment for all the calls
please drug balcony to
manufacturers revenue and the
need to New Mexicans to be able
to pay for the drug that we need
and use up a payment when it
actually increased sales of
these drugs relative to the cell
blamed excessive Drug not
portable I can for questions and
we need more that is national
experience topic it also press.
Welcome.
Thank you.
Questions that people have just
by way of a quick background
sites thanking you for the
opportunity to be here today I
wanted people to know that I
have it over decades worth of
experience in the pharmaceutical
industry and I spent many years
working in and around federal
and state governments my current
work is funded by the I'll
ventures really the Arnold
foundation specifically to work
with state governments
pharmaceutical cost containment
policies so it just wanted to
sort of preface everything by
saying that we understand it
everything that the
pharmaceutical industry does
it's perfectly legal even if we
don't like it you know there's
there's nothing that they do
that is wrong legally and and I
think we have to sort of
approach it in that way and I
think
For the prescription drug
affordability board is not meant
to analyze the industry at all
in fact I would.
The end result is that purposes
more drugs are school more
people have access on an attempt
to limit revenue because for.
It really is a solution to
affordability and access
Just a couple other things I I
would really
stress that there's a need for
public policy I'm sorry I
mention some of it but but the
industry the business model that
they have you see trench you
know any industry any company in
the industry that we're but we
were to start to solve this
problem is going to be punished
by Wall Street and obviously
companies have
you sherry due to their
shareholders so it's important
to think understand that it is
public policy also more working
together I'm cynical companies
can't collude to solve this
problem these are so so that's
why we're at a public policy
right in in in terms of public
policy I think is really
important structuring to think
about how to lower cost of the
product through the supply chain
early on you know distribute
this
portability throughout the
system alternately and I would
hope that rebates would start to
go in and are really really just
likes the rebate situation that
they're in today.
I think the public policy really
needs to focus on the notion of
affordability as opposed to
value a prescription drug
affordability board looks at
affordability and leaves the
question of clinical value to
health plans providers and their
patients which is really
important sort of division of
responsibility here.
With that I would just leave it
at that.
Thank you and Representative I
do see here co sponsor here
Representative excuse me Senator
Steinborn thank you madam chair
good to be with you could be
with the committee and my co
sponsoring get to be with the
experts as well I just want to
say madam chair I when I was
asked to sign on to this bill I
I took a long look at it I read
through all the materials and
look at what other states have
done.
And that sounds thought it was a
progressive sound idea for New
Mexico to try to get our arms
around.
the ever increasing cost of
prescription drugs by way of
background I introduced a bill
well for several years that we
finally got past several years
ago creating a pharmaceutical
drug purchasing counsel for the
state of New Mexico the pulled
all the state agencies together
to try to do cost containment
and
And that was held this kind of
an innovative solution in the
country to try to contain costs
but even with that it's that
limited effectiveness
At that you know because it was
a very open ended
Model for them to work with.
And speaking to the head of our
risk management division and
General Services Division which
purchases health care for all
state I asked him what he
thought of this idea of a board
and he thought it was helpful he
thought it could be good for the
state so I think that's really
important expert witness by
curiously because that is the
person that purchases healthcare
for all of our state employees
so I think this is a so when I
did that people are are are
supported and it would be good
for the state of New Mexico so
I'm proud to support it be a
sponsor bank manager.
Thank you madam chair and so
with that I will where we will
open it up to public comment
into the questions from the
committee great thank you so we
will open a poll for fifteen
seconds for those in the
audience that would like to
base our hands in favor or in
opposition to house bill one
fifty four we'll keep that open
for five more seconds.
Okay great so we have fifteen in
favor and twenty eight again
it's.
So let's hear from those folks
that are in favor.
If you will please raise your
hand.
Barbara make eighty you are now
and it.
Thank you I am actually opposed.
my name is go ahead and go go
back to you we're gonna take
those that are in support first
okay thank you.
Stewart rose you are now and it.
I'm opposed as well okay folks
please lower your hand will get
to you once we are on opposition
we're hearing from those in
support currently partial
Martinez you are now in muted.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee I am Marshall
Martinez executive director of
equality New Mexico.
The ticket people need this
legislation let's be clear what
queer and trans people need is
an overhaul of the health care
system as a whole we are clear
that we cannot for we cannot
reach that possibility right now
and allowing our communities to
continue to suffer Montoya is
feasible is that should be heard
of we're on the verge of ending
HIV and aids in the United
States because of one drug the
CDC has said that those living
with HIV who have successfully
suppressed their viral load your
daily medications cannot
transmit the virus to edge HIV
negative people and that seem
drug cannot be prescribed to
people at high risk of
contracting HIV is ninety nine
percent effective for preventing
them from contracting the virus
that drug itself costs two
thousand dollars per month where
entrance people are most likely
to work hourly low income jobs
and if they are fortunate to
have access to good health
insurance like myself the Kobe
for those medications is often
more than seventy five dollars
per month.
Thank you Richard Mason your now
and made it.
You madam chair members of the
committee my name is Dick Mason
I'm sure the action committee of
the league of women voters New
Mexico we have a strong position
that health care and
pharmaceutical should be
affordable for New Mexicans but
I also want to talk with someone
who's worked on incremental
reform around help help that
pharmaceutical cost in every
time you go out to prom to
benefit managers they do got the
insurance they speak up.
The pharmaceutical companies
they speak up an envelope like
Blackwell so we need some
comprehensive approach to.
Representative portable drug for
New Mexicans so we stand in
strong support thank you.
Thank you Nicholas court you are
now and made it.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is
Nicholas Cordoba I'm an attorney
at the center along poverty we
have center stand in strong
support of H. B. one fifty four
all every missing deserves
access to affordable medications
and as with every other area of
health care the lack of
affordability remains a
significant barrier to many New
Mexicans who need prescription
drugs.
H. B. one fifty four would
provide relief to thousands of
New Mexicans by establishing a
prescription drug affordability
board which would be tasked with
containing costs for
prescription drugs insuring that
patients can afford the purchase
their medications and also
making sure large drug companies
can no longer get away with
runaway costs more more Mexicans
can't afford their medications
in that same vein we cannot
afford to let this opportunity
to help New Mexicans for their
medications go by thank you
we're to to pass.
Thank you Christina Caffrey your
now and it.
Good morning thank you my name's
Christina Caffrey I live in
Albuquerque I was born of the
very rare genetic disorder
called go she's disease and for
thirty years yes thirty years
the medication that I take for
this costs more than three
hundred thousand dollars per
year made by a company named
Genzyme and it was actually
publicly funded research at the
NIH that first led to the
development of a treatment for
this disease in the early
nineties but that was given away
to tons I'm and now after small
changes to the original
treatment since I'm still
markets a derivative for more
than three hundred thousand
dollars a year so my life saving
medication costs the same as a
house or fifteen cars and all
because I simply lost the
genetic lottery and up at
companies like to point to high
it I research costs but Jensen
has more than recouped its
research costs and it up
profited from publicly funded
research and it looks like I'm
out of time but if you support
this bill.
Thank you we have engine.
Jan Henrik with A. R. P..
You're now in meeting.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Jane hammer
I'm a volunteer advocate with a
a RP New Mexico and I live with
multiple sclerosis MS I take a
drug to help manage my in mass
that cost me dearly a hundred
thousand dollars each year and
I'm responsible for about ten
thousand dollars that cost I
know the struggle that many New
Mexicans space trying to pay for
their prescription drugs drugs
only work if you can afford them
the price of the mass treatments
doubled from twenty eleven to
twenty twenty it's time to hold
big drug companies accountable
A. A. R. P. is working across
the country in that effort with
this and other initiatives to
stop our excrete we stand in
strong support of H. B. one
fifty four and urge you to pass
drug pricing reform to keep
prescription drugs affordable
with a do pass but thank you.
And we have Health Action New
Mexico you are now and it.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Barbara
Webber and the executive
director of Health Action New
Mexico.
We stand in store well.
We recognize that with forty
four percent of New Mexicans in
a poll this year showing that
reporting that they cannot
afford the medications that
because of cost that they skip
medications or they simply leave
medication prescription on the
shelf again because of cost the
cost to the state is great not
only in terms of the health care
that people don't get are the
interrupted health care because
they can't take their
medications and that leads to
more severe consequences in cost
the system more money but in
addition to that drug costs as
the only cost center that is not
regulated.
Continues to escalate the
overall health care costs for
our system and
I believe the bill rates
actually
one costs that says.
One cost that they say is that
that research and development
but more money is spent on
marketing directly to consumers
than it is to on innovation and
research and development so we
encourage New Mexico to take
this forward step along with
other states and set up a a
prescription drug affordability
board please support but what
bill thank you.
Thank you Bill Jordan your now
and maybe.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Bill Jordan
representing New Mexico voices
for children.
I suspect that we are all in a
bit of a love hate relationship
with big pharma and drug
companies right now we love
their amazing work to get these
vaccines develop so rapidly and
safely but when we go to fill a
prescription the outrageous cost
just don't seem to be justified
especially when we're reading
that people in other countries
are often paying much less for
prescription drugs than our own
copays.
This bill is simply a way for
you to let your constituents
know that you're doing your due
diligence to get them the best
health care at the best possible
price thank you.
Thank you current record you are
now unmuted.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee my name is correct
on the director Liz from
advocacy ministry of New Mexico
within advocacy ministry also
speaks on behalf New Mexico
conference of churches we too
are here today to offer our
strong support for H. B. one
fifty four.
As you heard this is simply and
it this is basically an issue of
portability and access and we
believe that this bill addresses
a barrier that New Mexicans
faced in sustaining their own
health personally as others have
stated I to have been in a
position in my life where I have
not taking prescribed
medications because of their
cost even when covered by
insurance so for those reasons
and for the all the reasons
previously stated by the experts
in previous proponents I urge
your support for H. B. one fifty
four and I thank you for this
opportunity to speak.
Thank you Andrew Baker you are
now and it.
Hi can you hear me we can.
Hi my name is Andrew Baker and
I'm a registered lobbyist with
Health Action New Mexico as well
as a recent graduate at the UNM
college of population health.
I urge this committee to pass
this bill because prescription
affordability has a strong
effect on health outcomes if you
need a drug that's too expensive
you don't have the option to
shop around for a lower price
because there are so many
alternative treatment options
that are not backed by evidence
there are often people who seek
out ineffective snake oils and
end up paying more for something
that doesn't help them.
Most spending by drug companies
as Barbara mentioned goes to
advertising rather than research
and development and should not
be up to consumers to pay for
increases in cost of drugs to
increase advertising the US is
also one of the only countries
that allows advertising for
prescription drugs we're paying
more to sell these drugs to our
own people and it creates a
pressure to prescribe that
requests to quote ask your
doctor about this drug puts them
in a position where they have to
manage the risk of prescribing
unnecessary drug versus a huge
risk of not prescribing a drug
to the one case in a thousand
where the patient could die
into.
That creates an adverse
incentives and I believe that
that's something that could be
mitigated by this bill thank
you.
Where you.
We are going to opposition.
Please raise your hand.
Curler and M. you are now and
it.
Good morning madam chair and
committee members it's Leri
Sonntag here on behalf of New
Mexico business coalition NBC
opposes health the one fifty
four because it helps a simple
solution to prescription drug
costs but has numerous
unintended consequences for our
state imposing arbitrary price
cuts on drugs overlooks the fact
that not all companies being
targeted by this legislation a
pharmaceutical bio
pharmaceutical giants summer
small research businesses
developing future life saving
drugs and therapies.
Bio pharmaceutical industry our
state is a vibrant and growing
sectors supporting twelve
thousand five hundred jobs the
sector generated over one
hundred forty three million in
state and federal revenue in
twenty nineteen we applaud the
efforts of lawmakers to tackle
healthcare costs but H. B. one
fifty four was developed without
key stakeholder voices we are
need to reject this bill at this
time and going forward to
include those who will be
severely affected by small rural
pharmacies thank you.
Thank you Steve you are now and
muted.
You'll have to press star six
nine to a new on your end.
Right now we can.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Steve corn and the director
of governmental relations I can
international cancer advocacy
network testified in opposition
to the H. B. one five or I can
is a five oh one C. three
non profit organization based in
Phoenix Arizona helping late
stage cancer patients throughout
the country provide clinical
trials promising drug therapy
every day we help patients
including in New Mexico deal
with the struggle finding the
right drugs at the right time
reporter projects on behalf of
our New Mexico patients we
strongly oppose the G. one five
point price controls established
by HB one or almost certainly
reduce patient access to
critical drugs will also reduce
the development of new life
extending life saving drugs
because it will reduce
investment in research for these
reasons we respectfully urge a
no vote on H. B. one five four
two just consideration of
alternatives that will more
actively reduce drug costs what
pro preserving access to
protecting the research project
thank you.
Thank you days and weeks your
now emitted.
Morning madam chair members the
committee Jason Weaks were
registered lobbyists from open a
door six we manufacture among
other things diabetes drugs of
the city medications and the
reality is that a lot of the
medications that we and other
pharmaceuticals manufacturer are
critical to treating patients
and create coming up with
innovative schemes in which we
can treat these are both chronic
illnesses and temporary
residence and the your
investment is required in order
to help these drugs and the
reality is that the unintended
consequence of this bill is that
it imposes price controls that
could limit access to drugs
access these drugs is absolutely
critical for numerous patients
who are facing this is and we
think there are a lot of better
ways actually address access to
drugs and improve access to
those drugs in affordable
mentors so for those reasons we
stand opposed this legislation
thank you.
Thank you.
You are now and it.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name Mr
center and I'm here today on
behalf of the pharmaceutical
many factors of America or
important farmers concerned a
bill could jeopardize patient
access to prescription medicines
they also recognize the role of
other actors in the supply chain
and bypasses other solutions
that would bring savings to
patients immediately the bill
caps prescription drug prices
within the supply chain which
could have unintended
consequences for patient access
such as a pair cannot obtain
that there be at the state's
upper payment limit and or
pharmacy or provider cannot stop
the drug because it cannot
obtain the drug at the upper
payment limit not only could
there be significant
consequences of the state airs
and setting an upper payment
limit there's and there's no
evidence that this will save
money for patients because no
state is implemented in upper
payment limit the bill does not
capture the full range of
entities involved in the supply
chain that play a role in
determining how much a patient
pays for medicine lastly the
farm has offered to work with
legislators in the interments
listens of potentially lower
cost for patients including
passing through rebates to
patients and insurance well.
Thank you Madam you are now and
muted.
Thank you madam chair this is
damage are representing more
corporation I won't repeat the
COVID you've heard from prior
speakers I would say that Merck
is committed to working with the
legislature's to an examination
of costs and prices throughout
the supply chain however we note
that the responsibilities given
to the board as part of this
bill are enormous and there is
no appropriation that's not the
case in other states attempting
to do the same thing we're
appropriations in a million to
two million dollar range have
been made we believe it would be
best suited for this bill to be
rejected at this time to work
with all stakeholders in the
interim and attempt to do this
kind of thorough investigation
of prices at the entire supply
chain as suggested thank you.
Thank you Jason Thompson here
now unmuted.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Jason
Thompson I registered this this
for Sinope pharmaceuticals I
appreciate the sponsor bringing
this bill forward we do
respectfully stand in opposition
and for the reasons stated by a
farmer that you've heard
previously we do stand in
opposition to the bill thank you
ma'am.
Thank you our call your now
unmuted.
Alright.
Urinated.
Okay we will come back to him.
Ashley Ashley Wagner you are now
and it.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I'm Ashley Wagner
director of public policy for
the New Mexico chamber of
commerce we appreciate the
intent of what the bill's
sponsor is trying to accomplish
but are concerned that the
measure would likely limit or
eliminate access to essential
and potentially life saving
drugs for New Mexicans for
instance if a pair cannot
successfully negotiate for
payment therapy at the state
prescribed right are of a
pharmacy cannot stop the drug
because it to cannot meet the
state prescribed right over six
thousand medicines could be
restricted in particular.
Prescription drugs for asthma MS
non small cell lung cancer and
rheumatoid arthritis will be
impacted New Mexico acting alone
with arbitrary price caps will
ridges will reduce drug
treatment options for New
Mexicans thank you for giving me
the opportunity to speak today.
Thank you Charlie market here
now unmuted.
Can you hear me we can thank you
thank you madam chair members of
the committee Charlie Marcus
Representative a registered
lobbyist for you Eli Lilly.
Specter the sponsors and their
intent with this regulation of
we for the same reason sort of
been stated by others stand in
opposition to the.
Measure.
We believe that there are many
other considerations along the
supply chain the need to be
addressed and another
opportunities for adjustments
can be made and still accomplish
the goal that have.
Horrors of work such as this
concern that the price that will
be sent will be artificial and
does not take into account some
of the opportunities in other
places.
To deliver these reductions to
the patient thank you very much
we do stand in opposition to
this measure.
Thank you Tony Trujillo here now
and it.
C.
knowing what they're saying.
Tony you'll have to and then on
your end.
Thank you thank you madam chair
members of the committee my
name's Tony Trujillo I'm a
registered lobbyists for
strategies three sixty whose
client biotechnology innovation
organization is offering this
testimony in opposition biotech
recently submitted a letter to
the committee which goes into
great detail the reasons for
their opposition however I'm I'm
not just point out three points
that were contained in the
letter for your consideration we
respectfully oppose this bill
because it will not save
patients money but it will harm
the market for innovative
medications.
Number two the price Kate caps
make it harder and more
expensive for small companies to
attract.
The investments they need to
fund our indie and for and makes
it harder for larger companies
to justify riskier Wendy no
state has implemented a bill
like this and this bill is too
complex has not been given
enough debate during this
session for this reasons we
oppose house bill one fifty
four.
Thank you for making your now
and it.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Barbara
mac and then the and I spent the
last ten years on the board of
the American medical association
where they have me working on
drug pricing because that is a
major concern for physicians
across America and they had me
do that because I am a cancer
doctor and run a cancer practice
here in New Mexico this bill
would damage the end of the
supply chain for drugs without
making any difference at the
beginning so of the large
companies that manufacture these
amazing drugs that help my
patients would be still charge
their prices and I would not be
a able to pay them I can't by
the apple for five dollars and
sell it for for in state and
business so this would damage
the ability of us to deliver
care cancer care to patients who
often have no other options so I
oppose this bill and request
instead that the committee
consider working against the
pharmacy benefit manager bill
thank you.
Thank you rose you are now and
maybe.
Correct hello I'm I'm Stuart
rose and I'm the founder of the
virus Science Center in in
Albuquerque a business incubator
for companies in biotechnology
I'm also a member of the
bioscience authority of the
state entity that's trying to
promote biosciences in New
Mexico.
This is well motivated
legislation everyone wants lower
drug prices.
The problem is it won't work
price control systems whether it
be for pharmaceuticals or any
other product simply do not work
what they do is lead took to
reduction of supply and the
inability of people to get
medications there are better
approaches competition is what
drives lower prices for anything
and this is not a mechanism for
competition in addition this is
a national issue there Sanchez
said this would be the the would
be the third state to do this
kind of a thing what's going to
happen when there are fifty of
these it just simply cannot work
and creates an excessive
bureaucracy for our state that's
going to further Representative
Europe and harm our reputation
for being unfriendly to business
thank you.
Thank you Quinn Lopez here now
and it.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is come up some vice president
western sky community care Woods
dedicated to transforming the
health of Communities New Mexico
expression and anyways we
completely understand the
frustrations that everyone's
expression on his cost much
respect we stand in opposition
to H. B. one fifty four
scratches not been successful in
surrounding states scored
different situations The New
Mexico and health insurance
industry along with agencies
such as oversight HSD I see a
work really hard to assess and
address these challenges copay
study of your side demonstrated
that the industry has been
successful ensuring
affordability prescription drugs
for New Mexicans we will
continue to work on importation
options and develop targeted
solutions to expensive genetic
and biologic drugs issues
complex many say has made state
national international
components and we will continue
to address these challenges with
new innovations and developments
as prescription drugs of all HB
wanted for just not appropriate
solution to Mexico at this time
thank you.
Thank you we're gonna try our
call again.
Are to your unmuted.
Madam chair can you hear me we
can I apologize madam chair for
not being able to get my cell
phone muted last time madam
chair members of the committee
we stand in opposition to this
bill my name is our call on
behalf of the Glaxo Smith Kline
for the many reasons discussed
by everyone else who was in
opposition around the complexity
of the pricing and without
reiterating that I just want you
to know we really appreciate the
opportunity to oppose it but
would like to have this pushed
into the end from so we can get
each of those folks in the
supply chain around the table in
front of each other which is
been really challenging and
exacerbated during the last year
that we've all gone through so
we respectfully ask that you
oppose this bill encourage the
sponsor to deal with this issue
with all of us and then from
thank you madam chair.
Thank you.
It looks like that concludes our
public comment now on to the
committee Representative Chasey.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you very much Representative.
Rubio and I would Senator
Steinborn was doing heart
karaoke when he was presented.
Even look like.
Well not exactly you look more
like James Porter that
Anyway I will.
I.
I wonder if there if you would
like to address Representative
Rubio the.
Pretty persuasive.
Are given by the light.
Doctor back in any who's been
president of the American
medical association and the New
Mexico Medical Society and
yourself is a cancer drug that
we might be looking at some
unintended consequences.
So if you give you that but then
I also wonder is actually
something that a single state
can do or not need it really be
a federal solution.
Yes thank you madam chair to
address the federal piece.
I mean I I personally and you
might agree with this is that
it's really hard to get anything
done through Congress and so I
think what we've been sort of
having to do here at the
statewide level is really try to
address issues in it from the
legislature because the need to
to get this done is is so
critical I I understand the
concerns that people have
regarding what this more may not
do and and I can certainly let
Jane speak to the federal side
but
I mean.
I think the stories that I have
heard from people who are
struggling to afford their
medication it I feel I feel like
this is the kind of system that
we need to at least work towards
to really address a lot of this
I I I know that there's a lot of
threats that we've been hearing
for the last few decades that
formal pulao the of states
because a regulation these are
questions these are directives
that we've been hearing for a
very long time
I just want to remind the people
of the committee and the folks
that are that are listening is
that the the prescription drug
affordability board only affects
some high cost drugs so it
doesn't actually affect
development it doesn't affect
the biotech industry it doesn't
have anything to do with that it
just strictly is overseeing the
high cost drugs that people in
our state are having a really
hard time
addressing and and paying for
and you know all my mom has been
sick my entire life
and I at the the the issue with
medication has always been
around affordability and I think
what I find problematic is that
because so many who are
dependent on medication to live
art are so scared they when they
hear a lot of the scare tactics
and fear mongering because what
people are afraid of regulation
I think that's really what's
really putting me at odds with a
lot of the opposition is that I
mean where I'm happy to figure
out a way to address this but
I I just I I I worry that we are
scaring six sick people in order
to stop regulation and I think
in the state of New Mexico
should be should it try to
address it in some way shape or
form.
I guess I just wonder I I did
have
you know I've had conversations
with lobbyists who were in
opposition and
I I wonder.
It the ones that I talked with
said.
We could try to work on a
solution and I just wonder has
this gone to the intro health
and Human Services Committee and
and actually has there been an
effort in the past to address
these particular high cost drugs
which are staggering when you
hear the cost of them and yet we
don't want them to not be
available at all so has it
One areas where they have
actually madam chair work
together thank you sorry you
need to know it's it's it's
totally okay madam chair
representatives when we were in
health and Human Services all we
did have some very there's a lot
of what I believe intentionality
from the chairwoman from health
and Human Services saying that
this could potentially be
prioritized in the interim
depending on the outcome of this
legislation on Sunday afternoon
I believe Representative Fajardo
introduced we pass something on
the floor about it
Where there is I think a lot of
discussion that Representative
Kevin brought up as well in
terms of of medication and
equity and and really
challenging that that piece
legislation that I think house
bill one fifty four I could
really address and so
I.
To address that I I would just
say that I think there is a lot
of momentum there is a lot of
energy around this idea and this
concept because there are of
policy makers and and folks who
are heavily involved in these in
these in this work people who
are directly impacted them
alright that they personally are
are being impacted by the cost
of medication that we could
potentially have a very robust
up.
The
P. that that that could I think
not necessarily just addressed
the concerns of lobbyists and
the people who are making money
off of medication but more in
terms of how do we make of this
board one that functions in a
way that supports those that are
directly impacted on an everyday
basis who who who are just
trying to live but can't because
they can't afford medication.
Representative and and
Representative Chasey looks like
Senator Steinborn wants to chime
in as well.
Answer my question about the car
you yes I got a great deal that.
An answer to that question
Senator Steinborn the answer is
yes madam chair I'm here to say
that the rumors are true and
we'll out yes that you're saying
and ones later we'll see what
you can see what you got and
chair Chasey.
so I I did want to test your
really important question madam
chair I can about what we've
done in New and the potential
impacts because as a reasonable
question I think Representative
Rubio is is right these are kind
of the standard garden variety
of reasons you always hear from
the pharmaceutical industry any
time you try to reform them is
it's gonna cut our in the even
though the federal government
helps to subsidize a lot of that
research they spend tons of
money on marketing we this look
at other countries and see of
that pharmaceutical industry
consultor of the lower propped
lower cost to them so I will say
in our state we have tried a lot
of different techniques to
aggressively in lower drugs this
is kind of the new frontier it
seems to never end up because
the prices continue to go up I
would really and I would say
that this board itself.
will not be mandated at I don't
want to speak out of turn but I
think that will have the
flexibility as to how they
recommend price ceilings and I
would suggest madam chair if we
could lead change four bathrooms
kind of the leading expert speak
to this particular issue.
Sure okay.
So thank you senator thank you
I did want to speak to this
Pharmaceutical companies
participate in every market in
Europe and around the globe in
Japan and Canada where there's
actual national price setting
this bill doesn't affect
manufacturers list price there
wack whatever they do national
and this legislation financial
transactions inside the state of
New Mexico.
Around drugs for which there is
an upper payment limit.
So that is one point I wanted to
make in.
Arm has said that they would
threaten to withdraw from me
over a bill that means law being
enacted back in the early it
doesn't or maybe and they never
followed through on it.
We need to sort of do these
things without being too.
Well I'll just.
Requests you know the threats
that the industry would
intentionally harm patients
because they're not willing to
accept something that would make
their drugs affordable for
people as we sell more trucks
even with that set of facts they
still want to threaten our
patients and I find it very
upsetting that they continue to
do this that's the only reason
that there wouldn't be access to
drugs in New Mexico is
intentional.
We wanted to add on to.
Just when we're when we're
comment from the and I'm
certainly going to listen to the
debate here but
you know I've always I've been
concerned for.
From the beginning when I was
first elected with the
president's the lobbying power
of big pharma at the same time
right now I am so grateful.
For the vaccines.
That have been developed and.
I have.
They.
And you just recently and I it's
just like.
Such and such a relief.
I I don't want any.
Adverse effects because of this
I have had two of my dearest
friends.
Die
During cancer in the last five
years and.
One.
A bit longer than the other and
she was in I'm a number of
clinical trials.
In different states.
And today is your birthday
actually so I was thinking of
her today.
I was also thinking
Representative Armstrong
speaking about her daughter
Aaron.
And the number of clinical
trials she has been in.
So on the one hand I'm I'm
always.
An advocate for
four will health care and.
And as a right not a privilege.
But it's it's sort of scares me
when.
People who are providing.
Or attempting to provide that
kind of life saving care.
To and I know all of us have
had.
Dear friends who been in
clinical trials
Really really concerned about
the effects of that so I guess I
I I wish.
There were.
Perhaps an opportunity for
everyone to sit down and see if
there is a potential past.
Towards accomplishing the goals
of both sides that that's all
chair thank you.
Thank you representative
Representative bagels.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you a representative and senator
for bringing this legislation as
a social worker I to have worked
with
families and people who needed
access to affordable medications
and so I I want to make sure
that this is the vehicle
To do that and and I'm not sure
that it is so that you know I
wanted to start off by asking
Senator Steinborn I know that
you you talked earlier did you
an established I think it was in
Senate bill one thirty one
the entire agency pharmacy
purchasing Council to address
high prescription costs so if
we've already got that why do we
need another council.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative it's a good
question is there really
different animals
the council looks at drugs
purchased by the state of New
Mexico for constituents of the
state of New Mexico programs
exclusively and
And in its volunteer all the
they they certainly don't have
the authority that this board
would create so this poor
creates authority to actually
review review drug prices and
set up our limits after they
voted take public comment by the
way and they also that this
board also includes a council
that includes lots of different
voices but so it's really
counties it's a bit I think my
my.
Coach was to get everyone around
a table kind of the.
The ideal of what we talked
about your can't get everyone
around a table that's what my
bill dent said Hey everyone get
around the table compare notes
see if there's ways you can work
together and save money and it's
still a work in progress but
that certainly didn't happen as
aggressively as I would've liked
will still say it's a work in
progress but but this is kind of
a different model Representative
to actually aggressively.
You know set some upper limits
by the way other states I'm
thinking of New York are.
Taking of Oklahoma I believe
have done different types of
models where they were more
aggressive with what kinds of
drugs they would allow the plans
with how much they would pay for
plants pay for certain drugs so
so different states have
wrestled with the same concept
and unfortunately.
You kind of need to get
aggressive too aggressively
control these prices I think New
Mexico needs a more aggressive
tool.
Like this it is innovative it is
cutting edge but it's hopefully
that explains the difference
between that that sin the bill I
introduced the light I passed.
So madam chairman and senator
when you talk about the board
that you establish is voluntary
what would the make up of this
board be.
Well madam chair it's voluntary
but it's
their their powers are they have
affirmative powers that the
other group did not have the
other group said that they
should examine different things
but they had no power beyond
that I mean no one HSD had
powered make another agency work
important.
You know they just had.
Senator there do have today
which is to negotiate the best
they can
So what this does does it allows
this board that is voluntary
appointed to actually have
authority to set up or limits
for what these drugs what can
you can pay for for some of
these drugs if they decide on so
that's the big difference
voluntary boards but different
four.
The forty.
Thank you madam chair
not sure that we get to the to
the same place but I'll move on
so
The governor madam chair
submitted to the federal
government a request for an
approval to import drugs from
Canada it won't this essentially
be the same effect as this bill.
Madam chair representative I can
certainly get our expert as far
back to speak to this but from
what I am.
State I can I can go ahead and
and have her speak to them.
Thank you certainly.
Thank you.
So the importation of wholesale
importation is actually
different
Also importation potentially
would import more trucks.
Scripture before ability toward
we be addressing of the whole so
I importation is limited by
federal law so things like
insulin cannot be imported and
insulin is highly problematic
for many many this country other
biologics a lot of the cancer
treatments and things cannot be
imported so you know biologics
in other drugs at the secretary
my determined cannot be.
Really high cost things are not
eligible for importation which
is a very big limitation federal
law New Mexico has to work with
so this is complementary No Way
they're not they're certainly
not at odds in the will be
addressing the same things.
Thank you madam chair and and
thank you for the response
So.
Expanding of the bill is so if.
If there's going to be madam
chair fees charged to the
manufacturers and distributors
to support the prescription drug
affordability fund.
The governor general but it's
you know weeks bill that says.
madam chair with those with
those prices be passed on to
consumers.
Madam chair representative I'll
let agency for bath I'm speak to
this but from.
But no
there there it won't but I'll
let agency for that.
Certainly and here again
I can speak to how it has is
working out in Maryland so.
The based on page in assessment
would be slide is a very broad
range the funding is for us
relatively small organization so
Maryland has the same.
Funding for emitters set up as
the New Mexico bill and it has
wound up being calculated about
a thousand dollars manufacturer
in per insurer which when you
think about the size of the
global pharmaceutical company in
the billions and billions of
dollars transaction thousand
dollars it's not that much so.
They could try to sort of spread
that over.
All sorts of.
You know the product increases
but I think it would be you know
a relatively small portion many
product includes right.
Okay thank you madam chair
I guess what I'd like to just
put out there is I'm very much
in favor of the intent of this
bill and I would like to be in
discussions further discussions
on this
You know whether it the bill
passes along or whether it is if
we talk about in the interim
committees because I think it's
such a.
It's something that New Mexico
needs to to really have these
really deep in depth
conversations and I think all a
lot of the stakeholders of need
to have input we need to have
very hard data on how that
happens and so I would like to
to see those conversations
continue to happen but I I
commend the sponsors of this
bill and and the advocates to
over data so hard on it I just
don't know that it's it's fully
there yet in my mind so I'm
gonna keep it listening to
debate but I once again just
want to stress my appreciation
thank you.
Representative.
Representative representative
Ely.
Thank you madam chair
representative and senator can I
make a suggestion
I I because I'm hearing this
discussion looks like
you know bill is headed and kind
of the right.
Motives sent intentioned by
there clearly is concern that
people are not fully engage at
and I recognize the center and
Representative done a lot of
work on this already I guess
what I'd suggest to both of you
is hold this bill go back to the
interim committee come back next
year.
that I mean I'd like to make
that suggestion I don't make it
often but I do think on
something like this there's
enough of a concern I can see
the committee members I had the
same concerns that it just
doesn't seem ready for prime
time yet get close but not there
so with that I I I want to ask
Miss Sanchez what they would
think about just pulling the
balance of let's come back next
year and visit about these
issues.
Thank you madam chair and and
thank you Representative Eli I I
totally understand and and
recognize what I'm hearing from
many of you on this committee I
did I did talk to the advocates
prior to this Committee just to
sort of give them an
understanding of what may or may
not happen
Representative chairwoman
Armstrong from health and Human
Services during our last hearing
did state that she would
prioritize this issue in the
interim and I I believe Senator
Ortiz you know would do it as
well
I mean I I feel that if if if
this is the this is yes and I
would much rather that it be
done knowing with that there's
some intentionality of working
forward on this issue not from
just a lobbyist and
pharmaceutical centered notion
but not really from from the
place that we can have some real
stakeholders who need to be at
the center of this of this
effort that with the can not to
say that with the condition of
but that would really be my
recommendation moving forward
that that we're getting he bring
being be bringing people into
this conversation that it be
done with the people who are
directly impacted at the center
of that and by that I mean the
people who have to pay for these
drugs to survive.
Representative Nibert excuse me
Senator Steinborn and I don't
know if you want to also respond
as a co sponsor yeah well I
think we have to understand and
you know the the arguments from
the pharmaceutical industry
against a bill are always
emotional because people all the
all of us many of us you know.
Enjoy pharmaceutical all you
know treatments and and so.
You know workers waited by Hey
if you don't do it as as Jane
said it's about threat you're
gonna lose that having said
that.
when you get into the economics
of medical economics of
pharmaceuticals in the increases
something I've worked on a lot
probably more than most of the
Legislature having worked for
years to try to deal with price
containment you understand that
it unfortunately takes
progressive bold action to do it
the industry they were against
my other bills even sit around
the table and have discussion
I mean I could tell you very
stories even when that started
as a memorial that they were
opposed to that and so members
this committee we're on we're on
that panel so it was bipartisan
by the way I work with reform
Representative dandy so it's
just it's that's the nature of
this industry they're going to
continue to fight it they're
going to continue to fight a
bill like this I don't think
sitting around a table will do
it I realize it's a novel
concept for the committee I'm I
would I would suggest
alternately the best way to keep
the conversation going just to
keep the bill going
Because you know I think on any
bill that we do whether it's.
House bill seventy five or
whatever then they said well we
just need more discussion but
sometimes parties just don't
agree and I think this is one of
those issues unfortunately so
with that I I would encourage us
to move it forward but I'm gonna
really to for two the sponsor
who's you know this kind of the
pole position as work with the
advocate center and may have a
better sense of.
You know.
What you like to do so.
supporter decision there thank
you Representative Eli you still
have the floor I'm so madam
chair that was at thank you okay
thank you representative
Representative Nibert.
Madam chair as always I do have
a number of questions
But what I'm hearing is baby a
motion to table as is baby in
order about would save.
Be a lot of time and effort walk
through our service so I would
move that we we table our house
bill one fifty four at this
time.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representative Nibert to we have
a motion to table Representative
Nibert and a second by
Representative Eli that is a non
to bond hi debatable motion so
the clerk to call the roll
please.
Representative Chasey.
Yes.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative guidelines yes.
Representative Nibert yes.
Representative Ortez yes.
Representative Rehm yes.
Representative Zamora yes.
Representative Chasey.
Yes.
Representative.
Ortez.
Yes.
Madam vice chair.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Madam chair with that you have
eight in the affirmative and one
in the negative.
Thank you Representative and
Senator or Representative the
competition they would have.
Thank you.
I thank speaker
bend the hunt started doing that
he called Peter Wirth
Representative
I just as.
We've done that to all of them
and as they.
Really.
status that is an appropriate
title good to see you all again
thank you for your time thank
you.
Thank you both for your time I
really appreciate it.
Thank you and with that everyone
that enters our agenda madam
chair I by hand up
Representative Eli yeah I'd like
to make a motion we brought back
last time I'd like to make a
motion no I'm I'm a try again no
recommendation on house bill one
sixty two.
The committee substitute right.
Sure I make a motion to table
one sixty two.
So we have a motion to table
house bill one sixty two
Representative Rehm and a second
by Representative Nibert.
The clerk to call the roll
place.
Representative Chasey.
No to table.
Representative Eli to table.
Representative Gallegos.
Representative Gallegos.
Representative night part.
Yes the table.
Representative Ortez.
No to table.
Representative Rehm yes the
table.
Representative Zamora.
Yes to table.
Representative guy it goes.
Madam vice chair.
Madam vice chair.
Chair blue.
Yes.
Cool.
Madam chair with that you have
for in the affirmative through
the negative into I believe are
excused.
Thank you everyone house bill
one sixty two has been tabled
for a second time.
Of without that concludes our
agenda thank you everyone and I
will see you all later in
Judiciary thank you for the
public for helping to and
joining us today we are
adjourned.
