But the members without a
recorded vote.
Representative Alcon.
Representative local issue you
know.
Representative Alcon A. T. il.
Representative bash.
Present Representative bash is
here Representative bone grafts.
Representative will guide here
Representative Cook.
Representative Harry Garcia.
Is it is.
Representative Harry Garcia is
here Representative Miguel
Garcia.
Representative Miguel Garcia is
here Representative at a.
Representative ETA is here
Representative McQueen.
Representative Roger Montoya.
President Representative Roger
Montoya is here Representative
Pettigrew.
I know I.
Want to do is just I know.
The state is.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Representative Roybal Caballero
is here.
Okay members because close we
have a quorum.
Please.
Members please rise for today's
vacation offered to us by the
gentleman from San Juan
Representative Allison.
Thank you Mr speaker.
I will share with you my the
numbers
The.
Could also but it's in the state
on the dates are for women who
can go
where I can manage to talk to
you today.
The where.
By Senator you can show.
Image of controlled expected in
knowledge of the.
Of the the one that that any
question because of the loss for
the.
Some of these other he could
where.
The.
The card.
Where the condition of the on
second of funds and then having
the C. Google Inc.
It's not the same here the
funding for the house of the
public it's building tool and
that the where.
By.
The latest on that the needs of
the lost so I the one that the
queen of heaven hi costs with
the public it's just the
building code.
Senator.
Well
educated was on foot and it's a
visual.
Because of this legally was
honestly was honestly because
honestly.
Other.
Or has been for the.
Full for all the minutes
listening that has blessed us
with.
Thank you for the person's
safety that has brought us
together today thank you for the
moisture we are receiving.
Yes from complete blessings as
we continue to work for a fellow
man our communities and our
constituents.
From all corners of our great
land of enchantment we can work
together to plan for a better
New Mexico.
Different minds and mindsets
ideas to assist her father to
formulate these ideas into one
line one plans to progress one
Mexico one nation.
Yes blessings upon her family's
home we left behind to allow us
to do our legislative
responsibilities.
We also just blessings upon our
health care workers and continue
to be our frontline defense
against this terrible pandemic.
We also just blessings upon our
public safety officers our first
responders are more important
than our leadership locally and
nationally.
Let us go forth and we see
before us.
Hi this hello this.
This.
The above us.
This is for this V. is for this
V. this for this payment.
Thank you John.
With the gentleman from.
San Miguel SantaFe in Torrance
Representative Castellano please
leave us in the pledge of
allegiance.
And with the gentleman from.
Chavis Representative Nibert
please listen saluting New
Mexico's flag.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Good afternoon this is the good
afternoon members I move that we
go to the next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business no objections ordered.
Good afternoon everyone.
Today's the last day of bill
introduction.
So please remember if you have
any great ideas jacketed now is
the time to turn them in.
Also.
members we need to do another
refresher on how the voting
system works.
Service so please pay attention.
If we are on a roll call.
During the first five minutes.
you push the button at your
seat.
If you are marked excused.
You still push the button and
then you are no longer Martinez
using you are marked with the
test for being present.
If you walk into the room if you
walk into the chamber after the
first five minutes.
An attempt to push a button you
can't do that because the system
has been.
Deactivated and the chief clerk
is calling people's names out.
She only calls those who have no
response if you are marked
excuse she will not call your
name.
This was the topic of our
conversation several days ago so
this is another reminder that it
is not a flaw in the system
nothing is broken nothing is
failing to work or to record
your vote you see you know that
if you're in the room you're
marked excuse the chief clerk
when I call your name.
Annually to the marches excuse
on a roll call vote.
Any more questions please let me
know I'm happy to answer them at
any time.
The gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
we go to the next order of
business committee reports.
No objections were.
To read.
Mr speaker your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to Mr referred house
joint resolution twelve has had
it under consideration for thing
with recommendation that do pass
and it's referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Georgene Louis chair.
Mr speaker move adoption.
Transaction a favorable
committee report on house joint
resolution twelve all those in
favor please signify by saying
aye.
Calls propose nay.
Canadian forces up to.
Mr speaker your transportation
public works and capital
improvements committee to
is been made for house bill one
twenty eight has had it under
consideration point I was
recommendation that a do pass
an answer for the appropriations
and finance committee
respectfully submitted and have
a good review of chair.
Adoptions for speaker we're on
it I'm sure favorable committee
for house the one twenty eight
all those in favor please
signify by saying aye.
Also as nay.
Three point out to.
Mr speaker your transportation
public works and capital
improvements committee team has
been referred house joint
resolution one has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that I do path as
amended and it's referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted on helical Rubio chair
of adoption is there was a lot
of Shendo reported a committee
and house joint resolution one
to avoid because the.
The accounts are all.
The report the style title.
Mr speaker your labor veterans
and military affairs committee
team has been referred house
bill forty eight has had it
under consideration point it was
recommendation that it do pass
an answer for to the taxation
revenue committee respectfully
submitted and failed Lee Alcon
chair unanimous consent of the
committee pleasure together
acted upon the scene of a
reflection of the journals of
their act on individually
hearing objections order to
read.
House bill ninety four do pass
and then to the appropriations
and finance committee.
House bill one twenty six to
pass and then so the government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee.
House memorial three to pass
respectfully submitted of the
sale the Alcon chair.
Mr speaker murdered for.
United option favorable
committee reports and houses
forty eight ninety four one
twenty six and house memorial
three all those in favor please
signify by saying aye.
Well as was made reports
redacted.
Mr speaker your consumer and
public affairs committee team
has been referred house bill
forty six has and has had it
under consideration for the same
with recommendation that do not
pass but that house consumer and
public affairs committee
substitute for house bill forty
six do you have an answer for to
the Judiciary Committee
respectfully submitted Joanne J.
Ferrary chair finance consent of
the committee point read
together acted upon a single
vote and reflect in the journals
of their act upon individually
hearing objections order clerk
to read.
House bill fifty six to pass and
then so the government elections
in in Affairs Committee.
House memorial twenty four do
pass respectfully submitted
Joanne J. Ferrary chair.
The move to adopt we're adoption
of an unfavorable committee
report house bill forty six and
a favorable committee report on
consumer Public Affairs
Committee substitute for House
Bill forty six favorable
committee report on house bill
fifty six and a favorable
committee for House memorial
twenty for all those in favor
please signify by saying aye.
All this was named Canadian
point about that.
German Bernalillo.
The speaker move that we go to
the next order of business
introduction of legislation.
No objections were
there to meet.
House bill one ninety three
introduce representative
Sarinana Trujillo headed it and
get an act relating to public
education amending the process
for required criminal history
record checks requiring
confidentiality house bill one
ninety three introduce
Representative Sari√±ana Trujillo
headed up and get it.
House bill one eighty three
having been read twice by title
is germane pursuant to house
executive message twenty five
are ordered printed and referred
to the Education Committee
that's government elections and
Indian Affairs.
House bill one ninety five
introduce for representatives
black Hernandez Santana Crowder
and head at us and act relating
to property tax providing
flexibility regarding the
requirement to provide proof of
eligibility for disabled
veterans property tax exemption
house bill one ninety five
introduce for representatives
black Fernandez Saniona Crowder
and headed up.
One ninety five every minute
twice by title I determined to
be germane pursuant to article
four section five B. one of the
constitution order it printed.
And referred to the.
Labor veterans and military
affairs committee thence
taxation and revenue.
House bill one ninety six
introduced by representatives
Pettigrew thou lord and
Castellano and act relating to
public safety providing that the
law enforcement protection fund
shall not revert to the general
fund house bill one ninety six
introduced Representative
Pettigrew doubt board and
Castellano.
The one ninety six having been
read twice by title.
Determined to be germane
pursuant to article four section
five B. one of the constitution
order printed and referred to
the Judiciary thence
appropriations and finance
committees.
House bill one ninety seven
introduce Representative Dow and
act relating to children youth
and families department.
Replacing the secretary of
children youth and families with
the governing board house bill
one ninety seven introduced by
Representative Dow.
For one ninety seven having been
read twice by title is ordered
not printed and referred to the
rules committee.
House bill one ninety eight
introduced by Representative Dow
and act relating to rulemaking
prohibiting rulemaking during
that period he did a public
health order unless the governor
publicly sets forth the
necessity for the rulemaking and
an executive order declaring an
emergency house bill one ninety
eight introduced Representative
Dow.
One ninety eight having been
read twice by title is ordered
not printed and referred to the
rules committee.
So one ninety nine introduced by
Representative lands an act
relating to lines.
Requiring that the county clerk
of the county in which line of
mechanic or.
For a material then is recorded
shout within the ten business
days of recordation mail a copy
of the lean to the address of
the owner of the real property
income right and.
I will lean.
Providing for a fee house the
one eighty nine introduced
Representative Lane.
Never.
One ninety nine.
Having been read twice by title
is ordered not printed and
referred to the rules committee.
House memorial thirty nine
introduced by representatives
Ramon how Delco bear doubt lane
and black a memorial declaring
February fourth twenty twenty
two law enforcement appreciation
day and the house of
representatives House memorial
thirty nine introduced
Representative Rehm federal co
bear Dow lane and black.
House memorial thirty nine.
Having been read twice by title
and having been introduced by
Madam was it a pandemic of
Columbia.
Is ordered not printed and
placed on the speakers table.
Motionless acknowledge the
legislation.
House memorial forty introduced
by Representative Roybal
Conrado Memorial requesting the
governor to declare August first
twenty twenty two public
employees retirement association
day in New Mexico and
celebrating the association
seventy fifth anniversary house
memorial forty introduce
Representative Roybal Caballero.
House memorial forty having been
read twice by title is ordered
not printed and placed on the
speakers table.
House memorial forty one
introduced by representatives is
out brown black lane and death
of a moral proclaiming February
fifteenth to the bill twenty
twenty two New Mexico state
firefighters association day and
celebrating the association's
one hundred years of service
House memorial forty one
introduced by representatives
it's out brown black lane and
down.
House memorial forty one having
been read twice by title is
ordered not printed and placed
on the speakers table.
House capital of the request one
three seventy are hereby
introduced and referred to an
unknown location.
Legislative either.
House bill two hundred
introduced by representatives
Townsend Scott and Rod Montoya
an act relating to rules
requiring certain state agencies
to conduct a cost assessment for
rules that impose new mandates
on the oil and gas industry
requiring the development of
recommendations to reduce costs
to industry and a study of the
impact consumers.
Requiring reporting house bill
two hundred introduced by
representatives Townsend Scott
and Rod Montoya house bill two
hundred having been read twice
by title is ordered not printed
and referred to the rules
committee.
House bill two hundred and one
introduced by representatives
Townsend and Rod Montoya and
actuating to rules requiring
state agencies to conduct a cost
assessment for rules that impose
new mandates on industry
requiring the development of
recommendations to reduce costs
to industry and a study of the
impact to consumers required
reporting house bill two hundred
and one introduced by
representatives Townsend and Rod
Montoya council to one having
been read twice by title is
ordered not printed and referred
to the rules committee.
House bill two hundred and two
introduced by representatives
Townsend and Rod Montoya an act
relating to open meetings
amending the open meetings act
to include interim meetings
within its provisions house bill
two hundred and to introduce by
Representative Townsend and Rod
Montoya school to to having been
read twice by title is ordered
not printed and referred to the
rules committee.
House bill two hundred and three
introduced by representatives
Townsend Nighbor.
And Rod Montoya.
An active waiting to criminal
offenses providing that
knowingly.
Making a false statement on a
matter for which testimony as
requested and Legislative
proceeding constitutes perjury
regardless of whether the
statement is made under of
affirmation or penalty of
perjury house bill two hundred
three introduced by
representatives Townsend Nyberg
and Rod Montoya.
The
house bill two or three minute
read twice by title is ordered
not printed and referred to the
rules committee.
House Bill two oh four introduce
representatives Anderson is data
Allison Trujillo and Dixon and
act making appropriation to the
crime victims reparation
commission for sexual assault
services programs House Bill.
Two oh four introduced by
Representative Anderson headed a
Allison Trujillo index and go to
for having been read twice by
title I determined to be
germane.
Pursuit to article four section
five B. two of the constitution
I ordered printed and referred
to the appropriations and
finance committee.
House Bill to I introduced by
Representative Strickler Nighbor
Rod Montoya lane and Allison and
act relating to the environment
enacting the geologic carbon
dioxide sequestration acts
providing for the utility unit
is ation of formations for
subsurface Act sequestration of
carbon dioxide limiting
liability of owners of sequester
Asian facilities following
transfer to state ownership
establishing fees declaring an
emergency house bill two of I
introduce Representative
Strickler Nighbor Rod Montoya
and lane and Allison House Bill
to I having been read twice by
title is ordered not printed and
referred to the rules committee.
House bill two of six introduced
by representatives Baca and
Lara.
And act relating to public
education creating the secondary
instructors act allowing the
licensure and contracting of
secondary instructors requiring
satisfactory clearance of
fingerprint based background
checks excluding certain school
personnel out provisions house
bill two of six.
Introduced by representatives
Baca and Lara.
Thank.
House bill two six I've been
read twice by title is ordered
not printed and referred to the
rules committee.
We are injection legislation
does anyone have any more bills.
Memorials can be introduced
after today this is only built
the deadline for introductions
for bills.
Any other bills.
Any other.
Okay we're waiting it's fine I
if anyway this no problem I just
wanted to make sure that.
We get all the bills and before
we do that here bills.
Gentleman from religion have
built.
Right so that is fine we're in
no rush I understand there's at
least two more bills that are
being printed and jackets will
to standardized for minutes and
wait for this bill second.
Generally from Chavis.
For what purpose do you rise Mr
speaker point of personal
privilege.
we can do that on an
announcements so let's go back
to announcements miscellaneous
business the gentleman from
Bernalillo.
Speaker I move that we go to the
next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business no objections order
gentlelady from Chavis.
Mr speaker thank you very much
folks on you dis today.
This is very.
Yes full gift from the New
Mexico cattle growers
association.
It will keep your hands warm you
can work in them you can do all
sorts of things and most
importantly Mr speaker you will
not be leaving fingerprints.
Mr speaker there's also a story
about a young lady named missing
or as involved in all sorts of
activities throughout the state
of New Mexico she's wonderful
young lady and these like I said
earlier these gloves were
presented by the New Mexico
cattle growers association.
Mister Bronson corn and Mr
Lauren Pederson and Mr speaker
they may be up in the gallery
I'm not sure so if you see those
two gentlemen with us and let us
welcome you to the house and
thank you for the clubs.
The gentle lady from Chavis has
a long and sort of trouble
history of providing items for
members desks from
making other members candies and
red chili chips and others hers
and I'm afraid of these gloves
you're going to do nothing but
further enable some of the
nefarious conduct to the
generally from Chavis to be done
without to introduce our ability
to pay in the contact on the
appropriate culprit so you know
I am concerned.
But will just have to keep an
extra close eye on the gentle
lady from Chavis to make sure
that we don't have any candies
originally chips promo and in
secret through the use of fire
new gloves and Mr speaker
they're also really good for
removing tires off the cars.
Mr speaker I would also like to
point out to the body that the
motto if you look on the back of
it this is from a green from the
ground up and ladies and
gentleman that's what New Mexico
agriculture is all about.
He would get to enjoy the fruits
of our labor for breakfast
dinner and lunch.
Sabar.
And that's how it is set up in
the country Mr speaker it is
breakfast dinner and supper so
enjoy your gloves and if you see
these gentleman walking the
halls Dylan thank you Mr speaker
thank you very much.
Mr speaker on that are generated
just getting off the phone the
state police about my car the
gentleman from civil and
McKinley Chairman Akan.
On that point about to lead to
Mr speaker I just wanted to
remind of that house one time
there was a
A representative from Santa Fe
who will our is to date the
speaker his last two starts with
me I will mention his name but I
think I remember that first and
taking my children to send I
haven't forgotten you should've
used loves like that.
Thank you Mr speaker you should
talk about the the four
Representative Trujillo and that
way gentleman on.
used is nesting starts in the.
Okay the gentle lady from
Bernalillo Representative Chasey
Mr speaker how do you want to
handle introductions of our
interns who are not seated on
the floor with us you can
certainly introduce your intern
and I can just and to stand up
in the gallery and give us a
wave.
Speaker and members of the body
and had a really brilliant and
wonderful political excuse the
political.
Turn this week and from the
university of New Mexico she is
a senior studying political
science that's where I
actually went astray in my
introduction she's studying
political science and
International Studies at UNM
she's originally from Saint Paul
Minnesota and after graduation
she hopes to either teach
English abroad or get a year of
work experience before going to
graduate school I think she's
going to go into journalism and
she's excited to be helping out
this week her name is sue Hamza.
Welcome to high.
Gently sent.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
we go to the next order of
business introduction of
legislation no objections
ordered Clark to read.
House Bill two oh seven
introduced by Representative
Jason Harper and representative
James Strickler.
Act relating to taxation
providing a gross receipts tax
deduction for certain business
to business services house bill
two oh seven introduced by
Representative Harper and
Strickler.
Two seven having been read twice
by title I determined to be
germane pursuit to article four
section five B. one of the
constitution order it printed
and referred to the taxation and
revenue committee.
Thank you Mr chairman of the go
to the next order of business
committee reports no objections
order.
To read.
Mr speaker your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee tomb is been referred
house house health and Human
Services Committee substitute
for House Bill one thirty five
has had it under consideration
for seventh recommendation that
it to pass respectfully
submitted Georgene Louis chair.
Move adoption we are adoption of
a favorable committee report on
health and Human Services
Committee substitute for House
Bill one thirty five all those
in favor please signify by
saying aye.
This was a three point Dr.
Mr speaker Education Committee
to ms Berman to whom has been
referred house bill sixty.
Has had it under consideration
point I was recommendation that
I do pass and this referred to
the provisions of finance
committee respectfully submitted
G. Andr√©s Romero chair the
speaker move adoption of the
committee report were adoption a
favorable committee report on
house bill sixty all those in
favor please signify by saying
aye.
Was posing reports about the.
Mr speaker Education Committee
too is been referred house bill
one forty two has had it under
consideration point I was
recommendation that it to pass
and that's referred to the
appropriations and finance
committee respectfully submitted
G. Andr√©s Romero chair move
adoption of the committee
report.
adoption of the federal
committee report on house bill
one forty two all those in
favor.
Please signify by saying aye.
Posted of those names Committee
point about.
Mr speaker your health and Human
Services Committee tomb is been
referred house bill one fifty
seven has had it under
consideration point same with
recommendation that a do pass as
amended an answer for the
appropriations and finance
committee respectfully submitted
Elizabeth Thompson chair.
The speaker move adoption the
committee report we're on
induction of a favorable
committee report on house bill
one five seven all those in
favor please signify by saying
aye.
This was a committee for
stopped.
A last call for bills.
Bills.
No okay so we are okay I'm told
that there are no more bills on
their way so we're going to go
gentleman from Bernalillo.
Speaker I move that we go to the
next order of business
introduction of legislation no
objections ordered.
Okay folks this is going to
sound a little strange senses
when we introduced the generic
feels we're just gonna read out
the numbers and the sponsoring
member and I'm gonna refer them
all with a single bit just to
save time.
to read.
House bill two hundred eighty
three two hundred and twelve
introduced by speaker egolf
house bill two hundred and
thirteen to two hundred fifteen
introduced by Representative
Martinez house bill two hundred
and sixteen to two hundred and
eighteen introduced by
Representative guide us house
bill two hundred and nineteen to
two hundred and twenty one
introduced by Representative
Townsend.
House bill two hundred twenty
two to two hundred and twenty
four introduced by
Representative Rod Montoya house
bill two hundred and twenty five
to two hundred and twenty six
introduced Representative Lente
house bill two hundred twenty
seven to two hundred and twenty
eight introduced by
Representative Lundstrom house
bill two hundred and twenty nine
to two hundred and thirty
introduced by Representative my
Estes.
House bill two hundred thirty
one to two hundred thirty two
introduced Representative
Ferrary house bill two hundred
thirty three to two hundred and
thirty four introduced by
Representative.
G. Andr√©s Romero.
House bill two hundred thirty
five to two hundred thirty six
introduce Representative McQueen
house bill two hundred thirty
seven to two hundred thirty
eight introduce fair presented
of Louis House Bill two hundred
thirty nine to two hundred and
forty introduce representative
Thompson house bill two hundred
forty one to two hundred forty
two introduced by Representative
Chasey.
House bill two hundred forty
three to two hundred forty four
introduced by Representative
outcomes house bill two hundred
and forty five to two hundred
forty six introduced by
Representative Hetta house bill
two hundred forty seven to two
hundred forty eight introduced
by Representative Chandler house
bill two hundred forty nine to
two hundred and fifty introduced
by Representative Rubio an act
relating to the public peace
health safety and welfare for
House Bills two hundred and
eighty to two hundred and fifty
house was two hundred eighty to
two hundred fifty having been
read twice by title are ordered
not printed and referred to the
rules committee.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Then go to the services
announcements and miscellaneous
business no objections order
okay so we have most of us here
so let me explain how these
generic bills work for the new
members over the last several
years what we've done is adopted
a policy where
we will upon request if any of
the.
Sponsors of the Jericho's
withdraw the bill from the rules
committee referring to the
committee where the chairperson
as the chair or to a different
committee and we will announce
at that time the two oh two
number for the committee
substitute than those are then
published on the website
I think on the there is a link
on the agenda.
That with the public has notice
for what the steps to bill is
before the bill is hurting
Committee it's a bit of an
unusual practice but we thought
that was a good to the.
Make a practice to the public
knows what's being heard in
committee so beginning tomorrow
the end the session you'll hear
me withdraw built in rules
committee and SO two two number
where the bill is going and then
it'll be added to the agenda
it's worked well for the last
several years that we've done
that so that's how that works
And.
I am we have Representative
Debbie Armstrong
she's not serving on committees
currently I am appointing her to
the Judiciary Committee.
Since you have a committee serve
on Representative Armstrong
Debbie Armstrong as you
appointed to the Judiciary
Committee.
Are there any other
announcements.
The gentleman from San Juan
thank you Mr speaker I was
reminded by the Senate that we
do have a basketball game on
February tenth calling all
basketball players give I manage
your time so you won't get her
and
I thought that I didn't realize
that the game is on it so it's a
big fund raiser for the UNM
Cancer Institute and is super
great costs and
my colleague mom my **** is in
charge of the rounding up all
the basketball players
on the disabled list so I'll be
right you guys on thank you Mr
speaker.
Thank you Joe and the general
for San Juan Representative
Allison.
Thank you Mr speaker on the bus
this morning there is a fire and
it's titled missing and murdered
indigenous women and relatives
March it is this Friday and it
coincides with the American
Indian day at the New Mexico
state legislature is co
sponsored by senator Shannon
Pinto and our own for a
Representative Wonda Johnson.
if you're able to join them at
the Santa Fe plaza stage and
then they will be marching to
the capitol after that thank you
Mr.
Thank you gentlemen are there
further announcements.
Going once.
Gentlelady from Santa Madam was
a.
Federal comment.
Andrea cold thank you Mr
speaker.
is here I've had the pleasure
of sponsoring Paul drove a
barbecue day.
At the legislature.
And I think it's something that
I'll probably fifteen years that
I believe many of the members
house and Senate hasn't.
So this is we're trying to plan
it.
How the.
Could not do it because we don't
have the employees.
And and not Joel and I were
talking and that's very
interesting because they have
three stores that are open but
they don't have enough folks
that want to work.
So that they could come appears
in the day.
Us so like many other companies
we're struggling.
For employees.
And so this one strain on
brewery unemployed their jobs
out there and I just wanted
everyone to know because a
number of the members are asked
are you doing pod rules this
year so now we're not doing
drugs is here because we don't
have the employees thank you Mr
speaker.
The gentle lady are the further
announcements.
The general if you
Representative Rubio thank you
Mr speaker I just wanted to give
an announcement that we will
have a transportation committee
meeting tomorrow we just have
one bill on the agenda thank
you.
Members take note and as we're
looking at the scheduling for
committees that meet tomorrow
morning we will come on the
floor at eleven tomorrow and we
will proceed to third reading on
house appropriations and finance
committee substitute for House
Bills two and three will start
that as soon as we can get to
our procedural work tomorrow
morning I don't think we'll have
and actually when I have an
afternoon session tomorrow so
we'll take up the the
appropriations bill.
More Levin and then starting on
Friday we will probably have
Third reading for you know an
hour or two depending on how
long the debates go and then.
will have to visit with chairs
to sit we likely will be meeting
on Saturday for some third
reading of so we'll do that
maybe the afternoon I think
there's committees meeting in
the morning on Saturday so just
referenced planning.
Okay the gentleman from Chavis
said you know Terry.
Yes thank thank you at this the.
Based on Representative cut
drill drills.
Madam.
Look at the October twenty
first.
LFC report.
It's really eye opening.
The high I'll give you a high
level of a is that a family of
four.
With a with a single.
Wage earner at.
At the poverty level.
If they are participating in all
of the state.
And federal programs.
They will have a combined earned
income of a hundred and four
thousand dollars a year.
That was shocking to me Mr
speaker and I think it might be
why I drill barbecue can't find
anybody to work.
The generator area Santa Fe and
Taos thank you Mr speaker the
rural development land grants
and cultural affairs committee
will meet tomorrow morning at
nine o'clock.
Never say no gentleman for Rio
Arriba Sandoval and San Juan
chairman Monday.
Thank you Mr speaker your house
agriculture is seeking as in
water resources committee will
meet tomorrow morning at eight
thirty in the morning thank you
much more signal generated
Bernalillo Representative Chasey
thank you Mr speaker I wanted to
announce the house judiciary
committee will meet at one
thirty four of fifteen minutes
after the floor session we are
going to begin with house bill
one thirty two than one fifty
one and fifty five and seventy
nine than nine and I just want
to let everyone know we had the
existence of public comment last
at our last meeting for a bill
that was a wonderful build but
had no opposition I am going to
be limiting public comment to
twenty minutes per side unless
there's some compelling reason
to do otherwise because we
really could not have a twelve
hour meeting at this time Mr
speaker and hedges and gentleman
also hi and systems that
Judiciary Committee assistance
have been trying to contact
sponsors to ask sponsors to
please provide the names and
email addresses of your experts
so that they can be more
efficient we don't have to delay
the committee and that way
waiting till we get a mall on
the panel so thank you very much
Mr speaker and we'll see all of
House Judiciary.
Never say never and that's a
good point we made the point
several times to the session if
you are presenting a bill in
committee and you have an expert
witness please coordinating with
the committee secretary so that
we get the appropriate zoom link
emailed out to the experts so
they can be brought in as a
panelist as an important step
and it continues to be something
that folks are not doing so
please do that Jennifer Lee a
Santa Fe Torrance and Valencia.
Mr speaker the House Energy
Environment that's resources
committee will meet tomorrow
morning at eight thirty B. as in
thank you.
Members take note are there
other announcements.
Gentleman earlier thank you very
much Mr speaker house commerce
committee will be meeting today
at one thirty house commerce
committee meeting probably at
one thirty this afternoon thank
you.
Representative no other other
nonsense.
Going once.
Going twice.
Gentlelady from Olympia.
Mr speaker you probably already
know that today is groundhog
day.
So I have a question for you.
Was agility what did the
groundhog see trainer tell him
before you send them off to the
winter Olympics.
Generally what go for gold.
Pretty good gentle lady.
All the groundhogs and gophers
are going to be confused.
Jennifer Joe's any Tero you were
recognize for a joke.
Well I'm not going to take the
bait I forgot to I just found
out there's a a Republican
caucus immediately following
won't take long but.
Just so you know okay committees
will still start at one thirty
so
okay that needs to that's fine.
The gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr chairman of the
house in recess until eleven
o'clock tomorrow morning.
Thank you is a take that motion
I want to thank everyone for
joining us in the gallery thank
you for the gloves guys
appreciate that.
Please be sure to follow the
work of our committees have good
afternoon enjoy the rest of your
evening the house recess until
eleven not a living thirty
thousand recess until eleven AM
tomorrow.
