Here.
Representative Sariñana.
Representative dot.
Representative Strickler your.
Representative Townsend Here.
Representative Chandler.
Representative Ferrary your.
Representative Sariñana.
Vice chair Stansbury here.
And we.
We have a quorum.
Thank you everyone
Before before we begin today I I
want to go back every visit
issue that came up in our
starting meeting.
at one point wall present
Montoya was asking questions.
I interjected I I believe I
believe that Representative
Montoya.
Was crossing a line about
attacking not only members of
the committee
but also members of the public.
And I want to bring that back up
because it's happened before and
I sincerely hope it doesn't
happen again.
But it was it was sort of more.
Egregious in this instance
because of the it went beyond
members of the committee which
isn't in and of itself
inappropriate but actually
extended the members of the
public and I I see I can see
here some of these furring his
brow he presses a recall on
talking about but it you know
there is language does use that
Lee was inappropriate.
Beyond that you you question the
identities of the members of the
public who spoke out in favor of
a bill.
and
I think.
You know we work with each other
you know hopefully we develop
some level thick skin we work
with lobbyists
hopefully they have thick skin
but then when we have members of
the public who aren't used to
testifying you know they should
be able to come here and tell us
what they think of without
feeling attacked in and I know
that.
Will filter Tax.
Yeah I just wanted to bring that
up and reminded committee to be
respectful of really everyone
involved in this process
including including our staff.
And I'll just leave that at
that.
we want to ensure attended
today.
House bill one ninety five
Camino Riel regional utility
authority we're expecting an
amendment on that the amendment
is not ready so that bill will
be rolled.
And that leaves us with just
three bills they seem pretty
straightforward to me.
so as always I hope to have the
thoroughbred efficient meeting
our first bill this morning is
house bill two thirty nine.
creek W. mine inspector position
with Representative Gail
Armstrong Representative
Armstrong whenever you're ready
please present your bill.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'd
like to I'm not sure and my
apologies on how you run your
committee but I do have a expert
witness of our Chris Tucker who
is the state mine inspector if I
could ask that he be let into
their.
The to be able to speak and also
Dr Cleve make Daniel the vice
president and administration of
finance at New Mexico tech.
Representative Armstrong I have
promoted Chris Haffner and the
only McDaniel that I see on the
call is in Olympic Daniel is
that possible that that that
that's an.
I don't think so but Chris is
fine the the state mine
inspector is fine okay I think
this is a pretty straightforward
bill thank you Mr chairman so
with that I would present to you
house bill two thirty nine which
basically is creating a
The position of a deputy mine
inspector and and it's
prescribing duties
With the creation of this what
would happen is New Mexico tech
would be
Tasked with
the W. about pointing the W.
mine inspector in the case of a
mind specter be are not
appointed at the time or the
absence of a mine inspector I'm
this position will allow the
responsibilities of the state
mine inspector to be carried out
without delay whenever there is
a vacancy including allocation
allocating resources for mine
rescues investigating money
because of the technologies
developing and mine safety and
health training programs and
implementing a program of
certifying money person
There was
It's basically to just keep the
inspections going if in the
absence of the mine inspector
and I wondered if the state mine
inspector would like to say a
few words Mr Chairman.
Mr Hefner.
I think you need to meet
yourself on your and.
Show me he's a need on our end
correct.
yes you should be okay.
Okay now he's got.
And Mr chairman Olin is Dr Cleve
make Daniel if you could allow
him to come in that would be
great and there's Mr Haffner
now.
Is it working at this point yes
we can hear thank you doctor one
manual is Dr Daniel yes you just
called and asked that I confirm
that
initially Sir my name is Chris
government currently this state
mine inspector and.
There was a glitch with this so
I we are supposed to address
wide I believe that this bill is
necessary.
There's been several times in
the past number of years that
the position statement inspector
has not been filled for one
reason or another everything
from death to just leaving the
office so the duties of the
state mine inspector needs that
are critical to the mining
industry and the safety of the
miners in the state.
Our coal certification coal mine
operators can't operate without
certified individuals and it's
the duty of this office to do so
by.
by legislature actually so
during that period of time if
you can't have certified
individuals the call must
literally have to shut down make
some other arrangements since
we're the certifying agency
secondly in the case of
accidents there twelve accidents
that have to be investigated by
the state mine inspector.
We have had this during the last
absence of the State month
specter we had of the Taliban in
the southern part of the state.
That needed to be investigated
and that's the by law hazard
complaints in this directly
affects the safety of the miners
when they call in and they have
something that they feel is an
unsafe action that again has to
be investigated by the state
what specter without one it
can't again there's the grant
writing that has to be done
training issues which is the
main function of this office.
Submitting the state budget.
Spending time for the staff and
okay and all all of the fiscal
responsibilities those are
things that have to be done.
Currently there's no way to do
that by adding this new material
to create in the position of the
step deputy state mine inspector
which the.
Position is partially outlined
in the constitution but not the
duties.
So this would allow temporarily.
For the W. state mine inspector
to fulfill the duties of the
state mine inspector until the
governor could appoint a new
state specter.
So it's not taking away anything
is merely.
A gap measure to allow all the.
W. state mine inspector to
fulfill those duties would be.
Wanted temporarily by the
president of New Mexico
institute of mining and
technology.
To the fulfill those duties.
Until the governor could appoint
a new one.
So I don't believe that there's
any issues there are just
currently there's no no
mechanism for that to take
place.
And with that Mr chairman we
would stand for questions.
Okay thank you for that before
we go to the committee that
there's any member of the public
who is participating and would
like to speak on this bill
please raise your hand
by pushing the right hand
function if you're on the phone
you can raise your hand by
pressing star nine.
But first up we have Mike Bonin.
Thank you Mr chairman.
My name is Mike Boeing on the
executive director of the New
Mexico mining association and we
stand in full support of this
piece of legislation they're
attempting to solve a problem
which is that money inspector
just stated has occurred several
times over the years and what
happens is if there is a vacancy
in that position which.
a couple years ago this happened
and went on for months before
the spill and we couldn't get
those certifications for our
miners and it's not just in in
working its promotions and
things of that nature also which
effects their income as well as
the operations of the more so we
stand full support that asked
that the committee support thank
you.
Thank you for that and I don't
see anyone else wishing to speak
on this bill so we'll go to the
committee.
So again I see raises that the
expert.
Daniel did you need to add
something does that the at the
of the bureau of business and
finance I supervise the
operations of state road might
say the apps Act The New Mexico
tech and I can attest that there
are significant challenges
between the time Randy Lawson
with the fire former state mines
back left in January and Chris
was born September I can attest
to what the Mr bone is that and
Chris is that about the
challenges we face there is
significant we look for ways to
offer temporary solutions but
really they can't be rectified
until changes are made such as
in this legislation.
Okay thank you for that first up
for on the committee we have
Representative monthly.
Thank you Mr chair question I
guess for a for the expert
looking at to look at this I'm
how does the state mine
inspector's office work together
with the with the M. shop the
money safe safety and health
administration yes Sir we work
with them so we primarily at
this point.
Find the twenty that's mandated
by action the required part
forty eight training for all
anything that's not of Santa
gravel operation we do that
additionally on the basis of
accident investigation we are in
New York with the same time.
Thank you.
Office.
As the primary.
In this case nineteen seventy
two I believe that was the role
of the bureau of mine sectors
change from being taken out of
our doctor partners.
On Scott and wanted to education
the other duties remained in
place so.
We literally talk to ensure on a
weekly basis relative to issues
involving within the state.
Thanks for that Mr Hatcher
and Mr chairman
We have a lot of.
Small minds around the state a
lot of that that are.
Abandoned and.
I would see that more as a.
Function of the state mine
inspector to deal with those and
then ensure is that is that
correct is that incorrect.
That's correct and and but Sir.
Our students nor am shop
authority over abandoned mines
in this case that would go to
the bottom line lance group with
energy and metals they have
four.
We however to assist them and
how many times over the years in
terms of unfortunately it's
generally body recovery when
someone answers are bad.
So we have the resources to
enter those are in state.
So we help M. L..
With that option.
I think that Mr Abbey area for.
I worked in mining for thirty
two years for thirty of those
years I was licensed here in New
Mexico and.
We got for for a bulk of that we
there was reciprocity with other
states who had a licensing and
so when the state.
Stood up it's on.
Office then we started testing
here
I guess.
The large mines have multiple
agencies that.
that they
have to report to
they're smaller mines in the
state it is are those more the
purview of your office and shut.
We assess the small minds too
much greater extent than working
the large mines as I stated we
we help with the education
reminders the mandated training
that's mandated I am sure so
since they often times there are
training departments we help
them in terms of numbers much
more than we do the large ones.
Thank you for that just.
This is something I'm just
interested and I think this is
an easy but for most of us but I
just want to say I I appreciated
the relationship that the the
company I work for wesco for
years with the.
With the New Mexico tech in.
Reading industrial.
I don and diamonds I don't know
that folks know but that is
really just the compression of
coal so like to the like those
miners back home in San Juan
County coal miners a really
diamonds to them so thank you.
Mr Chairman.
Thank you.
any any additional questions
from the committee I have a
couple more.
Okay
Representative Armstrong we are
is this this isn't FTE.
Creating a new position or and
is there a fiscal impact that to
someone that has to be the W..
My inspector.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee
I'm not sure Chris would you
like to answer that question it
looks like the that will be
absorbed through EMNRD and
doesn't it shows there's no FTE.
allocation for dollars.
Yes currently there is a.
Much for calling the Social
state mine inspector that I was
being changed it's really a tire
change the position of deputy
state mine inspector is
mentioned in the constitution.
So that position was there we
are not requesting any funding
that because we've already got
got.
Then place John the manager
Walker temporarily was the state
mine inspector during the
absence Alvarado lost some more.
So there's no no new positions
created no additional funding
requests.
Thank you for that and
Representative Armstrong Mr
after it when the when there is
a state mine inspector.
Does that will that that team
mine inspector have duties or
just sort of be.
Like held in reserve.
Call.
Go ahead.
Go ahead.
Yes S. W. state mine inspector
is part training staffing
scheduling does all those things
the state mine inspector general
is the one who would accent
destinations I for the rats.
All just the day to day
activities of the office of the
state the the specter.
It's only active today.
The gentleman is teaching the
class zoom last four some of the
money throughout the state.
And and Mr chairman members of
the committee it would be they
would work in in conjunction
with with the state mine
inspector worked well with the
assistance of the W. mine
inspector so they would work
together in conjunction with
each other also they they would
be fully vetted and able to take
over the position if need be.
Okay
this this.
The so curious that it's before
the legislature at all I mean
this is like
hanging titles and and I suppose
our hands are probably tied
because we have the statute
dealing with the money inspector
which do so now we have to tweak
it but.
I really think this kind of
thing that our state agencies do
every day and.
Doesn't need to involve us so.
Representative Ortez.
Mr chair I move a to pass of HB
to thirty nine I can't.
The second Representative
Strickler chubby can you take
the vote.
Yes.
I'm Representative Chandler.
Representative Dixon.
Yes.
Representative Ferrary yes.
Representative Montoya.
Yes.
Representative Ortez.
Yes.
Representative Sariñana.
Representative Scott.
Yes.
Representative Strickler yes.
Representative Townsend yes.
By.
Representative Chandler.
Representative Sariñana.
By your Stansbury yes.
And chairman the queen yes.
And that is a two passed with a
vote of nine two zero.
Is we we nine.
Representative Chandler and
Representative Sariñana
Representative Dixon.
Right thank you thank you
reserve are trying you of the
past.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee for
your time.
Bill we have is house bill two
forty five a utility
distribution system hardening it
is a Representative Louis
available.
Yes I'm promoting her to
panelists now.
Representative Lewis.
Good morning.
Mr Chairman good morning
committing welcome House Energy
whenever you're ready please
present your bill.
Thank you Mr chairman and good
morning again committee members
last year we passed the red
modernization bill house bill
two thirty three with unanimous
support in the Senate and we
also passed in the house with
sixty one yes votes in only one
no vote so we're calling house
bill two forty five the COVID
bill because we are correcting a
drafting error where a comma was
excluded so the purpose of the
comments to clarify what can be
considered a grid modernization
project and what is not it's my
understanding that the intent of
last year's legislation was to
include a substation design as
part of a great modern
modernization with the COVID
missing however substation
design would not be counted as a
grid modernization investment.
So the bill is designed to
encourage energy companies local
governments state universities
public schools and tribal
communities to invest in
technology and infrastructure to
help modernize Mexico's
electronic embers this is a key
piece of legislation because it
will allow New Mexico to add
more renewable and me explain an
energy goals so Mr chairman your
lawyer and I know how you know
how important it is to have a
comma
during the work of legal
transactions in court
proceedings I if you will legal
case and comma you'll be
directed to cases where Graham
was pointed out.
Excuse me we're grammar just
pointed out including uses of
Khamis's so here you know we
just want to include that
comment and I also have Mr
chairman John K. years and and a
with the Legislative Council
Service says I don't know she
wants to add more because they
know she was he and
helping out with this.
This case
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Shawna
Casebier I work for the
Legislative Council Service I'm
not here in support or
opposition to the legislation
before you but to provide
technical assistance if
requested Mr chair I believe
Representative Louis very
accurately described the problem
that is trying to be solved in
this bill if you look on page
five line nine a comma should
have been inserted after service
after underground service so
that and substations designed to
produce service outages or
service restoration times was
actually included in the
definition of a grid
modernization project and not
excluded.
Because of how we indicate
changes in legislation with
underlining bracketing strike
throughs Xcerra it was not
possible to just insert that
Madam into this house bill two
forty five is it would have
actually shown up as any kind of
change to the legislation that
would have been your line so
what has happened is that the
paragraph has been reworked to
ring the exclusion to the end of
the paragraph and ensure that
substations designed to reduce
service outages or service
restoration times are actually
included I am happy to answer
any other questions that the
committee might have thank you.
Thank you for that
Representative lose anything
that before we go to the public.
Nothing more to add thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you Representative Lewis
if any member of the public
wishes to speak on the COVID
bill
also known as utility district
distribution system hardening
please raise your hand.
Seeing none we'll go to the
committee Representative
Townsend.
We're sorry it might be Antonio.
Sorry Representative Townsend I
saw a late payment.
Yes committee.
Mr chairman members committee
Mike d'antoni with Xcel energy
we thank the sponsor for bring
in the bill it's a clerical
correction that was overlooked
when it passed and we do support
the change in the bill thank
you.
Thank you for that
and I don't see anyone else so
now Representative Townsend
apologize for the disruption.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Representative Lewis.
Does the COVID have value.
I mean did it did affect the
FIR.
Mr.
Chairman and Representative
Townsend.
Sorry my computer's doing weird
things the the COVID has valued
to the extent that it's
important that to substations as
far as the FIR the last I
checked I didn't see one but
You give me a minute I can.
Mr Chairman could I get
assistance with that I'm used to
being able to look into the
share file system for my
committees but this isn't my
committee and I didn't see when
the last I checked.
Mr Chairman.
The fiscal impact at report is
posted online and it says no
fiscal impact.
Thank you madam vice chairman.
Belabor the point Mr Chairman
representative but it it would
seem to me.
By inserting the calm all
allows the utility to recover
costs that the COVID has value
in my point was
Is do we know to what extent is
affecting the regional F. I. R.
I or was it in was the basis
included in the FIR regional.
I'm sorry Mr Chairman Mr
chairman and Representative
Thomson your question.
Yeah I don't belabor the point
but if it by inserting the
COVID.
Allows a utility.
To capture.
Hostel in recovery it would seem
to me that it has some value and
I was just trying to.
Ascertain whether that value was
originally captured in the in in
the FIR originally or was it
mid.
And we don't know what the value
of the COVID is.
Mr Chairman us Representative
Montoya can I go on that point.
Representative twenty on that
point.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative Townsend I
believe the reason that that's
not reflected in the FIR nor
would it have been previously is
because it's not passed through
cost to government.
where where the cost for that to
increase will be
Before.
The PRC.
Which would be passed on to the
you utility Karia the right pair
so it's not it would be an
increase in cost but state
government will bear that cost.
Chairman and Representative
Townsend said if I may just also
I I think you're referring to
the the FIR as well in the
original bill and I believe
because the intent of including
substations were there you know
it would not have changed but as
the F. I. R. does reflect there
is no additional costs and and
Representative month and as for
act as well thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
representative.
Thank you Representative
Montoya.
You Mr chairman just a note to
the freshman in our committee
this is a this is how a season
senior legislator like George
Representative Lewis to be able
to get two bills passed back to
back one year and then the next
to leave out a common and easily
get it past next year so just
you know you can pad your
statistics that we thank you Mr
chairman.
Representative I I don't know
about that I I do think it's.
I'm always trying to get the
Legislative Council Service
putting comments and they are
very resistant.
Mr chairman if I may and and
Representative my tie and this
is actually not my bill from
last year thank you for the
compliment.
If any further discussion from
the committee.
The Representative Louis any
closing thoughts.
I'm and thank you Mr chairman
thank you committee members I
just hope that everyone you know
sees the value of grammar now.
And we can move forward and get
these substations twelve and
move forward with the intent of
the bill thank you Mr chairman
and committee members.
Thank you president listed some
of like to make a motion.
Representative.
Thank you Mr chairman I'm with a
do pass of go to forty.
I think the second came from
Representative Strickler.
Can you take the role and yeah
we could do unanimous all a lot
but it's actually really hard to
tell who's here so that's that's
why we keep taking their all.
taking a chill the please take a
look.
Representative Chandler.
Representative Dixon.
Here I'm sorry.
Representative Ferrary yes.
Representative Montoya.
Yes.
Representative Ortez yes.
Senator Saniona.
Representative Scott yes.
Representative Strickler yes.
Representative Townsend yes.
Representative Syriana.
Representative Sariñana are you
able to and you.
Resists it thank you your muted.
I'm here at.
Can I meet you.
Okay let's go on.
Chair Stansbury.
Representative setting and I may
be unmuted now.
Representative staring at.
So we your I needed that we
still can't hear you.
Okay let's move on please.
And vice chair Stansbury.
Yes.
And chairman the queen yes.
That isn't to pass with a vote
of nine two zero.
Thank you resent Lewis you're
the best thank you Mr chairman
thank you committee members.
So our final bill for the
morning
house bill two fifty eight move
state parks to tourism
department Representative
Strickler will you be presenting
that.
Yes Mister chairman I will my my
sponsor co sponsor Rebecca down
this is stuck in another
committee.
Yeah I don't think she can break
loose so I I mean it's up to.
sent to the committee if you if
you want to.
Go for what.
I would love to have a record
down.
Hello present this bill this is
she's got a lot more expertise
on this side and I do show
it's up to you Mr chairman.
sister D. my preference that you
go ahead and present it and then
she can join this you'll join
us.
Okay I think I thank all have to
go solo in.
Thank you Mr chairman districts
are do you have any experts or
we.
She was pretty much my experts.
Yeah she just send me a message
if you're sixteen people ahead
of her to speak in favor of a
bill that she said that she's
working on so she's going to be
I think she's gonna be tied up
for a while so I'll be happy to.
In the bill for the
consideration the committee and
yes let me know you're ready to
go.
Whenever you're ready okay.
What this bill does is move the
state parks division of the
Energy minerals and natural
resources department to the
tourism department.
Transferring functions personal
money appropriations property
contractual obligations and
statutory references and this is
a an item that Representative
Taos been working on
And
spending discussion near
committees and seem like a good
fit energy minerals natural
resources division is is quite
busy as you know with all guests
regulations rules and
regulations the mining.
Department the forestry for
service stay for street for
forestry division and of course
the tourism division I'm sorry
the the partition.
Of course division so
the scan of a brain storm.
That Rebecca Dow Representative
Dow is been advocating for some
time in the tourism industry is
a is a big industry in our state
and the state parks is a is a
great asset.
For our state I know in my
country in San Juan County we
have the Navajo state park
I don't know if you if any of
the committee members have been
up there of course Rod Montoya
and I'm very familiar with it
and it's a beautiful state park
unfortunately because of COVID.
Our state parks have been a.
Really been put on hold and that
a lot of our citizens take
advantage of our state parks in
in the in camping and and date
day M. day outings in this sort
of thing so we're hoping that
they will open up soon and
The tourism department is a big
industry for our state it's a
it's a up and coming industry.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee I know
C. Farmington is is is pushing
hard tourism in our community
because we have so many natural
assets with the San Juan river
running through our state
through our our city I should
say and we've got a lot of my
city parks and now we have a lot
of a of a federal lands that are
open to the public for various
activities hiking
Road biking four wheeling
and the list goes on we've got a
lot of hunting fishing as well
so especially what this does I
know it's a it's
The apportion Division.
Of the Energy natural resources
department is is it's a big
division I mean it's not just a
big department I should say and
switching it over to the tourism
Is a big deal and.
And and really that's about it
it's a it's a pretty
straightforward bill to.
One department to another.
HSD and we think they're more
aligned with their overall goals
to promote the New Mexico state
parks to the to the out you know
at side of folks outside of our
state and.
We want to take advantage of
that Senator Judy.
and now without shameful
questions.
Thank you Representative
Strickler never gonna go to the
public.
In when we go to the public
we feel we're about this because
we're going to the public but
that includes a state agencies
and we always like to hear from
our state agencies and I see a
Christie to Florida right now is
the state park structures soul
here from her I don't know if we
have anyone from tourism with us
today the first step we have
Christy Tafoya.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee I'm Christy
deployed director of New Mexico
state parks with the energy
minerals natural resources
department thank you for a few
moments to speak if you're on I
I do respectfully stand in
opposition to this bill for a
variety of different reasons on
why and I I want to mention our
mission resource protection
although outdoor recreation
education and safety are a big
part of our mission resource
protection is is front and
center with with our agency
which is also front and center
with energy minerals natural
resources department
Right from the tourism
department on where their
mission is to bring showcase our
state bring visitors into our
state we have a great
partnership with them currently
on that are concerns are with
regard to administration parks
are like little cities and
standing up on state parks
within tourism would really
require a lot of administrative
help for tourism with regard to
budget assistance legal
assistance human resources I. T.
there would be additional costs
to the tourism department and
bringing state parks and to the
Department
in addition I would like to say
we have a great partnership with
our one we're working with them
right now to try to
stand up our partnership with
Google in order to showcase
parts when we can bring them
open to the public more fully in
addition they've worked with us
on responsible recreation
through their New Mexico true
programming so we have a great
partnership with them currently
and at this point we cannot
support I cannot support this
bill thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Mr voice if you could
just stick around we might come
back to you if we have any
questions.
Next we have Selena Connie Lee
Connelly.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee can you
hear me yes.
I'm still in a community and I'm
a citizen of Albuquerque and I
also serve on the parks advisory
board and I stand in opposition
to this bill for many of the
reasons that director Tafoya
mentioned tourism simply is not
equipped to manage something as
complex as state parks in and
she mentions it's a it's like
running a city with education
law enforcement resource
protection it it's it's a super
complex place I also don't see
that the bill would serve to
improve the collaboration
between the state agencies or
departments and I don't think it
would serve it would improve the
services to New Mexicans or to
visitors in our state and then
finally I think this is X. and
unnecessary expense it doesn't
seem like it's it's the the
challenge of moving.
When agency to a different
department is is worth the
effort so I appreciate the
opportunity to speak with you
all thank you very much.
Thank you for that I don't see
anyone else from the public so
we'll go to the committee and
first up we have Representative
Dixon.
Good morning at thank you Mr
chairman and Representative
Strickler thank you for bringing
this bill I think it's an
interesting concept and
highlights one of the challenges
that sort of seems to be
throughout our state which is
collaboration between state
agencies and entities.
I was wondering if you could
just elaborate a little bit on
the what the with the primary
purpose of making this move is I
think you talked about tourism.
But I just I just want to be
clear what the what the goal
that we're looking to achieve
this thank.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Dixon yeah I'm
right I'm reading my notes right
now and and during this last
year.
We've lost about twenty thousand
jobs in the tourism industry.
And I just kind of puts a bright
to spotlight on on a the parks
in and I've been under funded to
I mean there prevention and that
there's just kind of the nature
of of government you never have
enough funding to a greater
parks and make them better and
and highlight them a little bit
so and and I want I want to
remind the committee that that
state parks.
Fine tune machine in terms of
the the department.
I
mean I don't know why almost
functions replace it just you
just moving it over to another
another department so it's not
like we're doing away with it
are dismantling any the
functions I mean they're they're
going full speed ahead they have
there have their mission they
have their a law enforcement all
the different things that they
that they manage yeah I forget
how we stay point we have over
twenty five with a I believe so
this is an effort.
To
Put it in in a.
The new new department tourism
department that
would give a better focus.
hopefully better funding you
know what the tourism
your broad and and energy
minerals it I mean it covers all
it wears a lot of hats Energy
minerals where where's a lot
hatch and I think only gas
mining and forestry is that
their place pretty well full so
Tourism is the account of a this
the wife of the future.
For for state I I know we're
trying to diversify our economy
and this is a way done then and
again all all all the all the.
The functions of the state state
parks remain remain intact
it B. L. logistically and it
should be in a smooth transition
to the tourism department and
with the emphasis and that
industry is hard hit right now
hopefully when we open up the
you know our economy and I think
that this coming I'm I think
it's coming soon.
we're going to see a.
A new bigger and and that the in
our tourism back in shape.
Actually our our restaurants you
know this part of the tourism
you know area so I don't think
it helps but I'm just trying to
raise some doubts from.
From
Not sure Rebecca Dow and I hope
I did a decent job.
Thank you that does help I think
that what I am interested in
seeing given the concerns
expressed by
some of the the state agencies
and also the fact that outdoor
recreation is in
the Economic Development
Department I would really be
interested in seeing just
adicional collaboration I think
tourism is going to be on
rolling are you know unveiling
some initiatives working with
local entities more closely so I
appreciate this I think it's a
really I think it's valuable for
us to be looking at tourism in
state parks and the
collaboration I am
uncomfortable with the move on
and would like to see a little
bit more
Sort of performance measures to
make sure that we can get our
tourism and parks and outdoor
recreation.
Doing some of this before
undertaking at this substantial
the staff but thank you very
much and thank you Mr chair.
Thank you for that
Representative Montoya.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative Strickler
As far as funding goes the the
the current funding that the
parks department state parks has
that'll fall if they're transfer
to tourism is that correct.
Mr chairman and Representative
Montoya that is corrected you
know we're not you know we're
not adding or subtracting to the
responsibilities just giving
giving them up.
Kind of a new the surge of of
Promoting tourism and I guess I
guess a good point by
representation on on outdoor
recreation as well part of the
economic development I mean that
so that's a good point.
Maybe that can be added to you
know added to their scope as
well so now it needs to status
quo for Sagan's.
Thank you Mr chairman of
Strickler that six that's
exactly what I was gonna go is
and if it's if tourism is not
the right department maybe it
would belong with outdoor
recreation as well
I think of.
Mr Chairman representative
director this last year we've
seen the state.
fire is inspector commissioner's
office moved out of the PRC.
to to a more appropriate
location I think for years
parties on both sides were were
suggesting members of both
parties were suggesting that
that.
needed to happen but it is
difficult I think I can
understand why people in HSD.
Are not interested and and
moving it is a disruption.
It is a you know.
What is used to is.
There's some other people to it
so I can see.
That because for years I mean
the under the Martinez Martinez
administration as well this was
something that was brought up
and at that time that the
department itself did not want
to move in and the governor was
inclined not to to move as well
it just seems like a.
The the the idea of maintaining
state parks.
where it's at is is a a
particular focus you know
maintaining and preserving that
is I think a good focus before
they are right now but but in
reality.
Maintaining verses accommodating
verses inviting being
Department that that.
looks at from the standpoint how
do we get more people to
participate rather than how do
we protect the land that we
currently have it's just a
different focus and I and I
think moving it to a different
apartment would give that that
focus and I the big reason I've
heard of a folks say that that
that it should be moved to a
different apartment is because
we have such great lands we have
such great natural.
Landscape and.
And.
The facilities at at those
locations have.
Have been handled in a
maintenance type of.
Capacity rather than a how do we
make it to where more New
Mexicans in particular would
want to go there and so and and
secondarily looking at it from
the standpoint of whether or not
agenda in tourism more and more
and economic development.
Is the idea of there is there
the more people that that do
that there are there are dollars
that follow so I'm not sure that
the tourism apartments the right
department.
It may be it may not be a but I
I have heard voices on both
sides of the aisle that point
currently at is not the right
place because the focus is
wrong.
and to their credit you know.
They're doing what they're
mandate is so what was under
tourism or if it was under
economic development the mandate
would be different and I think
could be easier than to
collaborate with other
departments.
Under a different focus so I do
support this
Hey it doesn't sound like it's
going to pass today if it if
tourism is not the right
department.
maybe is economic development
but I think it's pretty clear
that where it's at right now is
not the right place.
So I I look for supporting this
bill Representative.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
Representative Montoya there
there are we've we've done this
sort of thing before the PRC
used to handle all the
corporations and limited
liability issues.
For years and it just wasn't a
good fit for the public
Regulatory Commission so they
were switched over the secretary
state which most states handle
those functions so this isn't
new and and yeah there was
I just studies to consolidate
agencies switch things around
ten years ago and have been here
too long I can't cite the exact
year I know Representative bandy
was was very involved in that
that Committee
to the streamlined and
reorganized.
or agencies and and it and the
most recent example is moving
the corporations and limited
liability functions to from the
PRC to secretary state so.
something that we need to think
about and thank you thank you Mr
chairman thank you
Representative Montoya.
Any further discussion from the
committee.
So so one thing I want to share
and this is from.
This is from the the I think
it's a tourism analysis and I
just thought this was this was
well stated.
The.
The tourism department has
developed and continues to
cement this partnership nor to
Max maximize each agencies
independent mission that's
that's good right so with that
with what we want we want them
working together that goes on
tourism department's mission is
to grow New Mexico's economy
through tourism.
Which is largely focused on
marketing and promotion the
state parks division of EMNRD
has a resource base commission
focused on protecting and
enhancing natural and cultural
resources.
these missions will
complementary have fundamental
differences they're difficult to
reconcile within the single
administrative the park so I
mean I I get that
you know a lot of the.
I think about reorganization
occasionally it often comes up
in the.
it within your some of the the
role of the army Department I
sometimes think should be under
a nerd and vice versa we've got
the the Cayman fish Department
started out there as a free
agent we could definitely have a
sore resource page HSD that
there's lots of different ways
to do this.
I I agree with Representative
Montoya is that maybe tourism is
not the right department
you know what we're always
looking for improvements I I
don't think I'm ready to support
this particular suggestion
however.
So with that would like to make
a motion.
Fifty table.
With the tabling motion from
Representative Stansbury is
their second.
Representative Dixon is
attempting the second.
access second Shelby can you
take a look please.
Representative Chandler.
Representative Dixon.
Yes.
Representative Ferrary yes to
table.
Representative Montoya.
The table.
Representative Ortez.
Yesterday when I to explain
about.
Representative Sariñana yes the
table.
Representative Scott.
The table.
Representative Strickler.
He noted table.
Representative Townsend noted
table.
Vice chair Stansbury yes the
table and I'd like to briefly
explain my doctor.
And chairman of queen yes.
And that is a test to table with
a vote of six to four.
Representative Ortez to explain
but Mr chair representative
Strickler I agree with nearly
all of my colleagues here that
this this department's Division
needs more support needs more
funding to enact you know it's
all of its goals and to manage
the nearly three hundred.
A stab first but I I just don't
think this is the right move now
but I wanted to you know let you
know that that I think we should
really take a good look at how
those agencies talked to each
other and the support that they
give for for marketing an
outdoor recreation and funding
so thanks for the effort.
Thank you Representative Ortez
vice chair Stansbury.
Thank you Mr chair M. I. A. also
support the goals of the bill is
stated by the sponsor the idea
of lifting up the crown jewels
of our state and lands and
celebrating those and inviting
people to come visit them it's
something that we have to do and
something that's critical to our
economic future and also just
celebrating our lands and
cultures so I really appreciate
that I would love to see a
consolidation of all of these
programs and and better resource
management but I think that this
particular move at this time is
is I'm not advisable but I
appreciate the Sanchez goals so
thank you.
So.
That does it for today
Mr chairman Representative
Montoya Montoya yes can can I
just briefly respond to
something
and we brief.
beginning at the beginning of
this committee a couple of
things were stated I just like
to just briefly respond.
As far as
The discussion that took place
on Saturday and some of my
responses they were definitely
not directed at individual
citizens however Mr chairman it
has become the habit.
Of the of the added this
advocacy groups to site.
That minorities and people of
color are the reason we have to
to implement certain things.
And I would just like to say
that the hardest thing to hit.
Minorities and people of color
is unemployment.
And when that is not taking the
place that was that was the big
crux of of my comments not the
individuals there was there were
many individuals who called in
on behalf of themselves.
But time after time we have
added advocacy groups are using.
the the idea that somehow what
that that climate change is
going to be harder on minority
groups and people of color and I
just wanted that to be balanced
with joblessness and not being
able to provide for your family
is is hard on everyone
including.
Minorities and people of color
and so to whatever degree folks
were offended that were private
individuals my comments I assure
you were not directed at them I
I'm just tired of sitting back
as a minority and somebody who's
a Republican for years who have
been told that our motives are
racist.
For.
Only out for the rich guy and
definitely not a rich guy then
don't come from those background
from that background and because
I have a difference of opinion.
I have been impugned my party's
been impugned and see here and
here one group after another
site.
People who essentially my
relatives.
Both Hispanic and native
American and people that I know
in my own family and in our
community who are poor and to
speak for them I will continue
to speak otherwise because it is
it no one should be cited as if
eight eight whole group of
minorities are on one side of an
issue or another and with that
Mr chair I yield.
I strongly disagree with you.
It's I I will not debate it up
but if you.
Use that tone and that language
with the committee or the public
again I will can cut you off.
so one investment it's not clear
yet whether we're gonna meet on
Saturday as you all know all the
committees are going to cancel
the Thursday and Friday so all
the committee chairs want to
meet on Saturday so instead of
having to say there's a
committees and then there was a
Friday committee so late we have
everyone is trying to cram in
the Saturday and that's tough
because we're all on multiple
committees and then we have to
present the bills we're gonna
wait and see what's our
referrals we get.
In our for session which will
actually be able to participate
in today which is a pleasant
change and we'll make that
decision
Before Saturday so I I would
prefer not to meet on Saturday
but we start have to wait and
see what our workload looks
like.
And that's a present thank you
all very much we are adjourned.
