yesterday are sorry on the
twentieth it's the most recent
thing in the subfolder for CS H.
bill H. B. line for today's date
if that helps.
Yeah I'm not having any problems
accessing it go back to that
the general folder and then I
shall go back to twenty twenty
one and then hit the committee
go to the committee go to the
date of this meeting and then
pull up the bills and this will
come up in the amendment pops
right up.
Rather.
That the to to it's two two zero
zero to point to see us right.
Correct yeah that's correct and
I just made sure myself because
of the committee assistant
already confirmed it's there and
that's the correct version that
we've had in the Here file for
for a couple of days now.
And I've got it as well I just
pulled up great thank you thanks
everyone for confirming that
just a reminder folks to look in
the chair trial share file Dr
it's so organized by committee
and my date and that those are
the most recent versions that we
have including all of the
analysis that is based on the
most recent versions so
Representative Stansbury Rubio
let's go ahead again and we have
a motion for discussion on the
committee substitute so let's go
ahead and begin with that.
Great thank you so much and
madam chair and members of the
committee it's wonderful to see
you this morning the bill in
front of you and the substitute
in front of you is probably one
of the most comprehensive
approaches to climate change
that we've ever attempted to
take legislatively in the state
of New Mexico and it seeks to
tackle climate change and then
economic transition to a more
just equitable and sustainable
economy by doing a and three
primary ways so the first is
tackling New Mexico's greenhouse
gas footprint so as I'm sure all
of you are very aware our
governor signed an executive
order at the beginning of her
term I'm setting overall targets
for our economy in terms of
greenhouse gas emissions this
bill adopts a standard of
reducing our greenhouse gas
emissions by fifty percent by
twenty thirty and by eight and
net zero by twenty fifty and it
does so by is that setting an
overall cap on the economy
rather than going sector by
sector some of the questions
that folks may have is didn't we
just passed the ETA a couple of
years ago didn't that set carbon
caps and it did but only for one
secretary it was just the
electricity sector so this is
for the overall economy and then
the bill directs our agencies to
set specific rules and
regulations and the place in
order to meet those targets but
creates a lot of flexibility to
do that the second way that it
tackles climate change is a
directs our state agencies as
they are doing through the
executive order to help provide
tools and resources to our
communities so that they can be
more resilient to the impacts of
climate change and I'm sure all
of you are aware that climate
change is already impacting New
Mexico in terms of drought
extreme fire and impacts to
agriculture and and our water
supplies so it's very important
that we provide resources and
tools to our communities to do
that and there's also a
provision in there that directs
our state agencies to
incorporate consideration of
climate change in their water
management.
Decisions the third way that
addresses climate change and
frankly the overall resilience
of our state and communities
which Representative Rubio is
gonna talk a lot about as well
today is that it creates a sub
Council of the existing climate
Task Force that's focused on
just transition and diversifying
our economy because we know we
can't move into a claim it and
neutral and a climate resilient
future without diversifying our
economy and ensuring that our
communities have every
opportunity to thrive and build
the kinds that economic futures
they'd like to see and with that
I'd like to madam chair turn it
to Representative Rubio.
Thank you Representative thank
you madam chair and committee
members as as Representative
Stansbury is mentioned house
bill nine addresses a lot of our
our climate issues but also and
if not more importantly also
addresses and economic mechanism
that not only gets us closer to
meeting the goals necessary to
address climate change but also
provides opportunities for
frontline communities needing
economic opportunities during
these challenging times and also
in preparation for new economic
future for New Mexico house bill
nine is a home grown vision
coming from frontline
underserved and marginalized
communities who have been
directly impacted by the changes
in industry here in the state in
twenty nineteen we introduced
legislation as a standalone from
the energy transition act to
address a workforce development
this legislation would become a
workforce development study
conducted by the department of
workforce solutions and later in
partnership with the university
of New Mexico because of time
running out of the legislative
session in twenty nineteen the
legislation was unable to make
it through the committee process
however because of the junior
money that was available I was
essentially able to to to pay
for the study with the amounts
that I was allocated so that's
four to twenty twenty and the
study was under way and while at
work seem to hold for many of us
due to COVID nineteen UNM and
the work of gable Sanchez and
his team not only adopted to the
COVID nineteen times but they
managed to speak to over
eighteen hundred frontline
workers from all over the state
who will be impacted when
extractive industries and here
in the state these eighteen
hundred frontline workers were
surveyed in the midst of a
pandemic and the moment that
many of us knew would come which
was an incredible decline in oil
and gas what this study did was
provide a framework on how we
transition away from these
industries not only towards a
green economy but a sustainable
and non exploitative one that
framework is what you re hearing
house bill nine and is not only
the mechanism and vehicle that
provides.
The vision for the economic and
sustainable future for New
Mexico and it's communities but
it is also the roadmap to reach
our climate goals and so with
that I am and we we have a
couple of experts that can can
assist us if there's any
technical questions but at this
point we're we're happy to open
it up for questions.
And madam chair if it if it
would be appropriate at this
time I can help explain some of
the changes that were made in
the substitute that was offered
for discussion today.
Thank you representatives us so
let's go ahead and go to the
public and what we're gonna do
because this is a we've heard
this bill and another committee
and I know a lot of people want
to speak on it so we're going to
have thirty minutes for those
that are in support and then
thirty minutes for those that
are in opposition so folks will
have a time limit of a one
minute so sixty seconds so
please be concise and please not
to repeat others you can
introduce yourselves and tell us
if you're with a group but then
you're also welcome to say that
you support what has been said
by previous speakers so let's go
ahead and start with opposition
first so please raise your hand
if you would like to speak in
opposition and we will hear you.
if we speak and so if you speak
in support we're gonna cut you
off because again we want to
hear from folks from opposition
first.
So now we are going to specific
policy you're now and made it.
I thank you madam chair and
representative members of the
committee I'm just here as a
expert witness so let's move on
and we can move on to another
number okay we're gonna hear
from opposition please Mike
Miller you are now and made it.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is Mike
Miller representing the Permian
basin petroleum association
we're proposing H. B. line for
number of reasons for instance
we bill the bill is placing
additional responsibilities of
agencies already over burdened
we hear repeatedly have the
agencies are under staffed and
under funded this leads to bless
this legislation only adds to
that argument that in we don't
mind a fair and consistent
regulatory environment and what
would much rather see
legislation that adequately
funds the agencies to accomplish
the responsibilities which in
turn will likely accomplish many
of the tasks outlined in this
legislation for these and many
other reasons we oppose H. B.
line thank you.
Thank you Amy Barbie you are now
and it.
I mean you have to limit
yourself.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee Amy parity I am
the registered lobbyists for the
New Mexico oil and gas
association which stands in
strong.
Position to this bill today we
have had extensive conversations
that we plan to continue the.
This.
Sanchez echo in a way agents
seized we as an industry the oil
and gas industry is committed to
reducing emissions and train
more firemen Act also printing
operation.
Within the state even as this
bill is for.
That thank you this morning as
untenable for both.
St and the state agencies
regulate air industry.
Thank you very much.
Thank you John block you are now
emitted.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is John block united New Mexican
and business owner and I urge
you to vote no on house bill
nine is short sighted costly and
corrosive piece of legislation
that will cripple our New Mexico
energy industry a vital source
of funding to our schools and
hospitals the bills FIR states
that it the new significant
impact would significantly
affect state revenues costing
fifteen nine million dollars
over the next three years while
offering few solutions and how
to pay for this anti worker
legislation comes as countless
businesses have already shut
their doors for good and H. B.
line would be the final nail in
the coffin for hardworking
laborers across the state HB
night is nothing but a give away
to extremist you go left in dark
money groups and law firms that
have done thousands of dollars
into ramming this bill through
please vote no on destructive
job killing anti worker H. B.
line thank you madam chair and
members of the committee.
Thank you yes you are now and
made it.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you for the
opportunity to comment this
morning my name is to be Rivera
and I'm the director of
government affairs and
registered lobbyists for New
Mexico former livestock bureau.
Today I stand before you in
opposition to house bill nine
the legislation looks to create
sweeping regulatory changes to
meet greenhouse gas emission
reduction targets in order to
combat climate change our
members are directly opposed the
enactment of any legislation
that seeks to dictate how the
state address climate change
instead we recommend that these
types of policies and
recommendations be implemented
on a voluntary basis with
incentives for individuals and
businesses in twenty twenty at
the American farm bureau
federation of which New Mexico
is a member formed and co chairs
the food and agriculture climate
alliance the alliance has
developed a report with forty
voluntary recommendations based
on three principles and we
recommend that the state follow
a similar approach thank you and
please stand in opposition of
this bill.
Thank you Vince Martinez your
now and made it.
Good morning madam chair members
the committee on this Martinez
of tri state generation and
transmission.
price it is a not for profit
cooperative that provides
electric generation transmission
of forty two rural electric
cooperatives and for state today
along with our eleven New Mexico
rural electric cooperative
members in that New Mexico rural
electric cooperative association
we stand and respectful
opposition to HB nine.
By twenty twenty for more than
fifty percent of the Energy tri
state delivers to its member
owners will be from renewable
sources six years earlier than
the ETA mandate over the next
decade tristate we'll have
another one thousand megawatts
of solar and wind bringing RRPS
to seventy percent by twenty
twenty by twenty thirty two
years ago in good faith tristate
and that's member cooperatives
along with a broad group of
stakeholders agreed to the
provisions of the ETA we we ask
you this committee devote noted
and allow the DEA to fully
develop thank you.
Thank you Jim Winchester you are
now and made it.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you so much for
the time today Jim Chester with
the independent petroleum
association of New Mexico we do
stand opposed to this bill we
think that at best it's it's
highly duplicative and at worst
it upends a two years of
collaborative work between
industry the NGOs in the
administration to produce to
comprehensive methane rules
there are also major questions
surrounding the baseline data of
the data collection the data
analysis as well as the method
methodology in this bill we also
find that their numerous terms
are not defined and therefore
open to wide interpretations
in likewise we feel that this
bill would give regulatory
authority to introduce in boards
that are not qualified to make
important science based
decisions
so for these reasons we do stand
opposed to HB nine thank you
very much.
Thank you Mr Michelle frost
Maynard your now and it.
Good morning madam chairwoman in
members of the committee
Shallcross Maynard on behalf of
New Mexico cattle growers in New
Mexico will course we stand
opposed to house bill nine we
feel that the regulations are to
sleeping and are damaging try
agricultural businesses the
proposed regulations will hamper
business development and
expansion in New Mexico due to
its costly implementation house
bill nine proposes gas emissions
reduction which does not take
into account the agricultural
practices that are crucial to
the the supply chain which is in
a great need of expansion within
our state finally the amendments
to the air quality control act
does not considered drought
conditions that lead to low
quality air for these reasons
and many reasons previously
stated we stand in opposition to
house bill nine.
Thank you Kevin growing old your
now immediate.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee will grow all the
CEO of New Mexico real occur
Cooper so station
I'll just echo on the comments
of
Mr Martinez from tri state we
entered into the energy
transition act and the renewable
portfolio standards that it
included in twenty nineteen
we're gonna meet and exceed
the requirements of the tracking
of
emissions from our industry we
believe
All right take care of energy
transition act appreciate your
conversations with the Sanchez
and look forward to working on
getting our last couple fixes in
there and thank you for the
fixes that they have done but we
at this point still stand in
opposition thank you.
Thank you actually your now and
it.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I'm
Ashley Wagner the director of
public policy for the New Mexico
chamber of commerce and I
represent businesses and
industries all across the state
at your request madam chair I'll
keep it brief and non repetitive
so I will echo what has been
said before and we oppose this
bill thank you.
Thank you to do Trujillo you are
now in muted.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee my name is TJ to
real registered lobbyists for
Occidental petroleum the for the
reasons previously stated in
order to keep our COVID short to
get to debate.
The reasons previously stated ox
opposes the bill thank you.
Thank you we have someone
identified as each two four
eight eight six please identify
yourself.
You're also muted on your and.
Sorry I'm opposed to this bill
my name is Erin statutes and up
for many reasons stated prior to
the.
Thank you.
Thank you.
February is saying.
You're now and maintenance I.
Thank you good morning madam
chair members of the committee
this is Beverly at single
executive director very
producers of New Mexico for the
reasons stated I think these
this bill would harm business
and industry within the state
especially agriculture and as
farm bureau and categories is
that they're already working on
plans to make sure that they're
not harming the environment and
actually helping it the dairy
industry actually has a plan to
become carbon net zero or carbon
negative by twenty fifty and so
we don't want this interfering
with that plan that we already
have in place thank you.
Thank you Mike bow in your now
and meet it.
Thank you thank you madam chair
members of the committee I'm not
restate what's already been
stated I'm my name's Mike Boeing
on the executive director of the
New Mexico mining association we
stand in opposition to this bill
thank you.
Thank you so that concludes the
opposition and I apologize
because I meant to let everyone
know that we have the
interpreters online and if you
look at to the bottom of your
screen when you raise your hand
you'll see a little glow that
has interpretation there so if
someone comes on speaking
Spanish then you just go to the
global punch on at and
Tab English and then the track
that the interpretation will be
transferred for you so it's a
great function please use it and
we will move now to those in
support of house bill nine.
Do you are now immediate.
You'll have to get yourself Jen.
Madam chair and representative
my name is Jim Parsons I stand
in support of H. bill line as it
will build on the Energy
transection Act with clean
energy job creation
opportunities that will increase
state tax revenues a task force
that will be charged with
diversifying and New Mexico's
economy by including
opportunities for K. twelve
education of our youth and
community colleges to diversify
our skilled workforce with the
goal of fifty percent reduction
in greenhouse gas emissions by
twenty thirty and zero by twenty
fifty.
Twenty fifty New Mexico was
blessed with sunshine water and
other.
Technologies for clean enemies
energies and a diversified
natural habitat for attracting a
multitude of green energy
economic opportunities for
businesses and New Mexicans as
employees please support H. bill
money.
Thank you also Chavis you're now
and made it.
Madam chair co what's the hope
but yet they share a opted
Chavis you mention that the up
to Chavis demand born for Kewa
Pueblo I am the executive
director of NM nativo and a
member of power for New Mexico
with the passing of this bill we
can begin to move into a just
transition to a clean energy
future it is vital to put
indigenous black people of color
and other frontline communities
at the decision table to inform
our transition to an energy
economy that will address the
climate crisis our communities
are facing today many children
from our communities have
written in to ask you to support
H. B. line because they know it
is good for the environment and
all help reduce pollution and
because it ensures them a
livable future we owe them a
chance at that future we ask
that you passed H. B. line thank
you to sponsors Stansbury and
Rubio madam chair and members of
the committee yet hello at.
Thank you and ran you are now
and muted.
And I you'll have to and you on
your end.
Good morning chair members of
the committee thank you for the
opportunity to speak in support
of the COVID solutions Oct I
come to you as an organizer with
the New Mexico working families
party
a partner of many on in support
of each building nine I'm we
want to thank sponsors for
supporting organizations like
office almost let Nava for
ensuring transparent and
community driven solutions to
the problems that we face we are
just facing one.
Price is a global pandemic mass
unemployment systemic racism
climate crisis they are all
connected in the working
families party works in order in
an outside of elections to ship
the conversations to working
families need and want we're in
support of this bill and excited
to see that people will have
access to good paying jobs
access to clean air clean water
and a little bold planet for
generations to come.
Thank you Wendy at city you are
now and made it.
Hello my name is Wendy at city
thank you for this opportunity
as a private citizen in giving
COVID I am a frontline community
member of the Navajo Nation as I
call the four corners my
homeland what wristed a change
climate manner frontline
communities this entry has been
recorded as the warmest in
temperatures this is critical as
extreme heat poses health risks
for tribal members that are
still existing electricity in
the twenty first century and can
without fossil fuel last summer
to local and state newspapers
reported headlines of water
restriction from drought we need
a good snow pack from the
mountains as this as without
threatens a scarcity of our
rivers for agriculture
traditional medicines livestock
and drinking water supply this
past year are committees on
reservation for
disproportionally affected by
COVID nineteen pandemic hotspots
and Aaron Clemente pollution
hinder the growing season crop
production rangelands for
livestock and water supply H. B.
line begins action to curb
climate change record provide
emission targets for states to
help our impacted communities
thank you.
Thank you.
Ryan conduct you are now needed.
Thank you madam chairman members
of the committee house bill nine
provides for protections for New
Mexico's natural resources
including water and air the bill
also includes important
considerations for New Mexico's
workforce on behalf of the
fifteen constructing graft
unions of delayed with the New
Mexico building trades council
we stand in full support of the
legislation thank you.
Thank you Khloe JKR now
animated.
I know what the whole but hello
and thank you madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Chloe Jake I am a citizen of
county nation of Oklahoma and
we're gonna pueblo also a
lifelong resident of Albuquerque
I'm here before you to speak on
my own behalf isn't aligned
indigenous women I would urge
the members of this committee to
pass each line we have only a
few precious years to enact
sweeping changes so that we may
occur if the worst effects of
climate change I'm proud of the
many steps me stay in this body
have taking to address the
climate crisis but the work is
far from over each line is a
necessary piece of action not
only because it moves us ever
closer towards net zero carbon
emissions but because it will
also ensure adjust transition
for far too long communities of
color and low income citizens
have been left to suffer the
injustices of an Action on
climate change and this bill
will give us a leading role in
the transition to a green
economy allow us to determine
for ourselves how we will
succeed in it thank you thank
you Mexico with Ole you are now
and muted.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Erica today was policy
director at they and we stand in
favor of house bill money and
you it's as a racial justice
issue in order to have a just
transition to renewable energy
communities of color need to be
part of the planning process and
have access to the training they
need especially in tribal and
rural communities to benefit
from the job opportunities that
come from this transition for
this reason we urge members of
the committee to vote in favor
of house bill money to ensure
that black indigenous and people
of color are at the table when
decisions are being made for
them and families thank you.
Thank you we have to do with the
action.
You've actually your now and
muted.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee thank you so
much to all of those who already
spoke in favor of house bill
nine my name is Clarissa Duran
and I am from Espanola I run a
youth action league for young
adults who are grassroots
organizers and we stand in
support of all bills including
house bill nine that will ensure
that our young people are able
to continue life as New Mexicans
in the way that we currently no
way by supporting our mother and
supporting the people in our
state to honor Mother Earth we
ask respectfully for your vote
for house bill nine thank you.
Thank you Deborah Condit you're
now unmuted.
I am Deborah Condit and they're
registered lobbyists for
Interwest Energy Alliance
interested is the regional trade
association representing roughly
thirty at the nation's largest
utility scale renewable energy
developers manufacturers and
we're headquartered right here
in New Mexico interesting is
here to support house bill money
and we are encouraged by the
state's commitment to emissions
reductions and are excited about
the role the industry has to
play in delivering clean
electricity we're eager to be
part of it it be impacted part
of the discussions regarding job
creation and economic recovery
as a state diversifies its
budget thank you.
Thank you Nina benefit us here
now unmuted.
Good morning my name is nana
Bennett B. this I'm a community
organizer for Affero axion in
Grant County I will be speaking
on behalf of Gabriel Bennett B.
this who was unable to join us
this morning but has been given
but I've been given his written
statement.
Good morning committee members
Madam chairwoman my name is
Gabriel Bennett B. this I am a
lifelong resident of Silver City
and Grant County I'm here to
speak in support of H. B. line
our community is in dire need of
alternatives to the mining and
extraction industries though we
are grateful for the many
generations of employment mining
has provided our families we
must begin to look forward to
the possibility of the
incorporation of responsible
mining with the introduction of
green energy jobs and the
educational opportunities that
accompany them H. B. line is a
doorway to the future and an
opportunity for people of color
to it people of color
communities of color and rural
communities to have.
No one long here now and it.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee is no longer with
the national resources defense
council I am pleased to be here
today to support this really
important and landmark piece of
legislation has already been
stated at New Mexico's governor
Michelle Lujan Grisham began to
turn the ship for New Mexico
towards reducing emissions just
in our first day in office with
the executive order on climate
change this bill will ensure
that the state stays on that
track to reduce emissions
consistent with what's managed
by science and builds a leading
clean energy economy it's
equitable and inclusive and
bills for all New Mexico thank
you for that I respectfully ask
for your support.
Thank you Joseph Hernandez your
now and muted.
Good morning Matt madam chair
members of this committee Dr
Benny Shendo Jr those are the
net clinicians no okay but you
need us to to check noted this
the smell.
I am that the net energy
organizer for neighbor education
projects and I'm also a member
of a power for New Mexico and I
live here in Shiprock New Mexico
house bill Nye will give New
Mexico tribal communities a seat
at the table in in implementing
a more diversified and resilient
economy.
The equity that in this
legislation is needed and will
help our communities of be truly
resilient as we push through and
in recovering from the effects
from COVID nineteen.
Please wait for house bill nine.
Thank you.
Seventy with New Mexico cafe you
are now and made it.
Good morning.
Chair members of the committee
any my name is Debbie managed
and then later here.
And when accounting with thank.
I'm not a climate expert but I
am a mother of two and as a
reminder this bill is important
to me we're creating an
uncertain future.
For generations because we're
hurting the environment also we
lack a diverse economy that we
struggle financially due to the
fact that there's not many job
opportunities here in New
Mexico.
And the minute Connie is
important work retail extraction
business and although these are
all dignified occupations
there's not much room for
advancement and the use of New
Mexico often look elsewhere for
job opportunities.
House when I was strengthen our
communities by diversifying our
economy is with renewable energy
jobs and echo what's been said
about how the time.
Is now we're behind schedule for
climate change and we have to do
our part because it affects
separately.
We want to help your future for
New Mexicans more children seven
one please vote yes for house
bill nine thank you.
Any.
You are now and made it.
And it looks like there is a
problem with years June version
you're still using an older
versions who are not able to
allow you to speak.
Joan brown you are now and it.
Thank you committee chair
committee members and sponsors
of this bill my name is Joan
brown and the Franciscan sister
and to work with New Mexico
interfaith power and light we
work with faith communities
people of faith and conscience
all of the state and people of
faith see climate change as the
greatest ethical and moral
concern of our time and see it
as a multiplier effect in other
issues concerns that they
address my poverty and equity
interests generational justice
and health concerns we're
particularly excited about the
just transition part of this
bill looking at education and
economic opportunities for the
future in working with people of
faith and communities in
southeast New Mexico we've
already had some of these
conversations and they have very
creative and wonderful ideas and
are ready to get started to care
for the land that they love and
the people that they love in the
state thank you and please
support this bill.
Thank you Douglas Michael John
here now and made it.
Thank you madam chair committee
members and Douglas Mikel John
I'm an attorney and registered
lobbyist with the New Mexico
environmental law center for the
many reasons been stated by
supporters we support this bill
we thank the sponsors for bring
it forward and we urged
committee members to vote in
favor of house bill nine thank
you.
Thank you Camilla Ableman you
are now and made it.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee and Camilla I
amend representing the Sierra
club's thirty five thousand
members and supporters around
the state.
I'm it changes here extreme
weather has hit our region in a
very this way this week and we
see and what the lack of
preparedness can cause as the
parent of young children who you
can publicly hear in the
background it's my duty to act
on their behalf to limit the
worst effects of climate change
and to help prepare an economy
that is sustainable for them
agencies in New Mexico do need
to be properly and fully funded
they can't just be funded to
permanent but they also have to
be able to protect our
communities from the impacts the
industry impose on our state we
congratulate the governor for
having enacted a climb that
executive order and we think it
should be enshrined in law
please vote yes on H. B. line
and thank you so much for your
service.
Thank you David Hermio your now
and made it.
Yes madam chair members of the
committee thank you for the
opportunity to speak in favor of
this bill and thank you to the
governor for bold initiatives
Representative order as well as
the ETA thanks to the sponsors
for introducing this very
important next step in
transition to a clean and
healthy economy for all citizens
important in this our
legislation is the expansion of
this issue to at risk
communities who are most
impacted by the current climate
crisis I'm I'm a registered
lobbyist with the Energy action
fund we stand in strong support
of this bill and urged the
committee to continue this
discussion and continue this
process and all progress frankly
towards a cleaner and safer
environment for our communities
thank you.
Thank you Alex you are now and
maintenance.
Hello good morning good morning
members of the committee I my
name is Alex and I am I lead
organizer with affects your and
I'm gonna be reading us a
testimony from a leader in
Hidalgo county for more
Department Imoke one signs who
grew up who was born and raised
in Hidalgo county whose roots
are really deeply rooted within
his community and being from a
small community that all the
relations are close and being
from an a on a community that's
built from extraction and only
rooted in one economic industry
we see how diversity can be
what's that industry.
Or disappears and so this is
important that we ask for you
all to support H. B. H. B. line
to making sure that we're also
not only talking about the
safety of our of our lands and
our water but we also make sure
that we got economic
diversification within our
communities because that's going
to be the make or break up rural
communities so thank you so
much.
Thank you Christian because that
was your now and muted.
Thank you chairman committee
members my name is Christian to
see just speaking on behalf of
the coalition for sustainable
Communities New Mexico we're a
coalition of member governments
representing the cities of
Albuquerque Santa Fe Los crucis
in Santa Fe County our members
strongly support the passage of
H. nine cheating emission goals
statewide and diversifying our
economy requires participation
and collaboration from local
governments and supporting a
just transition from what's
important and all members each
of our members city councils and
county commission have passed
resolutions supporting the goals
of HB nine our need to support
H. B. line thank you very much.
Thank you Ben Shelton you are
now and it.
Thank you madam chair I'm just
honored to join everybody who's
us raise their hand to support
this bill today I'm not gonna be
duplicative of of previous
comments we think that this is
something that would enshrine
this bill would enshrine
transitioning climate leadership
I in the state for years to come
and across across sectors which
I think is really really keep us
something that we need badly in
order to catch the rest of the
state up with the energy sector
which is in a leadership
position thanks to the GA this
really should be the norm for
the more I think this is very
very important bill because it
centers transition centers New
Mexico communities at the heart
of the climate debate which
something we should be doing
every time we raise the specter
of climate change resiliency and
adaptation we should really be
centering New Mexico communities
thank you very much.
Thank you Chile dusting your now
and muted.
Madam chair and committee
members my name is going to show
you all the from Shiprock New
Mexico I am a grandpa a former
first defender and community
leader the rationale to keep
enter your development at the
same or increase levels to
finance schools won the state
coffers and find a paycheck for
families are well understood and
appreciated but to me that does
not compare to the need to save
the planet for our generations
to come it is urgent that we
protect the earth mother as her
life is all our lives H. B. line
presents the best option as it
will provide the opportunity for
those who want to reserves
and those who believe her
resources need to be exploited
it is imperative that we find
common ground and go forward
together instead of continuing
in non Indian opposition I
humbly ask you to vote yes on H.
B. line it is a matter of
justice for our children thank
you.
Thank you we have a couple of
the youth age advocates Alex and
Adrian you are now unmuted.
Years old I support.
That because I want a future I
care about the Rio Grande I care
about our precious conflicts not
getting enough water I care
about protecting
this bill will drive down
greenhouse gas emissions that
are causing climate change so
yes for our future yes for
eighty nine.
Committee my name is Adrian I am
twelve years old let me ask you
will we still be in a drought
when I grow up will there still
be pine trees on the Sandia's in
a hundred years will there still
be a Rio Grande snaking through
New Mexico.
These questions are in your
control today we do our part to
fight climate change you can
decide New Mexico's future you
can determine the course of
history right now vote yes.
Thank you.
You know you're now and it.
State.
You'll have to anyone here and
Connery.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is Khan
rich you know and I am the risk
of this proposal back then
Townsend and we support the
committee substitute for H. we
nine we agree with the intent
behind the proposed legislation
to address climate change and
find solutions to reduce
emissions and harmful pollutants
but up we do have concerns with
the make up of the climate
leadership council the bill
calls for right for tribal
representatives in the council
but you know there are twenty
three several sovereign tribal
governments your New Mexico
sako and I'm not saying that we
should all have a seat at the
council but the council is heavy
on representation by state
agencies and other entities and
tribes the situation usually get
more flights unless there's some
additional tribal representation
so we would ask that
The council make up be
reevaluated but we do support
the bill and we hope that this
committee will agree as well
thank you very much madam chair.
Thank you Health Security staff
you are now in muted.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee this is Mary
Feldblum and speaking for your
first works gap and we fully
support the the substitute this
bill sets up a very careful
process with the ability of
having a lot of great minds in
New Mexico including those who
live in impacted communities and
the tribes are to come up with
an important solution and what
the two young people just said
is absolutely critical for the
future so we urge you to support
this thank you.
Thank you then number written
you are now and muted.
Want to help us good morning
madam chair and committee
members my name is my
neighborhood and I'm from the
Santo Domingo pueblo I'm
representing the seller today an
organization dedicated to
increasing access to clean the
clean energy transition I'm also
standing up as a New Mexican
with a deep love for our state
in people another I echo other
supporters have said before me
and making sure that we
prioritize the health and safety
of by pop communities and are
you.
We have many blessings now that
we it is easy to neglect
especially when we have a clean
environment and we have a lot at
stake in this legislation I hope
you know yesterday's to support
H. B. line thank you for your
time.
Thank you Judy Coleman here now
and muted.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my names Judy
COVID and I'm The New Mexico
policy director for the Audubon
society run strong support of H.
B. line recent comprehensive
studies show that two thirds of
American bird species are at
grave risk from climate change
with almost four hundred species
on the brink of extinction in
the near future we also know
that certain communities bear a
greater burden than others from
climate change and so we
appreciate that this bill begins
to address that issue New Mexico
has been a leader on climate and
this bill presents a great
opportunity for to be a leader
again and we strongly urge you
to support it thank you.
Thank you Maria.
Number at you are now and it.
When is yes the numbers Maria is
going in the early
Representative Rubio Igor is the
more that's just what we get
late action then maybe that will
make you want to see what
article best you must see that
for the latest battle that
problematic again thank yes I
will get those one in four years
just buttressing notice yes my
yes let's see here actually been
let me thank you doesn't do it
okay yeah you're not lasting in
discipline is a yes coming or
level but I can Mr school that
is.
When I understand you still keep
it on Dennis that'll where we
should be able when is the crime
you go for a state late action
movie.
No this bill come people see
people but on the Senator you
know that will make you can just
settle.
Can
go is that it may on the impact
latest revision as community
because going to set us when
that electrical me but I miss
you guys you can and when I
think of you that then if you
leave the less than that it can
with us but it's you also in the
may dial it will still unical is
simple thank you.
Thank you early on I can still.
You are now and it.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee my name is Lillian
access to you on the deputy
director with how do and for all
the reasons previously stated
that particular all the
committee members that live in
these communities we definitely
support their voices and we
strongly support the community
the committee sub this line and
we encourage the committee to
pass the concessions Act thank
you so much thank you Hey your
now emitted.
Hello this is occasion Begay.
Ahead and begin please.
Acacia.
Good morning madam chair and
members of this committee my
name is occasion Begay I live in
Shiprock and I am a freshman at
Shiprock high school.
Well in favor of house bill nine
to protect my community
community and give my peers an
opportunity to shape and economy
an economy for much for us thank
you.
Thank you steep wise bird your
now emitted.
Good morning on behalf of three
fifty New Mexico.
Which is addresses climate
change we support H. B. line
thank you very much.
Thank you Alice since I work
here now in muted.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee I'm
Allison civic executive director
of the human resources
information project based in
Silver City and I'm also a
mother and for the future of all
of our children and all of the
reasons stated previously we
stand and support strong support
of HB nine and urged passage of
this bill thank you so much for
your time this morning thank you
Christopher then you are now and
it.
Morning madam chair and members
the committee names Chris then
I'm here on behalf of three
fifty Santa state stress our
strong support.
Built on good progress we're
making under the energy
transition act establishing
scientifically formulated
statewide emission reduction.
We important it creates a
process to engage New Mexico
communities and businesses.
To achieve these goals and just
inclusive manner challenge ahead
of us is daunting the
alternative building more just
and sustainable economy for the
twenty first century skip past
the articles.
Secretary of our children
grandchildren please support HB
not thank you for your service.
Thank you page night your now
and it.
I think you're good morning
madam chair and members of the
committee my name is Paige
knight and I am here
representing New Mexico voices
for children to stand in strong
support of house bill nine I
want to thank the sponsors for
this legislation and all the
times that and community
involvement that went into
developing this still.
House bill nine is needed now
for equitable economic
development and diversification
environmental and climate
justice and to help ensure that
New Mexico's children and
families so many of whom we've
heard from today can thrive in a
claim just and healthy
environment now and for
generations to come I strongly
urge your support for the
climate solutions act thank you
very much.
Thank you so we have just
finished the thirty minutes of
public comment in support of the
house bill nine and now we will
move along to the committee.
First I have Representative
Zamora.
Madam chair.
On this bill I have twenty eight
fiscal impact reports and
analysis I have two bills that
on my desk.
But neither one's the right
bill.
And then I have.
I've been working with the
analyst for the committee trying
to get.
Get it from.
The share file.
And I have not been able to get
it.
I'm gonna ask of the.
The committee to roll the bill
and I would gladly get together
with representatives
Representative Stansbury to
receive.
The right bill.
So that I can work on getting
the right.
Fiscal impact reports an
analysis on it so I can decide
for what I'm doing and what's
going on with this bill.
Representative Zamora we'll have
our committee assistant email
the bill too but it has been in
the share file for a number of
days now the committee analysts
have also received a and I
believe there are Anna and
Alice's are based on the
committee substitute.
And madam chair the I've gotten
together with the analysts say
they weren't aware that we were
gonna have this this change.
And.
We had this happen in.
In the water the other day
what's of representative
Stansbury and it was we have so
many bills and so many of our
yards and so many analysis that
we just the bill to be rolled so
that we can put our heads
together and and get on the
right page with everything and
the the chair of a good water
chairman land this.
The role the bills that we can
go back and and get our heads on
straight and try to figure out
what's going on and I just thank
you madam chair to look at this.
In this manner that that I can't
and I can't go back in the time
that we're sitting here debating
and I'm trying to listen to all
the witnesses and and learn of
their opinions and I can't go
back during all this time all
I'm trying to do my work on the
computer and decide for which
fiscal impact reports of which
analysis I need to use and I
don't even have the bill in
front.
Representative Zamora we can go
through the process of how to
navigate the share file later
but the bill has been in the
chair file along with the
analysis so I I don't know what
to tell you it's been there for
at least a couple of days of the
committee assistant was aware of
it the committee and Alice says
analysts were also aware of that
so I will defer to the sponsors
but.
It's in the share drive if we
need to have a lesson on how to
use that we can absolutely do it
but it's been in there for at
least a couple of days okay and
madam chair.
Can I asked of the committee and
and of you madam chair for
Representative Stansbury to go
through the bill and and read
that and explain the changes in
the building.
Yes Representative Stansbury.
Thank you madam chair.
Yes thank you madam chair first
of all I want to clarify that
what was just shared is actually
not what happened and House agon
Water it was a clerical error in
our other and and bill we did
submit this substitute on
Saturday and it was placed in
the Here file with the two oh
two number that was confirmed as
the committee and the secretary
has confirmed so has met all the
criteria but yes I would love
the opportunity to talk about
the substitution much change
because actually the substitute
address many of the issues that
came up during the public
testimony so first and foremost
one of the most important
changes that happened in the
substitute is that there were
provisions originally concerning
oil and gas and the methane
standard essentially and the
first graph that has been
removed from this draft and that
was one of the primary concerns
that the oil and gas industry
had brought forward so and the
language concerning as a sixty
percent reduction and and oil
and gas emissions has been
removed from the standard so
that it's just an economy wide
standard so that's one change
one of the other pieces of
feedback that came from the
agencies and others was about
some of the dates concerning how
and agencies that conduct their
rule making some policy changes
and so we restructured the bill
so that it would provide
sufficient time for rulemaking
is to occur and some
restructuring and how each of
the different rule makings for
an articulated in the bill we
also received feedback from the
electric co ops that they wanted
to ensure that the renewable
portfolio standards that were
included in the energy
transition act we're accounted
for in the greenhouse gas
emissions in this bill so we
made that change by
incorporating by reference that
greenhouse counters the ETA into
the spell there is but there was
some concern about emissions
tracking from the coops and so
we where hoping.
To continue that conversation
but in terms of the
incorporation us that actual
standard that was added to that
to the order and then we also
receive some agency and feedback
from the agency responses that
the state land office wanted to
be had to the to the task force
which we did we received
feedback from state Indian
Affairs that they felt that we
needed increase tribal
participation so we increased it
to three tribal participants and
and that Task Force and we've
also requested my understanding
is the committee requested an
updated fiscal impact report for
the substitute as the original
was on a very different version
of this bill so so those are
some of the major changes that
are in the substitute thank you.
Representative the more you
still have the floor.
Thank you madam chair and I'll
try to work with what I've got
and the I have more questions
hello.
Yes thank you.
Thank you Representative right.
Thank you madam chair
That that madam chair and
Representative Stansbury so I'm
looking at an FIR dated to
sixteen of twenty one is that
the correct one.
That is not an FIR on the
current order no.
Madam chair I'm.
The the bill I have is the House
Energy Environment natural
resource the point three
version.
But
I don't know if you know I don't
know how we.
I guess what we've got to do is
go to the share file on every
bill that's on the list stores
Sir way in the future that we
can be notified Hey there's a
committee set up for this bill
because I'm I'm obviously got
all the old but for make sure.
Anyway
Madam chair and representative
Stansbury so you've removed oil
and gas from this.
Is that in the original bill and
the committee substitute that
was adopted and house energy
there was originally a standard
of those sixty percent reduction
in oil and gas targeted
emissions and that has been
removed from the substitute yes.
Okay the.
Madam chair and representative
Stansbury that's we're.
A lot of my concern was because
of the state budget I mean.
You know I.
I'm not sure what questions to
ask right now because.
You know all the information
I've got is out dated but we
need so.
When we look at the FIR that was
dated to sixteen.
What we all are the
the cost to the state you know
when you start going through
this it shows that
See the.
Environment Department needed
three point five million the
energy minerals and natural
need to four and a half to four
point six million workforce
solutions need in the.
Two hundred and about three
hundred thousand a year.
D. O. T. needed a hundred and
seventy five thousand.
Cultural affairs needed one
point five million a year so.
Which one what are any of these.
Eliminated in the new one or do
we still have the same concerns.
So thank you madam chair and
representative bring like I said
we my understanding is that the
committee has requested an
updated FIR IT I don't have that
in front of me but some of the
original costs that were
associated with the original FIR
is involved rulemakings actually
and costs associated with
implementing that methane
standard because there was
concerns that they would have to
revisit some of that and current
activities that they've done for
your current methane will making
so it is my great hope that once
we get an updated FIR that it
will reflect a much smaller
costs for the state and you know
I think as was reflected in our
opening comments the goal of
this bill is to really
institutionalize the work that
the state is doing so that it's
part of the statutory framework
at the state and so well there
will be some costs associated
for implementing this for the
state we want to make sure that
it's in line with and what
agencies are capable of doing so
yes.
Madam chair and Representative
Stansbury I don't think anyone
on the committee is against
trying to cut emissions you know
with so
I think that all of us you know
we're recycling buying.
more energy efficient cars all
that stuff so.
Please don't take any of my
comments as yeah we want to
pollute the world but.
At
know one of the is this is kind
of a general comment when we
look at who is polluting the
world I think that we yeah and
hopefully you agree that you
know trying to and it in the
those countries are not taking
it serious and I think federally
we need to have them you know
put pressure on them to start
adopting rules like the US
because we're we're reducing
that but I'm gonna have to
I'm gonna have to get the
current bill
and then.
probably you know figured out
there thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative
Representative Ortez.
I thank you madam chair
representative Stansbury and
Representative Rubio
thank you for bringing this.
This bill and to to our
committee not the changes that
have been made I am I was the
comments really closely and I
was so moved by the young people
acacia Alex and Adrian I I have
two young girls myself so it it
It was it was just so
heartwarming to hear these young
people express their concerns
so so eloquently and beautifully
I as I read through the bill the
sub I I recognize that that use
is that the definition of you
this part of the
disproportionately impacted our
community but I noticed that
there is no there's no seat for
use of and use advocates on in
in the council or
in the deception about you know
economics so I'm I'm wondering
how we're going to address young
people.
yeah well actually thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative Ortez and one of
the changes that was made in the
substitute was adding you the
definition of impacted
communities and one of the
things that I think is important
to highlight here is that part
of how we incorporate this lands
that back equity through the
work of both addressing our
greenhouse gas emissions and
resilience and economic
diversification is by
incorporating this definition
that impact the communities
throughout the free market power
addressing that and that's what
makes this bill unique
innovative and frankly one of
the first in the country did you
actually very exciting approach.
Thank you madam chair
representative Stansbury I'm
Representative Rubio
I want to talk a little bit more
right I just need to understand
a little bit more about why the
oil and gas industry is is is so
opposed to this given the
me into the language that was
removed from the news at first
at all now in the sectional
longer in this in this out so
can you trust that a little bit
more the the how the missions
language was removed.
And why we still have this
opposition.
Thank you madam chair sure one
chairman Representative Ortez
you know I I don't want to speak
for industries that we have as I
think was mentioned in the
comments that have been ongoing
and continuing conversation with
industry and that's that that is
in front of you today does
address kind of the biggest you
sent the concerns and actually
the right here I think major
concerns in the original draft
the best no one was
the standards that were specific
for oil and gas and the second
was around amendments to the air
quality control definition that
was at the end of the bill and
now also has been stricken in
this version of the side and
that was also an agency concern
and there are some outstanding
concerns the industry has sent
us Representative lines on and
we're planning hopefully to meet
with them today to work with
works with them and their
regulatory offices I think the
thing that's important to
understand is that you know the
governor's office has already
through the executive order set
these economy wide emissions and
carbon standards for state and
is working through the
regulatory process and right now
they're working on finalizing
the methane rule which is quite
innovative it's I think one of
the best in the country industry
has been a major player in that
and so we don't want to approve
any of that work we do want to
make sure it's the strongest
possible standards and so the
whole point of how this bill is
drafted is to really I've been
sort of describing it as wrap
our hands around the entire
project of addressing our carbon
footprint in doing so in a way
that works for industry that
works for our communities that
works for agencies and actually
gets the job done.
Thank you madam chair
representative Stansbury I just
it just want to give a quick
message to Alex and Adrian
acacia thank you for your words
you really you really moved me
and this is why I'm doing what
I'm doing now because of you
guys so thank you that's that's
that that's it for questions.
Thank you and I second the shout
out that was great to hear from
the youth advocates.
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair of.
All right to
Working at a disadvantage
because I I did check the chart
the share files.
And sol Committee subcommittee
so by that the last Bruce up so
your things get changed to it
ought to be a little more
apparent the.
To us so that we can.
Read the right doctor I I don't
use the share file to read the
bills yeah I already have the
paper copy because that's where
I met my notes so I just checked
to see if we.
If they're better changes the
unfortunately there was a
committee so on paper and there
was a committee set up all the
share file.
Are preceded by formally do
Representative Nibert if I may
just briefly on that point the
Republican analyst was an
important to as soon as changes
were made so perhaps it might be
a good idea to have him email
you and your members those bills
if if folks aren't comfortable
using the share file or when
changes are made I mean I think
that might help in some of the
processes going forward.
Madam chair and representative.
I read that I hear a lot of nice
words with laudable goals.
I'm really concerned that these.
Nice words and laudable goals
are going to have.
The impact of the state that
does in fact create a new
economic future.
The difference might be that.
What.
Your goals are and I think all
of our goals would be it would
be a broader economic future.
But I'm concerned that.
Not only this legislation but a
lot of legislation that we're
considering.
Is going to have the exact
opposite effect.
And the young people the talk
about having a a bright future
with with opportunities to where
the at work at and brought in
New Mexico
I'm afraid that they're built
like this and and others
are sending a message they're
sending a message what we are
with that messages of lot one
of.
I need economic opportunity to
New Mexico it's one of well
discouraging economic
opportunity question was asked
why is oil and gas supposed to
this.
Quite frankly it says in this
bill that by the year.
Twenty forty twenty fifty
correct me if I'm wrong one of
those states we will be at that
zero.
Carbon emissions in the state of
New Mexico is that correct.
And madam chair representative
Nibert yes and actually I'd love
to explain at zero because I as
a scientific matter the bill is
agnostic about how we get to net
zero and one of the biggest
things we can do to get to net
zero is actually dramatically
increase our biological carbon
sequestration in the state to
reforest rural areas all over
the state that have burned or
had been detonated so there's
lots of ways that we can get to
net zero including and this is
one of the things that the bill
incorporates participation and
western and regional carbon
markets so there is a any any
number of ways that we can get
to net zero and I think you know
our large oil and gas company's
of already taken pledges under
the Paris accords and I
understand that they can get ten
at zero appropriations with a
combination of different tools
so I think it's important to
kind of understand the bigger
picture.
And a lot of that is is engaging
and very.
Costly expensive well programs
that sequester carbon in the
ground which ironically is also
used to produce oil and gas
But.
For your smaller operators for
your New Mexico operators for
your operators that that the
create the employment and the
our live and work here.
They are not the operators that
are engaged in all structured
part recovery project and so
get all the we talk about
opportunities jobs
and all of those things
If we're talking about chevron
oxy.
Who are the big ones that that
have substantial production or
or XTO which is acts on.
Right thank you put in the
search for recovery of
operations thank you and that
you have about our secure
sources of CO two whether it's
natural CO two from the earth or
man made CO two through a.
Eight.
Admissions process.
Have inject that into the grout.
Those are very expensive
undertaking requiring tremendous
capital
but your local oil and gas
company's my neighbor across the
street our.
Neighbors down the street our.
That there are or maybe one of
my fellow Representative Susan
Baltimore gas industry they're
not going to to to to those
types of activities so are
they're the ones that are
employing.
Geologist a professional using
local local lawyers at all down
the line providing the jobs very
jobs of the some of the young
people were talking about of all
that chevron and Exxon boxes
those jobs are in Midland Texas
Houston Texas
or.
Yes so Dallas area of oxy oxy
and chevron are are big Houston
based companies acts on use out
of out of Dallas as a big
presence you start so that's
where those jobs are but they're
not in Roswell New Mexico
they're not obsolete Mexico
would not and Carlsbad Mexico
So you know that the reason why
the oil and gas industry allies
say the industry of independent
strong association of New Mexico
which spoke against it is
because a small operators.
Are basically going to be are
out of business by the year one
fifty because I can't do these
other things that are going out
for the extraction of carbon.
Based products which methane
gas and petroleum or R. so.
You know I I I I I see a lot of
words on the paper I hear a lot
of nice words that that are
being that are you know if you
started out with this is a just
equitable sustainable blueprint
for New Mexico and so my
question is if we went to.
Zero emissions from our.
What would the effect of that be
on climate and climate change
that we're trying to to move the
needle.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representative Nibert so
let me first say that I want to
go back to net zero that is the
operative word here meaning that
you know what we all have taken
math the next when you add and
you subtract all of the things
in the economy we want to get to
net zero for the economy so the
standard that's in this bill is
not a standard for oil and gas
we removed the standard that was
for oil and gas it's for the
entire economy so we're trying
to get to net zero for New
Mexico in carbon emissions not
no emissions for anything under
any circumstance so that's where
you can offset I'm using
different kinds of carbon
sequestration with respect to
the impacts for smaller
producers I understand why
smaller producers are concerned
about the carbon neutral future
that we're moving towards
because of course they're
operating at the margins and I
actually believe strongly is
somebody who believes that
industry has to have a seat at
the table and has to participate
in the solution that we need to
figure out a way to help our
smaller producers make this
transition if they're going to
be able to operate but you know
the the reality is is that we
are facing catastrophic climate
change and if we do not take
action collective action in
every community every state
every country in the world
humanity is facing a
catastrophic catastrophe because
of climate change so to answer
the final question that you're
asking which is a really
important question which is what
is New Mexico's carbon footprint
contribute to the overall global
you know it's only a small
portion though I I can say that
our oil and gas production does
contribute a significant amount
and once it's used in admitted
into the air but that issue
about climate changes is it
really is what they call a
collective action problem
because emissions are
distributed all over the planet.
We have to actually take action
all over the planet and so this
bill is New Mexico's plan to
take action for our own carbon
footprint so just as you and I
and I think Representative Rehm
was just saying we have to do
our part so this is about New
Mexico doing its part and then
finally and madam chair and
Representative Nibert you know I
really encourage folks to read
carefully the economic
diversification and workforce
development pieces because these
issues around and the economy
are exactly what this bill is
about trying to help foster and
it's really important to.
Recognize that yes obviously and
these industries contribute
significantly to our economy
into our state budget but as we
heard in the public testimony
this morning from Carlsbad to
ship rock Santa Fe to Silver
City Los crucis communities
across the state are asking us
as the state as lawmakers to
create a process resource tools
and a forum to reimagine their
economic futures so that we can
have diversification we can have
self affirming culturally
affirming and economic
development in communities
across our state and not just
one or two or if a small handful
of industry so this bill is
really about fostering the
economic development and jobs.
Thank you madam chair you ask
about Representative you said a
couple New Mexico is yours slide
on a global contacts but that we
are significant and the fact
that are.
Petroleum and natural gas
products exported elsewhere how
would you define minimal and how
would you define significant in
those two contacts.
Well am madam chair chairwoman
and I representative Nibert I
don't have the ID the data
directly in front of me but that
is our state climate Task Force
publishes an annual report which
is wonderful and includes a
complete breakdown of our carbon
footprint by sector and its
overall contribution to that and
national greenhouse gas
footprint.
Well Madam chair representative
you use those two terms and I
just wanted to know what was
minimal because I I I I know
that the there's another
representative through staff
make the calculations that.
I think you're gonna hear those
calculations may have already
heard those calculations C.
house energy and essentially
that the conclusion is there's
nothing much to cope to do this
point the of a move the needle
all on our great house gas
emissions worldwide and there
are other forces are
particularly in and developing
countries that are going to be
more than concern in a
reductions of we we were all
those by are two million people
plus that in the state of New
Mexico so well let me ask this
question.
You said that this policy order
will will be effective for all
of New Mexico but that's not
quite accurate is a pattern
chair representative.
And madam chair and and
Representative line for it I I I
think any more clarity on the
question you're asking.
What are you your state that
this is going to affect affect
all of New Mexico at white
question is that's not quite
accurate because there's a lot
of land.
Landmass in New Mexico that is
ministered or or owned by
The tribal
entities that are not going to
be subject to this is that
correct.
So I'm Madam chair
representative Nibert that the
framework in the bill and
utilizes emissions as the
standard of how greenhouse gases
regulated and it includes
language that describes how
those emissions would be tracked
and understood so it's what it's
not at regulation on production
of any kind of particular carbon
it's it's about how much carbon
is released into the atmosphere
which is really what we're
trying to solve the problem that
we're trying to solve here is
not to change sure try to
At regularly at the at the
industry in a specific kind of
weight the problem we're trying
to solve here is climate change
which is the emission of carbon
into the atmosphere is you know
and I wanted to say that you
know I I really think it's
important that we not be
fatalistic about the capacity of
each individual to have an
impact on the overall on the
overall climate might my
backgrounds and water I work in
water and one of things that I
do is I I will it's really
important for people to
understand how different carbon
scenarios affect our overall
claim it and our water supply
and I love to show people graph
and I wish I had it here today
because I think it would help
really illustrate the point.
Even for New Mexico under
current climate scenarios if we
do not reduce carbon we're gonna
see severe impacts on snowpack
and drought but under no action
whatsoever globally we are
looking at catastrophic impacts
where water supply so we can't
just say oh well you know our
contribution isn't enough we all
have to do our part globally to
address our carbon footprint so
this piece is about addressing
New Mexico's emissions and New
Mexico's carbon footprint as
part of the overall collective
global action to address climate
change.
Madam chair representative.
Not sure that answered my
question
is it your intent for this bill
to limit emissions produced from
the.
Tribal animation
and Pablo's in the state of New
Mexico.
So I'm.
And madam chairwoman
Representative Nibert tribes
have sovereignty over their own
lands and exercise their own
sovereignty over those plans
legally yes.
So your intent is madam chair
representative.
I'm sorry.
Madam chair representative
Nibert this bill is about New
Mexico the state of New Mexicos
regulation within New Mexico's
at emissions where it has
regulatory statutory authority
tribes have statutory authority
over their own lands is your
pointing to.
Okay one one more time.
Is it your intent.
What this bill to limit
emissions from the pueblos
nations and tribal entities in
the state of New Mexico now.
Okay.
So.
Based on that madam chair and
representative.
This bill does not even.
Address all of New Mexico.
It can only affect.
The area with that New Mexico
that is not held.
By tribes but lows and that
nations is that correct.
And madam chair representative
Nibert it is correct yes so the
state only has jurisdiction over
its own its own purview it's on
lands and tribes have
jurisdiction over their own
lands this bill does not affect
jurisdiction.
Okay Madam chair representative
yes Hey tried nation or pueblo.
Decided.
To have a
To allow the construction of the
the manufacturing process that
emits carbon.
is it your intent by this bill
to
Calculate the emissions of
carbon from that facility and
then that would go into the
calculations that are used to
accomplish your that zero for
the entire state of New Mexico.
I'm Representative are secretary
chairman had chairwoman and
representative Nibert I'm these
are starting to get into
technical questions that I I'm
not sure that I'm able to answer
and so and Representative and
madam chairwoman if it's
possible could we bring our
expert in to help explain.
Representative who is your
expert I don't believe we
receive the last.
Noah Long from introducing okay
we will get Noah if you would
raise your hand please.
Right.
So Mr long has been promoted to
a panelist and he is on for now.
Thank you madam chair and madam
chair it with your permission
would it be okay to have our
expert help answer the questions
that have been axed yes please
and Mr long.
Thank you madam chair
representative Stansbury and
representative Nibert as I
understand the question is
whether the bill seeks to change
our amended anyway the current
delegation of admissions
authority to the state the
tribal entities within the state
and I think the answer is it's
clear that it does not
the Navajo Nation has designated
federal authority delegated
authority over air emissions
within within the Navajo Nation
New Mexico doesn't regulate
those facilities
my understanding is that the New
Mexico and Bernalillo county
delegated authority on their
missions within those areas
outside of the Navajo Nation and
would maintain that is dangerous
diction out within the state.
Question about Madam chair
representative.
Those emissions.
From my well below tribal or
Matia.
What they get calculated.
By the state of New Mexico in
determining the that zero our.
Carbon emissions for the entire
state.
Representative night Mr Madam
chair representative Nibert
the state already calculates
emissions from across the state
including emissions within most
tribal areas of the state as I
mentioned earlier the state
doesn't have designated
delegated authority from the EPA
for emissions and the Navajo
Nation and therefore does not
include those emissions and the
bill and again it makes no
attempt at changing that federal
delegation of authority.
Madam chair this gonna be a long
day
Let me ask this again.
In this bill.
Do emissions from Indian tribes
pueblos animation.
Get counted and to the overall
emissions for New Mexico in
determining the net zero goal of
this legislation.
Madam chair representative I'm
right I guess I'm not quite
understanding it disconnected
feel like I'm saying the same
thing over over again but
emissions sources within the
state including emissions
sources and tribal lands and
pueblo lands other than those
sources that are under federal
delegation to the Navajo Nation
are considered sources within
the state of New Mexico as our
State.
and so the both days thanks and
the sources that are not under
that federal separate delegation
would be considered for the
purposes of the bill and the
bill makes again no attempt at
changing the federal delegation
which as I understand can be
changed through state
legislation.
Madam chair and representative
Mr long.
What I think you just said and
correct me if I'm wrong.
Emissions of carbon from Indian
pueblos tribes and nations.
Located within the state of New
Mexico.
Would be.
Help it in terms of meeting the
net zero goals of this
legislation.
Madam chair representative
Nibert I'm again with the
exception of the nomination
areas that are does delegated
separately through the clean air
act
that's my understanding how the
state already counts in this
bill makes no change.
Madam chair
Representative Mr long.
Are you saying that only but the
Navajo missions would not get
counted and all the other well
pueblos and tribes would get out
of.
Madam chair representative ever
again the Navajo Nation seeks
are uncertain America air
mission sources directs
delegation from the EPA under
the clean air act and the
federal there are the federal
government delegates authority
to them for regulation of those
sources and the state cannot
through statute and then that
and there is no no time to do
that but all other sources
within the state including on
tribal lands in public hands are
are included.
The madam chair and
representative Nibert it maybe I
can help clarify and get us a
little and staff so and under
federal authority under the
clean air act what it what Mr
long I I think it is and was
trying to say is that among the
tribes that have delegated
authority to regulate their own
air the Navajo Nation has
delegated authority vis a vis
the federal delegation Authority
whereas other tribes in the
state to not yet has delegated
authority over the clean air act
and they're there for subject to
the state's delegation so but
that doesn't preclude them from
seeking their own delegated
authority in the future if that
makes sense.
Well what makes sense madam
chair and representative is
understanding what you're yeah
so this legislation there.
That and that was a question is
it your intent.
To capture or quantify the
amount of carbon being emitted
from.
The above lows tribes and
nations.
In calculating the net zero that
will apply.
For.
Your legislation your your goal
is to get to that zero and we
either include those emissions
are we don't have and I don't
care which it is I just need to
know which one are there in the
counter there not.
So I'm Madam chairman and
representative Nibert I think
what we're trying to say here is
that under the current M. regime
any any source which is
currently under state
jurisdiction is accounted for in
the emissions tracking and
because there are a number of
tribes and publishers which are
included in under the state's
jurisdiction than they would be
included under this framework
because it's using air quality
emissions is that basically on
page tracking workers.
And so madam chair
representative.
In order to accomplish your
goals.
That zero.
If you include those on the.
Those emissions.
Have there been any discussions
with the tribal entities that
they need to enact similar
legislation that would apply to
their lands.
Representative.
Chairman and representative
Nibert as discussed this is
about overall missions across
the state and so I'm I can't
speak to one on one discussions
that have been had with
different tribal entities but
what I can tell you is actually
some of the most significant
carbon sinks opportunities are
actually on tribal lands and a
number of pueblos within the
state and hickory Apache and the
Navajo Nation are looking at and
becoming major carbon sinks in
terms of reforestation and doing
incredible work in reforestation
so there's a huge benefit
actually for having an overall
carbon target in which and those
things can be accounted for.
They are prior bill.
There was a provision.
That.
Electric generators add to act
help for.
Yes carbon emissions.
From generating facilities
located outside of the state of
New Mexico I think you said
that.
One of the changes in this.
Committee order was dealing with
the nation's tracking.
Sorry did I our.
Did I get that right your
statement correct.
Madam chairman representative
Nibert wanted that pieces of
feedback that we received from
the electric coop was concerned
that the bill was not clear
enough about and taking into
consideration that targets that
were already set under the
renewable portfolio standard
adopted in the ETA and twenty
nineteen so we incorporated by
reference the ETA into that bill
for the purposes of accounting
for and those emissions targets
under the ETA so that's that's
what I was referring to.
Well I I guess my question is
under this committee so that
we're considering now.
Does the bill provide for and is
it your intent.
To.
Quantify.
The missions.
Occurring outside of the state
of New Mexico for electricity
that's generated that is
imported into New Mexico for
their customers.
Madam chairman and and
Representative Nibert ask our
expert to help answer this.
Madam chairman representative
Nibert the short answer is is
yes just the state under the ETA
accounts for imported renewable
electricity it allows for
compliance through the ETA with
renewables and so in order to
get an accurate accounting
for an increasingly integrated
western grid and as you may be
aware the number of utilities
remote moving towards joining a
larger western market
the intended state to balance
that with both discounted
imported rules as well as as
other resources that might have
missed.
To get an accurate count.
Madam chair representative is
there not some.
Court decisions a federal court
decisions that.
Program but.
The
I I guess the ability to.
Interfere with the Interstate
market for electricity and.
Would this legislation.
Run a file of those decisions.
Madam chair representative
Nibert no more than a dozen
states already count for both
imports and exports based on
emissions and many more than
that for the purpose of
renewable energy standards as
long as the statute in the state
doesn't separately County or or
undermine imported electricity
whether renewable or fossil fuel
treated any differently than
that the resources inside the
state there's no question of
dormant Commerce Clause concerns
and that's been question many
states and no state has had any
any concern.
So some Madam chair
representative it appears that
Representative this legislation
would be an effort to of.
May be.
Our local.
Co ops and R. three utilities
public utilities.
Yes.
Maybe having a certain mix of
Alectra city generation.
we even.
Factoring in the fact that they
may be M. forty generation from
from other states it's your your
to.
Capture carbon emissions that
may be occurring outside of the
Mexico is our as as I just heard
the testimony.
Is that correct Madam chair
representative Nibert the VTA
already does that it accounts
for imports of renewables and
all of the resources of the
utilities and this statute calls
out that ETA and the reductions
required and ETA both on the
task force level of the council
level as well as ensuring that
the agencies take that into
consideration in any role it.
So it's really consistent with
what the state is already doing
it are you.
Okay let's look at page I.
The committee subs.
Why it's six through fourteen
Again this is getting to the net
zero emissions by twenty fifty.
How will the state create
economic inclusion
opportunities.
Thank you madam chairwoman
Representative Nibert am I would
say a couple of things and then
I am I think it be great to have
Representative Rubio talk about
the work that they've already
been doing the last couple of
years I think you know the
example I gave a few moments ago
about the potential to massively
support carbon sequestration by
reforestation the state is a
huge opportunity we've seen a
number of bills the last several
years around fire management and
reforestation that were
bipartisan bills and those also
have the benefit of being
opportunities for carbon
sequestration and you know one
of the bills carried by
Representative in the last two
years ago and to also generate
significant economic development
in rural areas the sky is the
limit when it comes to economic
creativity and our communities
the idea of having a work group
that is articulated in the in
the lines that you just
pointed out is to actually
generate those ideas for
economic inclusion and
diversification and I
Representative Rubio would you
like to talk about some of the
work you guys should do.
Sure Madam chair representative
so for the last two years as I
mentioned in my opening remarks
there has been
work that many organizations
from around the state who
Representative thousands of
people and many of your
community specifically in the
southeastern part of the state
as well as folks up in the
northwestern region and and
throughout southwestern New
Mexico where they have been
engaged in a lot of
conversations around
how do we address issues related
to climate while still
specifically focusing on
economic opportunities for
communities and so part of the
department of workforce
solutions study which was
completed this past summer and
I'm happy to share that link
with you it's a very extensive
study that was done by the
university of New Mexico
provides the framework that we
are discussing today and so what
we are what we are asking
specifically when it comes to
Issues related to to equity
which are crucial for how this
bill is formulated and and is is
managed in the future is that
part of of what's important is
how tribal local governments and
those who are disproportionately
impacted are going to be
Representative in not just the
climate leadership council but
also the economic inclusion
subcommittee and this is part of
how we will implement a lot of
what came out of the New Mexico
clean energy workforce
development study many of the
recommendations that were on
there which were extensive and
I'll find a few is one
developing a comprehensive plan
for clean energy workforce
development that connects
kindergarten through twelfth
twelfth grade education post
secondary education and regional
workforce needs it it also
ensures that core core industry
competencies are included in
curriculum that prepares
students to obtain industry
recognized credentials it
supports partnerships between
colleges and universities that
allow students to take advantage
of specialized training and then
of course investments and and
paid apprenticeships internships
stipends things like that those
are many of the recommendations
that came one of the there are
several of the few several of
the many recommendations that
came out of the study
specifically to address this
economic and reimagination that
we're trying to really your head
and I think to the the points
that have been made already and
have been made for several years
now as long as I've been in the
legislature is that folks are
constantly saying we need to
diversify our economy and and
and there's all this talk about
how we need to do that and yet
when we present and propose
something like this that
actually is a road map to
getting there
The fact that we're that that
it's it's still being questioned
as whether or not it needs to be
condemned as it's something that
we need to continue I think is
it discredited minimizes the
work that's been done by
communities around the state and
and I think it's it's important
to actually say that this is
work that's been done for the
last couple years by communities
particularly in places like Raul
Carlsbad and and in Hobbs and
and and and these are important
steps that need to be taken
moving forward.
Madam chair representative well.
I can't say I read this
committee so but I read the fire
so have you you said it's a
roadmap to diversify our
economy.
And I read the words on the
page.
And unless you changed
drastically and it did not hear
that that was the case I don't
see a road map here.
I I I see a statement online.
R. seven eight says the state
shall create.
Economic.
Inclusion opportunity which I
think means high road employment
as it's defined in the we saw
prior committees up I bet that
that change
and and so I don't see a road
map and I don't see how the
state's going to create those
jobs then you explain to me how
the state's going to create
those jobs all those state
employees are explain how the
state creates economic inclusion
opportunists.
Madam chair representative
Nibert I would love to direct
your attention to section eight
of the bill because that's where
the me as the question that
you're asking and that really
sets so section eight of the
bill directs that no later than
August first of twenty twenty
one the co chairs of the council
shall convene and with the
secretaries of economic
development and workforce
solutions agreed to help do this
and then it lays out the duties
of what that that work group
should do and it's very very
clearly under that section
describes the process and manner
in which the economic
diversification plan will be
articulated for the state that
it takes in to account I am
relevant information from
agencies but most importantly M.
under as section D. as the bell
under three it says this
workgroup shall identify ways to
expand and diversify and New
Mexico's economy and then it
lays out some of the provisions
that it seeks to achieve you
know enhancing and expanding
economic opportunity creating
new employment diversifying the
economy and helping to stabilize
and bring economic resilience to
the state and state economy and
budget and then it also lays out
a set of criteria for actually
engaging with and ensuring that
communities have a seat at the
table and defining their own
futures.
Madam chair representative of.
That's a lot of words on the
paper.
The state is not creating the
jobs is that correct.
The economy creates the jobs and
madam chair and representative
Nibert by in order I think we
all you know we we all work in
government so we know that you
know that the government can
play a key role as a convener to
help to develop plans to help
create a and identify and foster
incentives and to help
communities come together around
common ideas so and madam chair
women and representative Nibert
you know one of the things that
our state has been challenged by
is having a really community
informed vision for what our
economy can look like in the
future and that's what this bill
is really trying to achieve and
madam chair and representative
Nibert you know we our governor
has undertaken through our
economic development department
to do really significant
economic planning for the state
but we need for our communities
to have a seat at the table to
reimagine their own futures.
Madam chair representative.
The economy doesn't create jobs
the.
People people decide to take
risks they create jobs people
that that are want to produce
something our that they take a
rest yeah and they are good
ideas bad ideas and different
ideas
that they pursue their drains at
and if it takes all that they
try to expand they create jobs
it's people that create jobs
it's not about the state yeah
and I would the the the economy
is just employee at an
indication of of maybe how well
things are are going out for my.
Standpoint of job creation and
maybe
Compensation to to employees and
raising the standard whether
that C. R. so you know I I see a
lot of water works here but but
at the end of the day.
It's not this it's not your
chair.
As was stated on page five the
state shall re and those.
Economic inclusion opportunities
it's basically where you're
wanting to set up a framework by
which these things are studied
and you all.
That.
You live this out well so that
people will take risks and will
see opportunities that break and
then.
Our user capital to invest to
maybe start a business expanded
business and create additional
employment.
Get out again page five says
shall create and that's really a
misnomer because the state's
last.
Going to be able to accomplish
that at last we you have the
state and I'm limited budget to
go out higher everybody that
wants to hire.
On page seven.
Houston the other.
All.
Yeah it's the same here page
seven talks about.
The council and.
You know the effort is to.
Create jobs the effort is to
create.
And economy that is going to
grow and create jobs create
opportunities for our children
the state of New Mexico.
I find it a little ironic that
so.
The council has one member
representing relevant industries
and business sectors that may be
affected by climate solutions
propose
The goal is to diversify our
economy the goal is to have this
employment the goal is to create
opportunities.
I I there are are very odd that
the very people that would be
created.
Those additional job so very
very people that will be created
those opportunities very people
that would be expanding our
capital thank you one member of
this council.
We got a lot of government other
folks we get one member from the
very sector that would actually
create jobs and I I.
I'm not sure that the.
That that membership of the
council is going to be able to
Have the vision that's going to
succeed and create an order I
would just ask you to we were we
look at that.
The gentleman what sure what
your real goals are
because it looks to me like the
the the calls are related to to
What the admissions.
And to drastically change the
way that the
A lot of the.
Businesses are are currently
operating which is going to come
at some substantial cost to them
employing capital and efforts
to.
Reduce emissions and to
take capital to to engage in
those pursuits and not taking
capital to engaging on expanding
employment opportunities
increasing their productivity
so I'm I'm a little bit
concerned about that all.
Madam chairwoman representative
I'm I would love to direct your
attention to page eight at the
sub we here at the added eighty
industry solutions subgroup put
to address exactly the points
that you're raising right now
upon consultation with a number
of our industry at who are
interested in this bill
including New Mexico gas and
others we added a whole sub
group to address exactly the
issue that you're raising.
Madam chair and representative
thank you for for pointing that
out so that's new material on
seven and eight or A. J..
Yes.
I don't know if this so this
issue was addressed or not if it
was in your Original Bill Page
fine lines three to five but.
I don't I don't know if it got
carried over not to tell people
I have a question on the all
draft if I reduction in
emissions has a negative impact
on my disproportionately
impacted communities.
And the reduction be suspended
or accepted under this bill.
I'm madam chair M.
Representative Nibert did like
to ask Mr long to help address
that were and Mr put we we.
Madam chair representative I'm
I'm actually not sure exactly
what you're referring to and in
the previous drafter or that
something that matter can you.
Well it it it said something
about the
You know.
We have to take into
consideration any adverse
impacts on a disproportionately
impacted communities.
And so my question is if I
reduction and the missions has a
negative impact on a
disproportionately impacted
communities have that reduction
requirement be suspended or or
can their operations be exempted
from the act.
The madam chair thank you and
Representative are thank you I
think I I think I now understand
the question and and yes there
is still language in the bill
requiring consideration of
impacts and just fortunately
impacted communities and it
leaves it up to the agencies to
determine the exact appropriate
action in each circumstance so
it's it's a bit hard to go down
I prophetical but
certainly the impacts on
communities both in terms of
emissions as well as other
impacts on the communities are
intended to be considered.
Well I might have a hypothetical
for you madam chair and and the
Mr along.
I'm mostly familiar with the
west southeast New Mexico well
professionally and that's where
I was born and raised in what
all of my life except for four
years in Albuquerque want to
your amendment and three years
in California on a loss so
basically fifty five years.
Of my life Stewart has been in
southeast New Mexico.
Yes.
A reduction of emissions from
the oil and gas sector because
a.
Negative impact on.
The disproportionately impacted
communities in southeast New
Mexico.
Chair of the.
Reduction in emissions for oil
and gas the exempted from this.
Act if it becomes law.
Madam chair representative
Nibert the the rule making
bodies are are directed in the
statute to consider impacts on
disproportionately impacted
communities existing statute
under their quality act also
requires consideration about
economic effects as well as
other facts so the specific
actions I think would depend on
this the costs and benefits of a
particular rulemaking and our
expectation is that the agencies
will continue to to do that
evaluation that they do every
day.
Madam chair you Mr long I
suspect that invites sample the
answer would be well
we're we're never going to get
to that point even if we show
that the economically this
portion we impacted communities
are adversely impacted by
such actions I.
I see the words on paper I just
don't think that that's that's
the goal and I don't think that
that that will occur.
With respect to
Generation of electricity.
My district
is for change away one of the
areas in the state that the.
Has.
Maybe the brightest potential
for.
Wind energy once
once there's transmission.
That can export that energy out
of the area.
They're grounded in Mexico and.
What my question is.
Madam chair representative.
When we calculate.
Emissions from these projects.
We've already said that we're
going to help for missions out
of state.
With respect like report
generation that's imported them
to go question is do we
consider.
The.
Carbon Representative
Representative for lack of a
better word
The.
Requirements are producing.
The vast resources that are
necessary to build and went far
for instance.
Madam chairman at chant
chairwoman and representative
Nibert communicate that to you
and Mr long.
I'm not a Chairman
representative Nibert the
production in state whether it's
production of a winter in our
production of of anything else
if there's emissions that
occurrence date those those
would be counted dot not all
imported drugs are considered
with would be considered so for
example you know if you buy
envelopes for is another state
and there and there's you know
you buy at your local store that
emissions from those drugs would
not be counted so it depends on
where the production happens
but
If they're if they're in state
emissions that day to counter it
and and if if they're not
they're not and they would.
So it industry is a little
different because they're at the
resource decisions happen here
in state and so the resource
implications are are considered
that's that would be impractical
for for inclusion of every
single product it's we're just
in the state
and so they're not all consider.
Well but on the other hand Madam
chair representative of this law
the the.
The importation of electricity.
From other states.
You're already stated that that
would be counted so so the
admissions from generation
outside of New Mexico.
Maybe from coal plants maybe
from natural gas plants maybe
from biogas plants that that all
produce cart have carbon
emissions in your capturing that
but what I hear you saying is
that we don't capture
necessarily part of the route of
Imported steel imported copper
imported are.
Hello madam or or other things
that are that are utilized and
are of various processes or
utilized in the state for
ordinary household use so I I
just want to clarification of
thank you for for clarify.
Overall page for she.
Winds twenty three or twenty
four twenty five of them page
the next page lines one through
I.
Could you explain what we're
getting at with respect to that
paragraphs of.
I'm.
Representative at madam chair
women Representative Nibert are
you I'm working from the sub.
I am okay good and my computer
okay okay and madam chair woman
Representative I think that
would be a great thing for
Representative Rubio or or Mr of
the way to address.
I'm thank you madam chair thank
you Representative which section
where you on.
State route seven on the bottom
page fourteen.
As are you working on it I'm
you're still working from the
old draft correct well I'm
working from point two two zero
zero zero two point two on the
computer okay.
All right so page seven.
H. fourteen No sorry page
fourteen.
One twenty four.
Which is paragraphs up.
Okay so providing requirements
can you repeat your question.
Just just tell me what you're
getting at or what is this
provision really.
I read it several times I'm.
A little bit at a loss where we
want.
Yes so madam chair
representative and and I can
certainly have Mister pope we
what chime in because this is
part of what came about through
the framework from the workforce
development study and that is
that
Many of the the projects that
exist in throughout the state
there's there's agreements that
exist within many of our.
Labor unions and and things like
that and so in this case what
we're trying to do is
Is to make sure that they're
included
in the resources that were so
that there's there's a there are
there are agreements that are
set up to provide
what some of these partnerships
that would that we and we
foresee will
Will come about through some of
the the the work that's that
comes out of the the subgroup.
Madam chair representative.
I still.
Maybe I'd be I'm just up.
Don't have the depth of
knowledge there to understand
the startup.
I mean this is a.
Find requirements so were
imposing requirements on on.
Yes private.
People do use project labor
agreements or community
workforce agreements.
Or projects.
That will be carried out the
intent of this bill
And then something about a
referral provision.
Required four years of qualified
available labor resources as a
term of agreement
I guess my question is is this
to impose.
formal agreements set sorry.
Say a landowner in northern New
Mexico wants to do a report
station project which show
Representative.
Representative already said is
very carbon.
Capture type.
that for in December.
Are you going to force that
person to to go through
require these.
Project labor agreements to to
plant trees on their property at
where we go with this I just
don't get.
Madam chair representative part
of what we are trying to
accomplish through this
legislation is that I think the
the key word is partnerships and
so this isn't requiring people
to participate in what we're
envisioning these are just
opportunities and I laid it out
earlier in in in terms of my
response to what the
recommendations came out of the
study is that when you have
cross
cross agency crossed across the
in
Cross agency cross education
when you crossed across
educational systems a lot of
opportunities arise in terms of
ideas and so in terms of the
part of partnerships that we're
talking about many within our
like our labor
The folks from our labor
community set up these these
opportunities with with of
through these partnerships with
employers so if there is a
private entity that is
interested in
Well some of these ideas that
are being considered these are
opportunities that they can
these are partnerships that they
can be part of and that's where
these this these mechanisms
woods would step in but it's not
something that would be forced
upon by
to the private industry for them
to for all of them to
participate in it's it's it's
purely all voluntary.
Madam chair representative I am
really use.
You use the word opportunity yet
in one twenty four I don't see
the word opportunity I see the
word requirement.
So yes your your words for
opportunity it seems that one
twenty four should read provide
opportunity for the use up.
But it was legislative
requirements for the use of.
Representative right.
Representative the record the
requirements are for the
partnerships that become
when when these partnerships
start to beef when they when
they're formulated that's what
the requirement those are when
the requirements will take place
but it's not of the and it's not
a at I think what you're you're
saying what I'm hearing you say
is that it's a generalization in
terms of an overall private
industry what we're saying is
that when the partnerships are
being formulated and front and
full and and and important and
of all the formalities going
through
those partnerships that books
that were agreed to participate
that's part of the requirement
is making sure that
that's where they're they will
be required so these these
private industry who participate
will be required but it's not.
Throughout the entire of private
industry.
Madam chair.
Representative.
It it seems to me that this bill
is brought often thought thank
it's it's going to apply
statewide except for.
The.
I already set up already Scott
and.
It says state agencies.
What's.
State agencies are going to have
to promulgate rules and then I
go down the section.
Section seven.
There were there rules are going
to find requirements for the use
of project labor and the.
All right.
I just.
I wish your story yeah we're
just opportunity we use the word
opportunity requirement because
I think requirement cells we see
business community that is not
option it's it's required all.
Again I think words on the on
the paper sent a message of the
words on the paper these.
At the.
Yes that was simply to provide
opportunities for you Sir
suggestion.
What this is going to be
required of the agencies to put
into their rules that amendment
would affect
these entities that are not
subject to the rules so well
concern there.
On page fifteen.
One six.
I see that a state agencies
shall fully help for climate
risk and impacts on my question
is how does the state agency for
your cal for.
Those two six.
Madam chair representative.
Madam chair representative
Nibert and I'm sorry I'm I'm
lost can you please tell us
again why it page number and
line number you're looking at.
This would be page fifteen.
One six.
Six.
So M. and.
Madam chair and Representative
Nibert the item that you're
referring to is part of section
six of the bill which refers to
the rule makings that the
builder acts so M. that since
subsection do here going back
down.
It says a state agencies are
fully account for climate risks
and impacts the state wide
emissions reductions established
in the bill and other harmful
emissions and its rules programs
and investments so this is
actually am part of what it what
we said at the beginning of our
presentation about
institutionalizing the work that
the climate Task Forces
currently doing under executive
orders through executive
authority so one of the things
that we need to do is a state is
to account for how climate
change is going to affect the
operations of the state and the
way in which we use public money
so for example if we're going to
use public money to build
infrastructure whether that's
capital outlay or roads money we
should be taking into
consideration climate impacts
because we don't want to get
washed away and then extreme
weather event for because of
climate change or catastrophic
fire where there's a high fire
risks so the idea is that and
this is language that has been
adopted it was done executive
under executive authority by the
federal government and it's been
done in a number of states is to
really bring a climate framework
and climate science into the
decision making of the state to
ensure that we're not making
investments that are Clemente
risky and all know that's what
private industry doing right now
our banks and insurance industry
are making sure that we don't
make climb it risky investments
so we as a state need to be
doing the same.
Madam chair and representative.
But it all more my lawyer at.
Yeah I don't like the outcome.
Of a decision of a state agents.
This is going to be the line
that are point to and bring in a
cause of action against the
agency for failure to fully
account for the state.
I mean those are are legally
charged words that are going to
result in litigation whenever
someone disagrees with a
decision of an agency.
They're going to save the state
agency has to fully account for
climate risks and impacts.
And that's where I would point
to the deficiency of the agency
in that it considered that but
it for doctor consider what it
considered a but it forgot to
consider the and if they are
charged with fully accounted for
those settings their failure to
consider the and our.
X. is going to our.
Because the point you have to
Send that back for further work
or are you know.
So.
The decision from from moving
forward from the agency has
started up to hold things up.
And so
from our.
Industry perspective that just
needs decisions made them the
ability to implement those
decisions.
Those words would cause me some
concern because I see those
words as allowing.
And may be promoting.
Litigation R. two
upset the decision of the of the
agency whatever it may be.
And so
I have a concern with.
Do you share any of my concerns
about regard.
Representative Madam chair
representative I think a great
example to help illustrate what
we're trying to talk about here
in this section is what's been
going on in Texas over the last
week if consideration of climate
change had been incorporated in
the utility planning and other
state agencies.
Actually might have been able to
avoid the shut down of
electricity and water for
millions of people so if I'm
incorporation of consideration
of climate change comes with
some litigation risk certainly
that's a consideration but I
would think that the lives of
millions of people and their
general welfare and ensuring
that the state is incorporating
climate change into the work
that it does is as important as
is facing some legal uncertainty
around it but we're certainly
and addressing these issues and
and so it's that point taken and
I appreciate you bringing that
forward.
Madam chair representative take
me through your propped up
process it reaching the
conclusion that you just stated.
madam chair madam chair and and
Representative commute the
clarify your question please.
Are you stated about maybe to
put words in your mouth but what
I heard was that act taxes are
fully accounted for climate risk
and impacts.
They would not have suffered the
dramatic effects are you
suffered the last week.
And madam chairman and
representative Nibert I think
we're getting beyond the scope
of the bill here I was just
using it as an example I'll
return to it New Mexico state
example for example and we make
millions of dollars in
investments a year and roads
water infrastructure water
infrastructure in particular is
a very Prussian one if we don't
consider the impacts of climate
change we might spend tens or
hundreds of millions of dollars
on a piece of water
infrastructure that won't
operate under Clemente and
scenarios so we have to consider
that as we're making state
investments.
Madam chair representative.
With respect to water
What would this be an effort to.
Representative sep the.
Current status of the law
regarding water rights and
beneficial use water to
beneficial use thirty efforts
regarding chat in that regard
to.
Maybe upset the.
Long established.
Water Wall rules in the state.
Our appropriation
The water medication use having
a priority all on each system.
Representative no there is a
section in the bill I'm on page
thirteen that says that the
agencies shall adopt rules and
policies to improve the
resilience of water supplies and
addresses how to achieve this
resilience measures but those
can be done at the basin scale
it's not specify specific as to
how it would be accomplished
from my perspective much of that
is infrastructure related
involuntary programs but I'm
this is there's no intent here
to disrupt existing property
rights or or the way the state
and does what happens.
Madam chair representative on
certainly.
All.
Our.
You know Madam chair
representative.
I was just interested in your
thought process taxes because.
Well.
I thank you.
We understand where we were
coming from.
That's that's okay.
That.
Our page sixteen.
Winds four through seven of.
This are this talks about the.
We are barman Department
tracking all statewide
greenhouse gases associated our
missions.
Quantify the emissions from
fuels extracted and exported
from Mexico.
And so my question is how is the
department actually going to do
that.
Thank you madam chairwoman and
Representative Nibert this is
actually getting at the heart of
one of the challenges the status
had and that's part of why it's
incorporated in this bill of
course you have to have a
baseline against which your
tracking anything to have any
kind of quantifiable standard
I'm right now it's my
understanding from conversations
with the agency is and that we
are trying to get a better
handle on what our actual
emissions are and in doing that
through a collaboration with the
researchers at the university of
Colorado and the report that I
mentioned earlier which is our
annual climate task force report
and shows that current way that
we do emissions tracking so what
this is trying to get at is to
help establish hello this is
established protocol so that we
have consistent emissions
tracking going forward.
Madam chair representative our.
Because they're building a great
disparity between the of
missions.
Side there's a barrel of oil
produced and we County New
Mexico.
That barrel gets put into a
pipeline that makes its way to
Houston taxes or Corpus Christi
Texas where that they're all of
oil is rich I.
Part of that barrel.
Goes into may be.
Boater fuel oil or motor
lubricants part of that barrel
goes to Gassaway that's and
burned in an internal combustion
engine producing the.
Hi good carbs and are producing
the CO two and goes out the help
on.
For that barrel becomes diesel
which has the same result part
of that becomes the.
These are it's.
Maybe the the.
At the lower end of the but
they're all you probably have
some asphalt products and and
maybe even some of oil
use first name or for Bernie
in certain applications and the
the.
Amount of CO two emitted from
each one of those is going to be
fast for and a lot of it's going
to depend on.
Where it's actually Burkett you
are part of that
barrel goes into the manufacture
of pharmaceuticals or bylaw or
The idea of plastic type of
components
of the not somewhat capture so
you have a great disparity and
what happens with that barrel of
oil and yeah boasted that is not
going to occur in New Mexico we
are we have a couple small
refineries but a lot of our oil
production drugs too much larger
refinery facilities elsewhere.
And so
we have tasked with this bill.
The department of it the
environment to track.
All statewide greenhouse gas
associated with the missions are
and to quantify those emissions
from fuels extracted and
exported from New Mexico so that
graphic details be
Representative the environment
department's going to have to
track that barrel.
When it's exported out of our
state and try to quantify.
That.
Carbon footprint IBM for lack of
a better word from from that
barrel of oil and that carbon
footprints going to be greatly
different different depending
upon to what use that the.
Gerald Boyle use so all we.
applied to.
And so.
Yeah well I just think you're
we're asking the possible all
right baby Our Environment
Department has reaches of the
two seven elsewhere thank get
some of that information but the
I'm not sure that the they have
the ability for have the
Person the number person that
may be required to do all that
because.
New Mexico oil and Mexico gas.
R. B..
Exported
I suspect virtually around the
world at this point time used to
be limited to the United States
but ballot the export the.
And the rest of the it could be
are exported.
Virtually anywhere on low yeah
and so.
That's a pretty pretty tall
Task barb barb it's going to
have
to fulfill its obligation under
this act all.
Madam chairwoman representative
Nibert I would just direct your
attention to lines two and three
and it directs agencies to
develop protocols so and we're
you we're not micromanaging how
the state agency created and
calculate and track those
emissions and there are industry
standards but what I love about
the questions that you're asking
as you're pointing to the
complexities of around the
lifecycle of carbon and and
that's really important to
understand but I'm this has to
be implementable and so the
protocols of the state what it
opt would have to be
implementable using the
resources that they have of
course.
Madam chair of our my last
question really.
Goes to one of time.
We passed the
The act which you alluded to at
the very beginning a couple
years ago.
And.
My concern is is work were
coming on the heels about with
with this legislation.
And we some of the people who
contacted the have expressed are
are worried that
we haven't even.
Digested.
The full and complete the
impacts
the bill we passed a couple
years ago.
And.
That maybe we ought to give that
some time maybe we ought to give
that.
A little more.
Time to study its impaction to
really come to grips with what
all those impacts before we
launch on another and I would
consider this to be a major
are undertaken by the state have
retention we has a major impact
on.
How.
Businesses you our state and
bank decisions concerning the
deployment of capital.
And
it just seems to me that are.
There's some merit in that
What service allowing.
Mr Foley barred yes prior
legislation before we embark on
all of this our piece of
legislation which many of the
proponents the required is
profile as you know we are a
very large to very all.
Important.
Piece of legislation all the
back of what was proclaimed the
same thing two years ago and so
my question is
have you given.
Significant federation to that
the.
Thought yeah
Are we really able to get back
all that far legislation within
two years with this new
legislation and digest both of
them virtually at the same time.
Madam chairman and
representative Nibert I am so
glad you asked this question and
the that legislation that I
think you're referring to is the
energy transition act which M.
at the beginning of our
presentation we talked about
only M. is in reference to the
electricity sector and as you're
asking this question I got very
excited and I pulled up the
state's climate task force
report that they issued in
October because I think this is
a great place to talk about the
fact that electricity generation
in New Mexico only accounts for
eleven percent of our carbon
footprint so the ETA was an
incredibly important part of
addressing climate change but it
only addressed that eleven
percent piece of the pie so we
have the other eighty nine
percent piece of that pie to
address in our carbon footprint
and what this bill does is
create the overall framework to
address a hundred percent of our
of our carbon footprint and it
creates a broader framework so
that we can hit our net zero
goals within that broader
framework so absolutely we did
consider the eighty eight we
incorporated by reference
especially to help accommodate
our our energy transmission and
producers and the entire point
of this bill is to address the
entire pie with respect to
waiting we're facing a global
climate crisis so we can't wait
we have to address our carbon
footprint and that's why we're
putting this forward.
Madam chair representative.
You know I think you're your
response points out that may be.
For our state.
Looking at the impacts of the
ETA which is eleven percent.
And giving that more time to
actually evaluate and determine
what its real impact is.
could be.
All right maybe they were built
in the next several years and
then you can deal with the
remaining eighty nine percent.
But to jump into this and affect
the remaining eighty nine
percent
without fully digesting the the
first eleven percent of.
That that that create
significant risks to the state
of New Mexico and yes yes the.
More or it's the ETA
As.
Negative affects on New Mexico
new Mexico's economy.
Sure that that that be known
before we we started posing
things all the other eighty one.
And and then.
You know.
But I think the comment was made
by by Representative from Lee
County that the.
You know we we buy a been spared
in New Mexico from some of the
artifacts courses that is called
here isn't it
and parts well eastern New
Mexico got pretty cold we did
suffer respects
I have a lot of that was
because.
All fired generation plants in
Texas panhandle supplying
electricity the eastern New
Mexico and I believe the
representative for Boyd county
COVID at the polite said and
Santa Fe and then the round
house were on because.
The San Juan generating plants
not been shut down and and so
you know I think the.
I think we ought to look at at
the effects of the TSL of over
the next few years before we
jump off and started posing
these types of requirements
on the remaining eighty nine
percent and then I would also
point out that no matter what we
do even if we went to zero
emissions tomorrow.
You said that will have a
minimal impact on the.
Global.
Because.
China is putting on.
Each month more a well maybe not
respond certainly
Is putting on on a fairly short
time period
bore of production of of our
greenhouse gas emissions that
that we produce in the state of
New Mexico
Each year so so the the impact
to to the overall issue is is
that what table we at we would
have time to study the ETA and
still.
That's a good idea and does the
things that there were
Representative walkoff which
that we could pick this up but I
I you know I think that the
could you back in the US at this
time is
It is rescue for the state I
think the message it sends is
dangerous and why I do agree
with the statement that it will
create a new economic future.
What I'm not convinced of is
that it's going to created
economic future prosperity and
one that the we will encourage
our children the state of New
Mexico yeah have
The very things that we all.
On this so committee want and
desire without chair all all
shut up.
Listen to us first.
Thank you Representative Nibert
and I believe you're all out of
quarters and so with that I
don't have anyone else on the
board but what I'd like to do
because we're gonna help floor
session starting very shortly
and a lot of these committee
members are gonna jump from this
committee to the floor committee
Judiciary so I want to give
folks some time to take a break.
And I want to roll this and when
we get back on Wednesday we will
pick up with a vote so I'm.
Thank you to everyone that
joined thank you to everyone
that made comments today I know
this is a very interesting and
the interesting subject that
many folks are very passionate
about and again once we continue
on Wednesday this will be the
first item that we will vote on
and then we'll continue with the
rest of our agenda as we didn't
get through in any of the other
bills today but I do think the
Sanchez today as well as the
public and of course our
committee members so with that
we are adjourned thank you.
Thank you madam chair thank you
committee.
