Representative Gallegos.
Madam vice chair Johnson.
Madam chair.
Madam chair.
Madam chair with that we have
six members present great thank
you everyone so we do have a
quorum we are going to proceed.
Madam chair.
Madam chair don't get us in
trouble for making your court.
I won't thank you for being on
time.
So we're going to begin first
with the house bill one twenty
two.
And I see Representative bashes
and the attendees list.
It would just be a mover over.
Oh that's right.
Madam chair did you say house
bill one twenty two well we were
talking about continuing with
house bill nine to take action
but I don't see any of the
representatives on.
so let's go ahead and start with
house bill one forty seven.
Okay great.
Yes.
Welcome Representative.
All.
Right do you have any experts
that we need to promote yes
Linda Segal is here and she has
some other experts with her.
well the experts please raise
your hands and we will promote
you to the panelists.
Great.
Okay.
Representative.
All right I'm here to present
house bill one forty seven and
it's amending and enacting
sections of the nutrition and
dietetics practice act and we
are updating this act because it
was originally passed in
nineteen eighty nine and has not
been updated or changed since
nineteen ninety six when the
only change decrease the number
of board members from seven to
five and licensed nutrition
professional scope of practice
is expanded over the three
decades to include reimbursable
medical nutrition therapy
therapeutic diet ordering and
more responsibilities requiring
verification of specialized
education and training.
And I would like to turn it over
to Linda Siegel and and Rachel
Leon.
To tell you or about it.
Rachel Rachel why don't you go
ahead.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Rachel young I'm a licensed
dietitian working in Albuquerque
hospital and I represent the New
Mexico Academy of nutrition and
dietetics we are now affiliate
of the academy of nutrition and
dietetics which is the world's
largest organization of food and
nutrition professionals and we
represent about four hundred
fifty registered dieticians
nutritionists in New Mexico no
goals of this update our
district the nutritionist
qualifications better protect
consumers from harmful nutrition
practices at a scope of practice
and make nutrition and dietetics
licensure more consistent across
the United States.
A licensed dieticians and
nutritionists we work with
individuals and groups in a
variety of settings to help
treat manage and prevent
nutrition related diseases such
as diabetes kidney disease
obesity heart disease and
metabolic disorders this
specialized services called
medical nutrition therapy and
one legislative unethically or
find qualified individuals it
can be harmful.
Well to answer any questions you
have about this bill and the
important work that dietitians
and nutritionists to every day
thank you.
And madam chair I might add.
Linda Siegel representing the
association the academy and it's
rare that we totally re write an
entire scope of practice and an
entire act but since this hasn't
been updated since nineteen
eighty nine this was so
necessary because of the
incredible changes in health
care and and dietitian
credentials and then the more
sophisticated knowledge that
they have and how they used in
hospitals so it's it looks like
a lot and it is a lot when you
Charlie rewrite an act but it is
comparable to what other states
are doing because they're
looking for consistency across
the state so that a dietitian
can move from state to state and
and prove her or his credentials
to be able to be licensed data
in a much higher level of
service.
Thank you.
I believe will stand for
questions.
Representative so now we will go
to the audience and take a poll
of you would like to vote in
favor of house bill one forty
seven or oppose it so the pool
is now open and you can put.
And we will close the poll in
two seconds.
Okay great we have eight in
favor and I against and so if
you would like to speak in favor
of the bill please raise your
hand.
Tabacum McKay you are now
unmuted.
Good morning madam chair and
committee members and like to
speak for our house bill one
forty seven and a local
registered dietitian I work for
the university of New Mexico
hospital outpatient and I'm for
this bill because it helps to
make more consistency of
practice that's what we do both
nationwide and in New Mexico we
do important work and it's
important to recognize that but
it's also important to protect
consumers because we want to
make sure that they're getting
consistent medical nutrition
therapy legislative the other
reason I like to speak for this
house bill is because I'm making
a more consistent nationwide
means that it's easier for
insurance companies to recognize
nutrition therapy and easier for
New Mexicans to get dark
nutrition therapy covered
through insurance thank you
thank you.
Okay Romero you are now omitted.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Rebecca Lambro and a
licensed registered dietitian
nutritionist and I fully support
house bill one forty seven as we
know it is been over thirty
years that the nutrition
dietetics practice tax has been
updated and is definitely
necessary that the scope of
practice is up to date to ensure
individuals in New Mexico
receive nutritional advice from
qualified professionals almost
forty percent of individuals in
New Mexico have pre diabetes and
about twelve point five percent
adults have new and New Mexico
have diabetes these alarming
numbers are even more of a
reason why we need to make sure
that individuals in New Mexico
are protected and do not receive
misinformation that we're
jeopardize their health it is
our duty as a state and as
professionals to ensure the New
Mexico New Mexicans receive
science based information that
is derived from the best
available research and evidence
I strongly support house bill
forty seven and thank you madam
chair and members of the
committee for your help in time.
like to speak in opposition
please raise your hand.
Okay seeing none we will go to
the committee.
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair just a
couple questions
It was kind of our cleaned up or
update bill that goes into.
A lot more detail but mostly not
bills the.
Of.
I'm a bit surprised at a couple
things work hard on page twelve
one fifteen.
For calling why did we take the
data out.
Madam chair representative of
the.
That was an oversight I think so
Page fifteen.
Representative I winds five
through nine.
I just was wondering
who would pre vent the
technician.
They're working under a
nutrition us that right that's
kind of what a lot of other
professions were somebody's
working under someone
But.
It just seems odd that we've put
that statute I I realize that
it's in the just in statute.
Just some things that I thought.
This very long bill.
We could have been a lot shorter
if somebody's gone through it.
Wait I don't think.
There's a lot of water words
here for the.
A lot of the stuff just to.
Help me to think that we really
need to all of this in statute.
I'm not I'm not objected to your
bill are I'm just kind of
surprises.
The so.
This area of practice requires
so many words in our statute.
Is there a question.
I was just a comment thank you
madam chair.
Thank you Representative.
Committee members.
Is there further discussion.
Madam chair there's not a move
to pass a second.
We have a motion by
Representative Eli for two
passed and a second for
representative Gallegos
Seeing no further discussion is
there any opposition.
Motion.
Okay seeing you have a do pass
on committee substitute for
house bill one forty nine
showing all members present
voting in the affirmative thank
you Representative.
You madam chair I just want to
say that I'm here now.
Okay great mark you as voting in
the affirmative thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Next we will hear house bill one
excuse me ninety six.
Representative Romero.
And representative if you have
experts that have them raise
their hands please and we can
promote them to panelists.
Thank you madam chair us thank
you Representative I had just to
experts if we could promote them
best eighty three she's the
senior staff attorney with the
national employment law project
and in the second Cadena
as well please right okay they
both joined us okay.
Please begin when you're ready
thank you madam chair thank you
members of the committee the
four U. S. house bill ninety six
this is something that many of
you have seen before in past I
believe unanimously in our
twenty nineteen session through
our house essentially this is
allowing for the pathway to
successful employment in
partnership with our regulation
and licensing department
ensuring that those who are
formerly incarcerated have
access and and a streamlined
sort of approach to an effective
way of getting a licensure in
our state madam chair members of
the committee I'm nationally
what we've seen is a movement
toward access to jobs within the
state and one out of every five
Americans needs a license to
work well one in three Americans
has a criminal record and those
are basically reflect affected
within our state since twenty
fifteen thirty four states and
Washington DC have reformed
occupational licensing laws to
make it easier for ex offenders
to find work in state licensed
fields and if we don't do this
Madam chair representative
so unfortunately this forces a
lot of ex offenders to
recidivism rate unfortunately
practice different services
without a license and so what
we're trying to do is make sure
that this works for our state
and works forward for employing
folks into the future this is a
bipartisan effort my co sponsors
Senator Moores we like to call
each other the odd couple and
have since twenty nineteen but
the reality is madam chair
representatives that we're
trying to create this access
point for those who are seeking
to do good and with me like I
said is to the C. because
they're not with gold futures
and Beth are well and she's the
senior excuse me make sure I get
her title correct
she is the senior staff attorney
with the national employment law
project he's been working on
this bipartisan effort for
years.
I will defer to them as experts
and if they want to speak to
this issue I would love to give
them the for madam chair
representative.
Thank you would you like to
speak are you available for
technical support.
And should it go ahead.
Members I think there
Representative presented it
perfectly this is our third year
on this effort and this is our
most simple version of the bill
after talking to regulation and
licensing and several
stakeholders over the years and
will be available for questions
thank you.
We will go to the audience and
the call
if you would like to vote in
favor of house bill ninety six
or against house bill ninety
six.
So we'll keep it open for
another ten seconds.
Okay we have closed up the pole
and we have eleven for and three
against so if you would like to
speak in favor of the bill
please raise your hand.
Carlos a roster you are now and
it.
Good morning good afternoon
chairs and members of the
committee my name is Carlos
Perez I was born and raised in
Espanol New Mexico my father has
owned a successful landscaping
business for many years and my
brother recently started his
barber business just motivated
me to attend NMC and studied
business administration hopes of
expanding their businesses and
creating new jobs.
That brings joy and provides
needs services in my hometown
unfortunately as I look to my
town I see many empty buildings
and many people on the streets
are doing as many have
questioned why don't these
people get a job why don't do
sell something or start their
own business I have learned that
it is because they can't they
have been committed to being
unemployed and successful I'm
successful because of the
mistakes that they had made
years ago that's why I am here
today because we have an
opportunity to change that
please so yes on H. B. line six
and allow our people to work and
start their own business thank
you.
Trujillo you're now needed.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is that number
through the and I was born and
raised in Espanola New Mexico in
them a policy associate with
gold futures for many young
women United as a formerly
incarcerated quit she got on
living with convictions on my
record I know how hard it is for
people like myself find gainful
employment on a daily basis I
faced discrimination and
assumptions because of my accent
my appearance and even my past
including when I had been trying
to find a good job many people
in my communities as well as my
own family had records as well
by voting for this bill you will
create you a do some of the
barriers that prevents New
Mexican for fully moving on with
their lives with dignity so in
the past is not dictate their
ability to move forward with
their lives regardless of how
many times they have the to try
holding a job in licensure can
be a big factor reducing
recidivism bold features have
the full support of HB ninety
six and thank the sponsor for a
dedicated work on this issue
thank you.
We have someone signed in at
D. S. d'espagne.
Yes.
My name's Steven that's been I'm
a registered lobbyist here in
New Mexico with Americans for
prosperity we supported this
bill last legislative session
because this bill breaks
barriers to reentry and helps to
weed to lower recidivism rates I
am we stand in support of this
bill again this session and we
hope to urge you to support this
bill thank you.
What we are now in.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Stephanie Welch and I'm an
attorney with the New Mexico
Center on Law and Poverty
Senator supports this bill
because workers with criminal
history should have a fair
chance at economic opportunity
many workers have a rest of
conviction histories and due to
this I refuse to job
opportunities and discouraged
from licensed professions
despite their skills and
qualifications limiting the use
of such histories to relevant
convictions will provide workers
with a fair chance to prove
themselves and establish their
qualifications without facing
discriminatory barriers thank
you for your support.
The stock needs sorry about how
you Steven.
Early urban you are now unmuted.
Early you'll have to and you on
your end.
Okay let's move on to let's
Vigil the Campos hello can you
hear me.
Yes we can.
Okay sorry about that was having
technical issues my name is
Darlene upon I live in New
Mexico and I'm legislative
leader with all teachers
formally on women United I'm
here today in support of HB
ninety six the past twenty years
of my life have included all the
repercussions that come with the
illness of addiction including a
criminal record I'm I've been in
recovery now for almost eight
years I applied and interviewed
with several employers that
offer good pay and long term
career potential and all and
with the same result at one
point in time I decided on a
training to teach early head
start classes lasted a few
months and as I approach the end
rate would have been issued a
license I was told due to my
criminal record and may not be
able to obtain and even if I did
chances of you finding a school
that would hire me or not very
good I was so devastated and
completely discouraged that I
dropped the class I have the
skills and experience to do just
about anything anything I
learned quickly and I get the
job done a criminal record
should not affect by chance yes.
Thank you lose health Campos you
are now and it.
Good morning members of the
committee my name is Lucy elect
employs I'm a policy associate
of gold futures.
Formerly known as young woman
United I currently live in
Albuquerque was raised from
aspen on New Mexico it is no
secret that has been has been a
steady Hubballi police and it's
been have a recount
criminalized.
My family and friends continue
as we look for ways to escape
the cycles of poverty and
incarceration they are
consistently met with hostility
and discrimination on the sole
basis of their criminal record
we strongly support H. B. ninety
six amending bill that provides
employment accessibility to New
Mexicans including those with
previous criminal records HB
ninety six would allow talented
New Mexicans to reenter the
workforce create new businesses
employ others in their line of
struggle and most importantly
revitalize our communities as
they escape the cycle of
incarceration we urge you today
to vote yes on H. B. ninety six
thank you.
Representative no.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Erica Sanchez I'm with New
Mexico can an organization that
partners with young people
impacted by the foster care in
juvenile justice systems we
support each house bill ninety
six for all of the reasons
already stated it's important
that we remove barriers to
employment and we hope that you
will vote in favor thank you.
Bank accounts right now omitted.
Program accounts for you but you
do appear to be unmuted on on
our end I'm on here and.
Okay let's move on to heather
Smith.
Hello there can you hear me yes
we can hear you are you heather
are you Diane yes I'm heather
okay great.
I also thank you good morning
chair members of the committee
my name is heather Smith and I
was born and raised in Las
Cruces New Mexico there's a well
known saying saying that states
the past should be a learning
experience not an everlasting
punishment and the New Mexico we
know forgiveness is important
for progression and this theme
holds true for H. B. ninety six
according to the pew Institue
almost one and three US workers
need an occupational license to
do their jobs a criminal record
Kandace qualified job seekers
from thousands of ISIS positions
nationwide this bill is
necessary because it addresses
and protects workers rights
against discrimination based on
one's past transgressions we
simply cannot continue to punish
people for criminal act they
have already served for this
will reduce that recidivism rate
and ex offenders and help create
a clear path for past offenders
to thrive in society please pass
HB.
Thank you I lean Escalante
you're now and it.
Okay.
Good luck members of the
committee maybe my name is
Eileen Escalante and from
Mescalero New Mexico I'm here
today in support of H. B. nine
six I served as assistant
prosecutor for the Mescalero
Apache tribe in which life
became challenging and suddenly.
I found.
Montoya towards recovery since
two thousand fourteen and to
that journey I have been
continuously criminalized hopes
to.
Towards a paralegal certificate
today that my criminal
background will do the tier the
company might significant T..
Okay and being able to help
individuals in the same journey
of recovery please vote yes on
H. B. line six thank you.
Mercedes Moraga you are now
omitted.
Good morning chair and members
of the committee my name is
Mercedes may have and I'm from
Albuquerque New Mexico.
I am here today score of eighty
nine said as a person living
with convictions I believe that
we all have and deserve the
right to provide for our
families right in line is the
right to work because of our
convictions we are pushed and
forced to go back to unhealthy
means of supporting ourselves
and our loved ones it is time to
stop need closing doors on
people with criminal records and
it's time start creating paths
for us to read it
we have the workforce please
vote yes on HB ninety six thank
you very much.
For over is there anyone that
would like to speak in
opposition of the bill.
Okay let's go ahead and try
Diana cash again she's raising
her hand your animated.
Okay did this work I just
employment your funds yes we can
hear you now I just wanted to
briefly say that I totally
support this bill criminal
records that are pertinent to
Perkins to a person's current
ability to successfully hold
down a job shouldn't stand in
the way of their ability to
build a life for themselves this
is good for everyone thank you.
Thank you.
So we are moving on to the
panelists representative Nibert.
Madam chair I'm sorry we do have
an amendment we have been yet
introduced I don't know if we it
should be move for discussion
now.
Okay give me one minute.
Really what I wanted to get.
Madam chair I don't see it
anymore sure for.
One bill start yeah we're on
house bill ninety six and there
appears to be the amendment
there we were just checking
Representative to make sure
everyone has it.
I'm yes so we'll have the clerk
read the number and
representative of you it just
confirm that's correct what
she's done.
Thank you madam chair
representative we have amendment
number two two zero zero eight
one point one.
That's correct.
Great thank you.
Madam chair I'm sorry I didn't
catch the number is at a point
one version.
Yes that's correct.
And representative Nibert you
still have the floor.
Well let's actually move the
amendment discussion well we're
we're we're yeah.
So I'm of the amendment for
discussion representative you
would explain your amendment.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representatives what we added to
this is just consistency
throughout the bill we realized
we had inadvertently left out a
section that would be consistent
with allowing for access to
phone licensure and I will
allow.
Representative consented to or
or bath two I'm sorry
Representative I'm sorry ms go
than a or as Bardwell to discuss
the technicality of the admin.
Madam chair members we have an
importantly left out the
subsequent section of law that
also addresses licensure and
licensure requirements for
people with former convictions
and that would have created
inconsistencies with what we're
proposing in house bill ninety
six and a current law so the
amendment is simply to address
those inconsistencies and make
house bill ninety six and
current law
consistent.
Great thank you is there a
discussion on the amendment.
Is there a motion on the
amendment.
Okay.
So we have a motion by
Representative guy a goes to
adopt the amendment.
By Representative Eli.
I do have one question sure.
Great thank you Representative
Nibert.
Madam chair on the amendment.
Directly one we're striking.
Moral turpitude
And.
I'm.
One major questions on the
original bill but it goes to
this as well
we we do have positions in the
state.
That require.
The utmost confidence of the
public yeah the license it's
being issue.
We don't issue license to.
Attorney's.
Without substantial background
checks about the.
Substantial education without
the of you know basically
trying to make sure that that
you always get people that can
be entrusted we're out of you
know people's very sensitive
information yeah and
Wondering if we're going a
little bit too far here with
respect to certain
Professions that are licensed in
the state.
By striking some of the
languages and the.
Good for.
I understand.
The purpose behind this I
understand we need to.
Not worry about.
You know things that happened
why in the past and maybe this
stuff so what makes FY with
respect to too many license.
But there are licenses issued by
the state that the
good people in positions of.
Public trust and
I'm I I'm not seeing the
exceptions for the the the big
exceptions for some of those
positions and some may be law
enforcement related somebody B.
R. the legal profession
some may be of.
I can imagine there's maybe some
other professions are the the
public has to have insurance the
people that are dealing with our
well I.
But also.
Do that the trust that we expect
level so.
I'm just a little bit worried
about structured summer outlined
reach by may not the.
Get some of the.
Why is where we need to undergo.
Don't have any particular
suggestions on this concerned
about thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative
Representative Eli.
On your madam chair I mean I I
think the concern I have is
related to that and it's to both
the bill and the amendment and
that is but I I would appreciate
Representative Romero's response
to this is the concern that I
would have one stepping on set a
the judiciary's role supervising
lawyers to the disciplinary
board.
and to licensure to attorneys
are we stepping into.
Territory where were invading
the province of an equal branch
of government.
Can you hear me alright yes I
can.
Madam chair thank you
Representative may I respond
chair.
Yes please thank you Madam chair
representative as you know the
state bar is independent and so
of course this you know through
the licensure process my
understanding and all that our
experts clarified that this does
not affect their ability to to
that in particular because of
the RLD process Madam chair
representative and all of that
my experts confirm.
Representative madam chair I
believe we did we've had this
question in the past and dot has
been the correct answer that we
have added that this doesn't
touch
the bar process
to the larger question the moral
turpitude language we decided to
strike this year just because it
is so vague like I said this is
the most simple here that had
this is the most simple.
Version of the bill that has
brought so we simply created
goal posts for these
for these but boards and
commissions on what regulations
they could give the to their
members so they can still create
a list of disqualifying crimes
before licensure so any given
board could it could create a
list of crimes for which they
will not except licenses from
those individuals
the first year that we brought
this bill we had a very very
long bill that tried to direct
the boards and commissions very
specifically and we got the
feedback from our old regulation
licensing department that that
was not
That was not feasible or would
not fit their work structure and
so that's why we brought forth a
very simple bill that allows us
that allows each licensing board
to make those decisions for
themselves.
Madam chair representative and I
appreciate that answer hi I
started to see agency analysis I
have to confess I've gone
through all of them has AOC
weighed in on this I mean have
they or this recorder they taken
a position on this.
Madam chair representative I do
not believe so even in the past
because they are separate
process season entities like you
said there are distinct
decisions to be made between the
AOC on a on a allowing for a
bard at recipient of the bar
rather than anything RLD related
so what we understood from
twenty nineteen is that they are
completely separate process
these and there should be no
overlap based on the language in
this bill because they are
separate.
Representative Eli you still
have the floor yeah I'm sorry
madam chair I'm going to get off
for a minute I'm going to go
down to the floor because my
internet so terrible I'm not
hearing anything so I wonder up
the process thank you madam
chair.
Representative.
Representative Chasey.
Thank you madam chair.
I just wanted to mention that
the big is to endorse the
concept that rural turpitude is
extraordinarily bay I actually
had opposing counsel argue and
convince the judge that because
my client had been.
Used up shoplifting she had.
It has been settled yet that.
She introduced some other
evidence because of her moral
turpitude and.
You know is when you think about
it is that do you want to have
shoplifting when you're a
younger person keep you from
supporting your family when you
are.
Really in need of a job and and
I I I just endorsed that that
particular
Torrez eliminating that
particular term because I see
that.
We're not talking about somebody
who committed.
Ryan against a child so it just
it just boggles the mind how
moral turpitude can be.
Can be.
Apply.
So
I think it's a we haven't
overstepped.
As the representatives sad.
Madam chair.
The different.
Professions.
Their own qualifying air
disqualifying.
After the it's.
Or or.
Qualifications.
So madam chair.
Thank you Representative is
there further discussion before
we take.
Before we consider the
amendment.
Nothing further madam chair.
Is there objection to the
amendment.
Representative Rehm for
discussion.
Madam chair yes and I'm I'm
looking at the amendment and I
see some of the disk qualifiers
we get that pulled back up here
to.
I'm sorry bear with me for a
minute I got too many screens.
I'm.
And I and I have some concerns
over at I I think we need a few
more our car about two years so
we go to.
The moral turpitude I mean that
support language issue
but there's a lot of case law
about what it means and we need
to come up with a better phrase
I agree so page two the new
number to know the new number
three.
It's.
Your okay it's the paragraph to.
So.
As applied for reinstatement
renewal or issuance of a
teaching certificate a licensed
operator child care facility.
Or employment there.
Well.
We have counselors.
you know the you could have a
conviction of sexual conviction
and I don't know that we would
want them to obtain the
counseling license
we have
One of the talking points
eminent talked about maybe bill
if you had a security guard that
job is going to work is a
bouncer and he had of violence
our convictions that may not be
what about a nurse
who has drug addiction
so I have some concerns I it I'm
not saying I'm against the idea
what I'm saying is I I've got
concerns on it thank you madam
chair.
Representative.
So we have a motion to adopt the
amendment let's go ahead and
call the roll on that.
Representative Chasey yes.
Representative Eli.
Yes.
Representative Gallegos yes.
Representative my part.
Representative.
Our test yes.
Representative Rehm.
No and I'd like to explain my
vote.
Representative Zamora no.
Madam vice chair.
Yes.
Madam chair yes.
Madam chair we have that we have
six in the affirmative and three
in the negative.
Representative bring to explain
your vote thank you madam chair
it's again I'm conceptually I'm
with you but I just I think this
ammendment moves alright wait to
where we need to be but not all
the way to where we need to be
in I think it needs a little
more work thank you madam chair.
By a vote of six to bring we've
adopted that amendment and now
on to the bill Representative
Nibert.
Thank you madam chair
Yeah.
Similar.
Remarks.
The idea that so we.
Well in some doubt.
On.
Childcare facilities but sure
don't go into depth on a lot of
other things I think kind of.
Highlights.
Maybe some current concerns that
I have with this bill
All right I agree that the.
We ought to not create barriers
to licensure we have a licensure
has nothing to do with the
Sure you're the person revealed
from their their history
And
think you're.
That we all have a pretty simple
bill that that accomplishes that
but to make this apply to every
board and state agency and by
the way.
The state bar New Mexico is a
separate entity however the
Supreme Court is a governmental.
The branch of government and all
lawyers are licensed by.
The Supreme Court they're not
licensed by the state our state
bars is.
Organization that's required by
the I.
Sprint corporate the this bill
would apply to the sprint
courted by reading.
What apply to every licensing
board according
The people that we hire as our
state police.
We hire as our sheriffs and
employees are detention officers
and our other people who are we
need to have the utmost
confidence to and so the public
has a right that confidence in
themselves
and
I suppose psychiatrists and and
other professions that are going
to be in a position to deal with
people's.
Of.
You know in our thoughts and and
so the idea of the that the.
Boards are going to be somewhat
limited.
And stroke yeah you're looking
at a person records
Concerns but at.
It seems more about who ought to
take the time to determine which
licensors.
should have.
The supply and and maybe which
ones require right.
Screwed the want to go down that
river.
Madam chair representative you
made a statement early on the
percentage of jobs in New Mexico
that now require a license I did
not write that down could you
give me that percentages of
Madam chair representative it's
one in five in New Mexico often
the data is between one and five
and one in four jobs requires a
license.
So that's twenty to twenty five
percent of the jobs New Mexico
require a license and you know I
might there are might just
comment that that seems to be
That in my mind is just
government trying to control who
has access to those jobs maybe
we ought to really investigate
whether we need so many
licensors.
There's a lot of things that I
think we require a license for
the very just be trying to.
To get a fee for people that are
that application or were
profession but that aside
All right.
I am.
What little concern with the
grass all right.
I'm really concerned
particularly with well
Representative back on
the spring or and the licensure
of lawyers chair and they
respond to that
Madam chair representative I've
just spoken with the
superintendent of regulation
licensing and they have nothing
to do with the bar process so
just to be able to put that to
bed madam chair representative
there's no there's no
interference from this bill and
the are in the process of for
the of our and and Supreme Court
madam chair representative.
Well.
When I see we're live.
All wise and all.
What's.
The.
Two one two.
And madam chair representative I
should just clarify to that this
it was in partnership with the
RLD they did get to that through
this in twenty nineteen madam
chair representative this bill
was vetoed by the governor
in orders for us to make that
claim up madam chair
representative to ensure that
all of the parameters that were
sitting here are in agreement
with the regulation and
licensing and what the autonomy
are we are providing to the
boards to make those decisions
and and to to clarify this does
not affect the judicial branch
and the our process chair
representative.
Want to read the section chair
and you tell me whether you see
the spring port exclude says
subject to the provisions of
subsection B. of this section
and section twenty eight that
street at four twenty eight two
that I.
I don't know if I refer to this
for work in determining
eligibility for employment with
the state or any of its
political subdivisions or
license departments were other
authority to engage in any
regulated trade business or
profession.
The board or other department or
agency having jurisdiction
meditate in the consideration
and convection.
Right goes on yes thank you and
the following under subsection
be.
Are you I read that is fairly
broad unless you can tell me
that subsection twenty eight
dash to dash for and for it to
the
that I specifically set up the
state for use sharps the the
police departments yeah and the
Supreme Court
All right I see this is being.
Brought it back I see it as
being all encompassing of.
Of government
All right that's that's my my
real concern it is a.
It it should apply
To everybody at your side of the
spring court gets about because
it's a separate branch of
government I think we need to
say so that we're not.
Was supposed to see section
statute I don't have those up
front.
Are the exception so.
Madam chair I don't want to be
the worst out.
But I I have real concerns.
Representative rooms although I
am fully supported.
And I want to make clear up
fully supportive of making sure
that people are who who have
been convicted of juvenile
crimes crimes after they're
adults that has nothing to do
with the licensure I am in full
agreement we need to get people
back to work to be productive
service you don't have to
convince I'm there but I am
concerned about some very
specific.
Our licenses that the state
requires people who are in
positions of trust and the
public that house has a right to
demand.
But the people in those
particular our jobs
Have.
No baggage in that regard and so
madam chair I I I would like to
see here.
I'd like to suit another bill at
the but I I'm not sure I can
support the breadth of the song
thank you madam chair.
Representative Representative
Rehm.
Madam chair I here's the same
concerns that Representative
night is just brought up I I
think that one of the things
That would be very helpful is
perhaps if there was a paragraph
that said this shall only apply
to licenses issued by regulation
and licensing or trade licenses
for their I and I I agree that
we need to narrow it.
When we look at page one that
paragraph a that goes on to page
two that Representative Nibert
read
I think back in the nineteen
seventies when
Miami Florida all of a sudden
was in need of police officers
and so they lowered their
standards and they ended up.
Our hiring a bunch of people.
Many of those people are became
drug officers.
And suddenly the drug officers
were the drug dealers in Miami.
Our in our.
What law enforcement
Statutes it's very explicit
about what are disqualifier the
time period that there are
disqualifier is for certain
crimes such as DWI can't be
within three years.
or you you cannot even of you
cannot be accepted as a police
officer.
Where
The the page two one two you
know its business for
professions four or other
departments I clearly see this
grabbing everywhere.
When we go down to page two.
One twenty convictions that have
been sealed dismissed or
expunged.
Those.
And just and should not be seen
but I know that that is a
disqualifier for
an attorney licensed if you have
not admitted on the application
that you have one of those.
And so I think that that that
really is going to the attorney
issue that was brought up.
Juvenile adjudications online
twenty three.
That could be murder right.
yeah you know if they're if
they're C. old there are.
Then you were tried as an adult
that grabs the adult trials.
For some of the most previous
crimes.
Madam chair and representative.
One of the words that I have a
real problem with let's go to
one twenty three and in on the
for now and then the crime is
not reason enough and I don't
know how you define that because
that is so arbitrary
I think any board could go ahead
and say well we're going to make
it ex number years and the next
order make it a different number
of years and I was wondering if
you had a comment on that.
Madam chair representative thank
you again for your feedback in
some of your questions I do want
to clarify that twenty eight
dash to dash five which we do
not at all amend except law
enforcement in the process madam
chair representative again this
does not affect the judicial
branch and the bar process and
madam chair representative as
far as the recent enough again
is exactly as you stated we
believe that the economy should
be provided to the actual board
to determine what who within
their pool of of licensees
should should have that access
to license Madam chair
representative and I will defer
to my experts to clarify how
it's operated in other states
Madam chair representative.
I thank you Representative chair
Sure I'm I'm happy to share a
little again a minute is that
every agency staff a senior
staff attorney with the national
women's law project
Worked on the sorts of fights in
what the state and state and
across the nation I'm and just
to I think it's important to yes
to step back and clarify just
one thing first is that I'm.
Before before you get into
exceptions and start worrying
about exceptions for specific
out license this to remember
that the background here is that
this bill is still allowing
boards to consider at.
Convictions felony convictions
that are related to to the
offense so they sell abroad
discretion to consider related
offenses and as Representative
Romero said
you know the reason enough to
determine what they consider
recent enough to be relevant and
isn't that what the whole
purpose of these laws are to to
to to only disqualify people
when they're past convictions
are relevant to the today to
license the occupation that they
want to work and and if they're
not relevant the person should
not be prohibited prevented from
working and I stated earlier.
So in this at the ability to
work and employment is so
incredibly closely tied to
people's ability to get back on
their feet to not commit future
offenses I'm to to become
members of their community I'm I
can say that a lot of these
provisions are very similar to
what's been passed I'm in
numerous states across the
country within recent years
doesn't have states have passed
laws very much like this in
recent years I should say at I
can I can save state across the
political spectrum with
bipartisan support I'm I'm happy
to provide more details on that
I'm not sure how much should be
useful.
Thank you madam chair and miss
Avery you bring up exactly the
point the law enforcement
academy board.
And if this applies to the point
in I think this is just want we
just to brought.
Right I think what we need to do
is make it apply to regulation
and licensing only and and get
this tirade so that we can get
it in the statute I don't have a
problem with someone wanting to
be a
be in construction something
like that.
But I do have a problem if we
have an individual who has
on felony conviction and we're
trying to get them into law
enforcement or become an
attorney a licensed attorney
Maybe was dismissed for the he
was an attorney and dismissed
for embezzling funds.
I am you know so we weights
three years and he's now goes
back in and he gets licensed
again is that what we want.
Madam chair representative
twenty eight dash to dash five
describes a non of the ability
to law enforcement agencies
regarding the criminal offender
employment act states explicitly
that the criminal offender
employment act is not applicable
to any law enforcement agency
however if they would like to
adopt these rules they may but
there's nothing here in that
shall be construed to preclude a
law enforcement agency and its
discretion from adopting the
policies that they need to madam
chair.
Madam chair that's all I have
for right now it's a I think
that another amendment is needed
to make it a little tighter but
in its current form might I
can't I can't support it however
we go back to I want to support
this because I think it's a good
idea okay so I think if we
tighten it up I think you're
gonna get it.
I I think we get more support
thank you madam chair.
Thank you
Mr Johnson.
Thank you madam chair I would
like to move with a do pass.
Thank you we have a motion for a
two passed by vice chair
Johnson.
Right there is an amendment.
if.
No we adopted the amendment.
Right.
On.
A so the motion should be our I
do grant has ninety ninety six
amended and amended correct
right thank you Representative.
Thank.
Okay great and we have a second
by Representative Chasey and is
there further discussion
Representative Chasey.
Madam chair I just wanted to if
if I'm the sponsor could.
Briefly recap this bill passed.
The house and the Senate.
But it needed a technical
correction.
And it's back for the technical
correction right and did you not
say it had broad bipartisan
support the last time that's
correct Madam chair
representative.
I can't remember I thought maybe
it was even unanimous site.
So madam chair representative
before made it to the Senate and
again we did send this to the
governor's office it was vetoed
for that technical change which
we've made and we again have
been working with the regulation
and licensing so we feel very
strongly that it is in its best
form that we can have we're
going forward with the amendment
madam chair representative.
Thank you very much madam chair
I I I don't understand the
opposition.
So so we have a motion prepared
pass on house bill ninety six as
amended and the second of the
clerk to call the roll please.
Representative Chasey yes.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Gallegos yes.
Representative Nibert.
Representative Ortez.
Representative Ortez.
Yes.
Thank you Representative rain.
No ma'am.
Yes Representative Zamora no.
Madam vice chair Johnson.
Yes please thank you.
Madam chair.
Yes.
Madam chair with that we have
six in the affirmative and three
and the negative.
You have to pass on house bill
ninety six as amended
Representative thank you thank
you madam chair thank you
Representative.
Next we have our very own vice
chair Johnson on house bill one
ninety seven.
Representative please begin when
you're ready thank you madam
chair and I have to at expert
witnesses they are even at and
rickets.
If we could promote them over
and Kathryn Hummel.
If you raise your hands please.
Very much apparently.
Okay even if you would raise
your hand.
We'll work on getting her over
right sure if she's in the
counties but go ahead and
proceed please okay thank you
madam chair and committee
members house bill one seventy
nine is a bill relating to vital
records birth certificates and
this bill eliminates the fees
for certified birth certificates
for homeless you.
And it eliminates restrictions
on access to these vital records
for homeless youth and
unaccompanied you.
This will help insure the lack
of
At birth certificate which when
we lack birth certificates it
handers us from getting
attaining an education or
employment or housing services
or those things of that nature
social security benefits those
types of situations so it's
going to remove that barrier and
eliminate a ten dollar he and
this is for homeless youth and
we estimate a little over ten
thousand homeless you identified
under and through the New Mexico
PED.
And we identified a hundred and
ninety three homeless youth in
McKinley county or identified
under them we can eat them tell
program so with that and madam
chair I'd like to ask money
expert witnesses to introduce
themselves thank you madam
chair.
Welcome introduce yourselves and
if you like to add anything
please percent.
Rent.
Sorry about that Good Morning
madam chair members of the
committee my name is Katherine
Hummel I am the executive
director at the dream tree
project which operates a
homeless youth shelter and
transitional housing program in
house.
I've been working to end
homelessness in New Mexico for
over seventeen years and am very
familiar with the challenges
that this poses for our young
people.
Thank you Catherine do we have
the that on the line.
Not madam chair we stand for
questions I still don't see that
okay yeah we don't see her in
the list so we will go ahead and
start the pool if you elect to
vote in favor or against.
House bill one seventy nine the
poll is now open.
And we are going to close the
pull now and we have nine or
excuse me ten in favor and two
against.
If you like to speak and favor
please raise your hand.
Erica Sanchez here now and it.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name's Erica
Sanchez I'm with New Mexico can
an organization that partners
with young people can't make out
of the foster care system and
are experiencing homelessness to
improve their transition to
adult at in our work we see that
accessing identification
documents is the foundational
issue that most young people
struggle with I'm a lack of a
birth certificate and their for
access to an ID prevents them
from securing employment for
social security benefits housing
banking and such that it puts
them in a catch twenty two or a
cycle of instability.
So we support this bill because
we need to remove barriers to
access and that ten dollars fee
eight he is a barrier to someone
who is in a position as
experiencing homelessness so we
hope that you will support this
thank you.
Thank you Hillary Lipton you are
now and it.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Hilary lipped and I'm the
director of transition aged
youth at CYFD and we stand in
support of H. B. one seventy
nine it is
But bill to help our youth
attain birth certificates
and as ms Sanchez said just a
moment ago so eloquently really
remove the barriers that that
are there both for the youth
that CYFD might work with but
also for the many many years
that are not involved with the
system that are out there
unaccompanied and homeless so
again we stand in strong support
of H. B. one seventy nine.
Thank you when Lopez your now
emitted.
Yeah good morning madam chair
members of the committee this
Quinn will become a vice
president at western sky
community care were health plan
and and always looking for ways
to provide innovative health and
social services to improve the
health of the community and and
members and we stand strong
support of this bill it's
important and and it seems like
it'll be a good tool in
assisting homeless youth
throughout New Mexico in in
accessing the services they need
in in getting the right
documentation that they need to
be able to to survive and
prosper into well so we
supported as a good social
chairman of the house bill thank
you.
Thank you.
Julianne L. here now and it.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee good morning I
also want to speak in strong
support of H. B. one seventy
nine I'm from schoolhouse
connection we're nonprofit
organization working to overcome
homelessness through education
we see the need that
unaccompanied homeless youth and
homeless parents have to access
vital records particularly a
birth certificate and that can
also be a key to getting and I
any social security card and
other documents that families
and youth need to be able to
access the most basic services
like housing and health care and
also be able to get employment
so that they can then and their
homelessness I also work
directly with the office of
vital records in the state of
Nevada to implement a very
similar law that was passed more
in twenty nineteen and I can say
that implementation has gone
very easily very smoothly and
has been you know virtually no
cost so I'm happy to support
this bill thank you very much.
Thank you is there anyone that
would like to speak in
opposition.
We will go to the committee now.
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair
All right I'm going to repeat
comments on date on an earlier
build similar to this
Yes the goal is to.
Simply not require.
the adults signature to receive
these records and we just made a
change.
Under eighteen years of age or
that are.
Because people between nineteen
and twenty five and.
Karen sign for the so and then
the second the issue is
if we just want to make these
records available to homeless
people
I think we ought to just say so
and and and just just the it
should be based on our age range
and just a this will be it's
almost our last comment again so
more like redo appears of this
bill here in the in the prior
bill last page A. J..
Basically.
Should be getting all paid
online twelve says homeless
those can be verified through
and then it goes through a list
of things but basically it says
but the homeless individual can
verify their homeless so that's
true we all need to list the
other staff or somebody comes
and says are almost there almost
and so we can we can do away
with some of that other stuff
comments all of this bill sign
is the other one.
I supported but I think we ought
to talk to you about Ruiloba
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative Rehm.
Madam chair and actually that's
along the same lines of what I
had you know the of on in a one
page for warning twenty one that
discussion about twenty five
year old I I mean we could have
a homeless that so thirty five
fifty years old or I almost
wonder if it would be easier to
just say.
That the records will be
provided to
are persons just free of charge
and just remove any reference
stage or.
You to take out all the pages
after that or you basically just
say that there are we'll go
ahead and give these person to
get free of charge the only
other thing that I found that
was
interesting was the reference to
the trailer park well I don't
know what is right outside my
district but there's a the
senior trailer park that I think
they call kind of or at least
the residents think it's high
end but anyway that's my comment
I wonder if we just shouldn't
make this bill real easy and
just say we're going to apply
the records free of charge to
anyone thank you.
Thank you madam chair and
representatives may I ask
Catherine to make a comment on
those remarks.
Representative if that's what
you like to thank you.
Thank you madam chair
representative Johnson and
members of the committee
I I believe they intention
behind having the documentation
state response the first comment
from any of the other entities
is that significantly helps
these individuals to access this
particular resource these are
professionals who are skilled in
working with these records
departments and and essentially
providing assistance and
reducing any potential burden on
the staff at any of those
agencies and so that generally
is is helpful it this either Lee
in the case of homeless young
people who generally don't have
that expertise and experience.
With regard to the under twenty
five versus under eighteens
again it's it's generally a
matter of of lack of experience
and expertise in navigating
these types of governmental
systems that's unique to this
particular population and and
doesn't I necessarily to those
who are thirty five or or fifty
or sixty five.
And without a stand for any
further questions.
Thank you.
Representative Rehm.
The floor are you done.
Madam chair they were more
comments than that and other
questions thank you thank you.
Committee members.
How we do all the.
We have a motion for it to pass
by Representative Gallegos and a
second by Representative Eli.
the clerk to call the roll
place.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Chasey yes.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Gallegos yes.
Representative night Burt yes.
Representative Ortez yes.
Representative Rehm yes.
Representative Zamora yes.
Madam vice chair.
Yes thank you madam chair yes.
Madam chair we have nine members
in the affirmative great thank
you Representative you have a do
pass on house bill one seventy
nine thank you.
Thank you thank you madam chair
thank you committee members and
I just like four to four one
more minute to Catherine would
like to have a closing comment
Catherine Representative we're
just gonna move along we have a
okay still some agenda items and
we already action on the matter
thank you all right thank you.
Next we have the house bill one
ninety six with Representative
Ezzell.
Good morning madam chair good
morning please begin when you're
ready Representative thank you
for letting me present house
bill one ninety six as amended
to date I do have some expert
witnesses I'm not sure if they
are on the
Screener not it Chris Herbert
the executive director of the
eastern regional Housing
Authority.
Possibly Rebecca Velarde of the
New Mexico mortgage finance
authority.
Or to the ambarella office of
public housing department of
housing and urban development.
Representative we do have
Rebecca very loudly and Chris
Herbert on.
Perfect madam chair madam chair
what we are trying to do here
with house bill one ninety six
as amended is to address three
done to oversized occurring by
MFA in the department of housing
and urban development of
regional housing authorities.
Representative two thousand and
ten to two thousand twenty one
point four million dollars was
appropriated to DFA for
disbursement to MFA for training
and oversight and breathe the
regional Housing Authority.
Madam speaker madam chair and
members of the committee.
what.
lost my place here I am so sorry
here.
Their stringent regulations that
are placed on our regional
Housing Authority is also is
already in place.
They are subject to federal
rules regulations and regular
come regular revel of that are
relevant compliance and
oversight through federal
funding miss madam chair and
members of the committee if Mr
Herbert would like to speak and
if you said miss Galardi was
also.
If they would like to speak I
would like for them to.
Participate as well.
Thank you Representative in the
the experts would like to add
anything more you're welcome to
speak now.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Rebecca
fuller day and the director of
policy and planning for the New
Mexico mortgage finance
authority MFA has dutifully
provided oversight of the
regional housing authorities
however recently US department
of housing and urban development
has reached out to MFA you know
to talk about the issues of the
duplicative wrote oversight that
Representative Ezzell has
discussed we agree that even
though we're happy to provide
this oversight to the regional
housing authorities it is
duplicative and therefore
provides a cut causes undue
burden to the regional housing
authorities though he is not
present in in previous previous
committee hearing Representative
was here in in support of this
bill.
Thank you Mr Herbert.
Yes in regards to the regional
housing authorities I am the
exact for thirty east regional
Housing Authority based in
Roswell
there are three regions that
north east and west all of them
operate the federal housing
programs of public housing just.
The federal government as well
and we have full oversight.
which includes budgeting
operations
This expensive so it is the over
the state in the bill that has
been stricken is duplicative and
you have a large.
All.
So Mister Herbert we got most of
that but it's really hard to
hire so it was a little choppy.
Yes
Representative Ezzell are you
ready for questions.
Madam chair at this time we will
stand for questions great thank
you for.
So let's take a poll right now
of house bill one eighty six for
those in attendance that would
like to vote.
It's open.
Then we will close it in five
seconds.
Okay we've closed the poll and
we have four for house bill one
eighty six and four against.
So if you would like to speak in
favor of the bill please raise
your hand.
Natalie Cordova you are now and
made it.
Natalie you have ten me on your
and.
Thank you very much thank you
madam chair members of the
committee my name is Natalie
Cordoba and the deputy state
auditor and I am here on behalf
of state auditor Ryan Cologne
and we stand in support of this
legislation as your experts have
noted the oversight without MFA
included exists and we feel that
this legislation.
Will ensure that with those with
those items removed there will
still be adequate oversight
thank you.
Thank you.
Is there anyone that would like
to speak in opposition.
Okay seeing committee members.
Representative Nibert.
Madam chair there's no debate
all will pass on house bill one
ninety six as amended.
We have a motion for the past by
Representative Nibert to just
their second also going to madam
chair we have a second by
Representative Zamora is there
further discussion.
Is there any objection to the do
pass.
Okay seeing then you have a do
pass on house bill one eighty
six as amended Representative
Ezzell.
You'll have to a new
Representative.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you so much
thank you.
Next we have Representative Gail
Armstrong on house bill two
thirty nine.
Representative you are being
promoted to a panelist and if
you have any experts we you have
them please raise their hands.
Yes.
State mine inspector Chris
secretary if you would raise
your hand and Dr.
McDaniel is on if you would
raise your hand thank you madam
chair.
Thank you we have Chris but to.
That's fine okay great please
proceed.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you so much for hearing my bill
today our house bill two thirty
nine this bill creates
A. deputy mine inspector
position at the New Mexico tech
institute of mining and
technology and assigns duties to
the position of the W. that
would require it to assume the
duties and responsibilities of
the state mine inspector if
there's ever a vacancy in the in
the state mine inspector
position madam chair with this
bill
some of the things that it would
protect would be
In the.
Unfortunate case there's not a
state mine inspector this deputy
state mine inspector would step
up until the governor would be
able to appoint a new mine
inspector what happened in the
absence of a mine inspector is
called certification doesn't get
done accident investigation
doesn't get done hazardous
complaints federal grant funding
and riding quarterly reports
training our initiatives of the
state budget time for staff
signing on off and on credit
purchase purchases and mine
rescue events and that was our
that's what happened in the
before this Mr Chris Haffner the
state mine inspector was
appointed there was a large
vacancy so this is for the
safety of New Mexico and Mr
Haffner if you would like to add
anything now's the time.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Bonsall.
you very succinctly outlined the
problems do occur in the past
this actually occurred several
times due to the death of the
State mine sectors and some
cases just the.
Retirement to the state specter
has placed a significant burden
on the mining industry to not
have anyone there to fill those
functions so
It would I believe be truthful
very helpful to the state to
create this position.
There is.
I'm sorry.
Thank you madam chair and with
that we'll we will stand for
questions.
Great thank you Representative
we will go to poll the audience
so we will bring that pull up
the the elective bill in favor
or against house bill two thirty
nine the poll is now open.
Okay and we are closing the
polling now and we have for.
In favor and excuse me six in
favor and four against so if you
would like to speak in favor
please raise your hand.
Mike but when you are now and
it.
Thank you madam chair my name is
Mike ball and on the second of
director of the New Mexico
mining association this is a
very important bill to the
mining industry as the
Representative stated the the
problem becomes if there's a
vacancy the coal miners and that
other miners have to get
certifications through the mine
inspector and in recent past we
had an opening for almost nine
months which didn't allow for
people being promoted or people
being just certified to start
working so we very strongly I
hope that you will support this
legislation thank you.
Thank you is there anyone that
would like to speak in
opposition of the bill.
Seeing none we are moving on to
committee members representative
Nibert.
Thank you madam chair
In the bill of the.
First page line twenty one and
twenty two gives me a little
pause for concern because
basically if we have a state
mine inspector you're forcing
the state mine inspector to.
Get assistance from the W. state
mine inspector so I'm wondering
if we audits right the inserted
language on page twenty one
twenty two and then on page four
on page three.
After paragraph a online fifteen
and sixteen percent of New.
Paragraph B. that says something
why for for duties as assigned
by the state mine inspector if
there is a vacancy state of the
state mine inspector's position
than the W. state line inspector
shopper for all job all duties
of the state mine inspector
pending.
Out of.
Or something along those lines
Because the bar was stated by
under inspector I'm not sure.
I would want to.
Necessarily have our our we had
a of that agency and I'm being
forced to do that in FY twenty
one twenty two H. lost.
So.
Just the.
Yes the representative.
What what are so that I could
probably write it out member of
the if not the that was a long
time and I have all this.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative Nibert I believe
that languages there are they
worked really hard on trying to
attract the language to where
the W. mine inspector would be
able to take over for the state
mine inspector in case of
An absence of the state mine
inspector so they would need to
know all the duties of the jobs
and I believe Mr Haffner if on
Mr statement mine inspector
happier if you want to add
anything or correct me on I
would love to you all act for
you to elaborate.
Thank you representative
Armstrong I.
In the dressing lines twenty one
of twenty two if I had not
interpreted that line in that
fashion.
But I can see are you would.
And.
I don't really read it to say
that it mandates that he you
have to have this assistance but
I can see how the interpretation
could come about.
So I'm open to having that
change if it's needs to get this
bill passed a few of the bill in
general is quite will serve the
purpose.
What I'd like to suggest madam
chair and and Representative is
if we if at all possible what
we'd like to do is get the bill
passed take that amendments to
the drafters and everyone
everyone that's included and see
if that's a friendly amendment
at the at the state level to to
take more time into
consideration of that we can
amended on the floor if it's a
friendly amendment if they do
believe what you're stating is
what's going to happen.
I would strike the inserted
language on twenty one and
twenty two that I would impact
and looking up at the.
Bill I would not inserted new
paragraph I just revised
Representative see on page
three.
So instead of Santa W. money
inspector shell says I think you
really want the state mine
inspector.
Shall.
Should have the ability to
assign duties to the deputy.
R. make it clear that the state
mine inspector get K. I'm
assigned duties to the deputy.
And that I want to vacancy in
the position the state money of
the state mine inspector.
I'm not even sure I'd say the
president may recommend I think
I just say the the the W. state
mine inspector shall perform the
duties of the.
State mine inspector pending.
A point.
I I I'm not sure I could do.
Dr wells in that position I I
just say that the.
The W. assumes that role but you
one of them to perform in the
absence of the of the state mine
inspector.
So I I just revise paragraph C..
Strong language of yeah that.
And just a
revise a light regency to make
it clear that number one the
deputy finance specter performs
a duties assigned to that person
by the state money inspector and
then have an automatic
assumption of duties of that
office is very.
Thank you madam chair and
representative and we will take
those that is duly noted and we
will take that to the parties
involved and see if that's a
friendly amendment but I again I
would like to see if we can get
it out of this committee
to get to the house floor
because as you know the
committees have been pretty
backed up and this was supposed
to be heard Monday and so we're
really appreciative that what's
being heard today and I really
would prefer not to wait another
two days thank you madam chair.
Madam chair I will I will do
whatever you would like me to
do.
I will be happy to make the
amendment that I'll be happy to
vote on it the.
follow up with Representative
weiter.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representative Representative
Eli madam chair yeah that makes
sense to me I'd like to make a
motion to pass of house bill two
thirty nine.
We have a motion for a do pass
on house bill thirty nine excuse
me thirty nine.
And is there a second a second
here.
Okay we have a second by
Representative K. goes.
Is there any objection to the do
passed motion.
Okay seeing none do you have a
do pass showing all members
present voting in the
affirmative thank you
Representative thank you madam
chair and we will look at that
amendment thank you Mr
Representative Nibert.
Thank you Representative
Armstrong.
Thank you next on the agenda we
have Representative Anderson and
house bill one sixty two.
Thank you madam chair madam
chair I assume you can hear me
just fine we can thank you madam
chair Madam chair of I'm pleased
this morning to introduce house
bill one sixteen so heck.
One.
Thank you madam chair I get my
numbers mixed up.
Madam chair of the house bill
one sixty two addresses are
governance issues at the EDD
para P. E. R. A. our public
employees retirement
association.
And it's it's not a new concept
the bill was introduced earlier
in the session after a great
deal of work there's been a
compromise and this compromise
is presented I believe in a
committee substitute that the
committee has received is that
correct madam chair.
Yes that's correct.
So this morning if I could I
would only address the committee
substitute of that I hope to
find adoption for as we go
forward because there is some
differences in this compromise
that has brought additional
sponsorship of the bill the
committee substitute and that
would be Representative Egolf
and Representative Lundstrom and
I don't believe either one of
those two are with us this
morning but none the less they
are
Have agreed to sponsor the bill
as well.
thank you representative will go
ahead and move the committee
substitute for discussion and if
you can tell us about it then we
can
go to the audience and then go
back to you.
Thank you madam chairman madam
chairman the committee
substitute is going to go I'm
gonna ask my expert witness Fred
Mason with thank New Mexico if
he could lead us through the
committee substitute and I would
then be looking to introduce
Carter but the the a political
and legislative rep for a SS
CMAT here in New Mexico of for
comment on the committee service
well so of.
If you're prepared madam chair I
believe Mr.
Hello whose nation is in the
audience and is ready to
percent.
Welcome Mr Nathan.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I'm Fred Nathan
executive director thank you
Mexico we're a bipartisan public
policy think tank serving New
Mexicans
let me just correct the record I
don't think you are the
Representative Lundstrom is a co
sponsor but I want to thank our
our to co sponsors of the
substitute Representative
Anderson and speaker egolf they
are both statesmen and we are
grateful for their sponsorship
of this critical legislation.
Excuse me thank you Mexico spent
most of two thousand nineteen
studying the issue of retirement
security in New Mexico and
producing this report which we
sent to every member of the
legislature about a third of
that report was devoted to what
could be done to bolster the
performance of our public
pension funds we give special
attention to the board of the P.
R. A. which oversees more than
seventeen point three billion
dollars of investments on behalf
of ninety thousand three hundred
and ninety six active and
retired employees in New Mexico
one of our conclusions laws and
there's no nice way to say this
is that the P. R. P. E. R. A.
board has been broken and
dysfunctional for quite some
time those of us that thank you
Mexico are not the only ones who
have reached this conclusion
your brief comments by your
budget staff of the LFC state
auditor Brian Cologne and a
group of retiree beneficiaries
the LFC wrote in the FY twenty
two appropriation
recommendations in volume two
over the past several years
multiple P. E. R. A. board
members have been censored for
contact and board members have
referred matters to the Attorney
General and state auditor for
investigation despite
investigations that ended with
no findings of wrongdoing on the
part of PR and staff lawsuits
against P. E. R. A. staff are
being
pursued by outside groups
members of which are represented
on the PED are a poor
additional eight few members
have a strong understanding of
either investments or state
finances similarly in may two
thousand nineteen state auditor
Brian Cologne wrote to the P. R.
A. board to express his quote
extreme concern and quote about
quote the.
Board's failure to uphold its
fiduciary responsibilities which
puts our retirees and future
generation of retirees at risk.
Finally a group of retired
public employees wrote a guest
editorial in the Albuquerque
journal in January of last year
in which they said P. eight P.
E. R. A. board disposition has
become the norm with a minority
contingents bending valuable
meeting time arguing about
accusations of theft of personal
property and whether members
should be provided snacks making
personal attacks and filing for
eight police reports against one
another there are lengthy
disagreements about meeting
agendas and member stormed out
to prevent a quorum requiring
board action.
Even current P. E. R. A. board
members recognized the urgent
need for reform at their last
meeting five members of the P.
E. R. A. board voted to support
this legislation which is
powerful testimony against
interest last year by contrast
the P. E. R. A. board
unanimously opposed a similar
bill.
So what can be done to fix the
serious problems with the P. R.
A. for.
In drafting this bill and the
substitute we were heavily
influenced by the work of Joshua
wrap a professor at Stanford
graduate school of business he
studied data from thousands of
investments by two hundred and
twelve pension funds over two
decades rouse principal
conclusion was that governance
matters and good governance
leads to higher investment
returns for example professor
Ralph found that qualified
independent professionals make
better decisions than those
without qualifications right now
no one on the P. E. R. A. board
is required by statute to have
any relevant qualifications to
serve on the board of the P. E.
R. A. now this isn't to say
there isn't anyone on the board
right now who is qualified but
they are not required by law to
be qualified.
The substitute for house bill
one sixty two requires on pages
forty six the majority of the
eleven voting members of the P.
E. R. A. board we held going
forward be required to have a
quote a background in
investments finance or pension
fund administration and quote we
borrow that exact language from
the ERP statute where the
majority of that board is
required to have qualifications.
I presume that you in the
legislature made the majority of
the E. R. the board qualified in
order to protect the retirement
of teachers by passing the
substitute bill for house bill
one sixty two you will be
affording those same protections
to the retirement savings of
active and retired state and
local government employees.
A second finding a professor
route is that the more elected
state officials that serve on
the board the worst the
performance of the investments
made by the pension fund.
On pages forty five of the
substitute for house bill one
sixty two you'll see that we've
removed the elected secretary of
state from the board and
replaced her with the secretary
of the department of finance and
administration who is appointed
to that job and inherently
qualified in the area of finance
and by the way the secretary of
state was very gracious about
this change.
We decided to keep the elected
treasurer but we made the
treasurer or his or her
designate a non voting member of
the board.
The other major change that the
substitute for house bill one
sixty two makes is that it
shifts the P. E. R. A. board
from being mostly elected to
mostly appointed why did we
change from elections to
appointments the short answer is
one it's easier to get qualified
board members with appointment
them by election and to very
very few eligible voters voted
in these elections take for
example the voter participation
for the state employees elected
to the P. E. R. A. board over
the last four years in the two
thousand seventeen election only
ten point six of the eligible
voters participated in that
election in two thousand
eighteen it was only nine point
four percent of eligible voters
in two thousand nineteen it was
only eight point eight percent
of eligible voters and in the
twenty twenty election it was
only nine point five percent of
the eligible voters now let's
look at the voter participation
for the municipal and county
employees elected to the P. E.
R. A. board over the last four
years in two thousand seventeen
only eleven point two of
eligible voters participated in
two thousand eighteen only one
person ran so there was no
election in the two thousand
nineteen election only nine
point eight percent of eligible
voters participated in twenty
twenty it was only ten point
four percent who participated
the bottom line is that about
ninety percent of eligible
voters choose not to participate
in these elections now the
retiree elections are better
with about thirty five percent
participation but that still
means that more than two thirds
of eligible voters choose not to
vote in retiree elections
ironically these elections are
not particularly representative
of the whole state current.
With the board's membership
comes entirely from Albuquerque
and Santa Fe yet there are
thousands of P. E. R. A. N.
members who live in rural New
Mexico.
It's easy to understand why this
happens it's much easier to get
elected from Albuquerque and
Santa Fe in those communities
candidates for the board can go
on their lunch hours to campaign
in the many office buildings in
their communities built with
public employees by moving to an
appointed board it will give
greater opportunities for public
employees to serve from places
like to house in Los crucis
Roswell in Santa Fe and Santa
Rosa and I understand
Representative Ely will be
coming with a friendly amendment
to enhance the cultural and
geographic diversity of the
board.
The substitute epaces forty six
spreads around the appointments
so that no one person or entity
can get control of the board.
The governor gets a single
appointment a plus of course the
DFA secretary the speaker gets a
single appointment the Senate
pro tem gets a single
appointment the New Mexico
association of counties in the
New Mexico municipal league get
an appointment that rotates
between and various labor
organizations get appointments
some things we didn't change we
didn't change the basic
allocation of seats between
different beneficiary groups
right now there are two elected
officials are ex officio was for
from local government for from
state government and to replace
retired employees that's the
same configuration under the
substitute for house bill one
sixty two we weren't interested
in changing who was sitting
around the table are sold
consideration was improving the
governance and making sure that
more of them are required to be
qualified.
The bottom line is that if you
pass this up for Senate I have
excuse me house bill one sixty
two you'll have the exact same
proportion of beneficiaries
around the table but you will
have more public employees
qualified investments in finance
and I suspect more rural New
Mexicans will have a voice at
the table as well finally I want
to highlight a few more changes
on page seven lines to to for
the term for P. E. R. A. board
members will be one six year
term instead of two four year
terms the terms are staggered so
that for new members come on
every two years finally.
On page nine lines twelve to
fifteen current law allows for
verbal notice of emergency
meetings of the PR a board we
change that to require written
notice which is a best practice
and with that I will return the
microphone to our co sponsor
Representative Phelps Anderson.
Thank you Mr nation of in
appreciate the work that you've
done on this.
issue for a long time and the of
when we work hard to correct in
solvents.
Within para it is a long road
and I believe very your your
presentation of lays out the
roadmap for improved in perhaps
a shortened trip to solvency
madam chairman if I could I
would.
Introduced my second all expert
witness Carter Bundy of Carter
Bundy as you know you may now is
our works with A. F. S. C. M..
Anyway it's water letters and
I'm as well Mister Bundy if he's
available please introduce
himself or I will put your drop
Wirth Mister Bundy.
Representative thank you for
that madam chair members of the
committee Carter Bundy with
absentee you turn notorious for
being a little bit about that
soup and we might be one of the
most difficult one so
Representative I don't don't
think twice about that we were
supposed to this bill when it
was first introduced we didn't
like the idea of all political
appointments we have seen that
in some cases I that can lead to
undue influence especially puts
all appointed by one entity
what we have sought for a long
time these these bills have been
around for awhile this kind of
balance between rank and file
and experts and I think this
bill strikes that balance right
now.
Just the fact of the matter is
it's virtually impossible to run
for the airport it's a board
that handles a sixteen to
seventeen billion dollars bond
that is incredibly important to
ninety thousand New Mexicans
split almost fifty fifty between
retirees and an activist it's
incredibly important to the well
being of of New Mexico it's
important to our recruiting and
retention but almost nobody can
actually serve on this board you
have to be available to meet a
couple of times a month and then
you have to take off extensive
time to collect signatures and
after that you have to take off
extensive time to run
most public employees in this
state only get a couple of weeks
vacation here some some from
gate three they literally don't
have the time even if they use
all their vacation time to
attend the meetings and together
the signatures and to run
effectively I will tell you all
organization in the past we've
tried to recruit.
People to run for this and the
the pool of people who are
available and willing to to run
for these seats is almost zero
it's incredibly difficult so we
think that this bill would
greatly expand the pool of
people who are able to serve
I I think as as Fred said you
see everyone's from Albuquerque
I think there might be one from
Santa Fe the they're not even
really from Santa Fe there from
Albuquerque an Albuquerque of
course deserves representation
but everyone is not correct
because you have to have large
buildings filled with whether
state employees county employees
or city employees for those
spots so we think this greatly
expands the pool of people who
are available it's a good mix
between people with real
expertise and rank and file to
talk about how these changes
really affect them a and I would
say there's real urgency to this
because.
a very small number of people
and it's just hard to get people
to vote in these elections when
you have average turnouts of
nine percent in the non retiree
spots it means you know five or
six percent of the per members
are making the decision I would
note that appointing from the
largest organizations
representing
state employees city employees
fire members please members
county members that actually is
representative of a far larger
number of paramount verse this
is actually expanding the voice
of members on this board
the truth is right now labor
organizations could.
we have tried to do massive
funding of campaigns and
recruiting and get up to ten
spots I
I'll be honest I don't even want
to ask me to control the sport I
don't want anyone group to
control the sport I think that's
dangerous what this bill does is
it diversifies the power you get
input from experts to get input
from a lot of people I and you
get input from guaranteed from
people in different benefit
plans fire please state public
safety state non public safety
and then city county non public
safety it's a really good mix of
representation and of course to
to retirees I stayed the same
the for the final piece on this
is you know our position has
been and and and those of you
who have been around for awhile
no this.
we're in this for the long haul
we want to see these pension
funds survive for decades and
decades you've seen us walk this
walk in the twenty thirteen
going back to two thousand nine
when John Heaton Representative
Peter was making pension
proposals we were in the thick
of trying to make this fund
better for everyone to make it
more solvent to make sure that
is there for the long haul
we walk the walk in twenty
thirteen when when we passed
Senate bill twenty seven we
walked the walk last year these
are not hard decisions for any
you by the way on to say that
we're gonna have to pay more
into this or that we're going to
have people work for a longer
period but we supported the bill
on the twenty twenty as well so
I think you've seen our
commitment to this
unfortunately I think some the
current board doesn't share that
commitment you hear things like
oh will get ten percent returns
every year for the next thirty
years some people even said
twelve or fifteen percent
returns should be there assumed
rate of return any of you who
have done any financial work.
Or just familiar with your four
oh one K..
That this has never happened in
history of the planet there has
never been an economy or market
that is going up and even ten
percent per year for thirty
years we believe that we need
this expertise and we need
service people on this board so
that we can get to a point where
the pension funds continue to be
well funded and so that you
don't get that information is
legislators where the the fund
looks overly rosy because the
purport is making a set of
assumptions like ten percent
returns a year and frankly have
never happened and will never
happened so I'll be available
for professionals but know that
this is really about protecting
the long term solvency of this
fund and retirement security for
tens of thousands of New
Mexicans thank you.
Thank you Mr Bundy.
Madam chairman I believe the.
we're prepared to move forward
to see if those who stand for
and against this legislation R.
president of.
If that's our next step madam
chair.
Right thank you Representative
we will go to the audience and
take a call if you would like to
vote in favor or against house
bill one sixty two the call is
now open.
You will keep it open for
another five seconds.
Okay we will close the bowling
alley and we have fourteen four
and thirteen against.
If you would like to speak in
favor of the bill please raise
your hand and we will call on
those those folks fired first in
favor.
Justin Cheney you are now and
it.
Okay madam chair up to the
members I'm Justin Cheney
president the Albuquerque area
firefighters vice president New
Mexico professional firefighters
represent approximately two
thousand firefighters in the
state of New Mexico we stand in
support of the committee sub for
House Bill one sixty two we
believe that having qualified
members on the parable ward that
represent a variety of different
our workers in the state is key
to the success of the para we
have also been working with the
different labor organizations to
try to make this bill as a as
good as it is so I want to thank
asked me with Carter Josh just
leading the charge on this one
so thank you guys for your
support I also encourage every
board member committee member to
support this committee so thank
you.
Thank you Jeff rigs you are now
on me to.
Thank you madam chair for the
opportunity to express my
opinion abre of changing the
public employees retirement
association for from its current
form.
Para retiree and a former board
member who has seventeen years
of experience and yet faced a
budget division I am critically
aware of the importance of the
functional pair of war.
Current airborne is just
launching in dangerous anyone
who doubts they should view any
meeting for the last three years
some of their website.
Basil's charges for an alleged
are board members and retired
public employees of New Mexico
these allegations were reviewed
by the state auditor and
Attorney General Jean does not
the general.
Lawsuits have been filed this
next.
I'm running out of time but I
stand in favor of this bill
thank you.
Thank you Dale.
Reminisce you are now and made
it.
Tell you have to and you on your
end.
Okay thank you thank you madam
chair and members of the
committee my name is Dale during
mass.
I am a current pair attention
respect and I'm here
representing a group of state
government retirees to support.
House bill one sixty two.
The parable or is in need of
major reform house bill one
sixty two proposes to change the
board member selection process
and require board members to
have expertise that is relevant
to their important duties.
The proposed composition of the
pera board would improve the
financial investment skills of
its members many retirees are
extremely concerned by the
dysfunction that they have seen
in the current board and
therefore I fully support this
bill to overhaul how the board
is constituted and particularly
if you're require that the
majority of the board is
qualified to do their job thank
you.
And your members of the
committee.
Thank you Josh Anderson you are
now in muted.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Josh Anderson with
us Council eighteen the
statewide affiliate for asked me
we represent public employees
across many of the different
plans within para and I just
want to echo the comments from
both of the expert witnesses
Mister Fred Nathan Carter Bundy
our council eighteen executive
board takes our pension solvency
very very seriously and this is
never an easy decision but they
do support a border reform that
is balanced and takes the right
approach to to fix the pair
board and make sure that parents
not only solvent but.
Is it is in a great position
going forward so we want to a
bank Representative Anderson and
everyone else that has worked on
this bill and we urge the
committee to support the
committee sub for house bill one
sixty two thank you madam chair.
Thank you Natalie Cordova you
are now unmuted.
Thank you very much.
Chairwoman members of the
committee.
I stand in support of this
legislation I am a former board
member of the board member in
previously represented the state
position as many have noted in
support of this legislation it
is necessary to continue to
protect an effort to protect the
pension fund thank you.
Thank you we will now hear from
opposition if you elect to speak
in opposition of the bill please
raise your hand.
We will go to merrily.
December then.
You are now in muted.
Merrily you'll have to and meal
on your end I'm sorry there we
go okay how's that that's great
okay thank you
I don't like this legislation
because it really does.
Attempt to solve a temporary
problem with a permanent change
and there are a number of
concerns that I have about the
way this this proposed new board
is constituted I don't see any
reason why the governor or the
speaker or the president pro tem
should have any representation
on this board all of the
representation should be for of
the the pair members both
retirees and future retirees of
I think that there is definitely
a problem with the composition
of the current board and all of
the the people who were not
getting along with each other
but as I as I said in a public
comment that I wrote to a number
of the members of this committee
this is like saying legislators
disagree so let's disband the
legislature it is just not.
Thank you Miguel Gomes your now
emitted.
Madam chair of the semi Galco as
I'm the executive director of
the retired public employees in
New Mexico and the our PNM is
the largest Representative
retirees in the state of New
Mexico with with members from
throughout the state and we have
not been consulted in any way
whatsoever with this committee
substitute there's so many
problems with this committee
substitute madam chair that I
don't think I'll have enough
time to get through this I
request a little bit more trying
to go through some of these
issues
some of the issues are for
instance only to Representative
as a out of the committee of
twelve Representative retirees
where you heard early retirees
represent approximately fifty
percent of the members of pero
Firefighters that only had two
thousand members throughout the
state get half as many
Representative is as retirees.
this is this is a solution for a
problem first looking for
solution it's anti democratic
it's elitist it doesn't
represent the people of New
Mexico that the same issues that
the Mr Nathan and others have
said about the parable or could
be said about the New Mexico
legislature are about the
Albuquerque city council or
about any number of elected
bodies throughout the state of
New Mexico.
Roberto Ramirez you are now in
muted.
You'll have to and then on your
and revert to.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is a
workaround maintenance I am
elected executive power board
member and chairman of the
legislative committee I stand
this from a position of
committee substitute for house
bill one sixty two the question
I ask you today is why is this
bill even relevant the current
elected board is made up of
members the financial expertise
let me give you a make or the
board Francis page CFU masters
of public affairs Lawrence Davis
MBA in finance and budget
director of the City of
Albuquerque Steve Neal deputy
chief investment officer surely
Reagan M. P. A. deputy county
manager of finance from
Bernalillo county animal Senator
Ortiz the F. B. masters in
accounting David Roybal.
Yes finance CFO of workforce
solutions Andrea after member
the five years you and myself
and hello hello Fisher who are
asking you leisure health bill
one sixty two cents is ninety
thousand public employees and
retirees and empowers public
sector union bosses to point out
the board you will hear from
clear Bundy was enough to this
to my to my knowledge has never
held public sector jobs in the
state we have members are upset.
This is the political capital
four percent.
Diana rosellas Ortiz here now
and it.
Thank you madam chair I I'm
after a member I am a public
servant I am a taxpayer I'm a
single mother of three and I'm
and mother advocate for a child
of disabilities I offered to run
for the ward because I saw the
lack of knowledge and as Roberto
Martinez mention I have a
master's in accountancy I am a
certified fraud examiner and I I
I also have a masters in finance
and a bachelor city county so
the information that was
provided Mr Nate and just
updated the board the current
board passed the house the most
qualified board that has ever
been in many years and also I'm
I don't see a requirement for
financial
knowledge for firefighters you
so maybe we can start
play the fate thank you are you
know to bring in those members
with more qualified people thank
you so much madam chair.
Thank you.
Greg for you you are now and
made it.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee I'm great trail on
the interim executive director I
just want to echo the comments
from our legislative chair
Mister of October need is the
parable or does a.
Close this this legislation
thank you madam chair.
Thank you.
Steven stark you are now and it.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Steven Astorga I am the
president of asked me retirees.
And Representative ninety
thousand retirees P. R. A. has
been in existence for forty six
seventy four years and we
respect our elected board we
stand to oppose H. B. one sixty
two the change from elected to
appointees will hurt our
pensions we hope that the
committee will strongly vote no
on this bill we thank you all
for the work you've done thank
you.
Thank you Marc Fleisher you are
now unmuted.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I'm Marc Fleisher
registered lobbyists for the
office of the state treasurer we
stand in opposition to committee
substitute house bill one sixty
two the bill removes the state
treasurer as a voting member of
the pera board you are you is it
other boards without elected
officials other states have done
better without elected officials
on the board there's no reason
to assume there's any cause and
effect to this are you.
State treasurer serves on many
state financial boards with
billions of dollars in your
state prove you the state
treasurer should continue to be
a voting member there should be
an elected official on the pera
board please keep the state
treasurer of voting member of
care.
We oppose Committee substitute
at out of for house bill one
sixty two thank you.
Thank you.
Erin your now and muted.
Hello my name's there Census the
acting president of local three
zero two two I stand strongly in
opposing this article or bill
house bill one sixty two and a
more report what I need justice
comments on this process and
please we ask that you know.
Thank you the French you are now
and made it.
I think we lost Patty.
Roy.
You are now unmuted.
Royal have to and me on your
end.
Thank you madam chair my name is
Roy to open I am the retired
City of Albuquerque employee I
can remember for thirty years
my pension is my major source of
income and I hate to see the
make up of the board of become
politicized as I'm afraid it may
be if this bill is passed so I I
just urge you to vote no on
house bill one sixty two thank
you madam chair.
Thank you and I see Patty French
again let's try this.
You're now and it.
Can you hear me now we can okay
what I was saying is my name's
Patty French my set on the pera
board for sixteen years I was
there and oh wait and all nine
four we lost half of the there
due to the recession we made
that up and we came back with
more this house bill one sixty
two is not about fairness it's
not about qualified members
because I tell you what I would
put myself up against any member
on that current board right now
because the I was trained I got
training it's it's it's
ridiculous so like I said it's
political because why is that
that fire and police do not have
to have any type of training
fire has.
Point zero to membership so it
is not about what's best for the
members just thought about
training and I want to say one
other thing all the people that
elected to put to committees.
Are now too stupid to elect
their paracord the same people
that.
Hello Fisher you are now and
muted.
Madam chair members of the.
I am politician.
We can hear you.
You madam chair I am a state
employee.
Member of para.
The reason I'm opposing house
bill one sixty two it's it has
as everyone mentioned that has
its own all are appointing
individuals when you start
appointing people the appointees
are not there for the membership
there are not that Permian any
other member care there there
because individual pointed them
they're there to make decisions
based on what that individual
ones or the group once they're
not there for the betterment of
the funds they have their own
personal reasons for being there
because they were appointed.
Should have.
And the membership has ways
current way of voting the only.
State member city members county
members and I believe that this
bill is designed specifically to
stop avoiding.
Thank you that concludes our
public comment and so now we
will go to the panel and
Representative Rehm your first.
Thank you madam I it if you want
to get Representative A. B. Y. I
understand yes an amendment and
then come back to me that would
probably be appropriate I I
don't know what the then that is
thank you Representative I
appreciate that I I forgot about
the amendment let's go to
representative Ely thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative Rehm so
and thank you leader Anderson
thank you for presenting this
bill I
I I did hear and I talked to the
sponsor about
particularly the rural areas and
making sure they're
Representative and so I did have
an amendment madam chair going
to the committee substitute
point I on page five line eight.
After members I would propose
adding these words.
With due regard to the cultural
diversity of the state.
And the geographical
representation of counties
statewide.
So the following members would
be that phrase and I'm happy to
repeat it madam chair if you
want please repeat it one more
time your course with so after
members online eight with due
regard to the cultural diversity
of the state and geographical
representation of counties
statewide.
Thank you our move that
amendment.
Thank you I'm Representative
Anderson is that a friendly
amendment.
Madam chair yes this is a brand
friendly amendment and improves
the bills thank you.
Okay great.
Do we have a motion to adopt the
amendment.
So madam chair.
We have a chance to remove
excuse me a motion to adopt the
amendment by representative Ely
and a second by Representative
Nibert is there discussion on
the amendment.
Is there any objection to
adopting the amendment
Representative Chasey discussion
on the amendment.
Madam chair this is trying as
far as I'm concerned if we do it
this way but you have a
committee stop and your amending
the committee stop so what you
really wanted to as if find out
if we all approve the amendment
and then just get a point two
version of the committee so.
Madam I thank you Representative
and and thank you Representative
Eli it is there any discussion
on this amendment for a point
two version of the committees.
Okay Sir.
Any objection.
Okay seeing none Representative
Eli if this
Comes out of the committee
please to work with the sponsor
to provide that point to
amendment but at least going
forward now will have an idea of
what Representative Anderson has
agreed to and we can move it
forward so now I will go back to
discussion on the committee
substitute Representative Rehm.
Thank you madam chair.
I don't know where to begin on
this
Are you I have several questions
but
me start off with some of our
experts I guess is probably
better
Madam chair and representative
and of Mr Mr anything you made a
comment no into he gets control
of the board.
How is it that six members are
you appointed and four others
are not and that doesn't give
control the European.
Thank you I will ask Mr nation
to answer that please.
Sure Representative bay Anderson
Madam chair representative
green.
I guess I guess I would point
out as Carter said earlier.
And right now with the current
configuration the unions could
controls six seats now the
control six I am a bit under the
current configuration they would
have ten under the substitute
they can have as many as six I
also point out you know we we
get too hung up on these labels
and everybody has the same
interest here we want the
highest returns with the lowest
possible risk and we want this
fund to be more solvent so I
would argue that it union and
nonunion members interests are
aligned they want the same
thing.
Thank you
Go ahead.
Representative Anderson.
Representative Rehm I will try
not to interrupt in in I just
please continue and Mr Nate and
is available to respond as well.
Might might I add one more thing
to that answer which is we also
should understand the different
unions
Different unions are all
completely independent of each
other so it's possible that you
can disagree with each other
they're not monolithic.
Thank you for that.
Well I'll hold that madam chair
and representative that Mr
Nathan I'll hold that question
for what was ask you just be
tell me what government
employees he actually
Representative what does he
represent some firefighters some
city employees.
Brand name off for me if you
can.
Are you asking me this are are
you asking this Madam chair
representative remember you
asking Carter.
Madam chair and Mr Nathan if you
can name off since you brought
him up please name all of them.
Well there during the bill they
are thank the jurors forests the
acts
of the substitute bill.
Do you do you want me to go
through that are.
Madam chair Mister Nathan no
I'll tell you what let's do it a
little bit different madam chair
and Mr
Bundy Ashley who does ask me
actually Representative in the
state of New Mexico what
organisers want different
trades.
Sure we do represent some
private sector members are
people like nurses and techs at
Christus St Vincent we represent
state employees some of whom are
public safety some non public
safety so we represent for
example corrections officers we
do not represent any state
please so they have totally
different representation and
then we represent some city and
county workers we do not
represent any uniformed
police or fire who were in the
police and fire unit so you know
to Mr nations point this is not
at all something where we end up
getting any control discord
whatsoever it is diversified
across the different members who
are in different professions and
different plans.
Thank you.
Madam chair representative and
Mr Bundy you said that it takes
time to collect signatures and
that these current of air board
members must take off turning to
serve so how is it going to be
different that they don't have
to take off time to server.
Madam chair representative bring
they will have to take off time
to serve and and that is a true
difficulty but they won't have
to get signatures or campaign
and that ends up being
especially for people who are
outside of Albuquerque weeks and
weeks of effort if they want to
be elected so
so you're you're absolutely
right there are still it's still
a sacrifice for people to serve
on this board but making it so
that they don't have to spend
weeks getting signatures and
then weeks campaigning
especially for those outside of
Albuquerque and Santa Fe is
certainly something that expands
the pool of available members
greatly.
Thank you madam chair and
representative Mister Bundy
you're just pointed out part of
the problem with this they don't
need to get signatures they need
to get political favor
political like this if you will
what's one to another point that
you said are madam chair
Representative Mr Bundy's said
that the Parramore was a ten to
fifteen percent return and that
they actually had map that ten
to fifteen percent while I agree
with that what is the pension
oversight board set their return
at.
Madam chair representative right
I apologize if I was on clear
about that there are members of
the power board including some
of the current proboards who
have advocated that they should
use a ten twelve or fifteen
percent assumed rate of return I
believe the current assumed rate
of return is seven point two
five percent and it's actually
been reduced from it used to be
eight percent so it's been
reduced over the years and what
that is done is giving a more
realistic sense of of where the
board is going and what it
solvency is the point about that
was that if you have members of
the pro board who were able to
hire staff and actuaries to
analyze the board is that that
we're going to receive a ten
twelve or fifteen percent rate
of return every year the
legislature will have a greatly
inflated sense of how well Kerr
is doing which that's when the
giveaways start happening you
see radically increased benefits
that and what I I work for you
we're we believe in these
benefits but it's got to be
sustainable you can't have no
three and three and a half
percent multipliers you can't
have three percent Cole was when
inflation is running at one
percent when you have a parole
board that doesn't get these
numbers right that assumes rates
of return of ten or twelve
percent or fifteen percent
you end up with massive
giveaways that are unsustainable
and unfunded and so that that
was my point about that but the
current assume greater return I
believe the seven point two five
percent.
Madam chair representative and
Mister Bundy of so how can the
pera board increase massive
giveaways if the state
constitution prohibits that.
Wasatch Fund.
Mr madam chair Representative
Rehm.
It's not just the state
constitution that prohibits
hurting the fund is that the
legislature will get a look at
the problem is that if the power
board is giving you information
based on.
Terribly L. of an informed
assumptions like that we're
gonna get ten twelve or fifteen
percent then the legislature
will get to have these giveaways
it happened in the late nineties
they'll have these giveaways
either reducing contributions N.
or expanding benefits beyond
what sustainable and you will be
legally allowed to do it because
you'll have an actuarial study
saying it's all just fine but it
will be based on data
assumptions that is one of the
ways in which having real
expertise and people who take
the long term solvency of the
fund seriously on the pro board
is so important.
Thank you chair and
representative and Mister Bundy
but we just we just agreed that
I I guess that the pension
oversight committee said the
pension growth.
Actor at seven point two five
percent so
that the pair board can't say
well it's going to be ten.
you madam chair Representative
Rehm I don't believe that it is
I. pod who actually sets the
assumed rate of return I believe
that is done by the parole board
and a minimum they can
instructor actuaries to to run
studies making those bigger
assumptions but I pod is not
separate return.
Madam chair representative and
Mister Bundy so you're saying
that the pair board doesn't
follow the recommendations of
the I've talked.
Madam chair representative Rehm
it does sometimes and but it is
not legally bound to.
Madam chair representative and
Mr Carter who actually makes the
investments for para.
Madam chair representative Rehm
the pera board hires staff from
executive director to investment
directors and there are sub
committees within the boards who
oversee investments and give
direction the final investments
are made by staff and they often
use outside firms to help with
that as well.
Thank you.
Madam chair and the
Representative Anderson I guess
this one's for you all of which
begin with our current board
members Francis page and she's
our chief financial executive
with a masters in public affairs
and retired budget director how
is she not qualified to
currently sit on the board.
Thank you Representative
Representative I think it is of.
Unfair for me to talk
specifically about individual
board members and their
qualification I believe that we
are simply addressing.
On that I want to be clear I do
not criticized the pera board or
individual members of the peril
board I simply believe that we
must.
Prepare ourselves for a long
road to solvency and I believe
having a board that is qualified
in understands the nature of
defined benefit programs of
Representative buyer her comment
about of suggesting of point
appointment to a board may bring
political favor and when I heard
yes I thought you know in my
life whenever I have served on
defined benefit pension boards
the idea that you were doing it
as a favor really escapes my
memory and simply that of I
think that it is important work
sixteen point five billion
dollars.
Is a tremendous amount of money
and it must grow and will grow I
believe
and so I just I'm not going to
be critical of peril past pero
existing para and so I think the
by individual comment on
individual pair members would be
something I'd rather not do
thank you madam chair on that
point.
Ely on that point yeah I
Representative and madam chair
thank you Representative
Anderson and about the very well
were policy body that's what we
do and it would be inappropriate
for us to be talking about
individual members are attacking
their character qualifications
that's what we're doing here so
I just I'm not being critical
madam chair representative Rehm
I just want to point out that's
not within our records are not
consistent with our rules the
hatch so we just a point of
reference thank you madam chair.
Representative Rehm use of the
floor.
Thank you.
Yes Representative I'll just
make the community aware of the
different is our expertise that
these members have.
We spoke about miss page we have
Mister Lawrence Davis he has an
MBA in finance and he's the
budget director at the City of
Albuquerque.
Mr stably he has an MBA is
achieve our deputy chief
investment officer over fourteen
thousand of fourteen billion
dollar fund.
Miss surely right in she's an
MPA deputy county manager
finance and Bernalillo county.
Diana rose all us shorties is a
CFA and a masters in accounting.
David Roybal has a B. S. in
finance in the chief financial
officer workforce solutions
right those individuals.
Would be exactly what you're
trying to find in this board.
one of the things that I find
interesting on this Madam chair
representative we go to page
five one nine we're going to
make the state treasurer now a
non voting member well the state
treasurer is one of the
individuals that filed a
complaint so what we'll do is
we'll silence here is that since
what that's.
And madam chair Representative
let's go back to
To a discussion so six of these
members are going to be
appointed by some form of you.
Three members are going to be
appointed by the legislature and
one appointed by the governor.
So we did this previously.
And if we remember back in
The
governor Richards administration
he appointed Mister bland to the
test I see Mr boy and then use
more Carrera to go ahead and
help him do some investments.
Which ended up being
investigated not only by our
Attorney General and the F. B.
R. E. and and lawsuits for us to
recover the the money so we've
already tried this and I don't
think it's a good point.
I'm Madam chair representative I
would say in two thousand six.
Was the pair of fun because
there's been some criticism that
late ninety there was a lot of
Jan I would.
January of a lot of benefits
given so in two thousand six
was to plan a hundred percent
funded.
Prior to the recession.
Representative
I'm not aware of what the
funding was reported in two
thousand and six so I'm afraid I
will not be able to answer that
question thank you.
Thank you madam chair and
representative prior to the
recession it was over a hundred
percent funded.
There's two things that happen
of course recession then of the
are
Fund calculation was changed by
what's called dad speak.
What's
I want to read a letter and all
of this receive this and this
came from
miss Patty French and Patty
French is been a friend of mine
I don't know probably thirty
forty years something like that.
And I I think that is real
important for nearly seventy
five years the trustees served
on a pair board have been will
act by ninety thousand members
they represent they are pointed
by political politicians or you.
I am a pair of voting member
house bill one sixty two will
take away my vote my voice my
representation on the board.
As a black woman taking away my
right to vote it's hard it is a
not insult to Dr Martin Luther
king junior and the many other
brave African Americans research
prison in death for me and
people like me to have a voice
and cast a vote.
I am insulted by the power grab.
We're replacing my
representation representation on
a pair board with political
cronies how dare you silence my
forties and suppress.
My vote Karia trustees and its
governing board of trustees
should be free from influence
from politicians and special
interest groups I was a pair
board member for sixteen years
and chaired for years also just
remember for over twenty years
and president of the local.
Three zero two two four five
years.
This is over ninety thousand
members on the pair board that
you want to take the voice away
from.
And I I can't support this I
think there's more that we could
discuss on this but thank you
madam chair.
Thank you Representative Rehm
next we have Representative
Ortez.
Thank you madam chair and and
leader Anderson.
I have to be on as I am just I'm
really hard sick over this I
I've heard so many calls I've
had so many emails from retirees
from so many folks
about what they what they feel
is
Anti democratic and I think
those are pretty strong words
that that's the language that
I've heard and that's what we've
heard from many of of the.
On the the participants
participants to their to their
comments I I understand the need
to professionalizing the board I
I really do
We do but but I want to know if
there's some.
Middle ground is there a way to
address the need to
professionalizing the board with
the.
With what folks you know feel as
the taking away of their
democratic their voting rights
to democratic rights can can
someone and leader leader
Anderson or one of the experts
help me understand if there's a
way that we can reach.
Some middle ground here's to
address the the issues that have
been raised by the retirees
thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative and
before I ask Mr Nate to address
that
I think merrily that that this
committee substitute is of an
effort to address the best path
forward for managing of the
screen portent pension funds and
I hear many voices expressing
many different opinions but at
the end of the day each one of
us faces a yes or no vote and I
chance to give consideration to
this methodology proposed in the
committee substitute yes the
next best step whatever actions
we take today is not in my
opinion the final step towards
reforming this board for
professionalizing governance
there will be additional steps
ahead but I do think this is of
a timely and I think
it will put us on a better path
to achieve better returns with
that Mr Nathan would you care to
comment.
You yes Representative Anderssen
madam chair Representative Ortez
consistent with what
Representative Anderson said
this isn't the final stop for
this bill so there will be
opportunities to amended as we
go forward but specifically to
your question you're correct
there is a third way and I see
where you're headed with this
page I wouldn't necessarily
consider unfriendly which is the
to retiree positions in those
elections you have higher
turnout you have higher voter
participation it averages about
thirty five percent we're at as
the municipal county and state
employees of the participation
there is south of ten percent
more like nine percent so I
suppose you could do something
where you
Cut kind of like the PRC where
it's elected with
qualifications so that might be
something we could work on it in
perhaps chairman chase sees
Committee because the next stop
for this is the judiciary and we
would be happy to sit down with
you and with the retirees and
with Mister Bundy and other
stakeholders to see if we might
then that part of the
substitute and allow for the
retirees to be elected with
qualifications and and that but
I think satisfied both camps.
Thank you Mr Natesan and
Representative I too would echo.
Willingness to bring that
forward in the Judiciary
Committee my only concern with
trying to address it in yes.
Current version of the committee
substitute compromises it is is
already I believe your
suggestions will further.
Improve the final product but I
would hope that you would
remain open minded to seeing
that adopted in the next
committee.
Thank you madam chair thank you
madam chair leader Anders and I
am I am open to that and I would
like to to be involved and have
that conversation with the
retirees I do have one more
question
Can you shed some light on the
process of for the appointment
of the the members from
firefighters police and asks me.
Yes in chair thank you thank you
Representative and I I will ask
Mister Bundy if he would.
address that good question Sir.
Madam chair representative or
yes they were hit there is no
spot for apps Committee or
firefighters or a PO a it it
goes to the
labor organization or the
employee organization
representing the largest number
of para members in that so it
could be the fraternal order of
police it could be C. W. A. if
it would be the large the group
that represents the largest
number and I believe the bill
says on ninety days before the
appointment is to be made and
that would be up to each of
those organizations to do it I
can say from our perspective if
we do end up with one of those
positions we would end up going
to our executive board would be
our process but each
organization will have its own
internal processes.
Thank you madam chair Peter
Anderson Mister Bundy for that
clarification and spread.
That that's all thank you thank.
Representative Representative
Eli.
Yes madam chair I just want to
see if I understand what we're
what what the plan might be
hello this is that we would come
back on Friday vote on the
committee substitute with the
amendment so that it has it's a
new committee substitute and
then we could entertain
additional amendments and when
we get it to Judiciary maybe
another committee substitute for
Judiciary my understanding that
right madam chair.
Representative I think that we
have a little bit time depending
on how much longer the questions
might be to get a vote on it
today and then working through
folks if it passes to work on
those amendments prior to the
next committee.
Madam that's fine with me I just
heard that we were going to have
a committee substitute that
would incorporate the amendment
before went to Judiciary so
about maybe I misunderstood
that.
I don't yes I just was trying to
figure it out.
Madam chair I do believe there
was a misunderstanding there
that my hope would be to see
committee action today and go
forward and work on the well the
amendment to percent in
judiciary before we it when we
go into the hearing process
there I believe that will
perhaps be a benefit we're in
the bill sees the Senate side
thank you madam chair on that so
and I see Representative Chasey
has her hand up as well as chair
judiciary I'm just trying to
figure out assuming this gets
out what would be the easiest
for judiciaire I don't I'm
agnostic about how we do this
that we could have the vote
today and work on a committee
substitute R. J. it's just gets
weird because we have a
committee substitute now with an
amendment.
And then it's going to Judiciary
where there would be further
amendments but I would yield to
chair Chasey to sushi has some
suggestions on Jennifer process.
Thank you Representative Ely and
and I do want to hear from
chairwoman Chasey especially
that is going into the fishery
but I I I have the same
understanding as Representative
Anderson and I think because we
have rolled this since Monday
you know that was another point
and and depending on how the
vote goes it might not even get
changed but chairman Chasey.
Thank you madam chair and my
apologies I have.
I have somebody here doing some
work and I had to step out.
I had a couple of questions but
I don't want anybody says a we
already talked about that just
tell me and I will ask them but
as far as the process goes I
think
we.
I can't remember when the
amendment was offered it seems
to me there was not objection
to.
That's right.
So here's graft.
Right and so when I think that
and I think representatives.
I'm a lie and I would agree with
me and and Representative Rehm
without Judiciary we can agree
that we're voting on a point to
version of this bill today.
And get it out with the point
with that amendment that we
adopted than Judiciary Committee
there have an entire committee
staff or we can then that your
committee so madam chair it's
fine we can amended committee
something another committee we
just don't.
And that committees committee
sub committee
so I don't I.
What we're talking about so let
me just I want to make a
statement a couple statements
and then also asked the question
well yes my question first
and that is what is the reason.
That.
You made the decision to have
the treasure a non voting.
Thank you madam chair
representative for that
question.
I want to make sure I'm I'm can
you go yes I am off mute
representative of.
In the compromise of it we have
decided that there is evidence
that I believe Mr nation will
support that having an elected.
Representative on a pension
board.
Is
There are some there's evidence
that it's not the best the the
the compromise well as well
let's just continue our state
treasurer on the board as a non
voting member and it was sort of
an effort to to split the baby
into ice balls and that is my
answer okay thank you I
appreciate that I I want to
comment on a couple of things
because I think a lot of the
mail I have had in opposition.
The spell.
Expresses the view of retirees
who don't like the fact that
their budget have been.
Is that it would have not been
as generous as they expected.
And.
I I just want to say that live
here or just the policy maker
and I am not an expert on the
pension.
But I am a retiree from.
The education system.
Believe me the educational
retirees wish they have the
benefits of the TRA in fact
there have been efforts over the
years to equalize the two funds
and.
Yes much more generous.
Then the
the R. B. does but both sides
needed adjustment at.
I think it's unrealistic for
people to say that.
The board this bill the bill
shouldn't pass because their
benefits have been cut for the
the anticipated benefits are
lower than expected.
This is.
It's it's because of the future
of the fund and the future of
retirees that it's been
necessary to do that.
I'm I'm finally I just want to
say it hardly seems.
That we should be certain that
there are a number of you.
There are a number of you
perhaps we're you know retirees
than others they're not
negotiating with our working
conditions here they're
representing.
Retirees they're just the same
as everybody else so I.
I think I get.
The suspicion over the despair
that you sometimes the vote for
people doesn't play here.
It's not like will the you
people are going to get better
retirement benefits than the
other members.
There each.
Doing their jobs for their
members so I just want to make
those statements and thank you
for answering my question.
I'm.
The state treasurer state.
Thank you Representative I
believe you're done.
Okay.
Great so I don't have anyone
else for discussion and before
we take a take a motion from the
committee I just want to state
my position and
you know I I agree with
Representative Chasey that
unions are doing a great job and
I think they're really standing
up for our our working people
out there but at the same time
we have had many retirees reach
out on this matter to me and not
only for my district but
throughout the state and I know
that I I understand a lot of
their concerns and I understand
what's trying to get situated in
this bill but I'm just afraid
that I I can't support the bill
Representative so I I'm just
gonna ask now that the committee
if we can get a motion by the
committee.
Madam chair all make a motion to
table.
Thank you Representative Nibert
well started we have a motion to
table and that's the non
debatable motion so the clerk to
call the roll please.
Representative Chasey no to
table.
Representative Eli now.
Representative guy Aigles at a
table.
Representative night part
yesterday will.
Representative Ortez.
Hello to table.
Representative Rehm.
Yes the table.
Representative Zamora.
Yes to table.
Madam vice chair Johnson.
Yes the table.
Madam chair.
Yes to table.
Madam chair we with that we have
I in the affirmative and for in
the negative.
With that Representative your
bill has been tabled.
Thank you for your time thank
you madam chair and I
appreciate.
The opportunity to present the
bill and know that the issue of
qualification on the pera board
still lies ahead for us thank
you madam chair.
Thank you.
And with that Committee members
we have concluded our agenda and
I thank you for your time your
attention today and I think you
to the public for all of your
input as well we will see you on
Friday morning.
