um
The house Labor veterans and
Military Affairs Committee is
now called to into order and
we'll, um, Miss Maddin, our
assistant, please call the roll.
Representative Anaya.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Hall.
Here.
Representative Johnson.
Representative Mejia.
Here
Representative Ortiz here.
Representative Reed, here.
Representative Terazas.
Representative Torres Velasquez.
Vice Chair Chavez.
Uh
Chairwoman Royal Caballero.
Vice Chair Chavez, here.
Thank you. So we have Quorum,
and before we get started,
announcement, while we have a
captive audience.
And I'll repeat it again. This
Thursday, we are going to
convene.
And we have invited the secret
cabinet secretary for Veterans
Affairs, and then we have the
highest ranking um in the
military, uh.
Aguilar.
Adjunct
General
Aguilar, I've been promoting him
and giving him different titles,
um, they will be giving the
state of the state of veterans
affairs and the state of the
state of military affairs in our
state.
And we will have one bill at and
it's related to they being here.
We will be hearing Senate uh
House Bill 158.
It will be, it is already will
be posted in the on the agenda,
we had to wait for confirmation
from both, and so, um, I believe
this may be the first time.
Yeah.
Anyway, thank you. Um, I believe
this is the first time.
That, um,
I'm glad I didn't have my parrot
around to repeat.
When we would have been in
trouble. Anyway, uh, I believe
this is the first time that this
committee will be honored with
their here that we're here on
time, that the audience and the
webcast, uh, that will have a
good audience, so that was my
short announcement.
Uh, representative whenever
you're ready.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, um, I am
representative Daan Hoffman v.
Hill, House District 15, North
Valley of Albuquerque, and this
is House Bill 146, um, not
often, Madam Chair, members of
the committee, do I actually
feel that a bill title is the
perfect uh exemplar of what it
is we're here to discuss today.
So I'm just gonna read it to
you. This is in relation to
railroads, the enacts, the
railroad Safety Act, which
mandates the use of wayside
detector systems requires
reporting of railway.
safety violations and prohibits
retaliatory action, providing
administrative penalties and
providing administrative
penalties for railway safety
violations as discussed in this
act, to my right, Madam Chair,
members of the committee is Clem
Harris. He's going to act as uh
my expert for this bill, and I'm
gonna give him a brief
opportunity to introduce himself
and make some opening remarks.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, thank you very
much uh for your time today.
First and foremost, we want to
thank uh Representative and
House Majority Whip Day Hoffmane
Hill for her guidance and
leadership, uh, through this
process we have worked
extensively with her and
followed her guidance. House
Bill 146 has two major
components, the first being the
requirement to utilize wayside
detector systems, um, to ensure
the safe operation of trains
with concise and expected
results from the railroads.
And the second component being a
prohibition of reporting safety
violations without fear of
retaliatory action.
I want to make it abundantly
clear that we've made every
reasonable effort, uh, to work
with the railroads ahead of
presenting this legislation.
We've given, we've given up a
lot in this process. This bill
is actually, uh, pared down 50%
from where we originally
started, uh, in this process,
uh, we've yet to be given
anything in return from, from
the railroads in, in the give
and take ahead of legislation,
uh, their go to response was to
say that we will sue you because
federal preemption says that you
cannot regulate us.
Federal law is currently silent
on wayside detectors and is
noted as such in the FIR. The
FIR also notes that wayside
detectors are often left to the
discretion of state legislators.
When there are 2 and 3 mile long
trains, who is watching what we
Uh, cannot see as a train is
snaked around many curves in the
train, uh, the terrain, uh, the
tracks traverse.
Wayside detector technology is
already in use. Wayside
detectors or the eyes of the
railroad.
They watch for hot, hot and
failing wheel bearings on rail
equipment. They watch for
sticking breaks and they watch
for a host of other issues.
As we saw, uh, from the East
Palestine derailment, not paying
attention, uh, to the existing
technology can have cataclysmic
results. Uh, this fiery
derailment occurred because the
railroad simply wanted to keep
moving.
Uh, the overall cost to clean up
the community is exceeded 1
billion with a B dollars and and
untold amount in the disruption
of lives.
I don't want to see a similar
disaster here in New Mexico.
Um, moving on, the ability to
report safety issues without
repercussion is critical in a
safety sensitive environment.
Federal Railroad Administration
conducted safety culture audits
on all of the Class One
railroads this past year.
Within 2 weeks into the FRA's
audit of the Union Pacific
Railroad, the agency was forced
to discontinue its assessment
due to Union Pacific's actions
to undermine the integrity of
the assessment process, Union
Pacific contends that this was
an attempt to be helpful by
management employees.
They were so helpful that
Washington State Senator Maria
Cantwell initiated an
investigation into how employees
were being coached on how to
respond to FRA safety questions
and that they were told to
report uh these interactions to
company leadership. A US senator
doesn't initiate an
investigation for trivial
matters, manners like a
management employee being
helpful.
Senator Cantwell wrote the
following, specifically, FRA
found that employees
companywide, regardless of craft
or employment location across 23
states.
Had been coached to provide
specific responses to FRA safety
inspector surveys and report the
interactions they had with FRA
inspectors to their supervisors.
The message to the rail industry
is clear. Address the outline
safety.
And work proactively with state
and local governments to protect
the safety of their residents
and communities.
We respectfully request for your
support of House Bill 146.
Thank you. And with that Madam
Chair, we'll stand for
questions.
Thank you. So how we um.
We receive the zoom.
Uh, opponents first.
Followed by the zoom in favor.
And then we.
Raquel Espinoza.
Good afternoon.
Madam Chair, members of this
committee.
My name is Raquel Espinosa. I am
the public affairs director for
Union Pacific Railroad.
Nothing is more important to the
railroads than the safety of our
employees in the communities
that we serve.
Railroads have been deploying
wayside detectors across the
country for decades.
We invented this technology. We
have refined it and made it
better.
The fact of the matter is that
each wayside detector is placed
not randomly the way this bill
proposes, but based on science
and data. The other thing I want
to address is the safety culture
assessment that was done on our
company.
Those were difficult to hear the
outcomes were, and we recognized
two things that we need to act
quickly and that we needed help.
So we got some help from a third
party neutral company that came
in and surveyed over 30,000
railroad employees, and we did
focus groups and town halls with
our labor leaders, and we are
putting steps in place to
improve. So, because of these
reasons and because this bill
does not understand how wayside
detector technology works.
We must respectfully oppose this
bill.
Thank you.
So there are no others on Zoom
for other opponents.
Please raise your hand on Zoom,
though House Bill 146.
Natalie Miller.
Natalie Miller.
Yes, I'm here.
Proceed, Miss Miller.
Good afternoon. Thank you, Madam
Chair and representatives for
allowing me to speak briefly in
support of House Bill 146 today.
I am Natalie Miller, the
Brotherhood of Locomotive
Engineers and Trainmen, National
auxiliaries, 2nd vice president,
and national legislative
representative.
I represent the New Mexico
families of the 600 BLET members
and countless more railroad
families from other unions and
crafts employed by BNSF, Union
Pacific, Amtrak, Southwestern
Railroad, Texas New Mexico
railway, New Mexico Rail Runner
Express and Cobras and Toltec
Scenic Railroad.
We want to thank Representative
Hoffmaneal for support or for
sponsoring this bill, and we ask
for your help to keep our
railroad crews track workers and
communities in New Mexico safe
by supporting and voting yes on
House Bill 146.
Yesterday marked the 2nd
anniversary.
Uh, excuse me. Yesterday marked
the 2nd anniversary for the
Um
Tragic derailment in East
Palestine, Ohio. House Bill 146
with 146, excuse me, would
mandate the installation and use
of wayside detector systems
require reporting railway safety
violations and prohibiting
retaliatory action.
And provide administrative
penalties for railway safety
violations, all which are key
components to ensure that an
accident like East Palestine
never happens in New Mexico.
While it does not have all of
the provisions we had hoped for
and all that are included in the
proposed federal railway Safety
Act, first introduced by then
Senator and now current Vice
President JD Vance, or the
amended version, which was
introduced by US reps Chris
Deluzio of Pennsyl
uh Representative Garamendi of
California, Loloda of New York,
and Rui of Ohio just yesterday
in the House of Representatives,
your bill, House Bill 146, is an
excellent start to improving and
enforcing the level of safety
that is now expected by the
general public in the wake of
East Palestine, in regards to
railroads and their operational
safety practices.
Wayside wayside detectors
installed at regular.
Yes, 2 minutes
are up. OK, I, I apologize. Uh,
we just ask that you please
support this bill, and we thank
you for your
All right, there are no others
on Zoom and just please remember
everyone to um the 2 minute, we
will, I, I.
I'm not discourteous, so I'm not
gonna cut you off midway through
your statement.
However, I will allow you to
complete your statement and then
politely intervene. Uh, what
we're gonna do since we have
individuals outside.
We will
With a show of hands, all those
opposed that are in the room
that wish to speak.
Can the sergeant check to see if
there's any.
or 4 Opposed. All right, you may
bring them in, please. The um.
We're taking opposition, the
sergeant at arms will hold the
mic for you and you have 2
minutes, please. Thank you.
State your name. Thank you,
Madam Chair. My name is JD
Bullington, and I am the
registered lobbyist for Union
Pacific Railroad in New Mexico,
and I just want to make one
quick point about why you posed
to this bill. I just want to let
you all know that.
Safety is very, very important
to the company. I think we all
know that.
And uh, I just want to address
the Federal Railroad
Administration's assessment of
UP's safety culture recently,
Union Pacific brought in a
neutral third party that
anonymously surveyed 30,000
employees.
Uh, to get valuable feedback on
safety issues. Union Pacific's
rail union leaders participated
in the focus groups and the
listening sessions and the
collaboration is ongoing and
it's helping Union Pacific
continuously improve its
communication, training and
safety protocols. So this is
just another reason why the
company believes this
legislation is unnecessary and
remains a.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Robert Romero,
registered lobbyist for NSF
railroad.
Um
Uh same as Union Pacific um
railroad safety is our is our
number one priority.
The railroads are are regulated
by the feds.
Um, right now, um, we use
wayside detectors, wasteside
detectors are used at
approximately 25 miles,
depending on the on the terrain,
25 miles apart. This bill calls
for them to be 10 miles apart.
We're not aware of any studies
that says 1010 miles apart is
the magic number. As a matter of
fact, Colorado and Minnesota are
studying this issue right now,
and we're waiting for direction
from the FRA on whether, you
know what what would be the
right number, but we believe
that we use the correct, the
correct, the correct distance
based on the train and based on
the site.
Um, so again, we, uh, we oppose
this bill.
Ask the sergeant just raised the
mic a little bit. Thank you.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair
members of the committee. My
name is Alison Riley. I'm the
public policy director with the
New Mexico Chamber of Commerce.
And while we fully support
efforts to enhance railway
safety, we believe this bill
imposes regulations that haven't
been studied or any kind of
proof that they'll improve
safety. So, I won't repeat what
uh the previous speaker said
about the uh 10 mile placing but
arbitrary placement could divert
resources from other critical
safety investments.
And the bill also requires for
extensive reporting procedures
that could result in operational
efficiencies, causing delays,
impacting supply chains.
And consumers across New Mexico.
Railways are already subject to
strict federal oversight and
when you add a redundant state
level regulation, it could lead
to conflicting requirements.
Overregulating an industry that
is crucial to New Mexico's
economy will not only raise
costs for businesses, but impact
jobs and future railway
investment in our state. We
respectfully ask the committee
to oppose this bill. Thank you.
Thank you. So, uh, show of hands
in the room, all those opposed
in the room, sorry.
All those in favor who wish to
speak, please raise your hands.
All right, you may step forward.
Um
Madam Chair and uh
representatives, I'm Charlie
Jeff Coats, uh, the legislative
representative for the BLET 811
out of Clovis. I am actually an
engineer and been doing this job
for 28 years.
And it is a dangerous job. Our
trains are 3 miles long now, and
uh the intervals are to be not
less than 30 miles, and they are
closer to 25, like, uh, that guy
said, um,
Shorring them up a little closer
would help us out a lot in
getting
The Information I need to my
conductor before I send him back
3 miles and then another 3 mile
journey back. So, uh, on behalf
of my lodge, we're all in favor.
Thank you.
One other person in favor.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, John Lipshuts
with the New Mexico Federation
of Labor AFL-CIO.
When it comes to the safety of
workers. Uh, it has always been
our firm belief that it is the
workers that understand what is
needed best for their safety.
Uh, that has always been our
stance, and it will continue to
be our stance, and that is why
on behalf of the well over
40,000 members that we
represent, we stand in firm
support of this measure and
thank the sponsor for bringing
it up and uh we really hope that
you vote in favor for the seat.
safety of our workers. Thank
you. Thank you. There are no
others, so um.
You wish to add anything or are
you ready for?
I, I think at this moment, Madam
Chair, members of the committee
were open for questions.
All right. Show of hands.
I saw uh debris in
um
Yeah
You do,
could you
your mic.
You know they
Ackerman and Lake Carter. Thank
you, Madam Chair, and thank you,
Representative. I will defer to
my expert who surely will know
that information.
Madam, Madam Chair members of
the committee. I'm being told by
the expert witness to the extra
witness.
They're, uh, there are in your
district and there are
approximate.
For that answer, and I, I have
one more.
Representative, uh, so this
would be um on the railroads who
would need to implement this
technology and, and.
Satisfaction of state law,
whatever that may be, that we
passed today or otherwise.
Thank you for that answer,
Madam. Next we have
Representative Hall.
Madam Chair, thank you,
Representative.
Expert
Got a few questions so I'll fire
them away one at a time, we'll
go back and forth. My first one
is um.
One of someone said they're
25-ish miles. Why 10 miles?
The Madam Chair and and
Representative, I will defer to
my expert who will, um, I have
asked the exact same question
and give a very cogent
explanation as to why we need
more waste our detectors and
smaller, uh.
Smaller portions of space, yeah,
distance.
Madam Chair, uh, Representative
Hall, uh, the answer very
simple. Uh, the more eyes and
ears you have observing these
Mosco, uh, the better off that
you can catch a problem before
it actually happens or as it is
happening to present to prevent
a catastrophic.
Thank you Madam Chair, um, and
I believe I have an idea, but I,
how many miles of railway go
through the state, and how many
different railroads service the
state of Madam Chair,
Representative Hall, um,
according to Union Pacific's
press kit, uh, found on Google,
uh, they operate approximately
618 miles of, of track in the,
in the state of New Mexico, uh,
BNSF has approximately 1700
miles off the top of my head
from there, uh, Google Press kit
or their online press kit, uh,
New Mexico, uh, Department of
Transport.
ation has a corridor of
approximately 100 miles. Um, and
this is geared towards uh Class
One railroads, um, there are
other railroads that operate in
the state, uh, such as the
Southwestern out in uh
Representative Taras, uh,
district, and then there are
also the, the narrow gauge
railroads that are in the north
part of the state, and then you
have Amtrak that crosses uh uh
works across both the Union
Pacific, BNSF and the New Mexico
DOT corridor.
Madam Chair, and pardon my
ignorance to how many of the
line rail lines are shared.
By these different railroad, um,
companies, manager.
Madam Chair, Representative
Hall, uh, a lot of that is
subject to trackage agreements
between, uh, between the, uh,
Class One railroads. Uh, they
have interoperable agreements
across each other's properties
at various places, um, and, and
an exact, uh, a good example
like BNSF operates from Vaughn,
New Mexico, uh, into, uh, El
Paso occasionally, based on
traffic and demands or, or if
there's a derailment, um, Amtrak
currently operates across uh the
Union.
Pacific Railroad across the boot
hill of New Mexico, uh, between
3 times a week and then Amtrak
Southwest Chief is daily
service, uh, across the BNSF
onto the New Mexico DOT corridor
and then back onto the BNSF, uh,
property at uh Lamy, New Mexico.
I'm continuing on to Chicago,
Illinois, Madam Char, you know
your stuff, um.
So when we're talking about
doing this, so by
And, and bear with me as I work
this through a little brain I
have left it.
3 o'clock in the afternoon. Um,
By having these detectors
multiple companies are using
these detectors.
All for the same purpose, right?
So one BNSF doesn't have one
set, another rail company
doesn't have another set.
Madam Chair, Representative
Hall, uh, yes, yes, sir, that is
correct. The tech uh the
standards are a little bit
different what each railroad
considers a hot journal or hot
wheel bearing to where they
actually stopped the train and,
and, and force the railroad to
to the the railroad forces
itself to take action, which is
usually by setting the car out
and placing it on a sidetrack,
where it can be uh repaired at
a, at a
Chair, so there's no.
There's no standardization.
On what's considered.
You know, I, I, I'm genuinely
curious what's considered
A hot bearing verse um
Seems to me without some kind of
standardization would.
11 company's idea of a hot wheel
bearing could be totally
different from another? Is that
what you're saying, Madam Chair?
Madam Chair Representative Hall,
yes, yes, sir, that's correct.
Each railroad currently has,
can, can set that threshold
wherever they please.
And as a result, you have
various actions that can be
taken, um, and if I, and if I
may relate from personal
experience, uh, at my time uh
for us.
And we had a locomotive that had
a failed journal bearing. We set
the locomotive out and uh went
on our way and then after
service had ended for the day,
we came back to Santa Fe to get
the locomotive.
Ambient air temperature that
night was 20 degrees. We were
able to verify that with a laser
thermometer pointer.
We moved the locomotive.
100 ft
And in 100 ft, that uh axle went
from 20 degrees and matching
ambient air temperature, over
250 degrees, uh, in, in a, in a
state of failure.
And that uh potentially could
cause a derailment that
potentially could cause fires
along the along the ride away as
a minimum up to and including a
catastrophic possible case
scenario.
Madam Chair, and my last
question, which just came to me
when the engineer spoken a
moment ago.
When you reference a conductor
having to go 3 miles back or
they, they're physically going
up and over or through the cars
or cause I've seen I've had the
joy of waiting at some of these
train stops.
And is that what they're they're
literally physically, there's no
one in the back of the, you
know.
How does that work? Just so I
can get a better grasp. Thank
you.
Madam Chair Representative Hall,
uh, currently it's prohibited to
walk across the tops of cars by
railroad operating rules. And so
in order for a conductor to walk
back to where the problem is,
uh, that could be anywhere in a,
in a 2 to 3 mile long train and
the wayside detector tells you
which axle has the failure, and
then there's a buffer built in
that if the detector is
incorrect.
That you are required to inspect
a certain number, number of
axles forward and back of that
location. And if there's
transportation unavailable at
that location to the conductor,
they physically have to get out
and walk.
All the way to the location
where the problem is located,
make a determination what's
going on and then potentially
walk all the way back to the
front of the train. So you, in
reality, this, this person could
be looking at around, a round
trip hike of 6 miles.
In, in the performance of their
duties to verify that there's a,
that there's a hot journal of
that uh uh at that car.
Thank you Madam Chair, that ends
my questions. Thank you.
Thank you. And next we have on
the list of representative Reed.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative, um, expert, uh,
can you explain a little bit
more about, I think we're
talking like we understand
exactly what the actual things
are and what are like what are
these sensors, potentially, you
know, can happen if something
isn't detected. Does that
question make sense?
Madam Chair Representative Reed,
Reed, yes, ma'am, it does. Um,
detect wayside detectors can be
used in a number of different
fashions and this legislation
primarily targets um hot bearing
detectors, and there's an uh an
infrared uh scanner that goes
right next to the rail that
looks up.
At the journal bearing as uh on
each car as it goes by, and it
takes a comparative reading and
you will see uh in that
information that's included, uh,
you'll see like a, a one journal
if it's running hot, so it's,
it's 220 degrees, um,
approximately that would show us
hot whereas uh generally, um,
the old school way that I was
taught as a locomotive engineer
to inspect a journalist when you
walk up to it, if you thought it
was hot, um, you would use the
back of
gloved hand to touch it and if
it was hot, it was usually, it
was excessive, um, in a worst
possible case, if you had a
bottle of water, you could
squirt water on it if it, the
water sizzled off, it was, it
was hot. Um, there's a a host of
other methods to determine we
won't dive into, but this bill
primarily targets uh
Failed journal bearings as a
problem and then, and then also
dragging equipment and a
dragging equipment detector can
be built into the same location.
It doesn't require multiple
assets being deployed. It's just
simply a set of paddles that are
on the outside of the rail and
also in between the rail that if
anything's dragging, it comes
along, it smacks the, that
paddle and then it sends an
alarm message uh to uh either
over the radio or uh in most
cases, the
railroads have this set up where
it goes to their hot bearing
desk and then they, the hot
bearing desk relays that
information to the train
dispatcher who in turn relays it
to the train crew.
And that's where some of the
request comes in for clear,
concise action on, hey, set the
car up. It's bad. It's gonna
cause a problem of potential
derailment.
Set the car up, and that's why
this legislation is, is written
in, in, in that manner.
Right. And so Madam Chair, and
expert, so the derailment the
concern obviously is for what,
hazardous waste or things? Can
you give me some examples of
things?
Madam Chair Representative Reeb,
um, absolutely, uh, I think
probably the easiest uh
descriptor we have of what can
go wrong in a in the most
extreme sense is what we
observed in East Palestine, um,
the bulk commodities that nobody
wants on the highways, and
because the railroads can
transport these commodities a
lot easier and a lot larger
commodities and what, what you
would want on a highway. Um, we
see all of that stuff. It could
be anything.
Uh, from polyvinyl chloride,
like was part of what was uh in
the derailment in East
Palestine, you see large
shipments of sulfuric acid, you
see large shipments of um
Laine. All of these things are
very, very nasty if something
happens to him, and if you have
a failure on a car.
And the railroad's mantra of,
hey, just keep going, keep
going.
Safety is important so you got
to get that train car to where
it needs to be on time.
OK. And thank you for that, and,
and so my question, Madam Chair,
also an expert representative
is, would there be any solution
to trying to put these um
detectors in more populated
areas or miles back or could you
uh
Madam Chair, Representative
Reed.
Um, because New Mexico is very
unique in where everybody lives.
And when you look out,
And, and some of the rural areas
of New Mexico, and I'm going to
cite the example that happened
last April, uh, being a chef um
at the state line.
Uh, there were, uh, it was a
multiple car derailment of 5
cars, uh, they were breached and
ultimately exploded in that
derailment and very thankfully,
It was only propane and LNG that
was involved in that derailment.
So once those cars went boom and
everything cooled off.
There wasn't anything longer and
everybody bemoaned the fact that
Interstate 40 was shut down for
2 days.
What about, there were varying
reports of between 100 and 200
people in the surrounding radius
of, of that derailment that
were, um, that were displaced,
uh, as a result of that
derailment. What, what about the
disruption to their lives? I
mean, yeah, we shut down
Interstate 4.
If that would have been
something significantly worse
than LNG or propane.
Then what?
So Madam Chair, you're talking
about is that the Pecos.
Which one was that, the one in
April, Madam Chair
Representative Reed, uh, BNSF
had a derailment uh just inside
the New Mexico border, uh, with
Arizona and the uh the community
of Manualito, I was, uh, was
evacuated in the surrounding
area, uh, I believe if I, if
memory serves me correctly,
there was a 2-mile radius around
there that ultimately impacted
over 100, 100 people.
OK, Madam Chair, expert, so
really it's not gonna make much
that wouldn't solve the issue
and put them in more populated
area um inconvenience and and
and highways in between those
areas, Madam Chair
Representative Reed, uh,
In this case, um, if you disrupt
anybody's life because of a
train derailment. It, it makes
no never mind whether it's in,
in a city or if it's in in a
rural community in, in, in my,
uh opinion. OK, thank you, um,
and
Uh, Madam Chair and uh do we
haven't talked about what, and I
know someone's probably gonna
ask it, is it a cost issue? Are
these things expensive or can
you address that at all?
Madam Chair, Representative
Reed, generally the railroads
consider the use of this wayside
technology is, um, um.
Their own, their own proprietary
information and they do not
release, uh, what, what these
cost. And I also want to add
from a discussion with
Representative Hall that uh as
locomotive engineers, uh, we
don't, we don't have a dog in
the fight in installing or
maintaining or doing anything
with these, uh, we just are
simply asking for the
additional, uh, the, the
existing technology to be uh
more abundant in in its use. I
appreciate it and um I, as you
know, we've talked about this,
that something like this.
could happen in my
representatives.
Thank you. Thank you,
Representative.
Like get represented for
bringing this legislation, um,
an expert, thank you so much.
Uh, we've had some discussions.
Do you have, you know, so things
that just caught my ear when I
was listening, Madam Chair
Representative is
When they were testifying that
they're against us, this says
that that you guys don't know
how this uh detection works.
There anybody here that can
kinda educate us on how it
works. I'm I'm just going from
what I heard, uh, from the
From the statement that was
made.
against this when I first heard
it, you know anything about?
What's that meant.
Madam Chair and Representative
Tarasas, um, not to to
discourage the, you know,
oppositional testimony, but
they're very well aware of how
this technology works. That's
why we're here on this bill
today. Um, the experts sitting
to my right is very well aware
of how we our detectors work,
why they work, why we need more
of them more often. So, um, I,
if, if.
Abel, I would like for him to
again go through this
technology, exactly what it does
and why it is that we're asking
from a state level to mandate
having this technology, uh, at a
more points than what is
normally.
See throughout Mr. Harris.
Madam Chair, Representative
Tarassus, um.
The uh primary uh
What we're aiming for with this
legislation is, uh, particularly
in regards to hot bearings, hot
wheel bearings on the train are
commonly referred to as journal
bearings. Um, there's infrared
detectors that are positioned
next to the rail that look up.
At uh the train as it passes and
it reads uh temperature of each
journal bearing as it goes by,
um, all the way from, from a
train crawling by to uh in, in
my case is with Amtrak, uh, we
have trains that run 90 miles an
hour. It scans those those cars
quick as they go by, um,
another, another primary, uh,
goal of this legislation is
dragging equipment, dragging
equipment, uh, detectors have
paddles that are next to the
rail that are also
So in between the rail that if
anything hanging down, whether
it's an air brake hose, maybe
the, the lever used to uncouple
the uh the cars, um, could be a
derailed car.
Something is dragging and when
it strikes that paddle, it sends
an error message either to, uh,
the railroad to a hot bearing
desk or it has a radio
transmission. It says you have
dragging equipment, you have a
hot journal at Axel.
1234, as an example, and that
initiates protocol that each
railroad has on how
Address
That hot
How to address that, that
dragging equipment.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. The, the reason
I think this question was asked
before, but I still didn't feel
like I got an answer, you know,
um,
Because I don't, I, I'm trying
to.
Understand this is, is there any
scientific proof that you want
more on curves or you want them
more when you're coming down,
uh, uh, a grade or going up a
grade or is, is there, um, you
know,
Certain speeds cause they're
running flat and they can, you
know, pick up speed. I mean,
certain areas because of the
temperature, uh, altitude, I
don't know. I'm just asking, is
there any scientific, it's just
questions that kind of jotted
down. Any scientific
Workings that you had study that
said, you know, you should have
them at this many uh this many
miles or this this amount of
time over this type of, uh, this
type of terrain or whatever. I,
I, I.
Do you have anything you can
produce that would, and I'm
just, I mean, I don't know. I
haven't heard anything on either
side other than when you talked
to me the other day, Madam
Chair.
Madam Chair Representative
Tarasis, uh, there is, has been,
um, some investigative studies
being done by the FRA, uh, the
Federal Railroad Administration
on, on this topic, but
unfortunately, because uh as you
have a change in administration,
um,
We've recently had that change.
You now have an incoming FRA
administrator that has a
different tack on how to proceed
with these matters and that
changes.
Every presidential cycle,
unfortunately, so we may not
have the results of any kind of
scientific study, uh, to your
question specifically to talk
about issues like altitude and
temperature, altitude plays no,
no bearing in this, um,
temperature, uh, one of the old
school ways of detecting whether
a uh a journal bearing had
failed was the use of a heat,
uh, indicating crayon. And if
the temperature was above, uh,
the ambient air temperature was
above, uh,
memory serves me 30 degrees.
It's been a minute since I've
used one of these crayons, you
use one side of the crayon and
if it was above that
temperature, you, you use the
other side of the crayon that
and it factored.
For, uh, ambient air temperature
plus the temperature of the
bearing, uh, to demonstrate a, a
visible failure by the crayon
melting when it made contact.
Mount Chair representative, I, I
just, I think.
I, I, you know, you kind of
threw me off when you said the
new administration cause I'm
going, I'm just thinking.
We just had an exiting
administration, and I would
imagine.
These didn't get changed in the
last 2 or 3 weeks. So how long
have you guys had these
detectors, 25 miles apart.
Madam Chair Representative
Tarasso, uh, that's currently
the railroads can install these
detectors wherever they see fit.
There is no, uh, federal
guidance that requires any
specific interval, and that is
uh noted that uh there's no
federal guidance required on
that, and it's left to the
states to uh do the uh determine
a distance in the uh FIR yeah,
but I'm confused, Madam Chair
Representative, because you said
the new administration would
have
You don't know what they're
gonna do, but the last
administration just left.
You were left with this 25 miles
an hour, 25 miles.
Uh, gaps. I don't understand
what, and how long has it been
that way?
Madam Chair Representative
Trosses, uh, it's been that way
for, uh, quite a long time as
detector technology has come
online and been used, um, and
that, that study that you had
asked for earlier in, in that
was admitted it was initiated by
uh the previous administration.
And the findings, Madam Chair
Representative.
Madam Chair Representative, uh,
there, we don't know yet. There
hasn't been, hasn't been
released.
OK, so Madam Chair
Representative, on my
understanding that they haven't
been released or they haven't
been finished.
Madam Chair, Representative
Trosis, uh, finished released.
I'm not, I'm not sure exactly,
but it, it's not been released.
I'm just, it's OK. I just wanted
to understand. So, Madam Chair
Representative, just so you
understand because, you know, we
don't know, I don't know a lot
about trains. There are no,
there's no detectors on the
train itself, like, I'm thinking
of my car.
You got your little, you know,
tires going flat and it tells
you, you know what, you're
Sensor goes off and you just,
does it have any sort of sensors
like that on the train itself?
Madam Chair, Representative, uh,
what you're referring to is, is
somewhat of a unique situation
to passenger equipment as an
example, uh, the New Mexico Rail
runner Express utilizes uh what
are called stink bombs. Uh,
there's a capsule of sulfur that
is, uh, put into the journal box
on, on these passenger cars and
it has a thermal melting point
that when it gets to that.
That uh that stink bomb fails,
and when you go back, it's
smoking and, and it's very
obvious based on appearance
based on smell that it's
something's failed, but that
works on a short passenger train
where you may have 1012 cars
when you have a freight train
that's 2 or 3 miles long, nobody
is back there to see that stink
bomb go off. Nobody knows it's
gone off unless you are
utilizing uh this wayside tech,
uh, wayside detector.
Please understand that I don't
know anything about trains, so
these questions might be odd.
Madam Chair. So there's no, I
don't know, camera technology
that can say, hey, look, we're
picking up.
Smoke coming out of the back one
or is it, you know, I don't
know, I'm in the front of the
train, I would think you'd have
some sort of detection deal to
see what's going on at the end
of the, the other end.
Madam Chair Representative
Trossis, there is no such
technology currently.
Alrighty. And, and when you have
a hot bearing or I'm I'm
assuming, is that a se bearing,
Madam Chair representative? Is
that what that means? I, I don't
know what that exactly means,
cause it's failing, so is it, is
it, did it get hot and seas, or
is it, is it fractured? What,
what does that mean?
Madam Chair, uh, Representative
Tarasa a hot journal, uh
generally indicates the
temperature threshold that the
manufacturer of the bearing
decides that it is, it has
reached a failure point,
generally, um, that is somewhere
less than the threshold of the
bearing seal on, in that case
and that seal is ultimately, uh,
the final defense in keeping all
the grease in that journal
bearing so that it's properly
lubricated. Madam Chair
Representative, you and, and.
Earlier, I just heard some
stuff. I just wanna make sure
you're not, you're not in
Sydney, none of, nobody's
insinuating here that the
railroad companies are just
wanting to just, they're gonna
go no matter what. I don't think
they're reckless that way. Is
that, you didn't mean that
earlier if I heard that where
it's, you didn't use the word
reckless, but you, you use the
word maybe that they're just,
they just keep on going.
Am I understanding that?
Madam Chair Representative
Tarasas.
Currently, because there are no
set standards at state or
federal, at the state or federal
level, the railroads can dictate
what happens in that case, and
we hope to change that with this
legislation, Madam Chair
Representative, and you know,
they, they can dictate that, but
I don't.
I wouldn't see that they'd want
to get into, I mean, an accident
or any railroad system, or any
company.
Plus the people that are on
board that are that are actually
driving the train or engineering
the train. I'm gonna risk
sterilize it, they tell you to
go and it's that dangerous. I'm
sure you can stop, but I
wouldn't see that they would
force you to keep going to the
point that they cause something
like to that degree, cause I'm
not trying, I just
I found that kind of strange to
hear that.
Madam Chair Representative
Tarassas, uh, that's exactly
what happened in the East
Palestine derailment, exactly
what you've, uh, what you've
insinuated just keep going. And
that was the language that I
used earlier was, hey, just keep
going.
Just keep going is the mantra
of, of the Class One railroads.
Mm, OK.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
I just, um, I, I was just
interested in, in to see what,
what uh technology you had, how
it works, and, um, if you had
any scientific um back into say
10, why not 15, why not 20, uh,
what I don't, I don't know how
the technology works myself well
enough to know that I know it's
scanning, but the last question
I had is the, does the rail
runner have to with the madam
chair with the rail runner have?
um, follow these Madam Chair
Representative Taras currently
as the legislation is written.
There is not a carveout for, for
the rail runner. There are
currently two wayside detectors
on railRunner property, one of
which has been out of service
nearly as long as I've lived in
the state of New Mexico.
So Madam Chair representative, I
just think, I think lives are
just as important on the rail
runner, and I don't understand
why we, we wouldn't have
included it on this.
Madam Chair Representative to
offices, there is no carve out
that, that impacts the rail
runner. They would, uh, my
understanding they would have to
comply with this also, they
would have to comply. I
misunderstood. OK, Madam Chair,
representative, yes sir, that's
correct. Those are all my
questions. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Uh, are there any other
questions from the committee?
Any other questions?
I, I do wanna make if there are
no other questions, um.
Make a
commentary and many of you have
heard this, I know
Representative has that.
Railroad safety is.
Close to my heart, um, we had a
family member.
Um, who worked.
In the railroads.
And um several gene. And um
unfortunately.
Due to um.
A breakdown and I don't ever
remember the mechanics or the
technology, but due to a
breakdown in.
He was working down below.
I don't know, um, but he was
working down below, fixing
something.
And there was some sort of
breakdown in communication.
And there were 2 trains.
Coming.
And um he was caught in the
middle.
Capitated and um they did not
realize that.
This had occurred because again
due to another failure.
Um, there was no way to convey.
that time.
And so consequently.
There was basically.
No body left until
I recount this because someone
said earlier in their testimony.
That workers know best.
They are
The front line.
They are in the trenches, they
understand what is necessary to
keep.
Their lives safe, but the lives
the lives of everyone.
And we have to.
We absolutely have to pay
attention.
To what
is conveyed by the workforce.
And so I just offer that we pay
attention, and I wanted to just,
uh, thank you. It's always
improving all our living in that
position.
So questions, what is the will
of the committee?
Represent.
There's a motion to do pass
motion by representative.
Represented.
I represented.
Uh, maybe have a rope.
Representative Anaya.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Hall.
Yes.
Representative Johnson.
Yeah
Representative Mejia.
Yes.
Representative Ortiz, yes.
Representative Reed.
Yes.
Representative Terazas I'd like
to explain.
Representative Torres Velasquez.
Yes.
But
vice chair Chavez.
Chairwoman Royal Caballero.
Yes. 9 to 1. Thank you. Uh, we
have a, uh, due pass on a vote
of 9 to 1, and we have
representative Tarasis to
explain his vote. Madam Chair, I
just, I was on the fence on this
legislation and I just
I would like to have more
scientific evidence on how close
would be better, you know, if
it's 10 miles, maybe it's 5
miles, maybe it's 15. I just
don't know enough about this
that I feel.
Thank you, Representative, you
have a Du pass and thank you
very much Madam Chair, members
of the committee.
All right.
Um
Again, I, I just wanna, while we
bring up our next presenter,
remind everybody that um I know
that there's a nasty bug still
going around, cough in your
sleeves, be conscious you and
um.
And that's it. They found it.
OK, Representative, um.
Whenever you're ready,
Representative, you may begin.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members. Good afternoon. Um.
Uh, House Bill 129.
Shorten the state employee
probationary period from 1 year
to 6 months.
Um, this only impacts employees
in the executive branch that
fall under the purview of the
state Personnel Board.
Uh, as defined in the Personnel
Act, um, I've been very pleased
to work with the state personnel
office and incorporate their
feedback into the timeline in
this legislation. Basically, the
reason for bringing forward this
bill is to um really bring
forward the benefits to decrease
uncertainty, reduce vacancies,
and create greater stability
within the team.
and agencies.
So in under the
of one year, we are spending a
Forces training, probationary
employees who may not become a
permanent employee.
Um, and at the same time, making
life difficult for the staff
that is already employed at
these agencies, um, this bill is
basically asking agencies to
make these decisions more
quickly, um, they can and should
be made more quickly. Um, and,
and through that, we are gonna
serve.
The new employees, the teams
that they're joining, as well as
the constituents of state
agencies. Um, I have with me an
expert witness, president of CWA
and I'd like for her to
introduce herself. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Megan Greene, I am
the president of CWA Local 7076.
We represent public workers here
at 13 agencies across the state
of New Mexico. I am also a
current state employee. I've
been a state employee for 10
years and I have personal
experience with
Some of what we'll discuss here
today. So thank you for your
time.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Are you ready,
representative for us to
proceed. Thank you. So, um, we
will go to um.
The zoom.
Audience and ask if there is any
opposition.
to House Bill 129, any other
opposition?
On Zoom, any, uh, those in favor
of House Bill 129. Dylan Pell.
Thank you, Madam Chair of the
committee. Uh, my name is Dylan
Pell, and I'm here with
communication Workers of America
as a union steward. I have
worked in the state government
for over 6 years.
I'm here to ask that you support
House Bill 12, and I share my
experience with how the long
probationary period harms
workers and the state.
Because workers on probationary
periods are terminated without
demonstrating just cause. This
has led to patterns of
management, willfully mistreated
and sometimes violating labor
rights of probationary
employees.
In my work unit, I watch as my
co-worker with a disability it's
not reasonable accommodation.
Experienced fierce retaliation
as a probationary employee.
She was ultimately terminated on
the last day of probation
despite being a successful
worker in her position.
She would not be the last
coworker I witnessed the
experience cruel treatment or
harassment.
While on probation. We keep
hearing these stories.
It's my understanding, several
of these workers have since
brought legal actions against
the state for unlawful treatment
violating their civil rights.
In addition to legal liability,
long probationary periods, and
mistreatment of probationary
employees has damaged the
reputation of the state as an
employer for prospective
workers, for those of us who
continue our service.
I believe 6 months is more than
enough time for a manager to
assess the job readiness of the
worker.
And the shortened probationary
periods will improve the state's
ability to hire and retain its
workforce it needs and reduce
costs by lessening legal
liability.
Being able to terminate someone
without just cause.
I believe you
went individual liberties. Thank
you again for your support of
HBO.
Thank you.
Victoria Leonard.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Victoria Leonard and
I've been an employee of the
healthcare authority for 5
years.
And a local union president for
Ask Me.
We want to thank our sponsor for
bringing this bill, and we
agreed that the one year
probation period is too long.
An employer and an employee will
know within 6 months' time frame
if an employee is gonna be a
good fit for an employment.
Uh, shorter probationary time
frame is gonna help an employee.
It's gonna help with the
employee recruitment. It's gonna
allow for employees to be able
to take part in benefits sooner
that they might not have
otherwise been eligible for.
Um, until they complete their
probationary periods.
Such as being able to promote or
move to the different
departments.
This allows for career growth.
It would also allow an employee
to feel integrated into their
positions sooner, which in the
long run is gonna help boost an
employee engagement and morale.
Thank you for your time.
Right, there are no others on
Zoom, so now we will go to the
uh audience and all those that
are here in opposition that wish
to make a comment.
Raise your hands. Do we have
anyone outside? No one outside.
All right, so all those that are
present.
That wish to speak in support,
please. OK. So everyone uh in
towards the back, so if you
would just step forward, and
again, the mic will be um.
Held for you.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of committee, John Lipshutz with
the New Mexico Federation of uh
of Labor, AFL CIO, uh, here once
again to thank the sponsor very
much for bringing up this
measure, and we stand in strong
solidarity with our public
sector, brothers and sisters on
this bill, um, really the
previous speaker said everything
that I think that needs to be
said on this bill. So for those
reasons, we urge your support.
Thank you.
Good, good afternoon, chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Dylan Lang. I'm the
state personnel office director.
Um, I, I stand in support of the
bill. I think it's a great
compromise um between uh the
needs of, of, of management and,
and uh and the agency to ensure
that um they have the right
employee that this employee is
trained, uh, with, with the
benefits that can be brought for
um uh employees standing for six
months, I think, uh, in tandem
with some of the state board
rules related to um
And our trainings required for
managers, we, we think that we
we'll be in a, uh, a great place
to ensure that uh agencies are
prepared to um deal with this
change. I think the only
comments that uh state personnel
office had were were technical,
um, uh, uh, changes potentially
to, let's put it in the
definition instead of the
rulemaking, um, uh, position
and, and we can work with you,
but, but generally speaking, uh,
shortening the probationary
period to 6 months, uh state
personnel.
Office supports. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee Carter Bundy with asks
me, these are my favorite pills
where I get to follow management
and we have workers and
management on the same page on a
bill. Um, I do want to thank
Director Lang of Spo and also uh
we've spoken to the governor and
Diegooncon about this, um,
Representative Sapanski has been
a great advocate for state
employees. The reason that you
see so much widespread support
and really no opposition so far
to this bill. Um, is frankly
that this is an important piece
to help our recruiting and
attention, especially the front
end where we need to get a lot
more people in the door and keep
them, and yet we're not
sacrificing any of the
standards, um, the agencies all
gave input to the state
personnel office, uh, and to the
governor, and I think it's clear
that they felt that they could
adequately um determine whether
someone was going to be a fit
for their agency within 6
months. Um, and in fact, a few
of them that we've spoken to
said we like this because it
makes us pay more attention
right from the beginning and
make
Sure we're getting them the
training so that because they
management doesn't want to waste
11 months investing in someone
for 12 months and then they
don't end up making it. So we
think this is a true win-win for
the state. It'll hopefully
address some of the concerns
that I know all of you have
about our staffing agencies and
urge you to support the bill.
Thank you.
Madam Chair and committee, thank
you for the opportunity to
speak. My name is Lindsay Hurst.
I currently serve as the
executive vice president of CWA
Local 7076. Our union represents
state employees at 13 agencies,
about 3000 positions. Our union
workers support a shortened
probationary period to improve
efficiency, reduce waste, and
give new employees career status
benefits such as alternative
work schedules sooner. During my
10 years as a state employee and
my 4 years as a
Union officer, I have witnessed
employees let go during the last
week of probation with and
without cause.
Often state agencies wait to
take action on letting go of
employees who are not a good
fit, causing programs to waste
time and resources on training
for almost a year.
Generally, it is clear whether
or not an employee is going to
work out within the first month
or two on the job.
One of the most experienced and
competent hires, the enemy D AQB
compliance inspections unit, uh,
that I worked with was pressured
to finish and turn in
assignments, threatened with
canceled leave to attend her
daughter's graduation and then
walked out the door.
On the last day of probation
without cause. We have also lost
competent probationary employees
because they are forced to work
a strict 8 to 5 schedule due to
the inability to adjust their
schedule to leave at 4:30 to
pick up their kids from daycare
or school on time.
These pass House Bill 129. Thank
you.
Good afternoon, chair and
representatives.
My name is Ann Keller, and I've
been a state employee for over
11 years here in New Mexico.
I am the, uh, treasurer of the
local 7076, and I'm here in my
union steward capacity.
I respectfully request that you
support and pass House Bill 129.
Um, under the terms of our state
of New Mexico collective
bargaining agreement, union
stewards are prohibited from
assisting.
Members that are in.
Employees that are in
Union-covered positions until
they finished their probationary
period.
Recently, an employee who had
just finished that one year
probationary period, contacted
me and
It was in regards to
Issues with her supervisor.
The member confided in me that
she was very close to quitting
and she already had her
applications out and to other
private engineering firms. She's
a very talented individual.
As I dug into the background of
the case, the employee revealed
to me that for about 6 months,
she'd been struggling with
domestic abuse, being kicked out
of her home by the abuser and
living unhoused for a period of
time.
Um, getting restraining orders
against the abuser, depression,
and other mental and emotional
trauma that comes along with
what she had been experiencing.
The member did not bring that
trauma to the workplace.
Because she was during that 6
months of time, she was still
under probation and she was very
fearful that her supervisor
would
Just can her and send her home.
Um, our steward team was able to
help her and we did quickly
resolve that, but the point that
I'd like to make is that had
her.
Probationary period been 6
months, we could have stepped in
quicker. We could have helped
her quicker. We perhaps, you
know, and, and we did, you know,
work with everyone, but.
Thank you very much for your
time and.
Madam Chair, members of
committee, uh, my name is Jerome
Romero. I'm currently serving as
the regional vice president for
Northern New Mexico for our
union CWA, um, I'm in support of
this bill because it does one
really critical thing and it
allows us to retain employees
currently with when employees
start their first year with the
state, we see a 30% of those
people that start within their
first year don't make it all.
of probation, they either leave
for higher salaries or other
benefits, and so anything that
we can do to retain the people
that we hire, um, it, it allows
us to continue and push forward
some of our agencies have 40%
vacancy rates and the, the sad
reality of the probationary
period is that we can look back
in the data and we can see that
some positions are routinely
not filled or are routinely no
one in those positions makes it
their their full year. We had
one case out of the department
of um
Cultural affairs where the, that
position they had hired 17
different people during the
course of of those years, and
those people didn't make it off
of probation. That's 17
different hiring packets that
they had to send out for one
position with within those 17
years, and some, some agencies,
unfortunately look at it as a
turn and burn, right? They're
not gonna, they're not gonna
train those employees. They're
they're just gonna try and use
up as much of their abilities as
they.
can before letting them go
within a year. So, um,
Everything that we can do to
retain those people allows us to
move forward as a state. Thank
you.
Are there any others outside?
No? All right.
There are no other comments, um,
representative, would you like
to close or do we proceed.
Madam Chair, I will stand for
questions. Thank you. So we
already have a list building.
And first on that list is
representative of this and
followed by Representative Reeb.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, uh, Representative for
bringing this bill, um.
I have a couple of questions.
About the benefits should this
be enacted, would, I mean, is
there any change in benefits
that the employees receive, um,
do they receive benefits after a
year or do they get them?
As soon as they're
Madam Chair Representative.
Not if you're referring to
benefits like insurance or
increased leave, um.
The only uh.
Not insurance. Everyone receives
insurance benefits from starting
with the state, um, the, the
benefits we're referring to when
we say employees will receive
more or enjoy more benefits is
things like a more flexible work
schedule through the alternate
work policy, um, our children
work schedule policy, they will
also be able to receive the
fitness wellness policy. I
believe those are the only two
that are, um, dealing with
policies that are restricted,
Madam Chair, expert. So that is,
um,
Like in terms of accruing
vacation time, things like.
They're, they're getting
of
Where they are now.
Correct, Madam Chair, there is
no restriction on using leave
during your probationary period,
except the fact that leave is
accrued, so you have to have
accrued enough leave to take
that leave. For example, we
approved sick leave 4 hours per
pay period, so you would not be
able to take a day of sick leave
for a month, but you can take
sick leave. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Um, I,
I guess I'm just, I'm so
surprised and very ignorant that
there was a one year
probationary period. It seems a
little bonkers to be quite
honest, um, I'm, I'm truly, I,
I, I didn't, I didn't know that,
so I'm.
Concerned and.
I guess I have the question to
you is why aren't we considering
something like 90 days, which is
I think pretty customary in the
private sector, even in a
nonprofit world, that seems like
pretty routine, pretty normal.
Madam Chair, Madam Chair and
Chair Ortiz, um, the, you know,
this, this time period was a
result of a lot of conversation
with state personnel, um, and I
think it's fair to say, you
know, spend your 1st 3 months
training an employee, really
working with them, getting to
know them, and then 3 months
really assessing, are they able
to deliver the responsibilities
of that position.
That makes sense, Madam Chair.
Thank you very much.
Representative Reed.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative and expert. So.
I kind of have a little
different. I ran an office for
half of those years and
I loved the one year
probationary period, uh, where I
was, which was the district
attorney's office, as you know.
Because it's a very difficult,
um,
Job to be even an administrative
staff person in law enforcement
or district attorney's offices,
Madam Chair, and, and what I
found is you didn't know in 6
months work out or not. I, I
never had that issue where they
were leaving, um, we had issues
more with them than having to
learn how to, what a criminal
docket was the the different
ways, you know, the, the, the
system working with all the
agencies, working with
attorneys.
complicated documents,
subpoenas, things of that
nature, and it took 6 months for
them to even learn the job and
then, then we would just try to
continue to help them and, and
wanted to give them that whole
year to see if they were going
to work out and sometimes it was
9, 1011 months, and it just,
even to them it was like this
isn't gonna be a good fit for me
because this is a very high
stress job, and I didn't realize
it. Same with the investigators
in my office, um, you could see
them toeing the
for that one year period and
then you come to the one year
and like I I made it through
probation, and then all of a
sudden I couldn't get him to do
hardly anything, um, so I mean,
I think it's just depending on
what agency and government
agency you're working with,
because I, I loved the one year
I thought 6 months I would never
know, Madam Chair, if this
person was a good fit for the
office and, and more so capable
of, of doing the job that was
required of a victim advocate.
of a investigator of an IT
person, things of that nature.
So I, I wanted to to make that
comment and, and I guess the
benefits that you're saying the
benefits of.
I, I heard alternative works
fitness, wellness, and not even
because our employees were
required to be there, you know,
whether they were to your
employees or 5 year employees or
6 month employees, you know, we
were an 8 to 5 job. We were law
enforcement. I mean, we had to
be there, so I know not every
office works that way.
But Madam Chair and
representative and expert. It
sounds like some of this is also
just workplace environment
issues. I mean, if somebody came
to me and said, I need to go
pick up my kid up from school at
4:30. I mean, it was not an
issue in our office, whether
they'd been there 30 days or 6.
That's how you foster an
environment that you want people
to stay and not leave, not use
an employee for 6 months and
have him leave. I wanted
longevity. I wanted him to stay,
so I, I guess I just never saw.
this, um, this issue, um,
But
But that just making those
comments, Madam Chair, I, I had
a question on the no
probationary period transferring
within age within departments, I
guess within the same agency. Is
that what this is for on page 2,
section E, uh the one employees
shall not be.
Complete any probationary period
upon.
otherwise move.
This is what I noticed why the
one year was also good in that
situation. For example, I had an
HR person or no issues with this
personality or anything like
that, but I was CFO and then
also in charge of my office. I
wanted him as handling my
millions of dollar budget.
Um, was very concerning to me
because that was a completely
different type of job. Budget
comes around once a year,
doesn't come around every 6
months, and that was good, and
so, um, Mountain share and um
experts sets and representative.
I felt that was completely
appropriate with what I was
doing. So, well, I understand
what you're saying. I, I think,
and I, and I think, um, I was,
uh, we'll be talking more with
law enforcement and the issues
possibly that uh and why that.
when you're maybe appropriate.
It, it just, I don't think is
across the board as I don't know
if you, if you want to comment
on.
On that issue and
uh representative appreciate
those reflections and I know
that um.
You have um
So I would say that while the
individual benefits, um.
may seem to be minimal that I
think the advantage of the
agency level, um, is really
significant because we have.
1 and 4 it uh positions.
And only 65% of.
Current hires make it, make it
through the past the one. So
basically you've got teams that
are caught in cycles of.
Having to refill positions over
after a year, if someone is let
go, and then it takes an average
to fill that position again and
then you're, you're sort of
asking the rest of the team to
cover. And I think that's
probably one of the greatest
benefits of the shortened
probationary period is for the
long-term employees to not
constantly have vacancies
because managers are making the,
um, so from a service
perspective to as the current
Teams, um, it does have those
benefits. So if it's that you
mentioned.
Um
And Madam Chair Representative,
I do want to say that it's not
that employees who
are
So
Managers do retain the ability
to work with those employees,
you know, document deficiencies
or um uh document training
programs and and things that are
required to come to proficiency
in a position. Um, it's simply
this, uh, also curbing a trend
of.
People waiting until you're in
the 11th 1 that probably could
have been like oh, Madam Chair,
those are my comments and I
would uh President Green wanted
to add to that.
Uh, Madam Chair, I think the
only thing I would, would add is
that uh my understanding is, is
written, this bill would only
apply to executive branch
employees under the purview of
the spell board in the Personnel
Act, so that is a very limited
number of state and I was gonna
ask you, ma'am Chair and expert,
could you name off who those
like what, what agencies or I
certainly cannot give you a
comprehensive list, Madam Chair,
I apologize, but um, would it be
appropriate to ask, uh, the
director if he's still in the
room or?
we as director.
back here. Yes, can you, um,
could you please just step up
closer to the mic.
We, for the webcast. Thank you.
Oh, I think they have a mind,
OK.
There is a mic standing if you'd
like to stand erect.
That's fine to go
um.
Madam Chair, members of the of
the committee, yeah, this, this,
um President Green is, is
correct. This proposed change
lives in the Personnel Act, and
the Personnel Act only covers
classified um employees and
those agencies with classified
employees, so there's a whole um
list of exemptions within the
act including um uh uh members
of the district attorney's
offices, uh, members of the
governor staff, exempt
employees, um, uh, if you are a
policymaking, uh, uh,
individual, and the list goes on
including um
Our our state police as well,
that they will not cover those.
So they're there and I'm
currently the, the uh state
personnel director, I am an
exempt position. I am appointed
by the governor, and so this
would not apply to me. It's
only, it's only those classified
employees, um, but it is uh the
full breadth of our agencies,
um, except for maybe uh even the
uh the attorney general right
now has classified employees
based on a lawsuit two years
ago, so it's DOH, it's uh the
health authority. It's any
Pretty much any agency that,
that you can that you can name
unless it's been, uh,
specifically um accepted under
the State Personnel Act.
So, um, it it just while you're
up there. So I remember in my
office besides the attorneys
being at will.
Everybody else is protected, so
it would protect every other
employee in the, I mean, they
couldn't be fired.
At will, I guess, if that makes
sense. An attorney could because
listen, and things of that
nature and, and didn't have to
be a reason, but every other
employee, I think besides maybe
one was protected and could not
be. Obviously, they could be
documented poor performance
after the year, but are you
saying that?
Those employees don't apply.
Madam Chair, Representative
Reed, um, so we, we do have
classified attorney positions
within the state, not at the
district attorney offices,
they're exempt, but, uh, and,
and the state personnel office,
we have a general counsel, um,
and an attorney position, the
general counsel is exempt,
right? But everybody else at
state personnel office is, is a
classified employee, which this
would apply to, um, again,
except for those few exceptions.
So many agencies that have
attorneys, um, most are not, uh,
exempt. So.
they would be subject to um
this, this provision
and expert, I appreciate that,
um, and I'm not so concerned
about the attorneys because I do
know they're at will and I could
have.
You know, let them go anytime
they're not performing. I had uh
when I was district attorney,
but I added an office of, I
believe it would protect them,
but so state police officers,
um, will not be on a one year
probation Madam Chair
Representative Reed, yeah,
they're outside of, of our
classified system. There are,
there are members of DPS
employees, sorry, members,
employees at DPS that are
covered as classified employees,
but the police officers uh are
are govern.
OK, I think that that makes me
feel a little better that the
police officers, I, I, I noted
that I would believe it would
take a lot longer than 6 months
for them to make sure that that
does definitely make me feel
better. So I'm guessing, Madam
Chair, and representative expert
that probably the staff and, and
people like that are the.
Madam Chair, Representative
Reed, yes, at DPS, Madam Chair.
I guess an expert. I'm not.
So why are you, I guess I'm not
understanding why you're losing
employer period. I, I guess I
don't understand. I did hear one
person make a comment saying
they go off for better jobs and
higher pay raises and things of
that nature, that that's gonna
happen when they're on probation
or not, so that comment I was
kind of like, well, I don't
think. But if you could help me
understand more the type of, I
mean, is it just that they're
seeing these people aren't gonna
work out in 9 months and aren't
doing anything before then or
could it be that they're
trying to work with them and
then they get to the end of like
I would, I would try to work
with them and give them the best
chance I could to make this
succeed, and then if it got down
to the 11th, you know, or 12
months, sometimes it just didn't
work, fortunately, um, so I just
wanna make sure we know for sure
that why this is not working.
Thank you, madam. Thank you,
Madam Chair and Representative
Reed, um, and I would say for me
personally in terms of
sponsoring this legislation, um,
as someone who's managed a lot
of staff in the past
asked
I feel very, uh, passionately
about good management and, and
Uh, swift management, right? So
you want to get in there with
employees right there and
prioritize that even though
you've got budgets to approve
and you've got policies and
procedures that you're working
on, you have to commit the time
as a manager to spend with those
employees in a year to me feels
like it allows for that to be
sort of put on the back burner.
Um, so for me, I, um, I feel I'm
passionate about this bill
because I want for our managers
within state government to be
excellent managers.
and I think this time limit, um.
Put some, uh, finality on that
and really some urgency around
that, um, but I know Ms. Green
had shared with me extensive
examples of some of the ways
that this has been challenging.
If she could chime in here.
Sure, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. Um,
I believe the latest spill
report I read stated that about
25% of employees were being
terminated during probationary
period and the rest were leaving
at well. I can think of a few
examples in my time in state
government, as I mentioned, I am
an environmental scientist in
Los Alamos. We are a small
office. We do oversight
monitoring on Los Alamos
National Laboratory. There are
about 10 of us doing oversight
monitoring on the environmental
remediation programs across the
whole lab. It's a small group,
we need to be efficient and we
need to have
folks come on board that are
trained, able to do the jobs,
all our jobs, with the exception
of one or advanced level
positions, so the highest level
positions, correct? We, um,
had to hire a couple of years
ago who was hired from out of
state. It was, it was quite
evident within the first.
I would say weak to the staff
who are at the same level as
him, that he had either lied on
or exaggerated on his resume
because he
I think had never conducted any
environmental science in the
past. It was, it was quite
shocking. And we lost an entire
year of monitoring data because
he did not know how to deploy
the monitors required to collect
that data in the field, took
almost a year for him to be let
go during that probationary
period, and that's just an
example I can think of where I
spent personally, nearly a year
trying to train someone who had
no background on the um on what
we are trying to do and um
really no desire to learn or no
ability to um complete.
the job. So we, we lost a lot of
data that year. I think that's
uh one example that comes to
mind. So I, and I, I hate to say
I do see that happen, um.
Quite frequently, I believe, to
your question that it is
Um
The fact that some processes
within the state move so slowly,
I believe, to, to move forward
on terminating someone even
during a probationary period is
Seems to be a slow process for
some reason. And so, Madam
Chair, and an expert just follow
up, so in that situation.
Did you just not know till the
end of the year? Why didn't you
terminate at? Oh, Madam Chair, I
am, I am not a manager. I am a
union member and a scientist
myself. He was at the same level
as myself, and I, I
Will say I did talk to my boss
about my concerns about his
performance and um that was just
how long it took to be dealt
with.
OK, so do you know, uh, what,
uh, Madam Chair, but OK, I, I
appreciate that. I just, um, I
just
Never really had that experience
like in an arguable sides of
that, but, um, I appreciate your
answers and it's, it's a tough
one for me because I've just,
it, it's worked very well and um
with that, I do thank you
representative.
Thank you, Representative. Next,
we have Representative Hall,
followed by Representative
Darazas.
Madam Chair,
Madam Leader, expert witness.
Um, some of my questions were
asked and answered about law
enforcement. I had a definite
Concern over some of those
things, but that's been
answered. Um, I was looking at
The LFC estimates that this will
Um, by decreasing the cost of
probationary period.
It will
Make, I guess, go up between 3.2
to 4.3 million.
Uh, with the general fund impact
of 1.6 million.
And 2.1 million a total impact
of other state funds and federal
funds of up to 2.2 million, and
that's under the assumption.
That it will get this LFC's
recommendation of 4%. You see
the 4% recommendation being an
annual.
Or as
Somewhat noted in here.
You get the expected results of
more retention, it might.
off. Do you have any, any
thoughts on that, Madam Mad and
representative, um, you know,
our hope is that
We will have increased retention
because we will have managers
that work more swiftly to get
them, uh, the training and the
support that they need. Um, so
in terms of that specific
estimate, I think it's very hard
to say, are terrific, um, but I
don't know if if Miss Green
would like to chime in there.
Uh, sure, Madam Chair,
Representative, um, my
understanding from the LFC um
review is that
Simply that
As is in statute now employees
received the legislative
increase at their one year
probation. So if we, whatever.
Increases, um, appropriated this
year if it's 4%, all off
probation employees get it at
July 1st, right? And then
As people come off probation
throughout the year, they
receive that increase, so I
don't believe they, it would not
be an actual increase in funds,
they would simply be getting
that money sooner, if that makes
sense. You would be getting it
at 6 months instead of 1 year.
Madam Chair, and then
Was there ever any um
I know you've given it a lot of
thought.
Speransky and uh I, and I
appreciate that.
By lumping
Taking a larger group of
employees because there are just
some jobs I would imagine that
you just can't learn.
And actually function at.
At 6 months.
Was there any consideration at
For
Separating
More because
I could see certain
administrative jobs that
wouldn't require.
It might be
To, uh, Representative Ortez's
word be 90 day and others that
might be more. Was that ever
considered manager?
Madam Chair, uh, and
Representative, uh, certainly
different jobs have different uh
requirements in terms of
Training, but I think this is
the 6 month uh figure was what
was settled on as something that
would be acceptable for the
agencies that fall under this,
um,
And and again I do want to
stress that the agency still has
the opportunity after the 6
months to pursue corrective
action or termination of
employees if they are not
fulfilling their duties, but
we're basically saying with this
legislation at 6 months, you
should know, do you want this
person to continue to be part of
your team and continue in that
growth and development process
that will hopefully follow them
through their entire,
um
An expert witness
So
During this 6 months, and I, it
may have been in here, there's a
lot of information, um.
Alright, is there the
opportunity fire without cause
now gone or do does cause still
have to
Be there uh as a retired FBI
agent, the first year of your
two-year probation was without
cause. In the second year you
had to have some cause along
with the other reasons it was
still easier to terminate.
Is the 6 months should just be
passed, uh, is there a provision
there for no cause, Madam Chair.
Um, Madam Chair, I believe it's
correct that they can be fired
without cause within the
confines of labor law, of
course, uh, within their 1st 6
months.
And I will, I will reiterate
that we do see many people fired
with cause after their
probationary period, as as a
union, we represent those folks,
but we understand that happens
and it sometimes it needs to.
Madam Chair, I yield the floor.
Thank you.
Uh, thank you, Representative.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Quickly,
thank you for bringing the this
legislation forward. I, you
know, I, I just have a couple of
questions. First one, the
probationary period, does this
affect any probationary period
on firefighters.
Police officers, correction
officers, uh, I'm reading here
something from the city of
Albuquerque. Does that have any,
would this have any issue on
this? or they're using this as
just a, a, a reference. I see it
as a reference.
Mad, Madam Chair and
Representative, this would not
affect any municipal employee.
Um, so at the local level and it
also currently employed by the
state either.
Excellent, excellent. And that,
I think I was on the fence, but
I'm glad that, that to see that
uh.
I think police officers do need
more time because we want him to
be safe out there, and I think
it takes a little bit more than
just, you know, saying rifling
them through there. At the same
time, Madam Chair
Representative, I think I love
what I, I like this.
I don't think this is gonna be
enough though to keep people
cause I mean.
Uh, one year, uh, look, in the
private sector we do 3390 days.
In 90 days we usually pick it up
pretty quick if there's people
are gonna be, you know, that
that person's gonna be um a good
fit and, and really it goes back
to
Vetting before you hire.
It's usually the best thing,
right? Because everyone's
wasting their time if you hire
someone and if you're dragging
it for a year, my gosh, uh, you
know, the probationary period
means I can, if I don't see that
you're fit, I would.
You can let him go in 20 days or
6 months. It doesn't mean you
have to wait a year. So I think
it's, it's disappointing to
hear, Madam Chair representative
people, if you know that person
is in a good fit and you're
waiting all the way to a year. I
think that's false hope for, for
um that employee.
I think that's, I think that's
not good for the agency. I don't
think that's good for the other
people that are working in the,
in that, in that department
because guess what, that, that
person wasn't performing anyway,
and then on top of that, the
little that they were
performing, if you're gonna let
them go. Now you don't have
anything, so now you have to
pick up even that.
So I, I, I, I do agree that, I
mean, that should be a quicker
process, but I also.
I think that we have to do a lot
more than this, um, Madam Chair,
and I, I'm not trying to build
your bill, but I, I really would
love to see us pay our people a
more competitive wage, a better
wage.
I think we lose a lot of, we, I
think the state of Mexico.
Trains people, we hire them, we
train them, we give them, we
give them the, the, um.
We give them the uh uh what do
you call it the uh resume that
they need for another for
another job, and then we, we
paid for all that and then they
go somewhere else. So I, I think
we need to build off of this,
and I think this is a start, but
I really would like to see us do
a lot more uh in, in especially
when it comes to pay, um, that's
just how I feel. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
any other questions?
Any other questions I have one
if they're not real quick.
Um
My question has to do with.
Is there in the
With our state personnel, um,
policies and procedures or
through our collective
bargaining, uh, is there a
midway point within the
probationary period whereby the
supervisor managers get with
these employees, go to the.
What is and then what needs to
be improved and then maybe
establish some sort of a work
plan to get them through their,
their next um steps. I know that
in, in the world that I came up
from that I worked, that was
what we established and that
worked very well for retention.
Thank you Madam.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
While it's not covered in our
collective bargaining agreements
because those do not cover
employees and their probationary
period. I believe probationary
employees are supposed to be
receiving 4 quarterly uh
evaluations, one on one meetings
with their manager throughout
the probationary period. I will
certainly state I largely do not
see that happen, but it is, uh,
I believe in, I don't think it's
in spell board.
Thank you. That's a very good
way of being able to gauge
across the board. So thank you.
There are no other questions and
what is the will of the
committee representative Wanda
Johnson. I'll second that.
Thank you. So there's a motion
by Representative Johnson
seconded by Representative
Teresa, do we have any
opposition to this bill?
But just one? All right, so we
will do.
Uh well, no, we just will note
the um
The one opposition by
Representative Reeb and so then
representative.
Um, leader, uh, Shitansky, we
have a Du pass with one
opposition, so that would make
it and in favor and one against,
so we have a do pass on 120
House Bill 129. Thank you so
much. Thank you, Madam Chair.
You're gonna move right along
because we did get a late start.
And people have been waiting
around for a long time,
including our presenters. So,
uh, we will.
Move forward
We're gonna go ahead and um
proceed, Representative, are you
ready?
Yes, I am madam chair thank you
very much you may proceed at any
time.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee members. I'm here to
present House Bill 138. This
little background this house
1308 is to provide a process for
uh medical providers, what would
be the mini minimum ratios
within our hospitals throughout
the state of New Mexico.
Um, I am, uh, for disclosure,
I've run Medicaid programs, but
I'm not a healthcare provider.
That's not my background. My
background is business, and I
will tell you every business
study since the Depression has
shown that.
Workforce.
purpose and were for
satisfaction and mission-driven
work is the key to retention and
recruitment for work care
providers, um, I believe this is
especially true for our medical
providers because the very
profession they're in are
mission driven.
And their satisfaction.
And being able to do their job
is essential for them to be
retained and be recruited into
those areas.
Uh, our New Mexico hospitals are
currently at a crisis.
Um, hospitals are ranked 46 in
the nation for patient safety.
And that's down from 41 in
previous years. So there is a
crisis for our safety of
hospitals. We continuously get
feedback from our hospitals
that.
They don't have access to
workforce and that by creating
any kind of minimum safety, they
will reduce beds and very
disappointed by this message as
I don't hear that they are
willing to reduce shareholder
stock.
Or executive pay that their
threat is to reduce more
healthcare access. Um, we
believe that by providing a safe
environment for our healthcare
workers and where they would be
satisfied to be able to do their
job, um, in a safe way. I mean,
you can imagine that if your job
was to make sure that the
individuals that you are
Uh, being that you are caring
for are at risk because you were
overseeing 8 and 9 patients at a
time. This is why we have so
much turnover in our house.
House Bill 38 provides a very
bare minimum.
Uh, standard of, of uh
hospital medical staffing ratio
that's based on a national
standard and then asks for
individual site specific
committees made up of
administrators and healthcare
providers at each site that will
determine site specific.
Uh, ratios above the bare
minimum. I have today, um, some
expert witnesses. I'd like them
to introduce themselves, uh.
with aging.
My name is Adrianinghouse.
Madam Chair and committee
members, I am Adrianing house, a
registered nurse.
Thank you very much and.
Thank you. Good afternoon, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
My name is Shane. I'm a lawyer
here in the state of
Albuquerque. I represent
healthcare workers.
Pretty much across the country
from Washington DC to Portland,
but my home is here in New
Mexico and represent.
Uh
Healthcare workers throughout
the state.
Thank you. I will see this bill
is being presented in front of
you with the support and backing
and development from our nurses
groups that are the boots on the
ground who are providing our
direct care services in our
hospitals. That is the.
And
In which who are
developing this bill and because
I know it's already late in the
day, I will stand for questions.
Thank you.
Thank you. And I'll just remind
everybody to please just so um
we will begin with Zoom.
All of those individuals are uh
that are on Zoom that wish to
offer testimony 38. Will you
raise your hand?
We have Christina Salazar.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Christina Salazar. I
represent the rehabilitation
Hospital of Southern New Mexico
and the advanced care hospital
of southern New Mexico. We are a
small post acute care facility
in Las Cruces, um, and I'm on
here to oppose HB 138 primarily
being um several factors just
bringing a different um insight
on being close to the southern
border in El Paso, and really
what we're already seeing in our
area, um, you know, the latest
data.
shows that New Mexico has a
nursing shortage of 8000 within
the state, um, for reference,
just speaking about our
Facility in general, we've had
one RN position posted since
July of 2024, um, and we have
not been able to find a
replacement, which is difficult.
We do have contract labor
in-house, um, we are, um, capped
at a certain census, and so what
ends up happening in our
facilities is those patients are
diverted to El Paso. So I am
concerned that creating more um
restrictions will create less
access, so I do understand that
it is a quality issue and
ultimately I do think that there
are better.
Um
There are other things that we
can look towards the American
Association and Colleges of
nursing posted that, you know,
the nursing shortage is only
gonna get worse. There's a lot
of reference to California.
California is one of the top 10
in the nation that has the
highest nursing shortage and
they have similar bills like
this, so I am concerned that
this doesn't necessarily solve
the problem, but I would
recommend focusing on policies
that assist in increasing
nursing school faculty and
nursing school enrollment, um,
and perhaps even more education
towards Safe harbor.
I, I failed to mention I'm also
a board member for the Mexico
New Mexico Organization of nurse
leaders, and so we very strongly
want quality health care in New
Mexico, but at the same time
want to have the autonomy to
continue to make decisions
within our hospital. Thank you.
Kristen Brown.
Hello, my name is Kristen Brown,
and I'm representing General
Hospital here in Grans, New
Mexico, and we respectfully
oppose HB 138 because we have
qualified working directors and
each of our departments, uh, we
assist with staffing in an
already difficult staff role,
critical access hospitals. It
would also increase our labor
and compliance costs, which
would force us to hire contract
nurses, which is not beneficial
for fiscal viability. It would
also cause an administrative
burden by enforcing another
committee to an already strained
leadership role, of course.
Top priority is to provide high
quality care and the best place
to work for our nursing staff.
So we do respectfully oppose
this bill.
Roberta Espino.
Uh,
good afternoon, Madam Chair
Representatives. My name is
Roberta Espino. I represent Alta
Vista Regional Hospital in Las
Vegas, New Mexico.
Um, I have a different bit of a
perspective. I am for the bill.
I have been in a director role
and uh right now I'm currently
in in ICU nurse and I have seen
both ends of the spectrum, and
the only way things are gonna
get better is by safe staffing.
Um, you not only put yourself
and the patients at risk by
staffing minimal, but you also
put patients' families and your
own family at risk as well.
Um, so I am for the bill.
Thank you. So all of those on
the zoom who wish to speak in
support of House Bill 138, will
you raise your hand?
Deirdre Murphy.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. Thank
you for the opportunity to speak
today. My name is Deirdre
Murphy.
And I'm a resident of the senior
senior assisted living.
Due to a botch surgery, 15 years
ago.
I've been like perfectly
paralyzed.
Over the years, I've been in and
out of hospital care. And I've
seen firsthand how critical it
is to receive the care every
patient deserves.
I'm here today to voice my
support of House Bill 138.
Because I believe everyone, no
matter who they are.
Or where they come from.
Deserves the highest standard of
care.
Safe and adequate staffing. It's
not just a technical
requirement.
It ensures that patients like me
are treated with dignity.
Attention and compassion during
some of the most vulnerable
moments of our lives.
I've witnessed overworked nurses
and stretch thin staff
struggling to meet patients'
needs. For example, there were,
there was a time when I required
immediate assistance, but the
staff is overwhelmed.
With too many patients. It's
heartbreaking to see them try
their very best.
under such pressure.
It's not their fault.
They're doing the best they can.
In an impossible circumstances.
House Bill 138 will ensure that
hospitals are held accountable
to provide the staffing levels
needed to care for the patients
safely and effectively.
Research has shown that adequate
staffing not only improves
patient outcomes, but also
enhances staff morale and
retention.
This builds a crucial step
toward creating a healthcare
environment.
We're both patients and
providers can thrive.
I urge you to pass this bill to
protect patients and support the
dedicated.
Healthcare providers who care
for us. Thank you for your time
and your consideration.
Mike Mendez.
Hello, my name is Mike Mendez.
I'm union president for License
and technical at University
Hospital, and I'm in support of
this bill, because I see
firsthand working with rapid
response, I get called to
emergency situations where the
nurses are short staffed and I
get to see, like I said
firsthand, that
These poor nurses are
overworked, really, really
stressed with their patient
loads, um, we had just 2 weeks
ago, one department had 2 nurses
covering the whole unit, and
they had, you know, a poor
patient.
Code on them
They had to start working the
code and unfortunately, the
family member ran out to get
help because these poor nurses
are trying to save this guy's
life. And it's not just one
department, it's the whole
hospital that's going through
these situations. I go to all
the different units as a rapid
response paramedic and respond
to a lot of critical situations,
um, and it's been increasing
over the past couple of years
because of the the staff
shortages, we've had a lot more
situations because there's not
enough nurses to attend to the
patients and prevent these
situations from happening. Um,
so that's part of my job is to
just, you know, put out all
these fires that, you know, come
along with the short staffing
and critical situations that
arise.
So I am for this because I see
firsthand that nurses need a lot
more safety, um,
Parameters in place and the
safety committee would
definitely help out.
Thank you.
Carmella Stars.
Hello, thank you for hearing
from me, Madam Chair, committee
members. My name is Carmela
Starris. I'm a former medical
malpractice defense attorney
from the Rhody law firm.
And uh I don't do that work
anymore, but not because of any
particular reason I love
doctors. Uh, in fact, the reason
I support this bill is because I
love our medical professionals.
I think, you know, I feel
strongly
The first speaker who opposed
the bill, Miss Salazar from
rehab of Southern New Mexico.
They're in such a bad position
because the reality is rehab of
southern New Mexico is owned by
Ernest Health.
Earnest He is a for-profit
company that buys small
hospitals. They own them in
Arizona, California, Colorado,
Idaho, Indiana, Montana, New
Mexico, Ohio, South Carolina,
Texas, Utah, Wisconsin, and
Wyoming.
These are not New Mexicans. They
buy our hospitals and they slash
staff to increase profits, and
the people who suffer are not
only the patients, but the
medical providers.
This bill will stop for-profit
corporate.
Outside interests from being
able to make money off of
Our
infected.
So I urge you to get your staff.
Um, and having there be
consequences,
you hopefullyail outside the for
profit interest buying our
hospitals and slashing staff.
Thank you.
Jane, Y.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Jane Yee and I'm a
member of Cobio and the
Environmental Justice Caucus of
the Democratic Party, both are
very dedicated to environmental
justice and healthy and
sustainable communities and
therefore, uh, we strongly
support uh House Bill 138 and uh
the um regulatory mechanisms
that it represents, um, uh, the,
uh,
provision of adequate care
through the insurance of uh
adequate uh patient provider,
uh, nurse patient ratios. I had
the honor and privilege to
belong to District 1199 hospital
Workers Union and work side by
side with nurses between 1976
through 1980. Back then, almost
50 years ago, I have to say, the
primary reason that the nurses
decided to form a union besides
to improve the
wages was to fix staffing and
scheduling issues. It was
because these brave nurses
valued their patients as much as
they valued their own lives and
their own families, they formed
this union. Um, this bill will
support the efforts of unionized
nurses but provide protection
for uh providers and patients
and non-unionized hospitals too.
Nurses are not only their
patients, caregivers, but
they're advocates too.
Hospitals.
and trade organizations like the
um American Hospital Association
have failed their communities
and with the privatization of
community hospitals and other
health uh resources by private
equity, the shortages and
substandard care will not
improve. I encourage this
committee to vote, uh, to pass
on House Bill 138. Thank you.
Tracy Whitney.
Good afternoon. Um, thank you,
Madam Chair and everyone
involved, um, I'd like to say
that I am the district
representative for, or I'm the
staff representative for
District 1199, the nurses'
union, one of the reasons I
think it's very important that
that you all support this bill
is because I'm, I understand
the, the finances and everything
else involved in this, but we
can't, the solution is not
writing on the backs of our
nurses. I get calls every
days, several times a day, and I
have people that don't even have
time to take a restroom break,
literally they're working
straight through and
That's, that causes a a a
situation for them health wise,
you know, this, our nurses are
being so overworked that
hospitals are chronically
understaffed, but we can't, the
solution is not to ride on the
backs of our nurses. I know that
there's got to be a better way
than our people calling me every
day I've I've had 55 calls
already today. Three of those
calls where people crying. These
are nurses.
crying about their working
conditions, and I know that you
guys don't experience that
because you're, you're not, you
know, the union representatives,
but
That's what we get every day.
You know, we have people that
are stressed to their limit, and
you know, since COVID, so many
of the nurses left have not come
back. I don't know, guys. I
don't know what the solution is,
but I know that it can't be that
we don't provide more nurses. I
don't know how we'd do that, but
that needs to be, you, you need
to understand what it's actually
doing to
To the staff.
Thank you. I would love for you
guys to consider seriously
supporting HB 138. Thank you.
Michael Contreras.
Please unmute your microphone,
Michael Contreras.
You may proceed.
Please unmute your microphone.
Mr. Contreras, if you're
listening, can you, um,
Unmute
We can't hear you.
Is that better?
Hello
OK, sorry for the, sorry for the
delay. I'd just like to ask your
support for House Bill 138. I'm
uh
A member and a delegate of a
District 1199 to nursing union
and uh
Just yesterday,
I had a talk with the nurse, I
just
Out of the blues and
I had never seen somebody so
stressed out that
I myself
felt compelled. And because now
I was obligated to make sure
that she is taken care of.
And
A lot of things that she was
telling me is because we don't
have time.
We go take care of ourselves.
And this lady was on the brink
there.
And I was very, very concerned
and I still am. I'm seeing her
today. Luckily she's talking
with another friend, so I know
she's doing all right.
But
You know, this puts a lot of
pressure on us that we can't go
take care of our own selves.
And we're asked to be taken care
of our patients.
And whatever stressful situation
is, we get out of one, jump into
another one, and it goes on like
that all day long and sooner or
later,
Well, we got to think about
ourselves, gotta help ourselves
before we can help anybody else.
Anyway which you support this
bill. I know it's hard for
management.
To stop everybody, but like, uh,
Whitney said, you know, we can't
do it all on our own backs. We
will break.
Thank you. All right, so that is
um all the commentary we have on
Zoom. So now we will proceed.
To the audience and all of those
individuals that wish to address
us that are opposed, will you
raise your hands?
All right, opposed, raise your
hands. All right, if you would
step up to the mic.
And we will hold the mic for
you.
Thank you. Bye. Uh.
My name is Mary Beth Thornton,
Madam Chair, and
Representatives, and I'm here
today from UNM Hospital in
opposition of the bill.
We believe that CMS conditions
of participation in regulations,
uh, will be violated by having
this bill. Currently, it is a
CNO's responsibility to ability
to staff based on acuity and
also have flexibility.
It is not uncommon for our units
like our progressive to have
patients that are floor level
patients and do not require as
much care.
Or have patients who actually
have no medic.
And we often have to hold
immunity.
Um, we have a nursing shortage.
My numbers that I looked at say
6000 nurses are short in New
Mexico. I don't know where we
can physically contract labor.
We did a fur analysis on this,
and the cost to uh the
organization.
So, we also believe that this
appears to be potentially in
conflict with the collective
bargaining agreement that we
have.
And for those
Hi there, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Julia and I'm the senior
director of government relations
with the New Mexico Hospital
Association, and on behalf of
our 47, uh, community hospitals.
That's weird. Whoever is on
Zoom, will you please unmute, I
mean, mute yourself.
Thank you. And Julia, before you
proceed further, would you state
your last name? It is written R
E T T E N. Thank you. Um, and
I'm here on behalf of the uh
hospital association's 47
members and their nursing
leaders to respectfully stand in
as already stated, uh, our fear
is that this, um, response to
the incredible acuity and
patient volumes that have an R
in our hospitals, uh,
particularly since COVID, I will
reserve, will result in a
reduction of care, um, and right
now.
in the state of New Mexico, the
number one issue that we are
facing is an access to care
crisis. Um, and so we, uh, hope
that, um, you all will, um,
consider, um, impact and
negative impact that we fear
that this bill will have um uh
nurses and ask you to vote in.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Alison
Riley. I'm the director of
public policy for the Mexico
Chamber of Commerce, expressing
our opposition to House Bill
138, while we fully support safe
working conditions for everyone
in the health.
As well as patients.
But unintentionally
Our state's healthcare
Mexico is already facing a
shortage of nurses, doctors, and
every healthcare worker you can
imagine, but mandating staffing
ratios could force hospitals to
close beds, reducing access to
timely and equitable care. When
companies look at expanding or
starting here in New Mexico, it
definitely considered the
healthcare system and the access
and quality of care that their
employees will have, and if they
understand that our healthcare
shortage could get worse. It
might not plan to expand or
start here. Staffing decisions,
sugar remain in the hands of.
Experienced hospital-based
nurses who understands the
needs, capability of the team,
and resources available, and
they must retain their
flexibility.
Unfortunately, the unintended
consequences of House Bill 138
would push more businesses out
of the state and therefore we
urge the committee to vote no.
Thank you.
And um Mr. Sergeant at arms, is
there anyone outdoors that is,
uh, wishing to speak in
opposition?
None. All right.
So then, may I have a show of
hands of everyone in the room
who'd like to speak in favor.
All right. So what we need to do
is we'll go row by row, if you
um
Can begin its back.
And line up.
And then we'll just keep
Moving forward.
No, Madam Chair and members of
the committee. My name is
Jennica Kilbride. I am born and
raised in New Mexico, and I am
a, I worked pre-pandemic, during
the pandemic and post pandemic,
all at the bedside. And during
the pandemic pandemic, it got so
bad that many nurses left the
bedside and have not returned.
Um, people keep talking about
the nursing shortage. There's a
nursage for nursing shortage for
a reason.
The work environment is
impossible. We became nurses
because we want to care for our
patients. And we're not, we're
not being given the opportunity,
the support, the resources to do
that.
I worked 13 hours at the
bedside.
Sometimes at the end of my
shift, I realize I have not peed
today. My 2 L of water that I've
brought have remained drunk.
That's just normal. I don't get
breaks.
I have more patients than I can
possibly care for safe, safely.
I'm a critical care nurse, and a
lot of my patients need to be 1
to 1, meaning that I am in that
room for 13 hours. I do not
leave their side because they
are that sick. They have pumps,
pumping the blood through their
system because their heart has
failed. If that pump stops
working, that patient is dead.
I am now starting to take a 2nd
patient. With that patient.
How can I
Possibly be in both places at
once, it's not possible.
I'm here begging you, please
pass this safe staffing act, so
we can continue to care for our
families, our patients, and our
community. And so that hopefully
we can work on our mental
health, wellbeing, physical
health.
Nurses don't want to work at the
bedside because it's impossible.
They're here in New Mexico. I
can think of 20 nurses that I
personally know.
That left the bedside. They're
here.
They're not one of them opened a
bakery.
He's an excellent nurse. He
opened a bakery because we can't
do this anymore.
Nurses will come back if you
give them the safe opportunity
to do so. Please pass this bill.
Good evening, Madam Chair and um
representatives.
My name is Stephanie Valdez. I'm
one of the nurses, um.
On the floor that I work
bedside, and I just wanted to
say that, uh, nurses are leaving
the profession they love because
they're exhausted, overworked,
and unsafe staffing ratios.
Patients are becoming more
violent and nurses are
constantly being verbally abused
physically assaulted, yet a 4th
degree felony chargesn't enough
to protect them.
Right now, nurses are expected
to care for 7 to 8 patients at a
time without proper breaks, no
time to eat, drink water, or
even use the restroom. This
leads to burnout, mistakes, and
worst of all, preventable
patient harm.
When hospitals are understaffed,
patients suffer. They fall, they
develop bed sores, they don't
receive the care they deserve.
We need safe staffing ratios to
ensure nurses can provide the
quality care that every person,
mother, father, grandparents,
children deserve, um, we were
there for families, friends,
community throughout the
pandemic. Now we're just pray
that you guys are here for us.
Um, I ask that you please pass
House Bill 138. It's time to
make a real change for both
nurses and patients. Thank you
for your time.
Hello, Madam Chair, members of
the committee. My name is
Anthony Baca. I'm a registered
respiratory therapist and this
bill helps covers us as well.
Um, if you do not know
respiratory therapists, don't
have one area of the hospital.
We help cover the whole
hospital. If there's a code in
ICU, I got to be there. There's
a code in ER. I got to be there.
If there's a code pink, meaning
a baby, I got to be there.
If there's a trauma coming in
through the ER. I got to be
there. If there's
Um, stroke alerts, things like
that, I got to be there in an
emergency situation. Not only
that, I also have a number of
patients that I got to take care
of on a regular basis that I got
to see throughout my shift.
When I'm too busy because I'm in
traumas, codes, things like
that.
My patients on the floor don't
get seen, potentially causing
more injury or potential
problems with that patient that
can lead up to a code or
something of that nature.
Um, there are times where I, I
work for a couple of different
hospitals.
Here in New Mexico when I've
worked for 3 others, but one in
particular I work at now, there
are times where I'm the only
respiratory therapist in the
hospital.
And to have to cover the ICU,
have to cover the ER.
It's virtually impossible.
There another hospital I work
at, we have to go from taking
care of a baby who just coated.
If the baby didn't make it.
I can't do anything with my next
patient. I gotta just go and put
on a very great face without a
second or a few minutes to sit
back and grieve.
For the baby for the family,
because I got to go take care of
the next patient.
I gotta put that fake smile on
my face and do the best I can,
so that that next patient I'm
taking care of sees the very
best of me.
And not see what I just went
through for the last hour and a
half.
Coding that
Newborn
This is the type of things that
are reality.
In this state.
And I asked for your
Um, acceptance of this bill and
help us all out. This doesn't
affect just me or the nurses
here.
It affects everybody in the
state from newborns all the way
to elderly patients, obviously.
Anybody in the hospital is
affected by this bill. Thank
you.
Anyone in the, uh, OK, there you
are.
Good afternoon.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Sharon Argenbright. I'm
a master's prepared, registered
nurse for more than 45 years to
address the nurse shortage, I
taught nursing here in New
Mexico for over 20 years.
When I relocated to New Mexico
over 30 years ago. I worked for
a hospital that had nurse to
patient ratios.
This hospital in New Mexico had
nerves to patient ratios before
California.
I got to experience the best
nurse work environment ever,
hands down.
I enjoyed my work. All my
patients got the care they
required. Nothing more, nothing
less. I enjoyed coming to work.
Fast forward 10 to 15 years,
things went south rapidly.
The ratios became an option.
The same hospital's emergency
department experienced a nurse
turnover rate of 75 nurses in
one year.
I had to shift my priorities
from teaching to addressing
nurse retention with the
director of HR at the same
hospital.
Do you know what your your
hospital's nurse turnover rate
is.
For more than 10 years, I've
petitioned our New Mexico
legislators for mandated
nurse-patient ratios.
The arguments against safe
staffing or stale.
There is a reason for hospital
nurse shortage.
Re-establishing the practice of
collecting exit interviews will
tell you the reason. New Mexico
nurses need mandated
Good afternoon, Madam Chairman
and the committee. Hello, my
name is Monica Latta, sorry.
I've been a nurse for almost 10
years. I've been a bedside nurse
for 8 of those years.
And I'm here to represent.
Healthcare professionals who are
who are advocating for a safer
staffing ratios and all
hospitals in New Mexico, so I'm
a little emotional.
House Bill 138 would increase
patient safety outcomes, which
in turn would increase the
quality of health for our
patients and our healthcare
workers.
Within the last 5 years, the
patient acuity has increased
dramatically. Patients are
sicker, suffering from severe
illnesses, an increase in
patient m mortality.
Patient assaults against
healthcare workers, pressure
injuries, and patient safety
outcomes. We nurses are having
to care for patients with
limited staff, the number of
patients to one nurse fluctuates
from 5 to 7 and sometimes more.
This causes
Bedside professionals to rush
patient care, miss vital
assessments.
Increase, increasing calls to
our rapid response team and
increased ICU admissions.
Health care providers are
burning out. Morale is at an
all-time low. New nurses, new
baby nurses are leaving the
profession at unprecedented
rate. Seasoned nurses are
retiring early.
Staffing shortages are creating
an environment where patient
care is unsafe, and to top it
off, violence against healthcare
workers is at an all time.
Hi.
We chose this profession to care
for patients, to keep them safe,
healthy and provide excellent
care.
Supporting this bill would
improve retention, patient care,
improved quality of life for
all.
I hope you will support.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Jasmine
Romero. I have been impatient,
and I at a hospital in Mexico.
Today I'm standing in strong
support of House Bill 138
because state staffing is not
just a policy issue, it's a
matter of life and healing.
During my time as a patient, I
was cured by nurses, physical
therapists, and CNAs, and an
entire team of dedicated
healthcare professionals who
guided me through my healing
journey. Each of them played a
vital role in my recovery and
without their care, I wouldn't
have made it.
But
It was impossible not to notice
the strain they were under. They
were rushed, overwhelmed, and
stretched far too thin. I could
see it in their eyes, hear it in
their voices, and feel in the
moments that they had to choose
between one urgent need and
another. They never stopped
caring, but they deserve better
house bill 138 isn't just about
supporting healthcare workers.
It's about ensuring patients
like me
was the uh received the care and
time and attention, we need to
heal. Safe staffing saves
I urge you to support health.
138 not to just for those who
provide care but for every
patient who will ever need it.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee members for the
opportunity to speak today. My
name is Gigi Regis, and I am a
registered nurse on a surgical
unit. I'm here today because I
have seen firsthand what unsafe
staffing does to patients.
And I carry those moments with
me every single day.
On my unit, we care for people
who have just come out of
surgery.
They are vulnerable, in pain,
and completely dependent on us
to guide them through their
recovery. Every single patient
deserves our full attention, but
the reality is we don't always
have enough staff to give it,
and when that happens, people
get hurt.
I want to talk about falls
because every nurse on a short
staffed unit has seen them. We
tell our patients, call us
before you get up.
When that call like goes
unanswered for too long, they
will try to help themselves, and
that's when this happened. I've
been the one to walk into a room
and find a patient on the floor
confused and scared, in pain.
From a fractured hip or an
incision that incision that's
torn open. I've held their hand
while calling for help, knowing
deep down that this never should
have happened.
And then there's the harm we
don't see right away, the
infections that developed
because we didn't have time to
provide timely wound care.
The pressure ulcers that form
because we couldn't turn a
patient as often as they should
have, we should have.
The subtle signs of
deterioration that we catch too
late because we are running from
crisis to crisis.
This is not the kind of care I
became a nurse to provide. I
don't go home at night, relieved
that I made it through my shift.
I go home wondering who didn't I
get the care? Who didn't get the
care they needed today? What
harm was done that I'll never
even know about.
I carry that weight and every
nurse on an understaffed unit
does too.
HP 138 is about patient safety.
It's about ensuring that when a
patient does press their call
light, someone is there. It's
about preventing falls,
infections, and the suffering
that we know how to stop, but
can't always
prevent.
I heard you.
38
because nurses to care for them,
and no nurse should have to
carry the burden of knowing that
with the right staffing they
could have prevented it
prevented it. Thank you.
Front row, uh, can we start on?
That end and then we'll we'll
move forward.
Um, Madam chaired patients who
are harmed by multi-billion
dollar corporations who cut
costs, causing injury to pieces,
where I represented an
individual who died of a
preventable heart attack because
she wasn't hooked up to any of
the monitors. When I deposed the
nurse responsible for hooking
her up to the monitors. I was
the first person to ask that
nurse what her shift was like
that day. She had her first
patient die.
Earlier that day and couldn't
take a break, had to clean up.
That room and move on to the
next. She was short staffed,
providers weren't aware, and the
first person who showed her
empathy was the malpractice
attorney deposing her, and
that's sad.
I shouldn't be the first person
showing that individual.
empathy.
We have a crisis in the state
where we have a for-profit
system that is harming patients
and it's harming.
Our, our professionals who are
responsible for providing
patient care. We need to protect
them. I hear the arguments about
short staffs and that there's
not enough nurses telling you
why they are leaving the
profession, believe them.
They are the experts on why they
don't want to do this job
anymore, or why they can't.
And it's impossible to be a
nurse in this state and provide
safe care when you have the
stress of life and death
decisions, the pressures from
your employer and then the
culture to keep silent when
mistakes do happen.
There's an opportunity here for
you to rectify and to bolster
one of the hardest working
groups in our state, which is
our nurses.
Any members. My name is Boyd
Olmer. I'm a patient and I went
through over 50 days in the
hospital in the state in the
last like 14 years.
And I've seen a decline in the
care and uh had an emergency
situation when I was in a room
where I was having a blood
transfusion at the time, nobody
present but me.
And I started feeling really
bad. I was having a reaction to
it and I hit the call button.
Waited
Over 20 minutes.
Screaming for help, thank
goodness the door to the room
was open partly maybe about 8
inches and some uh visitor to
the hospital heard me stuck his
head in and got me a cure, and.
crashing it came, saved my life,
I guess, um, my wife's a nurse
for 32 years here.
She's at the point where she's
only working, she's PRN where it
allows her to make her own
schedule.
She's come to the point where
she's only working 3 or 4 days a
month.
And barely gets a break, can't
drink any water, can't eat,
doesn't get to go to the
restroom. Um, just horror, you
know, and she can't wait to
retire and then she's only 62,
and she loves her work, what she
does.
They can't take it, you know.
And I feel for all the people,
and I heard nurses so many times
they're taking care of me,
struggling and uh somebody
mentioned the falls. I had that
happen with a, a co-patient in
one of my rooms. She kinda wait,
he got up. I told him, wait,
wait for help. He couldn't wait.
He fell.
And he just had back surgery, so
I encourage you to pass this
bill, please.
Oh
OK, sorry, um, I have a little
trouble walking.
Um, but I'm here.
In support of this safe patient
care that we need to happen here
in New Mexico. I worked for 58
years as a nurse at at Christa
Saint Vincent's and COVID
happened and then things
happened to me and so here I am.
But my mind is still sharp, and
I remember the days when we had
so many patients, we didn't have
enough nurses. Somebody would
run and say, oh my God,
somebody's on the floor and you
couldn't even go to help and
apparently the same situation is
happening today. I always think
about what patient care is
supposed to be about and it's
supposed to be safe and we're
supposed to be able to comfort
our patients, take care of them,
and make sure they're not
hurting anymore, and they are
originally are when they first.
come in. I'm not sure how many
of you I keep looking at all of
you. How many of you all would
like to be in a hospital, in a
bed, needing pain medicine,
needing oxygen that just fell
off your face and you can't
reach to.
To get it back on and someone to
help you, you've been laying on
your back, on your side for 8
hours, 10 hours, and whatever,
and you know, even when you sit
a long time, how your back and
suddenly hurts. I imagine that
patient whose circulation is
bad. I took care of cancer
patients. I was in the emergency
room for 12.5 years. I did
coronary care unit for 10 years.
I did during the AIDS epidemic
when no one had to take, no one
wanted to take care.
these people, we took care of
them on our floor. It was the
8th floor. We took care of those
people. We didn't care who they
were and whatever, but you know
what, we were so tired at the
end of the day, but those
patients got taken care of to
the best of our ability with
more people, they would have
gotten better care, you know,
and so I just, and, you know,
It has been years and years that
people say we should have safe
staffing, safe staffing and safe
staffing, and I keep saying,
well, we go, we keep going and
asking the legislators, please
help us, please help us, but
nobody seems to care, and you
know, it's not about the money.
I know that a lot of the big
companies come to you all and
tell you don't vote.
For this, don't vote for that.
It's gonna cost them more money.
These people who say they work
in hospitals and that they can't
afford more help that they don't
want to get more ner they can't
get more nurses. This lady who
was talking about more nurses,
they are out there, but a lot of
them are burned out, and then a
lot of them feel so bad that
your patient is dead in one
room, and you can't even go in
there to take care of them
because you don't have enough
staff.
And I think it's time for me to
be quiet and uh thank you so
much, but someday I hope you all
realize the need.
Thank you very much,
you move away, before you move
away from the mic, will you
please state your name?
I'm sorry. Thelma de Laura from
Santa Fe, New Mexico.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Madam
Vice Chair, members of the
committee for hearing our
comments today.
My name is Yolanda J. Elmer. I
am the CEO for District 1199.
District 1199 represents 5
hospitals in New Mexico, Holy
Cross Medical Center in Taos.
New Mexico, Alta Vista Regional
Hospital in Las Vegas, New
Mexico, Los Alamos Medical
Center, Christa Saint Vincent's
and also University of New
Mexico.
I am here today on behalf of
District 1199, Nucci and AFT
representing over 250,000
healthcare workers.
We are dedicated to providing
safe, high quality care to
patients across New Mexico.
2 years ago we fought hard for
safe staffing legislation. That
bill made it through two
committees, and we were close to
making New Mexico the only
second state in the country to
pass this critical protection
for patients and healthcare
workers.
Since then, thanks to the work
of 1199 and AFT even more states
have successfully passed safe
staffing laws, HB 138 is the
result of
Of that progress, it reflects
the best of most effective
policies from across the country
to ensure patients receive that,
receive the care they deserve
and healthcare workers who work
directly with patients of the
support they need to provide.
To providing safety.
New Mexico has a choice. We can
continue to do nothing and let
patients continue to suffer or
New Mexico can lead the way and
joining the grow list of states
that are protecting both
patients and frontline
caregivers. The unions, the
unions want safe staffing. The
workers want safe stuffing. The
patients of New Mexico deserve
the best care possible. Please.
Because of District 1199 and ask
you to vote in favor of House
Bill 138.
Thank you.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
Madam Vice Chair and members of
the committee. My name is
Stephanie Lee. Some of you know
me. I live in Rio Rancho. I'm
the deputy senior director of
AFT organizing and field
Services.
I am here on behalf of AFT
President Randy Weingarten, and
our local members at UNM
Sandoval Regional Medical
Center.
Safe staffing work grateful to
1199 because they have been
champion safe staffing for many
years. We are proud to stand
with 1,199 and work with them on
this legislation.
As Yolanda said, my sister,
Yolanda, AFT in 1199 represent
250,000 healthcare workers
across the country.
This legislation is a workforce
bill.
This legislation is for the
workers.
This legislation is for
patients. Hos hospitals have had
a long time here in New Mexico
to fix the crisis that we have.
They haven't done it. They keep
fighting that.
They will continue
And it will
worse. Please vote yes to House
Bill 138 because patients and
our healthcare workers cannot
wait any longer.
I think that, uh, completes our.
I'm sorry, I forgot that I did
OK.
One person, um, had their hand
up and we need to recognize them
on Zoom. Linda on Zoom?
Yes. Hello.
Can you hear me?
Yes we can hear you. Oh,
excellent. Um, thank you so
much. I was, um, kind of late to
this meeting, so I thank you
for, for taking me. Um, my name
is Linda Ramirez Weai. I am a
registered nurse here in New
Mexico. I was at a UNM Hospital,
our flagship for 10 years. It
took a whole lot for me to
leave. Um,
I'll tell you, um,
Firsthand, it took me
2 years, uh, probably these last
two years to really grasp
everything that happened to me
while I was working there. Um, I
went to Washington. I spoke to
our legislature up there. I have
tried to be on the forefront as
much as possible, only to have
No changes. Um, I ended up
leaving UNM and it, it took a
lot for me to leave. Um, I am
still a working nurse, but I am
not doing bedside work any
longer and it broke my heart.
Um, I have lost friends to
suicide.
Um,
The safe staffing, we were
really on our way. We really
were for a while there. We had a
changing of the guard of our CEO
and our CNO, um, prior to the
COVID pandemic, and at that
point, we were informed that our
ratios would be changing, and
that's prior pandemic. Um, when
we did go to um our governing
council and talk to them about
this during our meetings that we
would have with them.
um with our new, uh, governing
body up there, we were told that
we kind of just needed to get on
board, like the rest of the
country and that our ratios were
better and everybody else was
having 1 to 6 and 1 to 7 ratios.
So we just needed to accept that
that was the change that was
coming for us. Um, anybody who's
been at UNM and is attempted to
get through the emergency
department knows, um, the, the
sheer amount of patients that
UNM.
serves, um, the entire state is
there. Parts of Colorado, El
Paso, um, we have regular back
and forth through Lubbock. Um,
we see 4 corners and of course,
the entire reservations, so, um,
I don't know if anybody
understands just the sheer
magnitude of human beings that
get passed through there. And
The amount of work and effort
that it takes to take care of
our patients with the high QD
that we have. And I loved being
there. I loved it. I would have
stayed.
Um, I literally, with tears on
my face, could not manage to get
out of my car one day.
Um, after seeing, uh,
grandmothers who had had
strokes, uh, in the hallway.
Um, and hall beds and us being
told, um, that, you know, there
wasn't enough plugs to either
run a cardiac monitor, run their
pumps, and plug in the bed. So
you have to make a choice. Those
are the decisions that nurses
are faced with for every shift.
Um, it is put on us, on a shift
to shift basis for us to make
do. So,
It broke my heart.
And um I'm gonna ask you very,
very strongly to look at this
bill.
And really take into account of
that it
It breaks us. It breaks us when
we don't have that support. Um,
we don't, we know now, it's not
going to come from management.
It can only come from you.
You're the only people that can
really make a change for us and
for our communities and for our
neighbors, my family, my
neighbors, my community, um.
I would only take them uh only
take them to you, uh, prior to
that, um, because I believed in
the purpose of it. So I'm gonna
get off. I want to thank you
again for giving me the
opportunity to speak and uh I'm
gonna ask you to support the
bill. Thank you. Thank you. Hi,
I'm the chair now. Just for just
a moment
Representative Kates, would you
like to recite testimony?
Thank you very much, Madam Chair
and committee members. Well,
obviously, um, I believe that uh
your public comment is clearly
communicated that we are in
crisis. We are in crisis for
patient safety, and we are in
crisis for healthcare workers'
safety, healthcare workers have
a much higher percentage of
suicidal ideation and self-harm.
I also would like to say that
for every one patient, a nurse
has a
of the most minimal nursing
staff ratio, there is a 7%
increase of that patient dying,
not, not falling ill, but dying
in the hospital within 30 days.
This is a.
Bill that will address patient
safety.
Healthcare worker safety.
Help the healthcare providers
with their medical malpractice
incidences, as in we'll be a
safer environment for all.
I hope that um you've heard this
very powerful testimony and I
stand for questions.
Thank you, Representative Kates.
Any questions? Represent Mejia.
How will
How would the if this bill
passes, how will success be
monitored.
Madam Chair representative,
there's data for success for
regulations and for uh in all
hospital settings, whether or
not it's a number of days the
patient is, is there a number of
deaths, a number of liability
lawsuits, that is data that's
already created.
Thank you for that answer, Madam
Chair. I have another, um.
Question. Has it been done
elsewhere with a positive
outcome?
Madam Cha and, yes,
representative, there have been
many states this particular
model is a model that gives site
specific oversight groups that
has administrative.
Members in it as well as
healthcare workers in it and
this particular model, you can
find in Washington State and
Oregon.
As well as Connecticut, I
believe as well.
Thank you for that answer,
Madam. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative Mejia.
Now I have a Representative
Hall.
Madam Chair, Representative.
Um
a couple things here I was
curious about.
I think we can all acknowledge
there's a nursing shortage
nationwide.
Is that accurate?
Yes, Madam Chair and
Representative, there is a
nursing shortage nationwide.
Some are.
More of a shortage than others.
Our state is in a crisis.
Madam Chair, by mandating
something that's gonna be run
through the state, which
Rarely seems to work better.
Um
Where are the nurse is going to
come from? I've heard people can
know of 20 nurses who know this,
but from the numbers I've heard
today, we're running between 5
and
Over 8000 nurses shortage.
hospital which serves my
District is working with our
local college and stuff, and
we're trying to encourage.
Nurses to stay.
That are going through nursing
school, but to meet this
shortage, I don't, I guess I'm
not seeing how mandating this is
going to
nurses, manager.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representative for
that question. So our nursing
crisis has, although we are at a
uh crescendo right now we have
been struggling for about 12 to
15 years as we have uh more and
more corporate interests in the
healthcare. It is our belief
that for these 10 or 15 years,
hospital associations have been
able to
Uh, reduced beds, reduce
healthcare workers and make
unsatisfactory work, uh, work
environments we believe that the
nursing shortage, although we
also I would support um
education forgiveness for
medical degrees and other kinds
of nurse recruitment. I believe
that in the testimony today was
clear that nurses are leaving
bedside occupation because it is
unsatisfactory work because.
They cannot meet it with
satisfaction given the
incredible environment that they
have been put into.
Do to profit. We believe that
and you can see in other states,
if we create a safe environment
of satisfaction from
mission-driven work that you
will be able to recruit more
nurses. There are plenty of
nurses in our state. They will
choose to do other types of work
than bedside work because
bedside work is so dangerous and
unsatisfying.
Madam Chair Representative, um.
In our state, we, we have so
many different.
Very unique areas.
Just
Repeating this
I
Something for every hospital
isn't necessarily realistic. If
the San Juan Regional Medical
Center, for instance, we, we
can't turn anyone away. So when
I was looking at the one direct
care registered nurse shall be
assigned to not more than one
trauma patient in the emergency
department.
Even it
Full staff, there are nights
when we literally and I was in
law enforcement. I've seen them
stacked up.
You'd have to have more.
Nurses than we've ever had in
the history of the hospital and
we can't get the basic numbers.
So I, I would be worried about
these mandated numbers.
Coming up that would fit the
needs of uh hospital Y in
Albuquerque, but not a hospital
in.
Uh, Representative Reeves
district or
Representing Mejia's district or
my district.
I have some concerns over that.
Madam Chair
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representative. Yes,
we believe that every hospital
environment is different as
well, and that's why in HB 138,
we man, as you said, mandate,
but we mandate the most minimal
ratios at national standards. We
are asking for individual
on-site hospital groups made up
of administrative and healthcare
workers so that you have medical
as well as sustainability
information within that group
that can make.
Site specific ratios as, as you
pointed out, a different
hospitals have different needs.
This bill will address that.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, and representative,
so when we're looking at uh.
Mandates, I, I would imagine you
all looked at the, you know, the
stick versus the carrot type
thing.
Um
Because what's going to happen
when a hospital can't.
Or is not able.
To meet some of these, um, I
have a family member who's
retired from nursing recently.
Uh, and one of the bigger
reasons was not just the
shortage of nurses as she was
one.
Um, but
We have a shortage of doctors.
And because of the shortage of
doctors due to the litigious
nature of our state and our
tort.
We're driving off our medical
personnel.
And it's uh
It's concerning was that
addressed at all in your thought
processes, Madam chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representative. It is
most certainly part of my
thought processes when um we get
information concerned about the
medical practice in this state.
I never hear from the medical
providers about what safety
processes they're doing
oversight, reduction, making
sure instruments are not left
in, make sure that there's
adequate nursing so that
infections are not happening.
What I'm hearing about is
litigation. This actual bill
will address that as in.
We know that healthcare workers
reduce infections, reduce blood
clots oversee when uh there's an
emergencies and if they are not
in another room. So as I stated
before, one patient over.
The bare minimum ratio increases
their liability by 7% if they
were required to have safe
staffing, they actually should
reduce their medical malpractice
suits.
Thank you Madam Chair and
Representative, I've been joined
by my co-sponsor Representative
Borego, and I just wanted to
acknowledge her, thank you,
thank you.
Madam Chair, thank you for that
answer. Um, and
Human nature being human nature
when I see these committees and
subcommittees.
Um
sitting on one. We, we
committing ourselves to death.
up.
Society.
Is there not a fear of when you
get into too many committees
that you're gonna have too many
uh
Too many leaders and not enough.
Voices
Madam Chair Representative, I am
so glad to have this opportunity
to know our newest um freshman
representative I'm, uh, thank
you. Um, we, I would love to
engage in a conversation about
democracy with you. So I, I very
much believe that the more
variety of voices help us find
the right answer, even if it's
not my answer that I walked in
with, um, that happens in this
legislative process all the
time. Although it is long and
exhausting. I do believe that.
That my bills are better for.
Thank you, Madam Chair, I yield
the floor.
Thank you.
All right. Next we have
Representative Reed, followed by
Representative Raszas. This is a
hard thing because my mom's in a
little different.
And then I'm in this rural
community and and so it's, it's
this back and we do need to get
good patient care, but I, I see
like in my rural area, I guess
like the question I have like um
all mentioned.
So if I were a case that needed
to be there.
Where would I go?
hospital.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you Representative. Are you,
when you say where would you go,
are you asking as your patient?
Yeah, I'm not sure if I would
know what the rate um so I'm.
Well, I guess more my my my
question um chair and and
representatives, my fear is that
when you go into an ER, they're
not gonna be, they're gonna come
in and what if the patient ratio
to trauma patients. What if
there's a multi.
Multi-car vehicle accident and
you've got 3 neuro, um, it's so
hard in these rural communities
already. We're, we're getting
shipped to Lubbock. We're
getting shipped to Amarillo. I
have to come to Albuquerque, you
know, 3.5 hours away, um.
Uh border communities in these
rural hospitals and so
I, I, I worry about just getting
shipped out of state. I think
that Colorado, um, how do we
deal with an issue like that, I
go in and um let's say at 8
person car accident.
What's gonna happen? Are they
gonna refuse me? Thank you,
Madam Chair, and, and thank you,
Representative. So, um, a couple
things. One is, what are they
doing right now? So I believe
they're probably shipping you
out right now. So,
so Bill 38, the reason why I
like it so much is because it is
going to use medical providers
and administrators on that site
specific hospital. So I come as
an executive and nonprofit. I
understand the sustainability is
necessary for even nonprofits,
um, and so having that
healthcare input as well as the
administrator of the site
specific. Now as for workforce
development, I have heard, um,
Many answers over the years from
uh rural hospitals which do have
unique and specific challenges.
I do agree.
But
Imagine, imagine your mom is
admitted into the hospital. Now
you know she has to be pretty
severe because they don't admit
everybody, right? So if they're
admitted in the hospital and
there's an emergency.
And they pull all the nurses.
From the floor of the patients
they have admitted that are
completely vulnerable and at the
mercy of their caretakers to go
handle the emergency and the
emergency room. Is that proper
workforce?
Management, I think that we can
come up with better solutions
that will be safer for New
Mexico.
So, Madam Chair and represent,
but they're gonna have to take
you in the register for one
time, you know, see how all this
works, but, and then, then they
just are gonna get shipped off
wherever they get shipped off to
if Madam Chair Representative, I
have a fine arts degree and so I
will not tell you how they are
going to manage their workers at
the hospital. I'm gonna go to my
subject experts, which is the
on-site group that this bill is
proposing
and healthcare providers.
To tell me how they are going to
manage that.
Representative, um, I believe
represent your co-sponsor
wanted.
Would you like her?
Deer her.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you.
Representative Reed, um,
So
In 2010 when I retired from the
city of Albuquerque, I started a
business.
And you know, really.
Business thrives on competition.
And um there's a point in
business where.
There's a point of diminishing
returns.
And usually that point.
And I feel like New Mexico is
sort of at that point. I have a
mother who's 96 years old and
I'm her caretaker.
Um, and, um, my brothers also,
um, and, you know, we've spent a
lot of time in the ER. We spent
a lot of time in the hospital,
she does have some issues and um
I think that at some point in
time, New Mexico is kind of in
that place where we're seeing.
Not the best sometimes quality
care that we should, but at, at
the point where we have to
challenge and and let's face it,
hospitals are a business.
Um, and at some point,
Even a small community has to
step up and say.
You know
You know, there's a point where
Um
Nurses and doctors, both, we
need to start attracting them.
And start building more
facilities because
Our people are overworked, and
we saw that, Madam Chair, in
during COVID.
When our nurses were being, you
know,
To the brink, they were working
to the brink and sometimes our
legislators, um, but seriously,
in all due respect, I mean,
there's a point where business
Because of the competitive
nature of it, we might start
have having to attract more
businesses instead of going to
Amarillo or instead of going to
Lubbock or Denver or other
places, they are gonna start
locating in Albuquerque. They're
going to start locating in
hobbs. They're gonna start
locating in espanola because
they have to.
Because there's a demand for
that.
That type of
And this really brings us to the
point of quality care. What is
quality care and that, you know.
People will start being
attracted to New Mexico because
we have better care and because
we're imposing better standards.
So I just wanted to add that.
Sure, I mean, I, I never see
Clovis getting another hospital.
I mean, we can't, don't even
have the doctors, um, you know,
I don't think we're attracting
doc, um, we're not attracting
professionals here, um, with our
issues with the doctor, so it,
it's, it's sad when
When, um, I can know that I, I
remember, uh, I, I'll share just
a brief story, and I'm sure my
husband had had surgery and we
knew there was nobody who could
deal with his, he had a problem
after his surgery because it was
happening in Albuquerque, um, if
he was started bleeding, we knew
there would be no point to go to
Clovis because there was no
expert there that could take
care of them. They're just gonna
fly us, Lubbock, and we're gonna
have to pay for that. So instead
of going to Clovis, we decided
we would just drive to Lubbock,
and we were then told because we
didn't take the helicopter, they
may not cover the Presbyterian
may not cover it. It's
ridiculous. It just blows my
mind like I've saved you $60,000
helicopter ride and you know,
now you don't wanna pay for it
cause we're also dealing with a
local Presbyterian, um,
insurance in Texas, which is 90
miles from us. I'm not gonna go
3 hours and a half for 90 miles,
so it, it was a lot, you know,
anyway, um, that aside, I just.
I just don't think we're
attracting nurses and we're not
attracting doctors and we've
got, we are in a crisis, but.
I'll, I'll move on to asking
what is this waiver, um, in your
last page of the department may
grant waivers to rule or
critical access hospital patient
safety Act if the hospital is
able to document reasonable
effort, so
It says May and what,
how would you. It's excellent
question. I'll defer to my
expert witness.
Madam Chair, Representative, uh,
it, it's a provision in the law
designed to address some of the
current concerns that you've
identified. There may be limited
instances in which a waiver is
appropriate and under those
circumstances, a waiver would be
granted. It certainly is going
to be discretionary and it's
gonna be based upon the justice
of the situation, whether or not
that is in the best interests of
both the patients and the
healthcare workers in that
facility.
All right, and thank you, Madam
Chair, and expert. So it's, it's
so such as the Department of.
Madam Chair, Representative, uh,
the bill was drafted, assuming
the Department of Health would
continue to be the Department of
Health, but that, that's
changed. And it's now the HCA.
OK, thank you. And then, um,
Madam Chair and representatives
and experts, um, do you know
what the definition of obtain
adequate staff. Have you defined
that or is that just gonna be,
thank you, I'm sure.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative. Uh, there's no
definition to reasonable
efforts.
Based upon a case by case, uh,
analysis of what the hospital
did to it.
Alright, um, thank you.
Thank you. Next we have
Representative Terasas. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Um, I'd, I'd
like to start out with saying
that uh I'm sure that uh
Every person at one point or
another, we'll have a family
member, even yourself.
At a hospital. I mean, that's,
let's just start there. So, um,
And
I personally, it, because I'm in
the business that I'm in, have
been in and out working.
With hospitals and doctors since
I was about 1516 years old.
And I've seen the decline
massively and, you know, um,
over the last 35 years, it's
just slowly, slowly declined.
And in rural New Mexico, you
really, really see it.
Where we used to have.
Independent doctors working,
family practitioners or, you
know, specialists all over, uh.
In, in, in the corridor where
the hospital was, those are
empty buildings now.
Those are empty buildings.
We don't have uh urologist.
We don't have the
We're, I think we have one OB.
And there's covered an area of
Three different counties, and so
we're, we are in a crisis. I
agree and I, I appreciate you
bringing this this forward.
But
Um
I'm worried that the way in the
process in the way we're we're
presenting it is not going to be
necessarily the right answer. I
mean, I, I think, I think we've
got, you know, and I want to
kind of pick up where
Uh, Representative Reeve just
asked, I mean, who decides,
right? And
What does may mean? Um, and
that's left up to the whoever's
in that administration and maybe
the next administration changes
the way their policy is, and
maybe they hire a new person,
maybe that person quits,
whatever. It's left, it's too
vague.
And for rural New Mexico, I'm
gonna tell you what, what we're
actually.
Dealing with
When, when I was a kid, well,
not when I was a kid, just a few
years back, we were 68 bed acute
care hospital.
We are now at 25 bed critical
care hospitals.
It's a huge difference.
Why? We don't have doctors.
We don't have nurses.
And so I've not too long ago
found myself having to go to the
hospital.
And they were.
Busy, busy, busy, and um.
For whatever reason, they, they
couldn't, they didn't have the
capabilities of handling.
What, what we needed at that day
on, on that day.
So I had to go to uh Las Cruces,
100 miles away, um.
Thank you.
And so the thing is, we have,
you know, what, what we're
seeing, I, because I live in
this rural area and I, because
I'm in the mortuary business, I
see the results of what we're
talking about.
We have people that are being
flown out.
Constantly
Crusus.
Constitute constantly to El
Paso.
Because they don't have the
capabilities, they don't have
the enough staffing of doctors
and nurses.
OK.
So that that helicopter flies.
Kind of generally in the path of
one of my home.
And so I hear it, and it goes by
sometimes.
4 times a day, sometimes more.
And so
That's a very huge concern,
right? Because if you need
something right now.
They don't have the access.
So what worries me.
I
We make these mandates and, and
I want before I get into this, I
want to know what are the
repercussions if they don't have
these.
They don't meet the ratios that
you're seeing. What happens?
I thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you, Representative, so,
um, uh, if this bill so passes
in this committee, there will be
um an amendment for the next
committee that uh the drafter
inadvertently cut out of the
spill, um, which would be, which
would come to the repercussions.
I will defer to my expert
witness who can tell you what
those are.
Madam Chair, uh, representative,
there will be a a graduating
system of fines for hospitals
and healthcare facilities that
do not comply with the Act.
Explain that further. What that
means a fine. Explain to me the
fines that you're, you're trying
to um amend to this bill.
Madam Chair, Representative, uh,
the,
System is, is an administrative
system that would give hospitals
an opportunity to comply with
the law in situations where they
don't comply, they'll receive a
fine where they become
apparently unwilling or unable
to continue to comply with the
law, those fines will go up, and
I think they graduate, they will
graduate to
They start, they would start at
$1750 and would move up to the,
the maximum of $50,000.
So, um, Madam Chair
representative expert.
So these fines are per instance,
is that correct?
Madam Chair, uh Representative,
yes. OK. And so these ratios
that we're talking about.
Um, we go in there and we say, I
don't know, I
I, I don't know all the races,
but let's just say it's, you're
in a
ICU
And you're supposed to have 1 to
1. I don't you tell me if I'm
right or you can correct me,
whatever. And they're unable to
do that. What happens if you
have another patient that has to
graduate to the ICU unit, and
they only have one nurse that
they can get. What happens?
representative,
um, showing the the
noncompliance of this is not
just that you don't have a nurse
there, you will have your onsite
group that will inform whether
or not there was an opportunity,
you will also be asked how are
they recruiting their healthcare
workers, are they paying
competitive wages? Are they
giving those bedside nurses the
same pet a same pay as the local
RN who's doing Botox.
shots, we need to make sure that
we are competitive with our most
difficult, so it's not just one
like miss a ratio, there'll be
lots of um,
Data in which will be provided
to determine that. Madam Chair,
I just want to address your your
helicopter scenario is that this
is the current situation we're
in.
And we at the legislature has
been asked to provide some safe
staffing since 2014.
And, and we are sending out
helicopters 4 times a day. So
the current process that is
being provided to recruit and
retain our medical providers are
not working and one of the
reasons may be is we are not
creating a safe environment for
our healthcare workers.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, ma'am. And I,
and I think, look, without
getting into too deep in the
weeds, what happens is this.
Um, and I'm looking at it as
just as a, as a business guide.
Trying to process.
to process, how would you, how
would you control this, OK? And,
and so you, you'd say, wow, it's
not just a matter of money, it's
a matter of avoiding fines and
giving good patient care.
And so what, what, what I see
is, let's just say it's, that is
one instance.
Maybe I can explain it, but they
can't get rural New Mexico
can't.
Get the nurses and the doctors,
the ratios that they need, OK?
Even if we wanted my, I, I think
they're struggling really hard.
I think
I, now, there's a lot of stuff
that we agree on, I think nurses
should be paid more.
I think they should, they should
find a balance between those
traveling nurses and those that
are stationary, I think that
that they could find it, make a
balance to where some of that
money is spent with, with nurses
that are there. I think we have,
I have a bill that I that I'm a
part, you know, signed on
against HB 552, I think, where
we give uh nurses credits.
Uh, $3000 credits per year for
being a, you know, rural nurse.
I think
I think what has happened is we
slowly have gotten ourselves
into such a bind.
Such a binding that I'm gonna
tell you, it is not gonna be one
thing that's gonna fix us.
And I, I think what has happened
slowly, uh, and then it got fast
forwarded during COVID.
I
massive
The massive
to the, into the hospitals.
And there was a lot of fear in
handling some of them. So if you
were older yourself and you were
a nurse, Madam Chair
Representative, I think you
said, you know what? I think
it's time for me to retire.
I think the overworking some of
the, let me tell you this.
Nurses are amazing people. They,
they do things that people tell
me I couldn't do what you, what
you do, Louis.
I couldn't do what they do. I
can't, you know, to, to see
somebody struggle and suffer and
be there and watch them, you
know, whether they make it or
they don't, it's a very
difficult job. It's a very
stressful job. And, and I think
what what worries me is we, we
went through this.
phase where all of a sudden,
everybody in the United States
started fighting for nurses.
So those places, those states
that had more money and had more
in the, in the corporations that
could handle holy nurses, I'll
pay you more, come over here.
I'll pay you more to pull over
here. And I think what happened
is we're fighting for the same
pool of nurses.
Throughout the United States and
obviously we don't have enough.
So whatever that number is, I
don't know if we need, this is
just a fake number, but if we
need a million, we only have
600,000 nurses. And so we're
sitting here, everybody's
pulling those nurses. And
depending on your, on your
hospital and how it's structured
and how they're making money can
determine whether or not they
can compete in pulling those
nurses. That's just what I, what
I think, OK?
I'm sure, I think, I think.
What, what I see in our
landscape in New Mexico is that
we have over 1 point, over 1.2
million people on Medicare,
Medicaid in the state, which
makes us different.
Our reimbursement rates aren't
what they should be, in my
opinion. They should be, we
should be giving them better
reimbursement rates so that they
can financially fund what
you're, what you're asking.
I think, you know, we need to
work on, on these are just
little notes and by the way, not
one hospital called me, not one
lobbyist called me.
I'm just thinking of what this,
I'm just kind of, we're milling
this and I, I think Bill, excuse
me, Representative Hall called
his local, uh, administrator
just going, what do we do here?
And, and I just think, Madam
Chair Representative, I think
what we've done is we've, we've
slowed down and because there's
only those last few workhorses
that are being overworked as
nurses, right? That are spread
thin and they, their heart.
Is in it
And they're staying there.
have basically been worked to
death.
And so now they're just like,
They're giving up.
And, and, and for us to say,
well, you better have
You better have this many nurses
and this, this and, and, in this
department and that department
and you better do this, this and
that.
I, I respectfully will say that
I disagree.
For this reason.
If they can't get them.
Because the funding for
reimbursement rates aren't there
because over 50% of the people
aren't, are on Medicaid,
Medicare.
If we don't have the funds, if
we're not doing other things as
a state to give them.
Tax credits
If we're not doing other things
like thinking of, of nurses that
are going to do all of the
nursing schools around uh New
Mexico that are graduating.
Through the lottery scholarship
and through the opportunity of
scholarship, and as soon as they
graduate,
A lot of them are gone.
If we were able to just harness
them and say, hey, you know
what, New Mexico paid for your,
your, um,
Your education?
Did you give New Mexico two
years back and stay.
And backfill some of those empty
things I think we could start to
see some, some sort of a a a
move in the right direction.
Keep our, our nurses here.
And a attract our nurses through
other things. But I think what,
what, what I'm afraid of, let me
explain why I'm, it's, it's not
that I just want to say no.
I think what I'm afraid of is
what I just saw there where our
our our hospital goes from 68
beds to 25.
What happens is they say, you
know what, we know no longer can
have an ICU. We are at capacity.
We're gonna have to fly them
out. And they just start flying
out more and more patients.
And this compounding effect then
goes to rus because I've, I've
gone to Cruises and they're
overwhelmed.
So what is happening in our
little rural towns, Madam Chair,
Representative.
Because we're having
rural hospitals.
In maintaining enough nurses and
doctors, so they're just
shipping them out and they're
all going to
Ye
Las Cruces
Well, Las Cruces, Las Cruces,
Albuquerque area and uh
In El Paso.
So, um,
Would you, so I, I think
finding, Madam Chair, do you
think binding is gonna change
this, or do you think it would
Then possibly put the hospital
in a position where they say,
you know what?
I can't
I can't get the people that I
need to sustain these, these
requirements. I'll just close
that. I'll just close that
department.
What do you think would happen
if, if that really, do you think
that's a possibility? Thank you,
Madam Chair and thank you,
Representative, um, so as
business person to business
person, understand that we have
uh the wonderful great thing
about our state is that we do
only have 2.2 million people.
And we have all this vast
beauty.
And so if your town can't
support a Starbucks because it
looks at the population, it's
going to have a difficulty
supporting a corporate
healthcare provider.
What I am bringing to you is HP
135 to make sure that
We are not sacrificing the
safety of our of our patients or
our providers.
Um, and balancing the backs.
Of the profit on them, we need
to put them first and know that
if we create the environment as
an all business studies since
the 1938.
shows that it is not pay that
makes an employee.
Go or stay with an employer. It
is a work environment, it's
relationships, and then it's
salary and benefits, and that is
what we have not been focused
on, and we are still struggling,
you're still flying out 4 times
a day.
So I'm asking for a change to
see if we can improve that.
Madam Chair, Representative my
my co-sponsor would like to.
Madam Chair Representative
Terasas.
You bring up a really good
point, but I think that this
bill also brings to light the
whole issue of uh HMOs and the
owners of the hospitals and um
you know, one of the advantages
that I had as a city employees I
got to see how RFPs were done to
attract the city of
Albuquerque's and the county of
Bernalilos, um.
providers.
And we did RFPs.
And we attracted, you know, the
HMOs that bid on those RFPs and
we're talking about thousands of
employees that those.
Providers
would be responsible to.
Um, and then it was our
responsibility to select.
And this happens all across the
state, it doesn't just happen in
Albuquerque.
Um, we attracted um.
Some of the better known.
Um
Um
Hospitals
In Presbyterian, uh, loveless,
and we, and the city of
Albuquerque was responsible for
choosing.
The provider for all of these
employees.
And in reviewing those RFPs, we
looked for.
The pay, we looked for the
working conditions. We looked
for, you know, the number of
doctors, the number of
Of for, for different
categories, cancer, um, you
know.
Pulmonary, etc. etc.
And
One of the I was one of 5 people
that decided.
to recommend to the city
council, um, which provider we
should select?
And they were responsible again,
and I said for thousands of
people.
Thousands of city and county
employees.
Um, and we would recommend to
the city council, this is who we
we think would be would serve
our population, the best.
And I think that happens in the
south, I think that happens in
some area, maybe not as much in
some of the rural areas, but it,
they still are selecting a.
So when I, my point is, is that
this bill is also bringing to
light.
The business practices of these
organizations.
And whether or not they're
providing.
And whether or not they're
working to attract those.
And I understand that it's very
complicated to attract doctors
because there's other
circumstances, but
The core value systems are what
we're trying to increase here is
quality of that business and if
people start seeing that New
Mexico has a better business
system, better business health
system, then we're gonna start
attracting that, those, those
people.
And I think this is just one
piece of that.
kind of system that we're
working toward is to attract
because in the next 2 years, and
you know my background is as a
city planner and I look at
population and I look at how
populations change and, and, and
are attracted to our state.
We can compete with.
You know, Dallas and Denver and
Phoenix, and we're in that place
right now.
To be able to say that we need
to use some leverage.
In order to do that. And this is
one of the bills, and that's why
I got behind it.
This is one of those pieces
that.
can start creating that leverage
to attract and bring more
economic.
prosperity to New Mexico.
Representative, are you
no.
I just, I, it, it just, you
know, man, I'm sure I
Representer, I think, and I, and
I respect both of you and I
really do a lot for what you're
doing. I think what really
worries me is, and I must say
the disparity really is um.
Representative between my area
and yours.
You have the population.
And to, to sustain that, or we
don't.
And that's what the disparity is
between uh rural New Mexico and,
and urban New Mexico, you can't,
we have yet this is a rule
straight across the board.
And I am.
I'm gonna be honest, my biggest
thing that that that I don't
like about this is that it
backfires and I see it go, like
I just saw it from 68 to 25, and
I know all the people a ton of
people, I mean, I'm very
connected with the people there.
And when they come to my office
and they're telling me I had to
they send them out, they sent me
out, they sent me out, all
because we don't have the
doctors and nurses, and I'm
gonna tell you, uh, when I
asked, we just lost a really,
really good group of doctors and
nurses.
And I said, why did they, why
did we lose those, Madam Chair
Representative? Why did we lose
those?
Medical malpractice to pay for
those, those, um,
Doctors and nurses, well that
that staff, I should say that
staff.
It costs more in New Mexico than
I don't know how many states it
was like 4 other states
altogether.
And so
When we have stuff like that, it
makes it difficult and like I
said, until, in my opinion,
Until we
turn around and, and I would ask
you, would you support, would
you, uh, represented what you
guys support and maybe possibly
amend, we have a piece of this,
we're gonna do this as maybe as
a, as a package, would you
support
Nursing staff that is graduating
so if in the future if they're,
if they're getting
New Mexico dollars from the
lottery scholarship opportunity
scholarship. This, this is money
coming from New Mexico. Do you,
would you support them giving
back to New Mexico and staying
in a couple of years, and then
they could, and then they could
move on. Yes.
I don't know if this is that's
related to this bill
and so
but, but I would love to talk to
you about that, and I am
carrying a bill with similar to
that. OK. So Madam, I'm just
about wrapped up. I, I'm done. I
just, I just, uh, it's, it's sad
cause it, it's very, very
disappointing. We all know that,
that we need to do something for
our nurses and stuff. I just am
very afraid that in my in my
district.
It can cause some of the some of
the departments in my you know
and I haven't talked to my
administrator. He wasn't
available when I tried to get a
hold of him, so that's I'm done.
Thank you. I just wanna make
sure that we stay on track,
don't get repetitive. I
appreciate the passion and the
discussions, um, but I want to
caution us against repetition.
We have one more bill to go
through. So as this customary on
this committee before we go on
to the vice chair and myself.
Uh, I'm gonna recognize I had
one hand already. Are there any
other members of the committee
that would like to ask a
question. So right now we just
have representative and OK. So
we have representative Anaya.
And then representative.
Torres Velazquez.
And if no other then we'll go
with vice chair and then myself.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I will
try to make these comments a
little bit shorter. Um, you
know, pretty repeatedly, not
just here but also in the Health
Committee on which we sit.
Um, we hear often, you know,
we're not attracting or
retaining anyone. And it turns
out that we need to do something
in order to attract and retain
people, and so I'm really glad
that you brought this
legislation forward, um, Madam
Chair, um, and representative,
um, I also want to address the
litigation concern, um, because
this is actually a preventative
bill.
You cannot have litigation
unless you have an active
malpractice. What we are trying
to do is also mitigate the
amount of malpractice, mitigate
the amount of patients that are
hurt, ate the amount of deaths
that occur. And so I, if we're
speaking to a litigious
environment, we're also speaking
to the fact that we have a lot
of malpractice happening in the
state. And that is not good for
patients. I know a quote that I
keep hearing is also quality of
care. And one of the things that
I have to ask is, is it quality?
If we are stretching people too
thin, so much so that we hear
repeatedly that people are, are
dying.
are literally dying. And so I
just want to question the, the
phrase that I keep hearing about
quality of care, because I'm not
sure, um, we're able to give
workers the environment that
they need to actually provide
quality care.
Um
The uh
One of the things that I know I
told the health committee, but
I'll reiterate here. I
unfortunately, have also had a
series of health problems this
year, but I go to one in
particular. I've been to many,
but one of ER in particular
always has incredibly happy
people. And I have asked their
staff in the past, why are you
guys so happy? Like this is
literally the ER, you guys. And
they said, because we're
overstaffed.
We have the time to spend with
people.
And I thought that was one of
the most powerful things. Um, I
also, um, think that we have an
opportunity to lead and be
different.
I mean, we are competing for a
new workforce. We're competing
for a workforce with anybody
else. If anybody knows like
entertainment, you got to have a
gimmick.
And so for us, what if we were
the state that said we're
actually going to have the best
quality of care. We're also,
we're also gonna have the best
work environment, um, as I have
a colleagues who are graduating,
I believe we were the first
class of the BAMD program. I
have, um, friends who are trying
to come back home.
And they're trying to come back
home. And one of the things that
they're considering is, what is
the environment? I want to work
at a hospital? Do I want to work
somewhere else. Um, so, um, I, I
believe that we actually have
the opportunity.
To, especially at this point in
time, it's kind of a turning
point for us to say, are we
going to be different or not?
Um, I also want to say just as
this last piece, Madam Chair,
um, if we want to attract and
retain workers, then we, thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative.
Next we have representative um
Torres Velasquez.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I really want to just
say how much I appreciate and um
the work that you've put into
this. My mother-in-law was a
nurse in the late 70s, and so I
witnessed what she went through
as the hospital, um was bought
and made these kinds of changes.
I have a constituent who raised
a question, and I just, I'm not
sure because I think I may have
heard.
One of the presenters possibly
say Safe Harbor.
And that was part of, does that
relate in any way Safe Harbor
Act or late in any way to this
bill.
Saint Harbor is a piece of
legislation. Oh, madam Chair.
I'm so sorry, Madam Chair, and
Representative, um, Safe Harbor
is a piece of legislation that
was passed a number of years
ago. Nurses can evoke safe
harbor. Um, it's when they say
that uh po assignment is
untenable.
Um, they can, they can do it,
but there is no consequence per
se for it. It may not even ever
be reviewed by anyone but the
chief nursing officer. Um, it
also says that nurses will not
be retaliated against if they
file one at a hospital that I
work at or worked at, I don't
work there anymore, um, a group
of 10 nurses filed a safe harbor
one morning after a patient
died. They weren't retaliated
against, but all 10 of them have
left now because the
They got called in, they got
questioned a lot more. Their
charts got reviewed, things got
scrutinized. The pressure for
them to stay working there
became very, very great. So,
yes, safe harbors here, we use
it when we can, but it is less
effective. And so I appreciate
the question, Madam Chair and
committee members.
Any other questions from the
committee. All right, now we'll
go to vice chair Chavis.
Thank you Madam Chair, so I have
um just really a couple of
questions and I think maybe in
the beginning, you touched on
this point.
Um, so I'm looking at page 7 and
page 10, um, and basically it
refers to the professional and
technical staffing committee and
then on page 10, it's the
hospital service staffing
committee, so my question is,
can you outline what
Um
Classifications or job titles
are contained in each of those
um sections, um, earlier in the
testimony, there was one
respiratory therapist who
testified, but we know that
there are a ton more, uh,
depending on the size of the
hospital of um occupations that
that work there. So can you give
us an example again of what each
of those committees.
Look like in terms of the
occupations
if you would please state the
page number and make lineage 7,
10.
And page 1024. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I will,
um,
Allow my expert witness to
answer.
Chair, representative, uh, if
you would look at page 2,
beginning on page 2.
Uh, line 13.
Why I'm sorry, uh.
Starting with line 4 on page 2.
Line 4, defines direct care
nursing staff, uh, beginning at
line 13, we define direct care
professional and technical
staff.
Uh, I, I think.
The concerns that you raise is
that there's not a specific
identification of
classifications set out in the
bill and, and I understand that
concern the bill I think was
drafted to reflect the fact that
positions change,
classifications change,
hospitals evolve. So what we've
done is generally define the
types of workers who perform
work in healthcare facilities
and based upon those that we
have now, they would fit into
the categories identified, so
I'm sorry.
I'm sure, I just like to say
that the the intent of the
groups are not to say we have
one RN and one respiratory
therapist, the intent of the
groups that we have these direct
care health providers, and we
have administrators.
So, so that doesn't really
answer my question. So my
question is at this moment in
time, chair.
Representative
I'm just trying to speed it
along here.
Um,
Madam Chair Representative, so,
so my question really is, so
say, so thinking about right now
at this moment in time, what
classifications would fit in
each of those two groupings, the
professional and technical
staffing, and then the service
you don't need to name all of
them.
But give us an idea of what
you're thinking about. So for
example,
In the profession on Techoo
staffing unit. Would that be,
would that contain nurses,
respiratory tes, radiology
techs, I mean, sort of who would
that contain? And then in the
surface unit.
Um, would that be like patient
care tax, CNAs, housekeeping,
dietary. I mean, just kind of
give us an idea of what those
committees might look like at
this moment in time, not
thinking about they're gonna
change next year, but at this
moment in time.
Madam Chair Representative, you
probably just identified groups
better than I would, um, there's
going to be a nursing category
which would involve and include
registered nurses. There's gonna
be a uh a technical staff, which
Uh, it is people like
respiratory techs, uh, those
groups of people. The third
category would be unlicensed uh
hospital staff employees. I, I
could, you and I could go
through a list of technical
employees, uh, I think, for
example, the University of New
Mexico Hospital collective
bargaining agreement identifies
20 or 30 classifications as, as
you well know, uh, those forms
would be followed, those
technical employees who are
licensed.
So, uh, Madam Chair
Representative, the, the, so
then, um,
It would be a professional unit,
and it will be a technical
staffing unit or those two units
are one joint unit.
Madam.
Madam Chair Representative,
those two groups are they
comprise one unit direct care
professional and tech.
So depending on the size of the
hospital.
Um, that would really determine
the size of.
Madam Chair, Representative,
yes.
All right, that's all the
questions I.
Hi
And I actually had the
questions. I appreciate I don't
recall who did that.
But anyway,
um.
So I.
I'm covered.
And I appreciate your patience
and I appreciate the time that
we took.
Uh, it's an important, um.
Bill, as all of our bills are,
so I just wanted to say that
because I noticed that we did
not lose anybody really in the
audience.
I, I, in fact, you probably were
the one that asked the question.
I'm gonna give you one last, uh,
if you would please
representative, we have
representative de la Cruz who's
been waiting. Thank you,
ma'am, I just have one more
question, Madam Chair,
Representative.
So I was just looking at the
fiscal impact report.
And it shows what how much money
would be recurring out of the
general fund.
For the appropriation for this?
How are we gonna pay for this
when you see HSA and DOH.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representative. There
is no appropriation. We don't
agree with the fur.
OK. It's, it's.
Look like, is that 1.4 billion?
OK. Thank you, ma'am. Sure.
Thank you. And thank you,
Representative. All right, so
what is the will of the
committee?
Madame Cherimova Du pass.
All right, there's a motion made
by Representative Anaya Za Duas
and a second by representative
Torres Vilabo.
Representative Anaya, yes.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Hall.
No
Representative Johnson.
Representative Mejia.
No.
Representative Ortiz, yes.
Representative Reed.
No, and I like to explain my
vote.
Representative Terazas.
And I'd like to explain my vote.
Representative Torres Velasquez.
Yes.
Chavez.
Chairwoman Royal Caballero.
We have a 6 to 4.
we have a due pass
and we have representative Ree
who will explain her vote.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representative Kates,
and I
I wanted to just say that I,
this is a very, a very hard one
for me because as I said, I got
a lot of nurses in my family,
but for me in a rural district,
I, I've talked to my local
hospitals at um and I just can't
risk that our local hospitals
will be closed and one of those
reasons is we have Cannon Air
Force Base there, and I can tell
you 40% of the people that are
referred to Cannon Air Force
Base, being one of the special
ops spaces, 40% of
refused, um, because New Mexico
cannot provide the care needed
to help the Germans families,
and we have a special ops space
in uh Florida in a special ops
based in New Mexico and
If we don't even have a
hospital um in protallysis
probably more the steady, but we
don't even have the facilities
to and specializations in the
needs of our airmen and so I
just can't risk, um,
Our hospitals closing to at
least provide them emergency
act. Um, so for that reason,
that's why I'm not voting for
it, but I do.
Representative Tarasas to
explain your vote. Ma'am, thank
you, Madam Chair and
Representative again, thank you
for doing this. We, uh, you
brought up very good points of
what we need to do for our
nurses. But also, I'm for
similar reasons, I'm worried
about what it'll do to my, our
county hospital, or nonprofit
county hospital and also worried
about um
The state Fort Bear State
Hospital, that's there. And when
I read here that it, we're gonna
have an FY $275,700,000
requirement for the impact on
the budget, and we have no
appropriation to do that.
How, what can I, you know, we're
not doing anything for our state
hospital and then the, what
burden does it do and would they
close my hospital or shut part
of my hospital down is what
scares me. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Representative and um you have a
Du Pas representative. Thank you
very much and thank you to
everyone in the audience for
staying so late and supporting.
Thank you, Vice Chair and
committee and please don't
repeat this to other committees,
but this committee had the
smartest questions I've had for
all session.
Thank you.
are.
Thank you, Representatives de la
Cruz and Gurola for sitting here
through the entire presentation.
Thank you.
With you in just a moment. Thank
you. Can everyone vacate as soon
as possible so we can move on.
Thank you. Appreciate it all.
Thank you.
So, uh, Representative, we lost
a couple of members to the
Resroom, yes. So if we just
wait, just uh a minute. I don't
want you, I, I know it's a
valuable presentation, so.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Oh,
there he is. We had one more
member Jo.
He
They, they really wanted to get
out. They've been here for
All right, we're, we're gonna
give some of our members just a
minute because they had to use
the.
Everyone is filing back one by
one. We, we were, I was just
told there.
Water.
That's why they're hydrated.
There's some water and snacks
So
You have to wait for.
See anybody, anybody else out
there.
OK, that's fine. Why don't we go
ahead and get moving. I don't
want to hold up anymore. It's
already, I didn't realize that
it's after 6 already.
