Thanks chair Herrerra
chairman Nancy I'm here
we have a quorum warm that
secretary keeping the coast
please.
I.
Okay.
Good morning members of the
committee thank you for joining
us this morning we have a.
I don't see we have a light load
but we have a we have one we
have one bill this morning and
as we get to it we will take it
as we normally do it any other
bills and there are other than
this one we have one house
memorial that has been put off
by editor request of the of the
Sanchez so until he gives us the
the go ahead we'll just go ahead
and continue to to not
only for some others it to come
our way so with that being said
madam secretary we can bring
over representative Stansbury.
That be great.
Good morning representative
mining it's nice to see you all
again thank you for having this
hearing this morning absolutely
it looks like you have a great
originally and our state
engineer with you this morning
yes indeed perfect thank you
very much and so this morning
ladies and gentleman we will be
hearing house bill two ninety
eight state engineer here and by
video conference without further
ado representative Stansbury the
floors.
Thank you it and this morning
I'm going to go ahead and just
turn it and with your permission
Mister chair directly to the
state engineer or to Mr
originally this is an agency
bill and it's relatively
straightforward.
Thank you.
Have
a great day.
You Mr chairman my name is Greg
misleading with the office of
the state engineer a good Mr
chairman and and Representative
breed do we want to present our
committee substitute for
discussion.
Yet Mr chairman we if someone
could help move our sub this
morning we made a couple of
changes that were submitted.
Right well so make the most of
the Mr chair.
The motion made.
A second that.
Three this could be the
substitute.
Thank you Mr chairman saying we
appreciate the The New Mexico
sic Association working with us
to address their.
Concerns and the committee
steps.
Mr is the product enough
discussions
great so The New Mexico water
code.
Mr Resnick.
Your audio keeps going in and
out.
Yes Mr chair.
Mr.
You try to call in effect.
Okay when we have a call and
then perhaps Representative
Stansbury can talk about the
health it looks like up.
John also talk a little bit
about that.
The thing going great great
please call back in may yeah Mr
chairman I can I can take it
this is audio is not working but
as Mr president was saying we
worked all day yesterday I think
with the thank you New Mexico
state association to come up
with some language to better
address their their concerns and
so right now as the New Mexico
water code requires
administrative hearing before
the state engineer at anytime a
permit application is pro tested
or anytime a permit application
is aggrieved by state engineer
action
the current the current law
which is seventy two to sixteen
require state engineer hearings
to be held in the county where
the water rate is judicata it
licensed or permitted unless the
parties in the hearing units
stipulate another site for the
hearing of the house and the
house ag Water Committee
substitute for House Bill to
ninety eight retain it retains
the fault in current law the
state engineer hearing should be
held in the county where the
water right is located.
The substitute also would amend
seventy two to sixteen to allow
the state engineer hearings to
be conducted by video conference
or in person in Santa Fe for
good cause shown this would
conform the statutes to allow
hearings to be held by video
conference as as the agency has
conducted them during the
pandemic over the last year so
we would just want to formalize
this in law to allow us to have
that option and the amendment
also is needed to address an
imbalance in the current law
which on its face allows any
single party to a state
engineering to a hearing front
of us to detail Holden hearing
by video conference it's more
appropriate for the location of
the state engineer and speak
governed by the good cost
standard that set out in this
substitute bill so Mr chairman
hopefully upgrade will be on to
answer questions if he's on the
phone but otherwise we can stand
for questions thank you.
The state engineer.
For the reference of the
committee members Representative
Stansbury please be the to one
nine number twenty seven.
Yes I am Mr chairman the the
substitute number is two two
zero one seven three point two.
Very well thank you very much in
the US to add representative and
read for go to the audience.
That's.
Thank you very much thank you us
engineer that's then now move to
the attendees list all those in
attendance this good morning
thank you for joining us let's
move then to all those that are
in support of house the
committee steps to to house bill
two nine eight please raise your
hand at all of those in support.
Okay.
All those in opposition to the
committee substitute for House
Bill two ninety.
Okay so we have some hands going
up we'll go one by one down the
list let's begin with AJ.
Olson AJ.
Good morning.
You're with us good morning.
Mr chair thank you for the
opportunity to appear today in
opposition to the proposed bill
I must note that the prior to
this morning's announcement.
we had the people that I work
for had no knowledge of a
committee substitute that sent
to I am a practicing attorney in
Roswell I've been here thirty
seven years and primary of my
practice all these years and.
merrily associated in field
water.
Representative municipalities
government agencies individuals.
From.
Wake county to Luna Grant
County.
In matters involving the
groundwater and surface waters
Hey because of the Canadian real
grand the healer.
The.
Chapter seventy two article two
of three.
Of the statutes annotated.
Ramp the engineer the authority
to formulate rules and
regulations.
and governing administrative
hearings.
That has been placed on the
reason for that.
Yes to ensure that the
individuals with an interest in
Water Rights.
Are given an opportunity for due
process
to present their case and the
president of the proposed bill
as it was presented to us
certainly did not meet that
criteria.
I appear before you today as
general counsel for the Texas
valley artesian Conservancy
district.
Compasses lands and constituents
and Chavis and Eddy County.
Properly hundred thousand
constituents.
Incomes Jane approximately a
hundred and ten thousand acres
of irrigated lands.
As early as nineteen ninety one
the state engineer have
regulations in place governing.
Of the administrative hearings
in the methodology of what they
would be conducted including the
location.
In two thousand fourteen
actually in two thousand
thirteen the.
Engineer promulgated the new
role are requiring that all
hearings would be conducted in
Santa Fe unless otherwise
ordered by the hearing examiner.
Laughter.
The language of the present
seventy two to sixteen.
David was
Past what came through this
committee.
A pastor both so chambers and
was signed into law in twenty
fifteen.
That set the standard that the
party is that the hearing would
take place in the county where
the water right was administered
I'm sorry judicata permitted
etcetera let's otherwise.
stipulated by the parties and
that methodology is been
followed and has been successful
I need to point out that since
twenty fifteen.
It has been common practice for
the state engineer officer the
hearing unit.
A hearing examiner which is our
employees of the state engineer
office.
I'm gonna ask you conclude you
Madam Sir yes our position is
simply that this that this
legislation is not needed sure
that it's governed and we have a
practice in place that works
successfully for all the parties
concerned and we would asset to
this matter the table thank you
thank you it's going to be
Rivera Tiffany good morning.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee thank you for the
opportunity to comment this
morning my name is Tiffany
Rivera and then the registered
lobbyists for New Mexico
formalized Act bureau we
respectfully standing in
opposition to house bill two
ninety eight this morning this
bill removes the protections
that were put into place five
years ago when Senate bill two
seventy six was passed in twenty
fifteen there is a reason that
Senate bill two seventy six was
passed was because the
legislature recognized and
understood that the office of
the state engineer was placing
an undue burden on anyone that
was involved in a hearing before
them the costs are considerable
when traveling to Santa Fe is
required especially for many of
our rural communities who have
to drive over four hours and are
required to stay in Santa Fe
which has some of the highest
lodging rates in the state.
Well allowing for video hearing
seems reasonable it should be
noted how unreliable.
Access it and this morning is a
great example with Mister
Ridley's connection issues.
Further the OSCE in the state
agency that works on the behalf
of New Mexico residents and it
should be of the utmost
importance for them to have the
continued presence across the
state well continuing to build
relationships with the citizens
they serve and that is best done
in person thank you for the
opportunity to comment this
morning.
Thank you Mr I have a great day
let's go to Lauren Patterson.
Thank you chairman Lente and
members of the committee our.
In order in respect with that
the sponsor may only Stansbury
and on behalf of New Mexico
cattle growers association we
stand in opposition of this bill
we believe that the localized
impacts the decisions of the
office of the state engineer has
and that the fact that the
impacted parties live in the
water basin scattered with it
throughout the state.
And that the state engineer has
branch locations in various
water districts throughout the
state.
We do all that that the undue
burden on the impacted parties.
Would cause that problems with
with.
Presenting their cases that's
why state in New Mexico cattle
growers out stand in opposition.
Although we believe the
substitute bill is a better bill
we still stand in opposition
thank you chairman.
Thank you Lauren the school then
to cement the forecast was
forecast in the morning good
morning Mr chair members of the
committee Samantha barn castle
again for the LA communication
district we're located in the
lower Rio Grande in southern New
Mexico and we served thousands
of farmers to farm ninety
thousand six hundred forty acres
of agriculture ground.
Filing applications for
transfers of water rights is a
regular routine business down
here in access to the courts is
essential to achieving due
process.
Years ago in the legislature and
originally enacted this law it
was it was under the
understanding that access to the
state engineers hearing process
is the same as access to court
it is necessary to protect
property rights it is necessary
to allow due process to
litigants before the state
engineer and requiring those
litigants to travel all the way
to Santa Fe hall all of their
witnesses and evidence that
there including local OSC
staffers who would otherwise be
in the local area where the
water right is located is
unreasonable for the same
reasons that other people have
mentioned this morning I would
know that we were not provided a
copy and it is not online of the
committee the substitute so I
have not been able to evaluate
that but I will say that in
rural areas there are
significant hurdles to achieving
a stable internet connection in
so I even though I am a
practicing attorney I have an
issue with having a stable
internet connection in a rural
area where I live on a farm so
much so that I have three
different internet connections
that I have to maintain in order
to make sure that on any given
day I can for sure connect to
the internet to get to a court
hearing or something else going
on not many others can can
afford to do that and so when
you're talking about rural
farmers in rural areas or other
rule introduce or water right
owners I Representative small
municipalities also well I'm not
here on behalf of them today
many of them have the same
issues as some of these smaller
farmers do requiring them to
just pick everything up in a
whole lot to Santa Fe for
sometimes weeks at a time is
incredibly unreasonable and
expensive and what amounts to a
denial of due process and for
that reason today we oppose this
bill I would need to look at the
language specifically on the
issues related to the internet
access and.
When hearings but it does still
seem reasonable that if one
party cannot ensure that they
have adequate internet access
that they should be able to say
no we need to have the hearing
here in person I think that's
appreciate you being here let's
go to Beverly.
Good morning good morning thank
you Mr chairman members of the
committee I'm just really in
sync that executive director of
dairy producers of New Mexico we
respectfully oppose H. B. two
ninety eight for all the reasons
stated we really need to keep
the hearings in the county where
the water right besides just not
but and and you burden on our
producers thank you.
Thank you Beverly looks like we
are at the end of our list.
Your time Mr Chairman okay
seeing no others in the
attendees list let's go been
back to our committee
Representative Stansbury
digested in math to add before
we go to the committee yes Mr
chairman if it's okay I think it
would be helpful for the public
since the order was not posted
publicly if you would permit me
it's only two sentences I I'd
like to read the two sentences
on page a lot of the public
comment focused on so that the
public can hear what the sub is
actually proposing sure please
do okay and so I know a lot of
the public comment that we just
heard was about undue burden and
keeping the statute in place
that that that says that the
hearing shall be held in the
county so what the subs States
on page two it holds intact the
existing statute so says hearing
shall be held in the county in
which the water right at issue
is adjudicated licensed or
permitted and less and then it
strikes in the existing statute
the parties and state engineer
stipulate another site for the
hearing and instead replaces
that language so it holds in
place the statute about holding
in the county and then says and
last and this is the new
language any party demonstrates
good cause for holding the
hearing via video conference
support in Santa Fe so I thought
it would be helpful for the
public to hear that the new
language really just optimizes
flexibility at the request of
the parties involved.
Thank you very much
Representative let's not go to
the committee and for questions
and answers could represent is
out.
Of course Mr chairman thank you
very much.
Representative Stansbury I have
read your committee substrate
are read the ritual bills are
read the substitute bill and I
do not like this this bill was
passed in two thousand fifteen
whenever I was chair of the
house agriculture water
committee and those people
voting on it Representative
bandy you representative Randy
Crowder.
Representative and the new news
Representative Bob Willie.
Representative bill mccamley
Representative George Dodge
representative bill Gomez
Representative Bobby Gonzalez
and Representative Donna Irwin
and it was a unanimous vote to
his past this particular bill Mr
Chairman we have seen with this
pandemic going forward.
How many rural people have been
affected.
By not having internet access.
And I would like to Mr chairman
with your permission I would
like to just the state engineer
how many district offices are
there right now.
Thank you.
Mr Chairman representative that
we have a we have seven district
offices and state New Mexico of
that can I did kind of dress
something Mister chair I needed
service it's representatives
time to speak you had your
chance that present your bill
earlier Representative Ezzell
the floor is yours thank you Mr
chairman I would also like yes
this is.
John where these seven different
offices are located.
Mr Chairman Representative
Ezzell we have a the district
one offices in Albuquerque
district two in Roswell.
we have a
Los crucis district office we
have a damn district office we
have the Cimarron district
office we also have an aspect
district office
Did I mention Santa Fe I think I
think those are the district
offices.
So Mister chairman of I would
also like to just the state
engineer how many people Office
of the State entered into near
employees.
Mr chairman Representative
Ezzell we have three hundred
forty two authorized positions
with about sixty vacancies so if
you do the math on that
Hi to hundreds.
Okay thank you very much for
that report.
Mr chairman and.
Representative Stansbury
Stansbury.
I am bothered by the language on
page two I do not like this
language I think it opens it up
for any body to make protest
whenever you are stating and
this is on the last word online
I page two.
Because you have stricken the
parties the state engineer
stipulate stipulated that the
site for the hearing test
stricken that but the language
prior to it hearing shall be
held in the county which the
water right at issue is the
judicata licensed or permitted
unless any party demonstrates
good cause for holding the
hearing via video conference or
is said by that language bothers
me greatly we know every one of
us know that there are special
interest groups out there.
That whenever you say in the
party I am very very concerned
about that we have people living
out more rural areas that will
not be able to afford to come up
to Santa Fe and sit in on a any
hearing that affects them
directly.
Whenever there's a need to be
home taking care of business on
him because those are the ones.
That their livelihood is at
risk.
I have very sketchy internet
service at where I live and I'm
not that far outside of rules
will Representative Allison
constituents would be faced with
the same thing chair
Representative Zamora
Representative Brown
Representative small all of
their constituents will be
affected by this Mr Chairman
representative Stansbury.
I just feel like we're putting
an undue burden on those that
are going to be affected the
most whenever the state office
of the state engineer does have
the resources available after he
said there was closed two
hundred and eighty some odd
employees that he has working
for him in the various office
locate lost buses located in
Albuquerque rules will us crucis
dimming Cimarron as taken Santa
Fe.
Why are we putting the burden on
the person that is that is
suspected meadows.
To me this is just another wage
that is being driven between.
Those affected parties at the
office of the state engineer.
Mr chairman and.
Representative Stansbury.
The state engineer works for the
people of the state of New
Mexico not the other way around
and I take great offense to this
especially if I'm just trying to
get a crop out of the field and
I have to shut down and get my
happy put up your to Santa Fe I
am not happy about this all at
all I stand in strong opposition
to it thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Representative Ezzell
let's go to Representative
Brown.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative Stansbury so.
And quite frankly a a fan of the
office of the state engineer I I
think the work that's done is
crucial to New Mexico
I know that they
they are to some extent
understaffed as are a lot of our
state agencies so I I understand
all of those things but I'm I'm
going to agree with
Representative Ezzell of the
comments that she just made I I
do not think that this bill is
in the direction of goodness I
think that wherever the water
right issue exists is where the
hearing should be held not just
because that's where the the
main party is but the neighbors
are it's quite possible that the
examiners do to go out to a
field or something in and
inspect something to understand
the issue better so I see this
as giving too much
influence over the logistics of
the hearing to it says any party
all right so that's pretty vague
and I think that could meet
anybody who just wants to object
and I think that
disenfranchises
the the parties that are really
truly part of of this discussion
and need to be part of it so
I I understand the desire to
economize to some extent but I
think we're going to lose a lot
of slide and from water rights
holders if they're told that
either they go to Santa Fe or
they have to go through a video
conference.
Is this morning Mr chairman I I
couldn't even get on the
internet in my office I was able
to get on my computer but not my
I pad.
And we had to hunt and search
here at the office for this
committee substitute we we were
able to find it we finally did
get a copy just a couple minutes
ago so I there are all kinds of
issues with all this electronic
stuff that we're doing and
nonetheless Mr chair I really
think we need to make sure that
emitters go out to the counties.
It's important for them to get
out and and see and and need
person to person and and resolve
these issues so I'm I'm not
gonna be able to support this
bill I hope that the rest of the
committee will side with
the water rights owners and
again I think the Nibert
connection is really important
Mr Chairman representative
Stansbury
a lot of people are going to be
able to get involved in these
hearings.
Of because of of
Issues with the internet and
If anything this this
legislative legislative session
is showing us that so.
things are not very smooth yet
can't rely on our technology
very much thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Representative Brown
that's good Representative
Matthews.
Thank you thank you and Mr
chairman members of the
committee
How how many cases are
adjudicated a year how many how
many trials are you having or
educations are you having.
Mr chairman with your permission
since this is an agency bill can
I just a for to the experts to
answer.
You.
Go ahead Mr ritually Dantonio Mr
Chairman this is Greg Ridgely
can you hear me now you know yes
Sir I apologize again for the
earlier problem
The.
In the last year we have
exclusively conducted hearings
by the Video Conference and I
think the number is
approximately twenty different
hearing.
And.
Thank you thank you.
The state.
Great Mr is the absurdity
Representative Matthews Greg you
seem to have a really unreliable
to the to the point of this
conversation internet connection
and you keep dropping and now
with the audio so perhaps we
want to add different method
maybe perhaps calling it would
be an option but Representative
Matthews please continue.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you for should be
demonstrating Mr Ridgway the
problem with the technology
unfortunately
I I wonder if is this supposed
to be a cost saving move is
active the rationale behind the.
Legislation.
Mr Chairman Representative
Matthews is a it is a cost
saving moves and I and I I
apologize for not having the
time the for everybody to look
at the committee substitute
because I think when you look at
the committee substitute and we
do retain that the fault in the
current law that we're going to
hold a hearing in the county
that it is is that there's a
there of the only the only
difference here and and I think
most of the comments of coming
in because they look they're
looking at the original bill
this bill is been changed back
to make sure that the default is
in the county of what it does is
it job it allows for a video
conference to be held which
would be a cost savings of four
people traveling up if they
don't want to travel up we get
to go over video conferencing
but it would be it would be more
of a consensus decision right
now there's in a multi party
hearing what winds up happening
is one party has a the ability
to veto a so let me let me give
you a.
Better answer even
Representative Matthews with
respect to the big hearings one
of the huge hearings that we had
on the
On one of the pipeline projects
that was down in in south
western New Mexico there was
hundreds of protest ends and we
we healthy hearing in Sapporo
just to make sure that everybody
had easy access and we will
continue to do that so it's not
it's not about not being in the
county it just gives us some
additional options and and those
options are cost savings to the
state engineers office we only
have two hearing officers we
have to pick up and go of the
recent reliability of of Mr
Bates lease audio is is not the
same a system that we have in
place for hearings that we
conducted several hearings we
have back up opportunities but
it is a cost savings for not
only the applicants that don't
have to travel to Santa Fe and
if it if it's a consensus is for
everybody we will have what will
have still mostly hearings
within the counties where the
Water Rights prostatic protested
so we did not have time to work
the amendments because we had to
get him in this morning but up I
would
the stop there with the answer
but
Mr chairman I think we just
didn't have adequate time to go
over these I think a lot of the
comments are based on on that
original of bill that has been
altered to take into
consideration not only cost
savings but the just some
flexibility within our hearing
process these.
Is thank you Mr chairman at.
State engineer I I'm actually a
little confused by your lips I'm
confused by your answer
me and my screen back up
is is is the rationale for this
cost saving to the state
engineers officer cost saving to
the local litigants.
Mr chairman of Representative
Matthews it's the it's the ball
so we've done an analysis on on
having a default location and
we're looking at how much the
holding the hearings in Santa Fe
would eliminate travel expenses
of for our free hearing units
person which is about six
hundred forty dollars a day up
but also it would eliminate the
just a couple challenges of
hotel accommodations for the
those that are coming to of from
other areas of the state so
again you're coming in from from
Lee County or others it's it's
hard for some of the protests to
participate by coming in the
Santa Fe so would preclude them
from having to get hotel rooms
in Santa Fe to do the hearing
also so it can be a cost savings
if it's important enough to be.
When the multi party discussions
go on with our hearing units and
and we we if we realize the it's
it's better to have the hearing
in the county which is probably
gonna be ninety plus percent of
it we will have those hearings
in a county where the water
rights are are located.
That makes a lot of sense we're
just trying to get an
opportunity to have an option on
a video conference of if it's if
it makes sense for everybody.
So I hope that's clear but it is
a cost savings or can be a cost
savings for everybody involved.
I'm.
Mr chairman thank you for that
answer.
Mr Dantonio
And I practice law I did
litigation and frequently
travels throughout the state to
do that and there is a real
difference in being in the
community.
Just my personal experience it
was a real difference in being
in the community where something
had occurred where the people
were located
in terms of the for the.
I know what to call it maybe
distant this sense of
connection.
And it just seems to me that the
show kinds of proceedings and I
realize years are not exactly
like a court but but it seems to
me that
people do have a right to have
cases that.
Them be heard in the place where
they are particularly when it
involves land and property
rights
It and the other thing that
should bother some to me here is
that
it it it kind of feels like
based upon the comments we were
hearing some of the emails I was
getting prior to the hearing
that that this wasn't that it
very well in advance to talk to
the stakeholders and see if you
could reach an agreement I mean
it seems to me different to.
I have a stipulation that one
particular witness for example
could appear by video conference
or whatever versus having entire
hearings so
said so I'm I'm troubled by this
because I think there is value
in local communities being the
site of resolution of of local
dispute
and so with that I will
with asking questions you to
someone else.
Thank you Representative
Matthews this Representative
Zamora up.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Representative Stansbury and and
State engineer John bill
o'neill.
I am too concerned about this
bill.
I think it looks better the the
substance looks better than the
our bill but we still have a lot
of work to do on it.
We're we're we're presenting
this bill Representative
Stansbury we're we're we're
presenting this bill at a time
where we know.
That we still have a lot of
rural areas of the state that
need fiber optic so they can
have good service on their
internet and their computer or
something so they could attend
something like this.
How do you feel.
About that being.
The about that affecting the
people of the state and being
able to do this to the internet
and then.
With that being said do you not
believe that it's gonna affect.
The more rural and and the.
And the poor part of the state
the poor residents of the state.
Mr chairman and representative
Stansbury.
Raise an answer that question.
Sure sure Mr chairman of
Representative Zamora thanks for
your question I of.
Again I I think of what we're
doing of this year and this past
year in accommodating a lot of
the important work that we have
to continue to do and and
holding the hearings by video
conferencing it's been very
successful and we haven't had
any we haven't had any problems
we put some redundancies in
place and and so it's allowed us
to continue to move forward the
the only thing we're looking for
now is to have that option to
consider to continue this after
the pandemic of you know
Representative Ezzell asked
about our water rights division
offices and water is critical
and we left our our district
offices open in every part of
the state with limited contact
but the ability to to continue
to service the public so we we
understand the accessibility
issue like I said before we
anticipate the vast majority of
of hearing still to be in those
counties were dealt with the
protests are this was just given
as an option and again we don't
have an opportunity to the bill
got amended yesterday and and
dropped sort of late of we we
would.
we were not have the votes today
I can already see that but up I
think I think we just didn't
have enough time to work and
explain the amendment because I
think it's what address
everybody's concern on
defaulting to the county
so also out there Mr Chairman.
Mr chair and the.
Mr state engineer another big
issue that I see throughout the
state and is is computer
literacy.
And and how are we going to get
the.
Somebody that's not computer
literate.
To participate and keep up with
with the Video Conference.
The.
When when there's one going on
how can you explain to me how
how that might would happen.
Mr state engineer and Mr.
Sure Mr Chairman representative
more a it it happens frequently
I mean the most most of the
parties are represented by so
when we when we set these
hearings up we set him on video
conferencing most are
represented by counsel they all
have adequate connections to
participate we haven't had we
haven't had any problem and been
quite successful and and
allowing for that to happen so
we've we we do accommodates of
the parties all the parties to
make sure they have of you know
they have the the correct access
information of the hearings and
they'll if they don't have
personally they'll go through
their representatives we have a
these are full blown hearing
she's got technical
representatives professionals
that are representing of the
parties in protest and so they
do have they do have access
you know I'm I know Mister Olson
testified here I mean you know
he's typically idea member and a
lot of these parties a lot of
these are approaches that
applications and so you do have
those professionals that have
access that
you know that's that are
participating in the hearing so
so if if the protest and so
don't have it personally they
will get it through through
their up.
Connections with either their
legal or technical experts to
have the hearing.
And thank you for that answer
and and Mr chair and Mr
Dantonio.
Some of the some of the less
fortunate people don't have the
money to to get counseling and
and to get somewhere you know
four or they would be.
At a level playing field but I
can see a problem with that I'll
go on to further.
What you talked about having
just to hearing officers and and
that they have to travel
throughout the state.
The earlier in your testimony
can the.
It do you have the ability.
To put more hearing officers in
place.
Or or is that are you restricted
by your budget or or what's the
reason for that.
Mr Chairman representative
tomorrow we do have a vacancy
for another hearing officer
ideally if we could get
that that that position hired
but yeah we don't have a we
don't have approval and we've
got other key positions that are
vacant that are a higher
priority than that particular
one and so right now we're we're
sort of holding our own but that
there is a concern of of getting
additional hearing the officers
in the future so that we can of
the more timely in our in our
decision making so that is a
problem plus the travel expenses
associated with that it cuts in
our budget to be get done
Nichols and dined everywhere of
the pandemic it's it's it gets
increasingly harder to go out
and make those make those trips
we have to hearing officers that
would have to go out to with
within assistance and so there's
three people and the the per
diem pieces are there of and so
again we would continue to do
that we would find the money in
our budget to continue to do
that this substitute bill would
just give us that opportunity to
hold video conferences when but
it's in the best interest of all
parties and I and I think that's
that's an important concept here
is that all the parties would
agree right now the way it's
written in a lot of it's that
it's in the best interest of of
everybody well in a multiparty
suit because there's several
protest and sometimes you know
if one party just disagrees if
you have to go ahead and hold it
in in that particular county of
New and again we're going to try
to make the best decision of for
all for a fair hearing and I
like I said ninety plus percent
of the hearings would probably
still be in the county where the
protests were filed.
And thank you for that answer Mr
Dantonio and and Mr chair.
You know the the internet is
something we can we get the set
here and argue about all day
we're having.
All these a hybrid meetings or
yes meeting so I guess you could
say in the in the legislature
today and we've seen the issues.
Which is.
Not life and death right but.
It was it was bad
I don't know if you'd call it
luck or misfortune that that
the.
Mr regions bridge lease internet
broke down today and and wasn't
able to.
To work in the meeting like it
like you wished it would of
especially on this bill.
It is a and it's a serious
matter we can we can laugh a
little bit about it.
But the.
That's very concerning.
And and and more concerning
because as I know you could
delay or May Day is fixed the
problem and and carry on with
the meeting and stuff but it's
still an issue.
In the then the biggest issue of
that is is that we know a lot of
people the state don't have.
The internet capability so
that's that's just not fair
across the board there's just
not so so maybe this is
something for the future
I'm sure I'm sure if it doesn't
pass day it'll be looked at
again.
It's it's the technology we have
today and it's we just need to.
Get it.
Up to par where everybody's
content with that and and happy
with the okay to deal with that
the letter in letter C. and and
the places of the state where we
don't have the internet are big
concerns to me and and the
wording on page two word says
any party we've we've all seen
as.
Private.
Water right holders what can
happen.
When somebody on the other side
of the state or neighbor that
just doesn't like you or you
know and and we have to contend
of those things but we're
opening this up to any party
across the state and they don't
even have to make an effort.
So when they don't have to make
an effort they're more likely to
come up to the to the table and
just put issues on the table
that are gonna affect people's
business that they have worked
hard all their lives for.
I can see it big time in that
community.
In order it would it would
affect individuals trying to
make the levy that but their
hearts and souls into their
business and and that there has
to be better language but we put
together on that
And with that I I believe
that that covers most of my
concerns and the thank you Mr
chair and thank you Mr Dantonio.
Representative Stansbury thank
you Representative is a moron
and before we go back to
Representative Isabella brown
and Representative Herrerra at
this point it it just seems like
there are a lot of concerns
related to this bill
and not just from the from the
committee's perspective I think
in terms of the questions that
that's evolving now but also
from the public comment that we
just had and so I'm I'm
wondering I'm from from the
sponsor would you like to just
roll this bill work on this
during the interim with the or
with your agency Sanchez well
and Representative come back
next that.
Yes thank you Mr chairman and if
I could just take a moment I'd
like to the state for the
committee and especially those
who have a longer history on
this issue that I wasn't aware
of the history and how it came
to be and I'm really grateful
for and the feedback and for the
public comment and I think
obviously there's a lot more
discussion to be had and
consultation with stakeholders
so I appreciate the opportunity
and I think we'll roll the bill.
Very well I appreciate that
consideration and and by all
means I mean I hope this is not
a reflection of that we don't
trust you Mr state engineer we
don't we don't value what you
find for the state I think we we
look to you for your expertise
technical legal your whole team
is is who is who we need on our
side but at the same time we
want to make sure that we are
protecting our constituencies
that we come to Santa Fe are we
Representative through our own
offices as well and so with that
being said I hope you understand
that perhaps this is something
that during the interim so you
can work with with the with the
although that may be affected so
that we don't have this type of
issue and and and with Mr
racially get a better internet
connection while you're at it
is.
Appreciate that precede you
Representative Stansbury
Representative Mr the Antonio
but I do want to at least if if
the representative Ezzell brown
and interest was just be.
Nope okay Representative no okay
very well thank you also very
much for for your
presentation this morning and
for all of our committee members
at this point we have reached
the end of our referred.
Bills and so we will take up
anything that comes after us
after this as they do come and
so we will call a committee we
will not have a compact right
now we want we will meet
Saturday I went you'll have a
week and and then anything that
comes up we will meet we will
come back next Tuesday as I
systems up but that
Representative Ezzell did you
have something to add then.
Mr Chairman yes I do if I may
just have a moment Mr chairman I
want to tell the other members
of our committee that they have
really.
Stepped up and done a good job
about me whenever we have debate
yes I'm very passionate about
water and agriculture in our
state people know that but I I
want to commend all the the
members that are on here that.
Have really taken an interest on
this and add a lot to our
discussions so I do appreciate
that Mr chairman thank you very
