Representative Herrera,
Representative Lara Kadena.
Representative Matthews.
Representative Moya, here.
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Rubio here,
ranking member Zamora, here.
Madam Vice Chair Kate's here.
Madam Chair Ortiz, here.
Great, we have a quorum. Uh,
we're gonna switch things around
on the agenda today, we'll hear
Senate Bill 1001. Uh, thank you,
ladies for being here. Why don't
you go ahead and explain your
bill?
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, this
bill is, is super simple. It
increases the uh debt limit from
80 million to 100 or a MAFCA,
which as many of you may know,
it, they helps and it really
affects all of Albuquerque. Um,
they have the board has not
raised the milage rate for debt
repayment in 25 years, so it
demonstrates it's that simple.
We're just asking for approval
to raise that limit. uh,
Representative Barrego, do you
have anything to add?
Oh, thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for hearing our bill,
um, former MAFCA board member
for the last for 6 years and uh
supporting this bill. Thank you.
Thank you. OK, we're gonna go to
um public comment. Uh if you're
if you're supportive of this
bill, raise your hand.
You'd like to speak? Would you
like to speak on the record?
OK. Yes? No? OK. All right, uh,
we'll go to Zoom. Is there
anyone on Zoom who would like to
speak in support of this bill.
Madam Chair, we do have one
person, uh, Christina, you'll
have one minute, uh, when you
are unmuted.
Please see for this. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Can you hear me?
Can you hear me? Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Christina Fisher, Associate
director of Think New Mexico.
Happy to be here to support the
bill virtually. Um, so back in
2005, I think New Mexico worked
with legislators of both parties
and a broad coalition of
stakeholders to enact the
legislation creating the
strategic water reserve. In the
years since then, it has proved
to be a valuable tool to help
keep a little
Oh, I apologize.
Sorry about that.
Sorry about that. No worries.
that concludes our public
comments that time of the year.
Set time of the session. OK,
anyone in opposition to this
bill in the room.
On Zoom in opposition.
OK.
We're gonna go to uh members of
the committee. If you have any
questions?
Representative Zamora Madam
Chair.
That's a great, um, that's a
great thing to say, but I think
we do have some questions. We'll
hold on to that motion. Uh,
we'll go to Representative
Matthew's first and then
Pettigrew.
Uh, thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair and
thank you.
Um
My
So, um,
You're gonna increase the debt
limit.
For a mask by another $20
million is that what's?
Madam Chair, we're so what is
the additional money for?
Madam Chair. Madam Chair and a
representatives over the years,
um, Maca's, uh, storm drains
have deteriorated and so our
construction costs have
increased also and so that
basically is what we.
Need the money for and I say we,
I'm sorry, what they need the
money. uh man of chair
presenters if uh if uh if one of
my constituents.
120, sorry, 120 million. It is
the session is anyway, 120
minutes. What?
How would I describe to them
what they got for them. Madam
Chair, I would describe to them
that it's an additional $40
million and that, um, our costs
of construction have increased
and maintenance. So I think that
that's.
Well, that's pretty the economy.
Oh
Madam Chair, all the floodwater
arroyos in Albuquerque, and
there's many of them, um, North
Domingo Baca, the Calabasas, if
you think about the west side in
particular, the West Side has
grown exponentially, and so
there's additional um need.
And the Southwest Mesa as well.
So there's a lot of new flood
control facilities on the
southwest tying them, I
understand, but Madam Chair, um,
representative, yes. Additional
maintenance on the, in the
Northeast heights, because those
are already many of them are
already existing in royals, um,
and there's been a lot of
deterioration because many of
them are old.
And the cement crumbles, even
though they look natural
sometimes, um, there's cement
underneath.
So, uh, then they cover them up
with dirt and debris, just to
make them look natural.
Great.
Um manager chair representative,
I'd like to add that in, in my
I also forgot to mention Mrs.
Del Sol, which is a whole new
community.
questions.
Um, they're clarifying for me.
I don't have
If I understand this correctly,
you guys, uh,
Al
Represent
Um, back to that, have you done
some polling with
Uh, Madam Chair representative,
we haven't done that yet.
Madam Chair and, and senators.
I'm not, I'm not the person that
votes for a bill because I
haven't read it.
uh, or, or we haven't acted on
it. I, I'm not as closely.
Um
So
With that
The construction, I understand
the increased construction
costs. I understand all the
issues and why you need more
money to be able to resolve
different issues out there.
Madam Chair and senators, could
you tell me how much money is
Albuquerque putting into this,
the city of Albuquerque and
Bernalillo County.
Um, appropriating to Masca every
year.
Um, Madam Chair, and, and
representative before I get into
that, I wanted to mention that
um the taxes are not going to be
increased. Uh, this is just, um,
expanding the bonding capacity.
And so that that would be my
first, my first response to your
question. And then your second
question was, how much, uh, what
is the debt, uh, the amount that
that.
So I guess I'm answering both
questions with that response.
Madam Chair and senators, uh.
We're going to raise to 120
million that we're increasing
the indebtedness by $40 million.
When a bond is is past.
It increases the debt limit.
So, with respect to that, I'm
fine.
As long as, as the uh
The uh property owners get that
opportunity to say yes or no to
that.
My second part of the question
specifically was how much money
What, what, what skin does
Albuquerque and Bernardino
County.
So it's um 67,
let's see, 6.75% per meal.
Points.
0.675. Sorry.
Haven't had a second cup of
coffee yet.
And I'm sure and and senators I
understand how the math works.
We'll skip that part of the
question. Let's go to the, the
serious question. How much skin
in the game does the city of
Albuquerque and Bernaleo County
have with respect to the Arroyo
flood control.
Um, Mr. Chair, Madam Chair, and,
uh, uh
representatives representative,
yeah, um, pedigree, um.
The city of Albuquerque
basically, they have their own
funding AAA has its own funding.
Um, oftentimes they work
together to, you know, depending
on the project and the, and the
amount, um, they work together
sometimes to build or construct,
but it's not always, it's
usually aAFCA that's building
these arroyos.
So it's pretty much on AAA's
back.
In Madam Chair, um,
Representative Pettigrew, I will
add that if we actually did the
math from the 80 million that
was put in place 25, it would
actually be with inflation 125
million, but we're asking. So
we're being as conservative, um,
so that we're not affecting, but
it's, it's really needed. I
mean, 80 million isn't.
And he works.
Madam Chair and senators.
Don't get me wrong, I'm not
opposed to this bill at all. I'm
just trying to understand and
make sure that
Everybody's coming to the table.
I'm, I'm confident that the AAA
or the Amaca is working in uh
and getting as much as they can
with respect to federal funds
for
math got a hopefully.
Um, at the end of the day, any
of these royals that we've just
described ultimately affect the
residential of
The main metropolis area. That's
the reason why I asked her how
much is Albuquerque bringing to
the table with that?
And then the other side of this.
The arroyos outside of the
Metropolitan, how much is
currently up to that.
I don't have an issue with.
us as property owners, paying
taxes to protect our property. I
don't have an issue with that,
but I also believe that because
we pay taxes as the city level
and the county level, there
should be some skin in the game
with, with, with what we pay for
those taxes that help with
infrastructure. That's the
reason why I'm asking the
question. I want to make sure.
Um, this isn't another thing
where um
Albuquerque relies on somebody
else to pay the bill or burn Leo
really just like we do in so
many other areas.
Madam Chair and
a pedigree was that a question
then? No, it's, it's, it's my
perspective on things if you
want to respond to it, you're
welcome to AAA, and I just want,
I want them to give you a quick
overview of their budget and how
much they spend. Um, could you
come to the table that would be
up to the chair.
Very quickly.
Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Pettigrew, um, my
name is Kevin Troutman. I'm the
executive director of AMAFCA.
Uh, our budget for operations is
about 6 million a year, uh, our
construction funds, so this is
what uh the bonds will pay for
is about 12.5 million a year.
We're looking to increase that
to about 15 a year. That's the
reason for the debt limit
increase. Um,
Regarding the city of
Albuquerque in Burling County,
your question as to whether or
not they're contributing, there
are contributions. We are in a
uh cooperative program for EPA
for um stormwater compliance,
uh, and our EPA discharge permit
is all the uh organization
together, however, most of our
programs are separate.
Thank you very much. Thank you,
Madam Chair, for allowing me to
ask a few questions.
Uh, again, I'm not.
All the players have skin in the
game. Thank you.
It's a 22 pass motion on the
table. Do I have a second? Yes,
Madam Chair, I'd like to make a
2nd to the ranking members, uh,
motion. Thank you. Great.
Representative Matthews.
Representative Moya.
Yes.
Representative Pettigrew.
Yeah.
Representative Rubio.
Yes
Ranking member Zamora.
Madamba jokes? Yes.
Madam Ortiz, yes, uh, congrats,
you have a due pass on Senate
Bill 100.
Madam, thank you. Thank you.
Thank you.
OK.
Representative Dixon, whenever
you're ready on Senate Bill 37.
Uh, could someone save me a
jelly donut, please. Pardon me?
Could someone save me a jelly
doughnut, please. We will do, we
will do that. Representative
Dixon. Donuts only for the
presenters.
OK, Represent Dixon, whenever
you are ready on Senate Bill 37.
Thank you, Madam Chair. This is
the front of this committee.
Welcome.
Depends on if there are burritos
and doughnuts.
Um,
So, Madam Chair and members of
the committee, I have some
introductory comments, uh, that
I'd like to go through just to
sort of set the stage for the
bill, um, that way.
Hopefully we can answer some
questions along the way, um, and
then I can additionally weigh
in.
So
Um
To start, I'm joined by my, um,
experts, Lisa Haney, the general
counsel for the Interstate
Stream Commission and Angeli
Bean, the senior policy director
for the Healthy.
Healthy Rivers program at
Western Resource Advocates.
Um, so the strategic water
reserve. Let's make sure we're
all clear on that. Strategic
water reserve, uh, was
established by the legislature
in 2005, led by Representative
Joe Stelle, who some folks may
remember, um, and it was created
with broad bipartisan support.
The strategic water reserve
allows the interstate stream
commission to acquire water
rights through lease, purchase,
or donation for two purposes.
To support Innerstate Interstate
compact compliance or threatened
or endangered species, uh, in
order to prevent new listings of
animals to that list.
Um, Madam Chair and committee,
forward thinking legislators
recognized 20 years ago that
spending money today
to prevent costly and
time-consuming litigation and
other water conflicts is the
responsible thing to do.
In my mind this is precisely the
kind of tool we must ensure is
honed and ready to go to meet
the water challenges we are
facing today and down the road.
Over the past two decades, the
strategic water reserve has
become a valued tool to address
the water challenges we are
currently facing.
However, the reserve has
struggled to realize its full
potential. And so this bill aims
to make 3 improvements to the
program to ensure its
effectiveness.
First
Uh, this bill creates a
non-reverting fund.
Uh, this adjustment does not
come with any appropriation
request. It simply creates a
place for future appropriations
to be held to ensure the
interstate stream commission has
the flexibility needed to
complete these voluntary water
rights transactions.
Um, one of the things to note
with this, the reason to do this
is because frequently water
rights transactions will take
multiple years. And so if there
is not a non-reverting fund,
those monies could be reverted
before,
um, well, with that, the bill
sets a cap on this fund of $15
million and any appropriations
into the fund above this amount
would automatically revert.
Uh, this limit is in place to
protect legislative oversight
over large appropriations. The
goal is not to amass great sums
of money, but simply allow the
ISC to count on the funds
already appropriated being
available when those
transactions. Uh, 2, this is the
2nd uh improvement that we're,
uh,
That is included in this bill.
Um, is to add a third purpose to
the strategic water reserve to
benefit aquifer recharge.
Uh, there is significant surface
groundwater connection in many
places across the state, and as
our surface water supplies
decline are groundwater
resources become more important
than ever.
Uh, this purpose, um,
Sorry, uh, groundwater depletion
has had negative impacts on our
waterways ecosystems and
communities, and raising aquifer
levels supports the main purpose
of the strategic water reserve.
Higher groundwater levels in
surface water connected aquifers
can reduce losses in street in
rivers, meaning water is carried
downstream further and the
stream.
Adding interstate in stream
recharge would create a powerful
new tool to improve aquifer
health and further the existing
purposes of the strategic water
reserve.
The 3rd, um,
The 3rd main area of improvement
is to allow the interstate
stream commission to consider
supplementary benefits when
prioritizing funding.
So
As we move forward, um, this
change will allow the Interstate
stream Commission to prioritize
transactions that meet one of
the main purposes, so it has to
meet one of the main purposes.
But then could additionally
provide supplementary benefits.
So by doing that, we can provide
multiple benefits one
transaction, such as carrying
water further downstream for
agricultural purposes, ensuring
rivers are running when they
otherwise would be dry,
benefiting cultural practices.
or providing additional flows
that support recreational uses.
This multi-benefit approach is a
critical foundation for building
a secure water future. Senate
Bill 37 has thus far been
reviewed and debated uh by the
Senate Conservation Committee,
where it received an amendment
to speak to the issues raised by
the Office of the State
Engineer, um, and inst
interstate stream commission in
the FIR and the Senate Finance
Committee.
So, uh, Madam Chair and
committee, we
OK, we're gonna go to Public
Common.
Um
If you are in favor, raise your
hand.
Uh, if you'd like to speak, keep
your hand raised. We'll bring
the mic over to you. We hold the
mic.
One minute.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is JD Bullington, speaking
on behalf of the Greater
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce
that supports Senate Bill 37.
Uh, this bill augments and
supports the purpose of the
strategic water reserve, which
was created 20 years ago as
noted by establishing a viable
and responsible funding
mechanism to fulfill the mission
and purpose of that reserve.
Given our status as a state in
drought coupled with increasing
uncertainties about the future
sustainability of our water
resources, the timing of this
initiative is critical. This
bill will benefit not only our
native communities.
But it will also help ensure
that as New Mexico continues to
grow, our water resources will
be managed more efficiently in
both rural and urban areas while
protecting existing basins that
are critical to agricultural
communities and more heavily
populated.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee and the
sponsors. I'm Camila Feibelman,
director of the Sierra Club's
Rio Grande.
Chapter and we're strong
supporters of the strategic
water reserve generally, but I
wanted to tell a couple of
stories that the proponents of
the bill have told us about,
like the leasing of Hickory
Apache water rights previously
used at the San Juan generating
station that are now flowing
into the San Juan River.
This lease with up to 20,000
acre feet per year now provides
multiple benefits, including
protecting against future
litigation, but then take the
story of the dairy that was
willing to sell its water rights
to the Rio Grande, but that
moved on when the mud spill
really helps make sure we can do
these great water transfer.
Good morning, Chair, members of
the committee. My name is Tricia
Snyder. I'm the Rivers and
Waters Program director for New
Mexico Wild and a registered
lobbyist, we strongly support
Senate Bill 37, this improvement
to the existing strategic water
reserve tool emerged over a year
of broad stakeholder input. Um,
and while that we did hear a lot
of support for the in-stream
Aquifer recharge. We also heard
some concerns from uh our tea
and tribal partners about using
the strategic water reserve for
other aquifer recharge methods.
those proposed in this bill.
We're open to exploring those
other methods and other
contexts, but we believe that
the in-stream aquifer recharge
that's proposed in this bill
best aligns with the original
purpose of the strategic water
reserve, which is supporting
river flows to deliver on river
compact requirements and protect
endangered species.
Additionally, in stream aquifer
recharge and these original
purposes are well suited to
provide multiple benefits at
once, and this bill allows the
Interstate Stream Commission to
consider these multiple benefits
to
Prioritize water rights. Good
morning, members of the
committee. My name is Alison
Riley, public policy director
for the Mexico Chamber of
Commerce in strong support of
Senate Bill 37. Water is the
foundation of economic
development, and this bill
ensures that businesses,
farmers and communities have the
water security they need to
thrive. By creating the
strategic water reserve Fund.
This bill supports aquifer
recharge and groundwater
conservation, which stabilizes
water supplies for agriculture,
industry, and housing
development, which are key
drivers of
our economy. This bill also
protects New Mexico's ability to
compete with or yeah, you cane
by ensuring we comply with
interstate water agreements,
avoiding costly legal battles.
Senate Bill 37 supports job
creation industries like
recreation, conservation, and
infrastructure development, with
strong collaboration with local
governments, businesses, and
tribes. This bill makes water a
strategic asset for economic
growth, a secure water future
means a stronger economy, and
that's why we urge you, thank
you. Good morning, Madam Chair
and committee members and
sponsors on Jimberlier
registered lobbyist with the New
Mexico Association of Soil and
Water Conservation Districts
we'd just like to thank the.
for bringing this forward to
give a heightened awareness of
what's happening to our aquifers
around the state we feel this
could be a.
Another tool combined with
conservation to help.
Ease our water woes. Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Zoe Barker. I'm the
conservation director with
Conservation Voters New Mexico,
and for the sake of brevity
here, I will just say that we
strongly support this bill this
morning and encourage the
committee to do the same. Thank
you so much. Anyone else in the
room? We'll go to Zoom if you
are in favor.
Christina, uh, raise your hands.
Raise your hand.
Chair, we do have 7 folks you're
gonna handle Zoom. Please take
your number for the record and
you have one minute to speak.
Thank you, Madam Chair members
of the committee of Christina
Fisher, Associate Director of
Think New Mexico, and apologies
for jumping on the wrong bill
earlier. Um, but, uh, we worked
with uh a wide variety of
stakeholders, about 20 years ago
to develop the strategic water
reserve. Many of the folks
speaking in support today were
in support of the original
legislation, and it has proved
to be a valuable tool to keep a
little more water in our rivers,
um, for interstate compact and
ESA uh purposes, but what we
have seen over the last couple
of decades is ways in which it
could be improved, and those
are reflected in the bill that's
before you today. So very much
hope you'll support it. um I'm
glad to be standing with this
broad coalition again in support
of making some improvements on
the strategic water reserve.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Stephen Fry, and I'm
with Amigos Bravos and a
registered lobbyist, Amigos,
along with our partners, have
been working on this bill for
over a year. We have coordinated
with the ISC stakeholders in the
ag community, assekias and other
conservation groups. These
amendments increase the
functionality of the strategic
water reserve and its long-term
sustainabilities of water
management tool. In addition to
the other benefits mentioned, I
want to highlight the
prioritization of for
supplementary benefits. This
addition to the statute would
allow the ISC to prioritize
water transactions that benefit.
uses of water. An example would
be water is left in stream for
critical endangered species
habitat could also be used again
downstream to benefit
agriculture.
By focusing on opportunities
where water sports multiple
benefits. We can help our state
water managers meet as many
needs as possible for our local
communities and farmers, hunters
and anglers, and other
recreationists, while also
protecting important habitat for
New Mexico's famous flora and
fauna and ensuring New Mexico
meets its compact requirements.
I urge you to support Senate
Bill 37 and thank you for the
opportunity to speak.
Thank you. Next up we have Judy.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Judy Calman and I'm the
New Mexico policy director for
Audubon Southwest. Audubon works
to help birds in the places that
they need, and we do this in a
variety of ways, including by
working with private landowners
on habitat restoration and by
supporting programs which
bolster riparian ecosystems. 80%
of New Mexico's at-risk bird
species are completely riparian
dependent, and we know that
working to keep our rivers
healthy and flowing, not only
helps birds, but also helps
agricultural produce.
recreational river users and can
contribute to aquifer recharge.
So adding aquifer recharge is a
third purpose for the strategic
water reserve can support
endangered species, but can also
help carry water further
downstream where it can help
agricultural users. This new
purpose can provide.
The two existing purposes.
And we urge you to support the
bill. Thank you so much.
Thank you. Next up we have
Emily.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Emily Wolf, and I'm the
Rio Grande coordinator with
American Rivers. We're in strong
support of SB 37, which will
update the reserve statute to
address funding challenges and
program limitations so that we
can realize the reserve's full
potential. I facilitate the New
Mexico Aquatic Connectivity Team
where we're working with
communities to improve public
safety, fish passage, and
healthy ecosystems through
connectivity infrastructure
projects, but this is just one
side of the coin, a more robust
strategic water.
reserve fills a crucial gap in
fostering healthy rivers and
fulfilling water delivery and
wildlife needs as well as
supporting water rights holders
who are interested in utilizing
this voluntary tool. The update
to SV 37 through SB 37
strengthens the reserve in
several ways which carry
multiple benefits, ensuring our
communities, agriculture,
wildlife, and ecosystems get the
most benefit from the reserve.
Thank you for your support of
this bill.
Thank you. Next up we have
Brian.
Actually, yeah,
good morning, Madam Chair. This
is Deborah Condit. I represent
EDF Action Fund, and we're in
full support of Senate Bill 37.
New Mexico's groundwater and
surface waters are becoming
increasingly constrained due to
climate change and overuse.
Senate Bill 37 ads much needed
flexibilities to enable the
strategic water reserve to
continue to implement proactive
and adaptive water management,
allowing the reserve to support
aquifer recharge and reduce
groundwater.
Depletion for environmental
stream flow benefits,
acknowledges that groundwater
and surface waters are
fundamentally interconnected,
and the health of both will have
immediate and long-term impacts
on our ecosystems and the
environment, as well as our
community water security. In
this way, 7 Senate Bill 37
aligns with the original purpose
of the reserve to avoid water
management crisis and support
New Mexico's rivers and the
ecosystems that depend on them.
Thank you very much for the
opportunity.
Thank you. And next up we have
Oscar.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Oscar Simpson,
conservation chair, Rio Grande
Indivisible, for the reasons
already stated, we highly
recommend that you support how
Senate Bill 37 with its
amendment to allow aquifer
recharge. This is a critical
component for economic stability
in our air in our drying arid
climate. Thank you very much.
Thank you. Next up we have
LaDonna.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members.
My name is Ladonna Clayton and I
serve as the executive director
of the Ogallata Land and Water
Conservancy based in Clovis, New
Mexico here. Thank you for the
opportunity to speak in support
of Senate Bill 37. So 37
strengthens the strategic water
reserve by ensuring it can be
used not only to assist with
interstate compact compliance
and endangered species, Patrick
protection,
but also to support Aquifer
recharge and reduce groundwater
depletion. For over 3 years, I
have worked
directly with landowners, state
agencies, and federal partners
to implement long-term
groundwater conservation
solutions in eastern New Mexico.
We have seen firsthand how
proactive, voluntary water
management efforts can help
secure water for the future.
However, these efforts must be
reinforced by a strong policy
framework that supports local
and regional water security
encourages aquifer recharge and
ensures water conservation is
prioritized. SB 37.
that concludes them all public
comment.
Uh, thank you for that. If you
are opposed to this bill, you're
in the room, raise your hand.
Seeing none, anyone on Zoom in
opposition?
We do have one person on Zoom in
opposition. Deb, you'll have a
minute to speak and uh please
say your name for the record.
This is Deb Caldwell, and I'm
not in opposition, but it
appears that my hand wasn't
showing earlier. I did have a
public comment.
Uh, go ahead.
OK, um, as I said, um, good
morning, madam Chair and members
of the committee. My name is Deb
Caldwell, and I'm the executive
director for Friends of Boski
della Pache National Wildlife
Refuge as a nonprofit
organization since 1993, friends
supports Boyd Apache with
fundraising and advocacy, and we
promote the appreciation and
conservation of wildlife and the
riparian habitat upon which they
depend. We stand today in
support of SB 37. The strategic
water reserve is a tool that has
been around for decades, but we
believe that this bill is an
important step to improving its
effectiveness. One of the key
limitations of the strategic
water reserve has been ensuring
funding availability when the
voluntary water rights
transactions that it supports
become available.
Thank you. OK, uh, would the
sponsor like to address any of
the uh copious negative comments
about this bill.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I think
we're, we can go straight to
committee questions. OK, first
up is Representative Zamora.
OK, then we'll go to
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I
need to learn to not turn the
mic on until I move it.
Do you do?
Um
Madam Chair, Representative,
thank you so much for the bill.
Experts, thank you for being
here.
Uh, I have
Questions that hopefully can
clarify some things for me.
Madam Chair, I will start with
um
The purchasing of water rights.
With respect to like to send one
generating station, I think,
Madam Chair and Representative,
uh, that was a good use of, of
being able to do that.
Comment, uh, with respect to
the, to the dairy in Albuquerque
that move I think we can all
agree that force that came from
the environment department.
13 years ago to get rid of
dairies is the reason why they
went out of business, not for
any other reason.
Now that, now that we need cow
manure for biofuels, we're
trying to get dairies back.
Interesting how things turn
around.
Um
Madam Chair and Representative,
my first question is, can you,
your, the bill seems to be vague
in some areas, so.
Can Madam Chair, and
Representative, can you define
the benefits that the bill
doesn't really do a good job.
I believe it's in section 2. I
didn't write down line book and
page numbers, but we talked
about supplementary benefits and
prioritizing them.
So I think it's section 2, but I
could be wrong.
So, you're right, they are not.
Clearly identified of what exact
supplementary benefits there
are.
I want to make clear that these
are supplementary, that the,
the, but if there are some.
Madam Chair, uh, expert, thank
you so much for that answer. So,
Surely with the age of how long
this has been in place and been
working.
We have a few definitions of
what a supplementary benefit
would be. Can you give me a
couple of those?
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representatives. So, um, a
couple of supplementary, uh,
purposes, uh, could be cultural
or recreational in stream
purposes. So in terms of
in-stream, uh, that could be
fishing, boating, canoeing,
swimming, wildlife viewing,
nature study, etc.
Thank you very much, Madam Chair
and Representative for that
answer, um, I find it
interesting that many of our dry
ravines are still considered,
considered by, by at the
national and and the state
level, uh, navigable waters. So
actually, in much of
The federal aspect on in the EPA
which we've talked about on
several other water bills.
Um
I'm still trying to figure out
how we fish for sand trout, so,
uh, so, um, thank you for that
answer. Um,
Madam Chair and Representative,
the bill specifically
Removes the sacs from
Any of this conversation.
Can you tell me, Madam Chair,
and Representative.
Why we can do that with the
psychos.
Um, but not in other areas and
why that's important.
Madam Chair, Representative
Pettigrew, that is correct. I
will say that is in existing
statute.
Madam Chair and Representative
experts, you know, we have uh
Very old water rights.
Downstream of the Rio Grande,
off the Acus.
The
We lose during.
Through season.
I've never seen where.
In anything we've done in
statute.
Any negotiations from the OSC
between Colorado and
Texas and Mexico compacts where.
We impact those that ultimately
could get water to one of our
one of our rivers that feed all
the way through.
Um, I've never seen that have a
negative effect on acia.
But we sure do a really good job
of that in the southern part of
the state.
Madam Chair and, and, and expert
know very specifically the, the
original legislation talks
about.
And, and, and was just clarified
that the original negotiations.
Catas out of this.
But we never at any point, took
in mind the farmers and ranchers
to take water and have water
rights off the Rio Grande or off
the Pecos.
If the water's not there, we
just don't get it. Why, why the
separation? Madam Chair
Representative Pettigrew, thank
you for that clarification. I
think.
I mean this, first of all, I
will say there's no requirement
to participate water rights or
making a decision to sell their
water in an Asia has a big Mad
and representative experts, I
would say that same condition
holds true for anybody that
lives on the
Middle Rio Gran further south in
the Peas, anybody that sells
water, right, that they may have
along the.
As a significant impact.
On the people downstream of that
as well. Uh once again, I'm not
gonna belabor the point. It's
just it, I find it interesting
that we continue to
Separate and qualify and
classify.
Water.
And, and Madam Chair and
Representative, um.
Those water rights
Some aren't
As old, but some are as old.
And so that that's just uh.
It's just an observation from my
point.
I do appreciate the the examples
you gave representative with
respect to that. One thing that
I would like clarification on.
With respect to purchase of
water rights.
As, as your expert just
testified to this is purely um
Uh, personal decision on whether
or not we sell.
One of the concerns I have is
we're updating this.
What I, I would love to see.
As an amendment to this would be
the imminent domain can never be
used.
Inside of this legislation,
inside of the act.
And if it exists and I missed
continue
Perfect. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. Thank
you expert for that. Um, I would
like where it's at, not right
now. Not right now. We can do
that later, Pettigrew, it's on
page 4. Thank you. Lines.
7.
starting on line 7.
Perfect. I appreciate that very
much and
Madam Chair, an expert with
respect to the answer you just
gave on irrigation districts.
That means that any purchase
from
Wa right user.
would have to be approved by the
irrigation district as well.
That's
Thank you. Thank you very much.
So
Madam Chair, I would like to
move on to
How we're defining water.
And
Recharge now.
Madam Chair, um,
If I understand the the text of
the bill for all the amendments.
Recharge can only happen through
natural stream bed. Is that
correct?
Madam Chair Representative, if
you are acquiring surface water.
Madam Chair, Representative and
experts.
I think we can all come to
agreement that if we're.
Working on a strategic water
supply reserve.
Um
Natural recharge is the worst.
Pollution out there.
With the amount of evaporation
that we have.
As as water continues to go
downstream.
Yeah, what it takes, I mean, if
we look at the snow melt right
now that, that we've gone to a
different elevation over the
last 57 years.
Um
We lose 30% of our water coming
down the side of a mountain.
Just because of what's going
into the soil.
And that does not naturally get
back into the recharge zone.
We all know that the math is
pretty straightforward.
Um
So when we evaporate, and we
push it in the, into the dirt,
yes, it helps local vegetation
helps us to continue to grow.
Sometimes when we get really wet
seasons and then we get a really
dry spring or something like
that, then we create a whole
bunch of tumbleweeds.
we all have to deal with, but um
again, each of those.
Environment, um, foster
different types of animals.
And, and so.
But if we're looking to truly
recharge our aquifer.
The only way we, we, we master
the maximum amount of water is
actually recharge the aquifer.
Not to allow
Natural dissipation. Would you
agree with that, Madam Chair,
and Representative experts?
clarify that this.
This fire water specifically for
us and there was a concern about
what the strategic water reserve
can conserve water and recharge
our aquifers including more
direct injections, but there was
pushback of whether that flows,
and if there might result in a
material loss of the so I don't
do so.
Madam Chair Representative
expert, I, I, I hear what you're
saying.
With respect to the discussion
with stakeholders.
Um
I'm gonna assume there's two
different sets of conversations.
One from when the act was
originally done.
And this one, and with respect
to this piece of legislation.
And you're telling me, Madam
Chair, and that reviewed this,
the, the multiple committees
that you went through with.
Uh, with significant opposition,
um.
None of the
I, I mean
Holding just in bed.
Recharge.
Nobody sat there and and said,
hey, this is not the best
solution if we're, if the goal
as defined in the legislation is
to recharge and.
The stream beds as well. It's
got to be a combined.
Any thoughts on that?
Um
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. So that was
extensively discussed, but the
decision was made that it was
Madam Chair Representative, I'd
love to carry that conversation
on offline.
Uh, and we're not gonna, we're
not gonna solve it in here.
Madam Chair and and
representative experts, you
know, I go through the different
pieces of this, the, the state
engineer has their issues with
this bill.
Um, DOJ has their set of issues
with this bill.
And I don't think they're
resolved if they are, I haven't
seen updates to it, but.
Um, the DOJ.
Uh
has concerns with section 2.
Uh, traditional and cultural
practices, they have concerns
with Section 3 that I don't
think are really dealt with.
Um
The OSC with respect to the
definitions, I, I, I think one
specific.
Uh, statement from the DOJ.
They have a concern with surface
water lease or purchased.
Or the reserves shall not be
converted to groundwater via any
methods other than natural.
And, and you can go through the
rest of the, their comments on
that. At the end of the day, the
DOJ is not exactly.
On board with every aspect of
this, and neither is the OSC and
I think at some point in time
the LLC understand the
interstate stream commission's
role in, in New Mexico. I also
understand the, the, the
Set at the table with the OSC
has to have as well. And so I'd
like to, before this gets before
I'd really like to have.
More in-depth conversations
about this.
Uh, if there's some areas that
we can resolve that with
friendly amendments, then I'd
like to approach it that way and
Do my best not to have to
require another 3 hour debate.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. So
actually, so the FIR has not
been updated, nor the um
analysis, but the issues um
brought up by the Office of the
State Engineer have been
addressed. OK. And I'd love to
have that commentary outside of
this, um, doing my best not to
get the chair mad at me.
Uh, with the amount of time I
have on questions. I will have
some other questions when we do
meet offline.
Um, right now, the way I read
this.
As much as I know the intent.
I'm not behind this yet.
Thank you.
Representative Matthews, thank
you, Madam Chair and thank you.
Uh, presenters and
representative.
And I think uh this is the first
time this session where
Representative Dixon has come to
water and welcome her for.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. Hopefully
it's an enjoyable experience, so
I want to come back.
Well it's not madam chair, it's
not over yet, so I'm making a
joke, bad joke.
Um
My, um,
My first question is, um.
The purpose of this is that um,
Part of this is to help us with
comply with our compact
obligations, correct? OK. And so
my question is, Madam Chair,
presenters is, uh, where are we
obligations and I know there's
several.
Um
And um
compliance in terms of the
status on every compact. I, I'm
not the technical expert to ask.
We lost. Thank you. Thank you
for the answer, uh, Madam Chair.
Uh, do you know?
Um
I mean, my understanding has
been that we are short on our
So we are very concerned right
now, Madam Chair, uh.
Presenter are, are we?
Do you have any sense of where
we are on inappropriate for me
to
to guess right now where we are,
but we have to misspeak.
Um, Madam Chair, um.
Presenters.
Before assuming we don't pass
this bill just for purposes of
the of the question.
Um
How would we
Let me phrase this a better way.
Um
What I'm trying to kind of
understand.
The role
Is this
Um
This is not kind of an estate
engineer, this is coming from
the, from the interstate stream
commission and Madam Chair
Representative.
Uh, um, so,
What do we do? How does this
change what we are currently
doing.
In terms of meeting compact
requirements.
Current statute, the current
strategicer, the supplementary
purpose section, I think could
allow acquisitions that are
acquired for and that does not
change the compact compliance
change that, but it would make
each drop of water that we have
even more effective.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
And why are we doing this?
Madam Chair Representative
Matthews, I think now that the
strategic
reassess and rethink how the
program has gone and effective.
And I think
The last 5 or so years of of
drought and ridification that
all of that came together to
think how every state really
have a choice.
Um, Madam Chair presenters
representative, um,
The aquifer recharge.
portion of this
Uh, one of the things we've been
working authorizing an inventory
another day, um, this, the whole
question of aquifer recharge.
And can you do aquifer recharge.
Before or
In
Before we finish the mapping and
the authorized um
Quite frankly, this past summer,
Madam Chair Representative, I
think the answer is yes.
Aquifer mapping.
Absolutely, you can do this in
advance. So that obviously best
place where you might do retail.
OK. Um,
This year in the water
committee, I think we've been
in.
And I've been on this committee,
um, and a lot of Madam Chair,
uh, Representative, I think this
was the original strategic COG
as they say.
Uh
That, uh, Madam Chair
represented that, that would
help, obviously not, um, my
question is,
I, I've sometimes here and it's
like all of a sudden in Mexico
discovered that it doesn't get a
lot of rain.
Um
Which is
Obviously not the case.
So my, my question is, I
sometimes feel.
It's been very hard to figure
out are we
Duplicating efforts are we
leaving things with all this
mass of we've approved.
Um
And how strategic water reserve.
This is all the other strategic
plans anybody.
Paying attention to how these
new
Things we're doing in terms of
water, how they fit duplicative
or whatever.
Contrary to
Who's who's over, who's making
sure we're
These things are gonna work
together and be useful to us as
we do and how does your
Strategic water reserve plan.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair. Um.
And Representative, I'll give,
um, my assessment, uh, in
response to your question and
then pass it to the experts who
are obviously much more steeped
in this knowledge, um, I think
that one of the things, there
are two things that have
happened. Um, there have been
things like the um water and
infrastructure task force, the
50 year um water plan. So there
are a lot of things that are
looking at this issue
holistically now that we've had
for the past several years, um,
and so some of those, you know,
looking at the big picture and
figuring.
out where we need to make
improvements. And that leads to
the fact that this program has
been around for 20 years and
over the course of time.
Uh, gaps in the program, um,
have been identified in this
bill seeks to
Make it an even better program.
Learning on the lessons from the
past 20 years of what needs to
be improved, like the
non-reverting fund, um, things
like that, um.
So I think those two things are,
are just big picture, um, but my
experts uh may be able to weigh
in.
Very engaged in
Our agency really is fun of
initiatives that we find that.
Sorry, thank you. Ma'am.
We had, uh, and I know that
having gone to these meetings of
the problems in our lack of
enough staffing.
Tech infrastructure for the
agency. My question is.
How
Out of staffing and technology
and assess the capacity of um.
Responsibility challenges we're
gonna be facing.
In terms of the level of expert.
Skill in the profession.
We have incredible resources in
this. Just add, Madam Chair,
representative, that ISC has
hired for the first very new,
um, they just, she just started
this spring, so we're very much
looking forward and Madam Chair
Representative, I can 2 that
uh we have passed out of the
house. There was an additional
$1.5 million in recurring
funding, um, that can be used to
support that, and that's in
addition to.
With staffing but with the
technology that they need, so
I'm glad to hear.
Thank you. Chair, thank you so
much. Um, I'm trying to wrap my
brain around all of this, uh, so
since I uh was this subject any
of this stuff.
Madam Chair Representative, yes,
it was presented on in the water
natural.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
I look forward to, um, and that,
that usually helps. Um, so, um,
so a couple of things just so I
can kind of uh figure this uh
stuff out, um, what, uh,
department is the Interstream uh
um uh stream commission.
Madam Chair, it's a, it's a
harder question to answer than
one I think we are
administratively joined to the
office with the state engineer,
um, and so we work in tandem
with the office agency, although
the internet and, and we have
We work very, very closely
together.
Thank you, Madam Chair. And um
and who is, how is it
constructed like, so, so it's
been around for 20 years, right?
So it's, it's it's been around,
but like, is it appointed, is
it, is it hired as elected
positions, like how was how was
that commission instructed. The
strategic water reserve has been
The Interstate stream stream
commission. I, I'm sorry, I
don't, I don't remember the
dates that well, but we've been
around a very long time and
we're governed by a, a
commission that has 8 members
who are.
Thank you. um, thank you, Madam
Chair. OK, so, um, now I kind of
get a, so basically the money,
the, the 15 million max that,
that, that stays in there is
that's that's gonna be used to
acquire water rights, is there
anything else that that's that
money is used for? be used for.
Um, and then, um, so basically
right now, the only places you
were allowed to, um, Madam
Chair, sorry, um, to acquire
these water rights were to fit
into the
To, um, missions that you have
and that's for what endangered
species and compact compliance,
right? So if this passes, you
now can um if um you can
basically acquire water rights
anywhere else, if it fits into
aquifer recharge.
Madam Chair Representative,
and they would continue to do
that. This bill does not change
that. It would this bill does
allow this, so it, it, it
broadens the type of water that
could be acquired, but the ISC
would OK. um, thank you. um.
So, uh, Madam Chair, um, can
this be used to like
There's a lake that is.
Um, if there's not any in
endangered species, but we can
now filter money, I mean, sorry,
water into this lake and
recharge the lake, cause I, I
noticed that there's um.
Verbiage in here and I know
it's, it's a supplemental um
priorities as far as
recreational and stuff like
that. So it's like you get 2 for
1, great, um, you know, that
kind of stuff, but, you know,
would this be?
Do you foresee or can it be used
to
Recharge some of these lakes
that are going dry out.
Madam Chair Representative.
I
I'm not, uh, a hydrologist.
That doesn't strike me as a
Although I, I wouldn't say.
I can't say I've thought about
that enough to that there, that
would never. OK, thank you. Um,
very much.
Uh, thank you, Representative
Zamora.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you presenters for
bringing this bill forward.
So we're the funding right quick
so I make sure I understand
that.
So, so it's a $15 million.
Allocation that's already been
made or, or, or is it, we, we
put 1.5 million churn.
And representative
Madam Chair representatives are
more.
And this bill sets a current
bill does not add any.
OK, and, and Madam Chair and
expert witness. So then in that
$15 million cap.
If we were funding a lot of
money to it.
Could they then spend quicker so
that they wouldn't reach that
cap and, and to me, that would
cause inefficiencies instead of
efficiencies and
And
I don't think we, we have to go
very far on that, but just a
comment that I have to make
that.
You know, when, when we as
legislators fund something and
we do these things. What does it
do? What does it actually do at
the end of the day. OK, so I'll
go forward from that.
And
Madam, would you like um
the the reason to increase the
cap is not um in the transaction
of our rights. Um.
It usually takes multiple years.
And so one of the big things
that this non-reverting so that
they don't have to spend it
really fast. They can, you know,
go through the process when some
underwater rights.
Because otherwise, if it, if, if
it was as a reverting fund, if
they don't spend that money, but
what we want to do is make an
effective work.
Thank you. So.
There, there was, there was
something tagged about the, the
purchasing of water rights, but
we can still use intimate domain
in this to purchase land.
Or
A project
But
Am I correct?
I believe it's on page 4, line
8.
condemnation for real property,
only when that for that and
I'm not a
A little point there in the bill
that
That we really don't, I don't
care to see, uh,
So
So then
What we're doing here is we're
purchasing.
The increased river flow.
Madam Madam Chair Representative
in general, yes. OK, so then.
We are gonna be purchasing.
Groundwater
And or or water rights for from
ground.
bumped out of the ground
And pumping it into the river
and I, am I correct in that,
Madam Chair?
And presenters.
Excuse me, Madam Chair, don't
think that.
There is anything that would
necessarily prevent.
The Innerstate stream caps have
in, in the this new.
purpose.
Allows you to buy.
Groundwater acquire groundwater
to deplete or to, to reduce
acquire water, not pump it and
allow the, the aquifer to fight.
There are augmentation well
fields.
So
Madam Chan and presenters then.
This bill
Allows groundwater pumping.
pump water into the stream.
To have whatever control we want
on the screen screen, whether
it's compact.
Whether it's endangered species.
Whether it's
The other, the other choices
that we had that were
supplementary.
We can pump groundwater into the
stream to meet all these needs.
Am I correct in saying that,
Madam Chair
is that we are able to purchase
groundwater currently. And and
Madam Chair.
And uh presenters.
I have sat in this committee for
many of days with
representative.
Now, Senator Ezel.
And
She has educated me on the
Apennines in the past history.
Of when we've done this.
And it created some big
problems.
And I could see where it could
create some problems if we're
gonna pump groundwater.
Into the stream
And
And I could unders I could get
that, and I can feel.
That part of it, and I can see
that side side of the coin.
But if we don't manage our
streams right.
And we take this.
Bill and implement these
procedures.
We'd be creating a bigger
problem.
And, and more issues within the
state. And, and I'll go on from
there.
And go on to something else. We
go on page 6, line 16.
It says the Innerstream State
Commission may
cell or lease.
Water or water rights from the
strategic water reserve at no
less than a praised market
value.
So, Madam Chair and presenters.
So
With this bill
We will be able to purchase
water right and then have the
water rights under the control.
Of the Interstate stream
commission, right? Madam Chair.
Um, Madam Chair, Representative,
um, this is uh what you're
referring to is current law.
OK, this does
not change that. I understand
that.
But we can, we can buy.
The water rights.
And then it also states in there
that we can sell them.
So, so we can purchase a water
right.
From an individual.
And then
We can move that water right
anywhere in the state, Madam
Chair.
Um, madam chair, uh,
representative, so the
commission can only sell the
water rights, um, if the rights
are no longer necessary for the
purpose for which they were
acquired, um, but, uh, let's see
if our expert has more
Madam Chair, and, and
presenters. So then say we buy a
water ride and Vernon Leo
County.
And then we're pumping the water
out of a ground well.
Into the stream.
And the water winds up in Texas.
How does that affect
And everything that we do.
In, in moving water rights and
moving water across.
Not only
From, from where the water
right.
The county or however the water
right belongs in.
moving it.
Madam Chair Representative, in
the case of, um,
River flows. Well, they're all
still within one B.
Water can moved through the
hydro hydrologic analysis
indicated that that.
hit that stateline delivery, um,
you know, that would be to be
that said, and a very location
dependent and so uh uh.
an acquisition that was so
distant from.
The delivery point we needed to
meet might not be a good
candidate for the er
um have reasonable certainty
that it would make it there.
Um
General. So, so, Madam Chair and
presenters, so this water right
could be sold. Why, why wouldn't
this water right go back to the
original land where it was
purchased from.
Why, why is it?
And, and I understand it's the
old bill, but we're still
supporting the old bill with the
new language.
But, and, and this isn't
language that you guys put in
now. But why would we purchase
A water right
And then sell it to whomever.
Why wouldn't this water right go
back to the original owner, and
then, and then, well, OK, I'll
follow up with another the
original does um require that if
we sell a water right, we sell
it for its if it, if, if it were
sold, it would be offered as an
in terms of um the, the
legislation does not give the
original seller or something
like that, um, and we are
required to sell if we were to
sell it, it has to be.
Divestment of any water, right?
Madam Chair, I think that
concludes my questions.
Representatives, um, I'm sure I
make a motion for due pass for
Senate Bill 37 as amended.
There's emotions on the on the
table.
I call OK.
Representative Matthews.
Representative Moya.
I'm going to pass too.
Representative Pettigrew.
No
Representative Rubio.
Yes.
Ranking.
Madam Vice Chair Kate.
Yes.
Madam Cher Ortiz, yes, not my
vote.
But we have to go back to
Representative Matthews.
And I'm sure I'll, I'd like to.
Representative Moya.
No.
Representative Matthews uh
presenters and um.
But I'm a little concerned. I
just, I feel like we're doing.
Water is so important, we got to
get it right and I'm a little
not.
figuring happens to be one of
And the challenges we're gonna,
uh, thank you presenters. I'm
going to explain my vote now.
Um, I voted yes, um, because we
are in the position that we're
in now and with the.
50-year water plan and its
recommendations, um, the um.
The need to balance, um, the
recreational habitat protection,
all of those concerns as well. I
think that this.
Bill as timely in the
development of the fund, uh,
especially that it's
non-reverting and capped at 15
million. We're not making an
appropriation this year into
this fund, but it gives us
another tool, I think for the
Interstate stream commission,
uh, to, um,
To ensure that there are flows,
um, I believe that aquifer
recharge happens um in the river
as well, um, and.
It's important to um have all
the tools and the toolbox and to
have this, um, the ability to
make decisions like this and in
a voluntary way buying those
water rights and establishing
this fund. So thank you
presenters for bringing the
bill. And uh with that, you have
a uh a do pass and uh
Move on to the next. All right,
folks, we're done here.
