Here.
Representative Zamora here.
Madam Vice Chair,
Madam Chair.
Did you hear we have a
My apologies.
OK, Representative Little.
Uh, we do, are we good to go
with Zoom?
OK, let's begin with House Bill
16.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Members of the committee, good
morning and audience members.
Good morning.
I am Charlotte Little. I
represent House District 68 in
Albuquerque's northwest side,
and I am here this morning to
present House Bill 16.
Um
The
Fentanyl regarding fentanyl
trafficking sentences.
I will begin uh with a little
brief description and um address
the committee. Thank you.
Uh, section 16 creates a new
section of the criminal
Sentencing Act that toughens
penalties for fentanyl
traffickers and dealers.
Madam Chair, if a person is
found guilty of trafficking
fentanyl, their sentence can be
increased depending on the
amount of fentanyl they
possessed.
My expert witness, Mark Baker,
will provide details of.
will provide the details.
But if I may begin by saying,
In preparing for this
presentation.
I was looking through articles,
reports, statistics.
And what I cannot escape is
that.
From Farmington in our state
from Farmington to Roswell.
Returned to Demming.
House to Las Cruces, galloped to
Toumari.
Albuquerque, Socorro, and the
towns and villages in between.
have been hit hard by the
fentanyl crisis.
Yesterday was survivor day for
families of gun violence.
I will submit that every day.
I survivor's Day for families of
opioid overdoses.
Their families.
Survivors, friends, and
neighbors have asked us for
help, the legislature, to help
curb this crisis.
And in my mind, make no mistake.
Addressing this crisis is a
multi-pronged effort.
There is no one single thing
that's going to fix it.
It also requires
Compassion.
Treatment services.
As well as consequences for
those who pray on the people of
our communities.
Their families.
are asking us to take action.
And with that, Madam Chair, I
would like to introduce Mark
Baker, the expert witness. Thank
you. Sorry, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, thank you for,
uh, for having me in this
morning. Um,
Turning to the substance just to
briefly summarize, the bill
would allow judges, it does not
impose a mandatory minimum. It
would allow a sentencing
enhancement for um those who
were convicted of trafficking in
fentanyl in 3 scenarios. One, if
they have between 100 and 500
pills.
I would um allow for an increase
of up to 3 years of the
sentence, more than 500 pills
would be 5 years, and if the
person is involved in a way, um
where they're managing someone,
they're recruiting people into
the drug trade, um, and 5 years
would also be available to the
trial judge, um, for each of
these increases, the lowest
possible sentence would remain
probation. This does not force
incarceration, and I think
that's important for a number
number of reasons because um,
In the federal system right now,
there's a lot of pressure to
move state cases, state arrests
for drug trafficking into the
federal system, and there's no
flexibility for judges in the
federal system when you hit
certain amounts, you have
mandatory minimums, 5 years, 10
years.
This is more, more balanced and
nuanced than that because the
judge still can take into
consideration, for example,
someone who's a low level player
in a drug conspiracy, the judge
can still look at that person
and say, you're not in the heart
of this. You don't have to go
away.
Uh, for example, a couple of
weeks ago I was at the 10th
Circuit Court of Appeals in
Denver on behalf of a criminal
defendant who was being
sentenced for meth trafficking,
and he was just going to follow
a truck to Chicago.
Does that deserve a sentence? I
mean, it's, it's criminal.
Um, does that deserve a
mandatory 10, the very
conservative Reagan appointed
judge who sentenced him said on
the record, I wish I could do
something better than this.
If we strengthen the state
system so that fewer cases go
federal. It can alleviate the
pressure to put people in a
system that has no flexibility.
Um, on the other hand, fentanyl
is uniquely devastating. Um, one
pill can kill. Uh, I heard
somebody with a long tenure in
the criminal justice system say,
The old meth users, their old
heroin users, there will not be
old fentanyl users, um, because
it's so deadly, um,
statistically,
The CDC has identified synthetic
opioids and fentanyl in
particular is a primary driver
of overdose deaths in the United
States and the spikes are
staggering, um,
And
Uh, for New Mexico specifically,
let me find the number for New
Mexico. We have had like a 60%
jump between 2019 and 2021 an
overdose deaths, and
2019, almost three quarters of
people who were sentenced
federally for the crime of
distribution of drugs resulting
in death. Um,
Fentanyl was involved. 42% of
fentanyl pills that have been
tested have been shown to have
lethal doses and um
It's a
dangerous drug and also in the
sense that it's sold as if it's
a pharmaceutical pill, even
though it's being imported en
masse from Mexico and other
countries.
So you see it and it looks like
something the doctor would give
you, and I think for young
people, that's particularly
hazardous, cause you're raised
to believe that your doctors
only give you things that are
gonna help you.
And one of those pills can kill,
um, on a single dose.
So I agree with Representative
Little, it is not a silver
bullet. Um, it is an incremental
increase to join with other
efforts that are underway during
the session to deal with the
root causes of addiction. It is
intended to target dealers who
are spreading the poison, not
addicts who are just using to um
because they are now um trapped
under the um spell of the drug.
And so, um, we'd stand for
questions.
Thank you, Representative.
Let's now go to the audience,
those in favor of the bill,
please raise your hands. Uh, one
minute, please.
OK. Uh,
How about those in opposition?
Please raise your hands.
OK, let's go to Zoom. Do we have
anybody in favor to speak.
Right
In favor, uh, we have.
Larry Sontag.
Larry, can you hear us?
Hi, Larry.
Ah yes, you have one minute,
Larry.
Thank you, Larry.
Now moving to opposition, is
there anyone in opposition?
Hey, committee members, I'll
start with Representative Lujan
represented block.
Representative Ononornu and then
Representative Barrago. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Um.
First time I'm looking at this
bill and I
Truly, I've worked on um harm
reduction uh policy and continue
to do that. Um, so,
And I had to, I stepped out
briefly. Um what, Madam Chair,
um, I.
The increases from
What they are now. What, what
are the penalties now? what is
the increase now, Madam Chair?
Madam Chair Representative Lu
Han, um, a second degree felony
would be a typical um drug
trafficking crime, and that's 0
to 9 years.
So Madam Chair, so they can
already be sentenced up to 9
years. Is that what you're
telling me?
And
Uh, yes, Madam Chair,
Representative Lohan, they could
be sentenced up to 9 years. Um.
In, in practical effect, my
understanding is that many, um,
Drug trafficking crimes, even
with pretty serious weight, and
I'm using, I'm using anecdotal
information from Albuquerque,
um, people are getting 5-year
probated sentences pretty
regularly.
So the amounts and the levels
here underscore.
thresholds where you've crossed
from the type of dealer I would
not want to see scooped up,
which is somebody who has a
habit, buys 2 pills, that's an
extreme example, buys 2 pills
sells 1 to buy the next. We've
pushed the number of pills up
beyond that, but it sends a
queue of the legislature's
stance against fentanyl
trafficking at certain levels.
So they they retained the
discretion, but it also allows
for particularly serious
offenders who are above these
levels um for judges to go um to
the higher range.
Um, Madam Chair, so.
In the bill starting line 25
page 1 to the next page, 3 years
if the person is in possession
of between 100 and 500 pills,
capsules or tablets containing
the detectable amount of
fentanyl, regardless of its
concentrations or between 10 and
50 g of fentanyl powder,
whichever is less, and then 5
years, if the person is in
possession of more than 500
pills, capsules or tablets
containing a detectable.
Amount of fentanyl, regardless
of its concentration, are more
than 50 g of fentanyl powder,
whichever is less.
And so in 5 years, if the person
is recruit recruited,
coordinated, organized,
supervised, directed, managed,
or
Finance, financed another.
Commit trafficking fentanyl
pursuant to section.
Uh, 30-31-20.
The enhancement shall be in
addition to not a replacement of
charging.
to commit trafficking pursuant
to section.
30-28-2. Madam Chair, I'm a, I'm
a little confused. If we already
have the ability of a 0 to 9
year uh charge.
This, this creates an
opportunity for more charging.
Is that, is my, is that my
understanding as I'm reading
this?
Madam Chair Representative
Luhan, um, it gives the judge
more flexibility to go beyond
the the default range. It also
in state sentencing, um, it's my
experience that the judge
In determining where within.
Arranged a sentence very rare do
they go to the absolute highest
end, but they take a cue from
the legislature in terms of the
range that the legislatures
determined. So if you increase
the overall available sentence,
it doesn't mean that people will
now go from probation to 12, but
it does mean that the judges
will see that the legislature is
indicating that perhaps
Some time is in order where they
would have done a probated
sentence on a 2nd degree felony
before because the legislature
has passed an enhancement
specific to underscore the
seriousness.
So within Madam Chair, within
the parameters that we are
defining in this.
Piece of legislation, then you
would.
From what I heard you say.
would allow for a lesser
sentencing because we're seeing
more, uh, more of the 5 year
sentencing, and now we're giving
you an opportunity for a 3 year
sentencing. I'm just trying to
get Madam Chair Representative
Law. I'm sorry if I've um
confused the issue a little bit.
No, it's, it is definitely an
expansion of the sentencing
power of the judge. I'm just,
yeah.
Thank you, Madam Chair. That's,
that's basically what I'm
getting at. And so, um, Madam
Chair, I, I really just have to,
um maybe understand as I work
through the, the harm reduction
um policies and understanding
this issue in a very deep, deep
way and working with my
community and working with my
many organizations. I, I'm not
hearing from them and I don't
see them here today and I'm a
bit concerned about this piece
of legislation as it would
increase incarceration.
Is that
Am I on the wrong right track
manager with this increase
incarceration.
Madam Chair Representative
Lujan, the, the purpose would be
to increase the incarceration
for serious drug traffickers,
not for addicts. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative,
Representative Block.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
and this is one of the few times
where I will say I'm going to be
brief.
So, I'm just kidding, but
Madamti.
he's in this room. Just kidding.
Oh no.
Well, so, OK, I'm understanding
the bill, so it gives
enhancement possibilities.
To the judge. So it just gives
the judge more discretion on
somebody who was trafficking.
And currently, they would not
have as many tools in their
toolbox, and this would just
give him ability to sentence.
For a longer period of time. Is
that kind of what I'm
understanding.
From the legislation in a
nutshell, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, Representative
Block, yes.
May I add?
These
There you go. Um, as I stated,
uh, uh, in my introduction that
this is about the traffickers,
the dealers, those that are
preying on our most vulnerable
people out there, our youth.
are adults, everybody in
between. Um, and this is about.
Acknowledging that those
individuals that have a uh an
addiction or uh begin this or
introduced to this.
Um
Can sometimes get, can get swept
up in the judicial system.
Um
Rather than being able to access
services which we are also
trying to do at this, in this
session. So,
I look at this or I see this
bill as one that addresses those
individuals who are preying on
our communities.
With and the ability for the
judges to apply their
discretion.
Because of the circumstances
when a person who is using.
Make
May be caught
And brought to and brought into
court.
And I'll let you go, uh, add
anything on to that. Thank you.
OK, thank you so much, Madam
Chair and thank you,
Representative. Yeah, that gives
me a little more information
because I think these are
probably the worst.
the worst folks that we're
trying to get and I'm like you,
I am sick and tired of this
issue in the state.
Especially in my community,
it's, it's, we've we've found so
many individuals who have been
trafficking large amounts of
fentanyl, and there's just
nothing in the statue that's
very specific to fentanyl, which
I do like your legislation. It's
very specific, because this is
such a deadly
And horrible drug, and I, I
guess my one question that I'll
add to this is I know it's
specific to fentanyl, but I'm
hearing there's other drugs that
are being made that are
synthetics that are close in
biological.
Whatever, whatever they call it,
you know, it's, it's chemists,
the chemistry, right? It makes
it similar. And so Madam Chair
Representative, I just want to
make sure this would encompass
those as well, because I know
When it comes to one thing, they
find something cheaper to make.
And it's synthetic, they can
ship it in from China or
wherever they, they need to ship
it in from. And so I just want
to make sure with this cover
anything that comes in the
future other than fentanyl,
because I know it's been a
problem for many years, but
would this also cover that? I
just want to make sure that
that's in the statute, Madam
Chair, Representative.
Madame Chair Representative
Block. This is specific to
fentanyl. My understanding from
talking to people both on in the
defense bar and um prosecutors
is that the um in federal drug
law, there's um language that
covers equivalent, but they're
not seeing that, um, in, in any
significant
Um, numbers yet in New Mexico.
It could be at some point, but
the synthetics, um, that are
Um, equivalent to fentanyl or
often being shipped in from
China, um, off the internet, and
that has not yet been something
that at least the people that I
know in the legal community have
seen a lot of you. Thank you so
much, Madam Chair and thank you
for that and I, I think this is
a good piece of legislation. I
support it. I think we need to
increase.
These penalties and give the
judges more discretion. I do
think that
I mean, I, I guess I'm a little
I would go a little further and
say some of these people should
have attempted murder charges,
etc. when it comes to trying to
Give these to vulnerable
populations, etc. but I'll leave
it there. Thank you, Madam
Chair, and I, I appreciate you
bringing this forward. It's all
ahead.
Thank you, Representative Anya
Arnu.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, um, representative
and presenters for bringing this
bill forward. I.
Completely agree with.
What you're trying to accomplish
in this bill, um.
As many of you know, I represent
the International District in
Albuquerque, which is a district
that has been absolutely
Devastated by opioid use and
I like many others. I know these
families who have been impacted.
I've personally been impacted by
people who have um overdosed and
have lost their lives as a
result of use of these.
Just pernicious drugs, um, but I
wonder if
Increasing. I know Mr. Baker, I
want to thank you for first of
all pointing out this is not a
mandatory minimum, it's just a
tool that a judge could use and
increasing sentencing, but
As it relates to trafficking and
manufacturing, you know,
manufacturers aren't necessarily
driven by, you know, like
potential penalties, they're
driven by profit. And you know,
at the federal level.
We increased
Um, minimum sentence thing for
specifically fentanyl-related
charges in 2018, but we haven't
seen a reduction in use, which
is the ultimate goal, right?
Madam Chair, representative,
that ultimately we want to see a
reduction in fentanyl use and
we've already increased
penalties specifically for
fentanyl and have not seen that
reduction, and fentanyl is
incredibly cheap.
To make and to purchase. And so
what makes me a little bit.
reticent about this bill is that
given the
Given the fact that it is so
easy to get your hands on, it
just kind of reminds me of.
The disparity sentencing that we
saw with crack versus powder
cocaine in the 90s, um, and so
that makes me
A little nervous, so.
You know, I'm led to think that
the next level of sentencing
enhancements.
For fentanyl
We'll have the repeat kind of
disparity that we saw,
especially across racial lines
for fentanyl use. So can you
please, um, Madam Chair
Representative, Mr. Baker, can
you tell me why these
enhancements would be different
from what we've seen previously.
Madam Chair, um, representative,
um.
The the absence of the mandatory
minimum is really key to that
because it just removed any
discretion from judges and so
they were stuck sweeping up
everyone one and the same and
the and the sentencing
guidelines when crack first was
um the disparity between powder
and crack was imposed, were
mandatory on district judges and
so they functionally served as a
pretty close to the equivalent
of a mandatory minimum. Judges
did not have discretion. And so
I'm a believer that New Mexico's
criminal justice culture is
built more around
Um, looking at the individual
defendant and figuring out
what's appropriate in light of
that defendant's individual
circumstances. We don't have
regimented sentencing in the
same way that the federal system
does. So it would not cure it
because the, the purpose here
would be that in serious cases,
serious traffickers would get
more time, so they're, would
there be more people
incarcerated? Yes. Would I like
do I believe that that would be
tailored to the more serious
offenders. I, I absolutely do.
Just having seen how, you know,
I'm most familiar with.
Albuquerque, but having seen how
judges approach sentencing there
it is um not a lock em up
culture. It is much more
Designed to fit what's in front
of the judge in the individual
case.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um, and
thank you Representative Mr.
Baker for that answer. So it's
The fact that a judge can look
at each individual case and that
we are targeting the traffickers
and not necessarily the user
individual themselves. Is that
correct?
OK, thank you, thank you for
that answer.
Thank you, Representative
Barrego.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
Couple of things, um, one this
morning, there was a um report
on the news.
Of an individual in Las Cruces,
Madam Chair, that um bought some
fast food and the drink was
laced with fentanyl.
And uh it was very alarming
that, you know, 6 o'clock in the
morning when you're drinking
your coffee and thinking about,
you know, how could that
possibly happen? It was, um, it
was quite alarming. They didn't
say what fast food location, but
they did say that they ordered
takeout and when it was
delivered, the gentleman drank
the drink and ended up in the
emergency room. Um,
Just
I bring that up because that was
very alarming to me this morning
and I read your bill last night.
And um
I, um, I wanted to mention,
Madam Chair, um, although I
represent the west side of
Albuquerque on the Northwest
Mesa, I see, you know, people
just, I mean, all over
Albuquerque, just, you know,
recovering, not really
recovering the effects of what
fentanyl has done to people in
terms of their physical state,
um, you can almost immediately
tell when somebody is in.
addicted and it's coming off of.
Whatever drug they
Um, and I, and I
I believe that fentanyl has a
huge impact on what's happening
in our society. I also have a
mother who lives up in northern
New Mexico in Espanola, um,
which is also always sort of
been the.
The butt of the jokes in New
Mexico, which I really find
very, very offensive, but when
I'm seeing, you know, when I go
to the grocery store for her or
even just see around her home.
Um, she lives about
Uh, maybe 3/4 of a mile from
town, and I see people walking
up and down.
You know
The effects of these drugs and
coming off of them, um.
Her, her safety has been
seriously compromised, uh, Madam
Chair, in the last, um,
In the last two years, we've had
a fentanyl house, uh, drug
house, basically just.
Maybe 3 houses away from my
mom's house and she's living in
fear.
You know, when we were kids, we
grew up camping in the backyard
or houses were open, the doors
were never locked, and now, uh,
in her 90s, she's asking me what
is going on?
You know, what, how, I mean, she
is literally living in fear.
And the drug.
Everybody knows where the drug
house is. Everybody knows that
people are coming and going.
They're buying the drugs at this
house. Everybody knows that that
person that lives in that house
is a is a is a dealer.
I mean, the whole community
knows this, and including the
police because they've been in
and out of that place, um.
I, I thank you guys for bringing
this forward. I just, and, and
not knowing, you know, not
knowing that the law.
Um
How is this bill enhancing what
we already have.
And, uh, that, that's the
question that I have in my mind
because I heard the the
discussion from other
representatives about um
You know, the existing laws and
the federal law. So how does
this enhance that?
Yes
Madam Chair, uh, representative,
um.
It, um,
What I would say is it provides
a tailored enhancement for
particularly dangerous drug. And
so, um, it still would be
illegal to deal drugs before
this, but um given the
seriousness of the um
Fentanyl inflow into New Mexico,
it would, um, underscore the
need for courts to treat that
seriously and apply pressure
down where I know there have
been another discussion of the
need to provide treatment for
users and and support around
that. You've got to do that to
help build people up, but you've
got to have an incentive for
people not to look at somebody
who's dealing and making money
down the street and think, well,
I could do that, and it would
solve some of my problems, they
should at least see that there's
a consequence for that, and this
would help with that.
So it, it enhances the
consequences and the penalties
appropriate cases, yes, yes,
representative
um, yeah, I, I, something
seriously needs to be done to
stop this flow that's coming
into our state, and you know, we
see it in Albuquerque, we see it
in Santa Fe, we see it in
Espanola and probably Las
Cruces, I mean, the crisis is
real and for, you know, anything
that we can do, even if it's
incrementally.
I would definitely support Madam
Chair.
Representative Samora.
Madam Chair I move a dupe.
2nd
do pass by representatives Moura
and who's second?
Uh, seconded by Representative
Brego, please call Roe
before I um
Have you called role. We did get
a call from an individual who'd
like was uh.
Some information discrepancies,
so let's go ahead and afford
that opportunity.
Terry, can you hear us? Terry
Cole.
Mhm
Thank you. Let's go ahead and
continue with roll.
Representative Anya Nornin.
Pass.
Presentative block.
Yes.
Borego.
Yes.
Observed Lujan.
pass
Reserved Mehia.
Madam floor leader.
No.
Representative Zamora.
Yes
Representative Ona Nonu.
No.
Represented Lujan.
No, explain my vote.
Madam Beer.
Yes.
Madam Chair,
63
Lujan to explain your vote.
Thank you, Madam Chair. um.
As I mentioned earlier, I'm, I'm
just wrapping my head around
this and as I'm looking at um
R FIR, we don't have information
from.
Um, and analysis from uh
education um department or, or
judicial agencies. I'd like to
see more.
More information before I have a
solid vote on this and for my
questioning and asking about,
there was already sentencing in
place. And what I think what
we're trying to do here is
create a balance. And one aspect
I would take from representative
Block was that there are other
uh fentanyl opioids that haven't
been addressed in this bill as
well, and I, if this bill is to
move forward, I would, I would
uh recommend that you, you look
at those other, um, those other
types of um opioids that are,
that are in the system as
As we speak, even though they
may be at a lesser amount, they
exist and they are having the
same consequences, Madam Chair,
if that is the intent of the
bill, I just fundamentally
Need to, um,
have concerns about more
incarceration. I understand
we're trying to balance.
The crisis that we're having
with fentanyl, um, and address
those that are um most at fault
here, here, but there is a
balance and we um
I'd like to have, see how this
bill moves and, you know, the
further information and
education on this. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. Thank
you, Representative Little, and
thank you.
And now we are ready to move on.
You have a due pass. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you, members
of the committees for your
comments.
OK, let's hear House Bill 91,
Representative Ortiz.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, um, I
think this is the 5th time I
have presented some version of
this bill, um, but I think we've
gotten to a place that um makes
a lot of people pretty happy,
um.
I'm here to present HB 91, which
is the public utility rate
Structures Act, uh, it, it seeks
to address a pressing issue, uh,
which is the disproportionately
high utility costs faced by
rural low income and underserved
communities in New Mexico.
On average, New Mexicans living
below the poverty line, spend
20% of their income on energy
bills alone. They face pretty
terrible choices between paying
their light bill and paying for
heating or
Medicine or food, um, what this
bill does is, is that it
empowers the public regulation
commission to consider proposals
for low-income utility rates and
programs by investor-owned
utilities.
Which aimed to reduce the energy
burden on our most vulnerable
populations.
It's, it's critical that New
Mexico joined the other 20
states, including our neighbors,
Arizona and Colorado, which have
been implemented similar
measures to ensure utility
affordability for all.
Um, I have my expert witness,
Doctor Anna Lindon Weller, uh,
who is the senior policy advisor
of Clean energy for Western
resource advocates, you may
remember her from her, uh, state
agency days, um.
And my co-sponsor,
Representative Patricia Roel
Caballero, um.
And that's, that's really it,
Madam Chair, but we do have an
amendment, and I'd like to read
that in if possible.
We'll go ahead and move the
amendment for discussion.
Pardon me, I couldn't hear you,
Madam Chair.
Go ahead and move the amendment
for discussion. Great.
Would you like me to read the
202? Yes, please. 230243.1.
Your amendment.
You wanna go through your
amendment.
Yes.
Sure, it's impossible for me to
hear. I don't know what's going
on. Maybe I'm getting older.
But if you
I can't hear you at all. What
about now? I can hear you now
really well, OK, Madam Chair,
what this amendment does, it, it
just, it really pas down the
bill and makes it uh clear, um,
easier to understand, remove
some confusion, complexities we
uh worked with PNM to make this
amendment.
Uh just a little easier for
everyone to understand on page
2, line 4 after rates, we add
and programs, um, this allows
the PRC to consider a broader
range of utility proposals, um,
which will, um, really give a
lot of more support to our
low-income residents, uh, on, on
page 2, line 5, you add a add
and after the semicolon, and
then the last change is that we,
um, we've struck lines 6 through
1.
on page 2, which basically just
simplifies this bill and makes
it an authorization bill.
And that is the amendment
explanation, Madam Chair.
With that, we stand for
questions.
OK, committee members discussion
on the amendment.
in a block, Madam Chair, thank
you, Representative. So, OK,
I'm, I'm reading your, I just
marked up my green.
Bill of your amendments, which
I'd love to do. And uh so,
On page 24, so we're putting and
programs. Can you give me a
little information on what the
programs that we're referring to
are, Madam Chan.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative
Blanc, thank you for that. Um,
those programs could be, um, you
know, providing energy
efficient, um, appliances, uh,
it could be a rebate programs.
It could be really anything that
I that the investor owned
utility is looking at that would
reduce the energy burden for
low-income Mexicans, particular
for their service area.
Thank you, Madam Chair. That's
all.
Thank you.
We have um
I, I would move to adopt.
Amendment 230243.1. That's a
house Bill 91.
Do we have any opposition to the
adoption of the amendment,
seeing none, let's go ahead and
um
Adopt the amendment into the
bill, and we will now go to uh
public comment.
Let's go do the audience for
comments in support of the bill.
OK.
Let's go ahead and provide one
minute comments and we'll start
with my right, your left, back
here.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
Committee, I'm Ken Hughes with
the Coalition on Sustainable
Communities comprised of 7 local
governments who certainly have
many long constituents who would
benefit from this bill, so I
urge your support.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Melissa Bernardin. I'm
here representing the Sierra
Club and our 35,000 members and
supporters in support of HB 91,
when our friends and neighbors
have to choose between buying
food and medicine or paying
their utility bills. We know we
have a problem. The Senate
passed the sustainable Buildings
Tax Credit, energy efficiency
legislation and the seed program
to help families weatherize and
make their homes more efficient,
but still, New Mexico.
kins living below the poverty
line pay an average of 18% of
their income on utilities. This
bill simply gives utilities the
opportunity to help these
families by establishing
low-income utility rates. Thank
you.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Victoria Narconmaia and
I'm with the Seila Project. I
stand before you today in strong
support of the House Bill 91.
This legislation will create a
pathway to make energy more
affordable for families
struggling with high utility
bills, many low-income
communities and rural households
in New Mexico are paying a
disproportionate share of their
income just to keep the lights
on. House Bill 91 empowers the
public.
Regulation commission to ensure
fair utility rates, reducing the
weight on those who need relief
the most. More than 20 other
states, including our neighbors
in Arizona and Colorado have
already adopted similar programs
that help families while
strengthening local economies,
New Mexico should not.
be left behind by boating in
favor of HB 91, you will be
taking a critical step towards
ensuring that all families have
access to.
Good morning, uh, Madam Chair,
and, and members of the
committee. My name is Ricardo
Gonzalez. I work with El Paso
Electric, and we are
enthusiastically in support of
this bill. Uh, the amount of
work that has gone into this
from the representative and her
um uh colleagues has been
instrumental to getting this
passed and allowing El Paso
Electric, New Mexico territory
to share the same opportunities
that our Texas.
Brothers and sisters have.
So to that end, we are very much
in support of it, and I want to
give a personal thank you to
Representative Ortez for all the
work that she's done on this
bill. Thank you.
Yeah
Madam Chair, members Dean
Archelet on behalf of P&M, first
and foremost, we want to thank
the sponsors and their experts
for all of their incredible work
with us to get this bill to a
place of really enthusiastic and
I, I'm trying to think of
another adjective because Rico
took my enthusiastic support of
this bill, but I'll hit him like
for it later, but no, we just
really want to thank you all for
everything you've done and thank
you and
books.
appreciate it and we
enthusiastic enthusiastically
support 91 HP 91.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, Amy
Barraby, the registered lobbyist
for New Mexico Gas Company. It
has been a distinct privilege to
work with representative Ortiz
and all the other stakeholders
over the past 3 years on this
legislation.
As we share a mutual commitment
to helping our low income
customers we're sincerely
grateful for this empowerment of
the PRC to consider proposals so
that we can further our service
to people. Thank you very much.
Do we have anyone outside?
OK. And let's go to Zoom for
supporting comments.
OK, supporting comics on Zoom,
Larry Sontag, can you hear us?
Larry
Oh, OK, no worries.
All right, um,
Michael.
Can you hear us, Michael?
Uh, you have one minute.
Thank you.
Ona, can you hear us, Ona?
Thank you so much, Ona.
Glenn, can you hear us?
Hi, Glenn, you have one minute.
Go ahead, Glenn.
Thank you so much, Glenn.
Peggy, uh, can you hear us,
Peggy?
Thank you so much, Peggy.
Sylvia
Sylvia Lola, Lola, can you hear
us?
Great.
Thank you so much, Sylvia.
Yeah
And Edith Lopez, can you hear
us?
Thank you so much, and indeed.
Zoe Kraft, can you hear us?
OK.
Thank you so much, Zoe.
OK, thank you. Let's now go to
the audience for comments and
opposition.
Do we have anyone? Please raise
your hand.
Seeing Nan, let's go to Zoom for
opposing comments.
Moving on to opposing comments
on Zoom, we have Carla Santa.
Carla, can you hear us?
Thank you so much, Carla.
Hey, that's it, committee
members, representative block
and then representative Mejia.
And Representative Lujan.
Thank you so much. Thank you,
Representative Ortez,
Representative Caballero, Royal
Caballero, apologies and uh
Thank you so much. Thank you,
Representative Ortez,
Representative Caballero, Royal
Caballero, apologies, and
experts, so a few questions on
this, Madam Chair
representative. So I'm reading
the committee analysis, and it's
been updated with changes with
the newly proposed amendment and
I don't know if you have a copy
of that I can.
Give you mine once I read it, if
you, if you'd like it.
Madam Chair, it pretty much just
says,
And I think this is also in the
AG's analysis too, if you have
that, uh,
And I have a copy of that for
you too, but Madam Chair,
Representative, my big concern,
and I can give you the DJ one
while I'm reading the other one.
It
The analysis says that
Um, it could charge customers
with identical consumption,
different rates, effectively
making one customer responsible
for a portion of the
lower-income customers bill, and
then in the analysis it says,
um, this change will necessarily
increase the bills of other
customers. So that's where I'm
kind of concerned, and I'm just
wondering, Madam Chair
Representative, uh, do you agree
with that assessment? And if so,
uh, how are we going to remedy
that, Madam Chair?
Madam Chair, Representative
Block.
It's a really good question. And
it's actually,
Seems simple and is complicated
because ratemaking is
complicated. Um, so,
What this bill does, in essence
is allow the PRC to consider.
whether a low income rate or
program is just and reasonable.
The Public Utility Act.
Essentially,
Requires the PRC to first of
all, consider whether a rate is
just and reasonable, and that
applies to all forms of rates,
regular rates that you pay
residential rates, um,
commercial rates, economic
development rates.
All sorts of rates. Um, what
this bill does is allow the PRC
to consider a new type of rate.
Uh, with different categories.
Now all rates together.
Or a kind of balance, and it's
true that on the face of it.
Every time you have one group of
people pay less, other people
pay more if you have the same
number to reach at the end.
The question really is,
How much is that?
Going to be. And that's what the
PRC is designed to evaluate.
That's why we have a public
regulation commission.
Um, in other states where
similar low income rates are
authorized. You see a bill
impact of approximately 2 cents
per month.
On other residential customers,
which is not a very large amount
compared to
The overall utility bill. But
this is actually a question of
rate design.
And
One of the things that this bill
allows is for each utility, if
they wish to come to the PRC
with a proposed rate design.
And then the PRC will evaluate
whether that is good or not.
And not just for low income
people, but for every ratepayer.
Commercial industrial,
residential.
So, yes, there are impacts, but
They're not that big, and the
PRC can prevent them from being
too big.
You for that answer, Madam
Chair, Representative, and so, I
guess it kind of was brought up
maybe in one of these analyses,
I forget, but it talked about
somebody who
is technically in poverty,
right? They can barely pay their
bills, but according to whatever
the poverty, poverty limit is,
they're right above it. And so
Madam to representative, I'm
wondering how are we addressing
those folks? Cause I know when I
was growing up,
My folks, my mom was a school
teacher. My dad worked for the
state.
And we were, we were not doing
well, you know, we were very,
very low income, but because we
were right above the little knot
that they had for what low
income means because we were
taxed at a higher rate, etc. we
were getting less money in the
door. What about those folks?
Cause that's, that's kind of
what my concern is with my
constituents. I have some who
are affluent. I have some who
are very, very low income, and I
know that there are a lot of
folks who are in the middle
there, and they fell right below
what that low income threshold
is, and there's still barely
making.
it. So I just want to make sure
those folks are being considered
and could you just address that
for me, Madam Chair,
Representatives, expert. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative Block. That is,
that is the challenge that we
all face with our, with all of
these bills, right? How do we
support folks who don't qualify
for certain things because
they're just, you know, they
make a couple dollars more an
hour or maybe just a couple of
dollars more a month. So I think
the beauty of this bill is that
it really allows the utility,
the IOU to design a program.
based on what their customers
look like, you know, maybe they
choose to design a program um
that
is for folks who qualify for
SNAP or who um who are at 200%
poverty or 150% poverty or 250%
poverty, which would encompass a
lot of folks who are, you know,
are the who could be classified
as the working poor in New
Mexico. So I think that's, you
know, that's really kind of
baked into the bill is it really
Um, it really depends on what
the utility wants to do, and
they can do a variety of
programs, and it could be a
lower rate uh per kilowatt hour,
you know, that's their low
income rate based on whatever.
Whatever their qualification is
of low income is.
Uh, it could be an efficiency
and expanded efficiency program.
Um, it could be, you know, that
they decide that, you know, all
those who are receiving light
heat get a certain, a certain
rate.
I think that's, that's sort of
the beauty of the
Of the way the bill is designed,
that it affects both rates and
programs, but Ely, do you, would
you like to?
Just a very brief edition that
pretty much covered everything I
could say about it. Um, but I
did want to add that.
A utility can also propose more
than one rate or program. This
is not a one-time deal.
Um
The utility will have to go
through the regulated process
every time.
But
If they want to design a program
that hits the poorest of the
poor and a different program
that eases the burden on those
people who are just above or
just barely making it, they can
do that. And each utility will
know their customers best in
their service area.
Madam Chair and thank you,
Representative and I appreciate
that and yeah, it still gives me
a little pause with when it
comes to the actual application
of this because
I don't like the idea of some
people paying more, some people
paying less for the same amount
of energy, and I, I know that
that's a, it's a concern that
I've heard, and I also had
another question. I got an email
from a constituent who
They referenced
A Supreme Court case in the
state Supreme Court regarding
Utility rates, I think it was
regarding phone rates, Madam
Chair, I think it was uh
Mountain States Legal versus
NMSCC.
And I think it said that
establishing a telephone
discount rate program with
differences between economically
needy who receive the same
service is unjustly
discriminatory, and so, Madam
Chair Representative, I'm
wondering, could you address
that because I don't want to be
putting the state into any
litigation if we do something
like this and it comes back to
have to go to court. We, we
don't like to go to court,
right? So,
Do we have a response to that,
Madam Chair and representatives
expert.
we don't like to go to court,
but we often do, um.
Mountain states, I'm glad you
brought that up. That is really
the case that has made it
impossible for the, for
Any utility and for the PRC to
allow for a low income rate, um,
but what mountain states.
does do is that it doesn't
prohibit the legislature from
authorizing low income rates.
Um, it only prohibits the PRC
from approving those rates
without the legislature's
authorization, which is what
Um, we're doing now.
That clears that up for me.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I, I
just wanted to make sure to
address that constituent's
concern cause
It seemed kind of
scary
Madam Chair Representative Buck,
it's the reason why we haven't
been able to do this, um, but we
can do it as a, as a
legislature, we can allow that,
that, you know, they, we allow
the PRC to
Consider.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, and then my last
question, it may be a point
question, I'm not sure, but it
was also in the committee
analysis, which continued here
it said ratepayer
subsidiessidization of low
energy income customers or low
income customers has
historically been contrary to
long established principles of
fair, just and reasonable
rate-making and cost causation,
and so Madam Chu Representative,
I guess I just want to make sure
that we are going with the norm
and the well established
principles of.
Rama cause I want ratepayers to
be able to have equal playing
fields here, uh, can, can we
just address that for me real
quickly, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative Block, um.
We don't believe that
subsidization is contrary to
rate-making principles, um.
Great design, which super
complicated and that's like
that's gonna require like
several hours to really unpack
it, um, is really, it's, it's a
policy choice, and it can also
include subsidization, right? We
subsidize, you know, economic
development rates, um,
So, uh, it's, it's really sort
of a an art that I'd love for.
Sure. Um, so,
You mentioned cost causation and
subsidization. And these are
both components of rape design.
But they're not the same thing.
Um, so the principle of cost
causation, I would absolutely
agree with the committee
analysis on cost causation, that
it is an established principle
that people who incur a cost
should pay for that cost,
proportionately.
But
Subsidization is something that
happens in rate design, due to
the way that the electric grid
functions, and also do the
policy choices that we make.
Um, for example, if you look at
the um statute that we're
amending.
There are several other areas
where the legislature has
explicitly authorized
functionally subsidization.
One of them is for economic
development rates, which is
honestly an extremely important
function of the PRC to give for
a brief time or for a particular
area.
A business in extra advantage so
that they can get established in
New Mexico.
Um
Similarly, in that section, we
have a section on the efficient
use of Energy Act.
Um, which, when that was passed,
the legislature decided that
that could have low income
programs.
So
Subsidization.
Basically,
It happens, and one of the jobs
of the PRC is to prevent it from
happening too much.
To keep it as balanced as
possible, while still allowing
for rate design to express the
policy choices of the local
state.
Um, the policy choices we make
in New Mexico look different
than the ones that other states
make.
Um, sometimes they look the
same. This one we, I
If we, we get this password
joining a sizable crowd.
Um
So I mean, I don't want to say
that it's wrong that these
things happen.
But
They're a choice that we make
where we're balancing.
Can
We support new businesses with
everybody else paying a little
bit more. And we help
People get out of poverty and
not have so much energy burden
by having people pay a little
bit more.
And the PRC is there that
safeguard that backstop, to make
sure it's a little bit, not
enough to do harm.
That wouldn't be a just and
reasonable rate.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you for those explanations
and yeah, I, I think, I mean, I,
I get the idea of the
legislation. I mean, I really
do. I think that we want people
to be able to afford to put the
lights on. I mean, everyone
agrees with that. And I just
think it's the way that we
approach that is the question,
because, you know, I'm reading,
the more I read these analyses
and then the bill itself, like,
there's there's questions that
keep popping up for me, cause it
says here, while low income
customers may benefit, their
equity concerns since the cost
of subsidizing these rates.
will be redistributed to other
non low income ratepayers and
this will be exacerbated for
utilities that serve
predominantly low-income areas.
So, like in a low income area,
there may not be many folks to
offset.
The cost if it's a predominantly
low income area and I just, I
have some concerns about that. I
know you, you can probably
address that, but that's pretty
much my last point and question
and thank you Madam Chair and
representative.
Madam Chair, Representative
Block, um, we're not mandating a
low income rate. We're allowing
the um the PRC to consider those
low income rates and it really
is going to be different for
each of those areas and it might
not even be a rate for those
IOUs and I don't know I'm not
sure what your service area is,
is it P&M PNM, so they may be
able to offer your constituents,
um, a program, you know, instead
of a rate or both. Um, so
that's, that's really what, what
this bill is doing is really
just allow
knowing the possibility and to
consider all of those things,
right, really looking at their
customer base to consider what's
going to work for them.
To serve the most vulnerable and
the most the folks who need it
most.
Thank you.
Representative Mejia.
Thank you Madam Chair. I thank
you, Representative, for
bringing this bill forward. I
just have a couple of questions
and maybe um
Some of them were already
answered by um the questions
that uh representative Block
already asked, but I have a
question on the FAR report on
the cypnosis of the House Bill
91.
He says House Bill 91.
adds 2 additional rates that the
public regulation commission can
approve.
What are those two additional
rates?
So, um, every time a utility
wants to make a new rate, they
have to go to the public
regulation commission and
essentially ask permission.
Um, and the additional rates are
these low income rates that
we've been talking about.
Um, and
If a utility in their next rape
case when they come to the PRC
wants to, that would be have a
low income rate, that would be
an additional rate that they
were proposing. Thank you for
that answer, Madam. I have just
one more question on the um.
PRC notes that a definition or
participating customers and low
income should be added for
clarification. Um, what, um,
What
Are you using the federal
poverty guidelines for this.
Madam Chair.
representative Mejia, that
language is no longer in the
bill.
We, we, we
I'm sure. He says, um.
participating customers and low
income, um.
So I want to just clarify that
uh you're using the federal
poverty guidelines for that,
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, Representative
Meia, it would depend on the
utility. Um, so they could.
Use the Federal poverty
guideline if they chose. They
could use a different one.
There has to be a guideline, but
the utility has to include that
in their proposal.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative.
Senate of Luhan.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
I just want to say I support the
idea. I, I support the bill,
just so you know ahead of time,
but I do have a lot of questions
about this. And, and when most
of them go to some of the, the
comments, information from
Mnerd, um, and their concerns.
Um, HB 93 would create an
additional
92 page.
Anyway, this is.
I'm reading both and so what is
it, is this with this um with HB
13.
It's in, it's in um
That we will be um seeing in the
session this year, um, and
looking at beneficial
electrification.
How does this integrate with
that, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair Representative
Lujan, that's a really good
question. If that bill were to
pass, and there would be
beneficial electrification plans
that a utility would file. I
could actually see that a
utility could
Propose a low income beneficial
electrification rate or program.
Um, in much the same way as
right now, if this bill passes
and HB 13 doesn't, they could
propose a low income
transportation electrification
program.
Using existing law.
Um, so I think they complement
each other. Thank you, Madam
Chair. I'm I'm just.
There's, and there's another
bill too. That's why I was going
between information pieces and
just kind of putting this all
together. Um, so, Madamho, this,
this bill does a really good
thing and and looking at, you
know, um, having the PRC, um,
Implement the possibility of
what you're proposing in this
bill through their process of
looking at rates and, and so
the, the plan would come from
the utility.
And the utility, each utility
could have their own plan. Is
that correct?
Madam Chair Representative Lu
Han, yes, is correct.
So
In
The web of distribution.
Um,
We have, say we have um
To, well, we have PNM here, we
have El Paso Electric in our
state. We have others, and, but
the co-ops are not.
They can't opt into this. Is
that correct, Madam Chair?
I'm Chair Representative Luhan,
yes, but they're not required
to. They're not, but if they
did, and we had these different
plans, how does do those
different plans, if all met and
accepted by the PRC interact
with each other, just would it
just be based on those?
Doesn't those ratepayers within
those utilities, I'm assuming.
Madam Chair, Representative,
yes. Thank you. And so when
we're talking about, um, and one
of my concerns, Madam Chair,
because I have talked to you
about this and, and, and like
legislation in the past is what
um we heard from one of the
Um, the folks online that was
against the bill, Carla, and her
fear of um
Unintended consequences. What
have you, what unintended
consequences of you all thought
of that could possibly happen,
man.
And I answered.
Representative.
So
Mhm
A bad program would have lots of
unintended consequences. Um, it
could raise rates unreasonably
on other people.
But that is why we have a public
regulation commission. um.
It has this deeply important
regulatory role that
Has decades of expertise in its
staff.
And that staff is nonpartisan
apolitical. They are utility
engineers and economists.
And they're the ones who
Look out for unintended
consequences.
Um, and I very much think that.
When we build a regulatory
structure like we have at the
public regulation Commission.
And we make sure that they have
the good staff that they do, and
the smart commissioners that
they do.
Um
That those unintended
consequences, there are
guardrails against them
happening. Thank you.
Thank you, ma'am, sure. I, I
approve. I, I think this is
going to uh add some other
concerns and we talked and it
was not the same bills that I've
seen in the past. This is really
like mentioned, uh, diving deep
into this. So thank you, Madam
Chair.
Represented Brego.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, presenters. Um, so, uh,
Madam Chair, I wanted to mention
that in 2023, the New Mexico
poverty rate.
With 17.6%, which is higher than
the national average of 11.5%
and um that, those are the
latest statistics that I could
find, which makes New Mexico one
of the poorest states in the
nation. Um, I wanted to also
mention that um in 2023, we were
just coming out of COVID and as
you all know, that was a really,
really difficult time for.
Not just New Mexicans, but all
over the country, but New Mexico
in particular, especially being
one of the poorest states in the
country. I also wanted to
mention Madam Chair, that the um
our cost of living has
significantly increased. I don't
have that statistic right in
front of me, but I think that
when we talk about consumer
price index and um consumer
price index is, is something
that is measured monthly.
And that affects goods and
services, um, Madam Chair, just
last night, um, on my way home,
my mom said, go get your
groceries. I did, and I checked
the price of eggs. They were,
and I mentioned this because I
know that our sponsor is really
big on eggs.
And uh I uh, I noticed that it
was $9.36 and so I didn't buy
the eggs when I was there last
night, um, but I, I raised that
issue because um.
When I mentioned the um consumer
price index, which measures
goods and services, which goods
meaning eggs, um.
The, according to our white
charts, the CPI is current,
currently in January 19th, or
I'm sorry, January 15th, 2025,
which is just a few days ago,
right? About almost a month ago.
At the time is just going by
fast. Um, the consumer index
price index was 317.68. Um, this
is a 39% increase from the
previous month of 2.
9% increase from the previous
year.
Mentioning Madam Chair, all
these statistics because I think
it tells me how I want to vote
on this. Um, we're simply giving
the PRC, the option to create
these programs, and I don't
understand why we wouldn't do
that for the lowest of the low,
um, populations in our state,
especially since we're elected
to, and I don't want to make
this sound like I'm running for
re-election again, but um
You know, we're, we're just
giving the PRC the option to to
create these programs. So with
that, Madam Chair, um,
I look forward to my vote.
Representative Zamora.
Madam Chair, I move a do pass.
please call roll.
Is there anybody in your name?
Yes.
Representative block? No.
Representative Borego.
Representative Lu Han.
Representative Mejia.
Yes.
A madam floor leader. Yes.
Representative Zamora.
Madam Vice Chair, yes.
Madam Chair.
Representative Ortiz, how would
you pass?
Thank you, Madam Chair.
OK. Stay in the hot seat.
You have House Bill 93. Thank
you, Madam Chair, um,
This is not as simple as the
previous film, Madam Chair. I'm
gonna, I'm gonna make my way
through it.
Uh, thank you, members, Madam
Chair, um, I'm here to present
HB 93, which is the advanced
grid Technology Plans Act, um.
This bill is meant to address uh
one of the problems that are
electric grid is facing, which
is congested transmission lines.
Uh, New Mexico has some of the
best energy resources in the
United States, um, but getting
these new utility scale, uh,
sources of clean energy
generation like wind, solar,
geothermal, hooked up to the
electric grid is a very slow
process.
Yes, ma'am. I will let's
resettle in the room.
Madam Chair, I think that's why
I couldn't hear you before
because there was like, or maybe
I'm going de Madam chair.
It would be.
Let's go ahead and um hear House
Bill 93, but before we
Begin your um presentation
representative. I want to
re-announce that House Bill 98
was a due pass as amended.
Thank you. So now we can hear
House Bill 93.
991 was due pass as amended.
Now we can go to 93. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Um,
So, HB 93 is really dealing with
congested, um, transmission
lines. We want to get the
Energy that we generate, the
renewable energy that we
generate across the state,
solar, wind, geothermal, and,
you know, get it into, get it
onto the grid, um.
What we, what this bill does is
help our utilities make use of a
grants, advanced grid
technologies that can unlock the
Extra capacity on the grid that
we already have. Um, so,
What we're calling um
I want you to think about it
this way. Advanced grid
technologies, which we, we're
calling um gets, which are grid
enhancing technologies. They're,
um, they're sort of like the
like energy efficiency for the
electric grid.
They, we're not talking about
new lines or new generation. We
don't need building permits or
right away permits and we don't
need to put new easements on
land for this. We're we're
trying to do is make these
advanced uh grid technologies
make the existing grid more
capable of taking in that power.
Um, so this bill, um, really
encourages and pushes the
utilities to make full use of
these advanced, advanced grid
technologies in two ways. Um.
First, we asked the utilities to
include um advanced grid
technologies in their 20 year
planning processes, which are
called the integrated resource
plans. We're going to get super
technical with this uh with this
bill, um, and, and second, um,
the bill guidelines and guard
rails for the for the PRC uh to
prove the recovery of reasonable
costs for advanced grid
technologies under the grid
modernization Act. Um, Madam
Chair, we have a
Committee substitute today, um,
and again, I have my expert
witness, Doctor Anna Lindon
Weller, senior policy advisor of
Clean Energy.
Madam Chair, I move the
committee substitute for a
discussion.
We have it passed out.
Hey, would you like to read the
202 number and discuss your
community substitute. Thank you,
Madam Chair. The 20202 number is
230324.1.
Would you like me to explain the
committee substitute,
do we need to move the
discussion on the
Oh
Madam Chair, I'm going to
explain it. Um, so we were, we
worked with the PRC with PNM and
we made some big changes to the
original bill, um, in section
one, which addresses cost
recovery for advanced grid
technology projects. It's, it's
now an amendment to the grid
modernization Act as opposed to
a whole new section of laws
we're amending grid
modernization, um, it means that
the cost recovery for advanced
grid technology products, uh,
projects can now be, um, salt
like.
Any other grid modernization
project. Um, there's no
requirement for utility to
pursue an advanced grid
technology projects, so we're
not making them do that. Um,
any, any and all projects under
the grid Modernization Act would
already exists, are at the
utilities's discretion. Um, in
this version of the committee
sub, uh, the utilities no longer
have to uh file a separate
advanced grid technologies plan.
It is not mandatory.
it is, you know, at their own
discretion, um,
So that for the cost recovery
approval, um,
And adjudicate, which is an
adjudicated process. It's
separate from the planning
process in the ERRP which is not
adjudicated in the same way. I,
I hope that addresses some of
the concerns about this bill,
um, and again, I just want to
reiterate that these were
changes that came at the request
with a lot of negotiation with
with the PRC and PNM and we made
some changes to definitions, um,
so they're, you know, they're
more clarifying, um, make sure
that the technical terms are
accurate and also achievable,
um, those
Those changes came out of
discussions with advanced Energy
United, Inner Western PNM and uh
lastly, Madam Chair, in section
4.
Which amends existing law on
integrated resource planning,
um, we had a little bit of a
language clarification to make
sure that the advanced grid
technologies are one of the
things that the utility will
need to consider when writing
their IRP. It's complicated,
Madam Chair, but with that, we
stand for questions.
Thank you, Representative
committee members discussion on
committee substitute.
Representative Lujan. um.
Madam Chair, I, I'm following.
Somewhat because I kind of
chewed on the initial, the
original bill, not knowing that
there was a substitute.
I remember we're just getting
the substitute now, so, um,
Can I ask a couple of questions
related from the previous two,
OK. Um, so.
Madam Chair, um,
Representative
So, um, in regards to, and maybe
this will get us through the,
you know, get through quicker,
um.
In regards to some of the issues
that Ener had.
Um, to the bill, um,
In it creating an additional
utility filing that was.
That was corrected in the
substitute, correct?
Yes, ma'am.
OK, that's good. Um, that was a
concern. And then there are
other
OK, so another uh cost recovery
issue is um the original bill
allowed utilities to submit
tariff riders or changes in the
base rate for approval to
recover costs associated with
the advanced grid technology
plan.
Or projects typically general
rates, cases in New Mexico can
take 9 months to a year that
took, that was taken care of by
you moving this into the grid
modernization Act, is that
correct? Yes.
Great. Those are my concerns
too, too,
um.
And then the other concern with
Amner was.
Uh, regarding shared savings,
which returns a defined portion
of grid enhancing technologies.
Uh,
That provide uh avoided cost
benefits infrastructure owners
through the I.
I'm going, I'm getting confused
with this, Madam Chair, because
I'm trying to put it together
with what I heard.
Um
Go for the back here.
Um
Regarding methods of recovering
costs still I think we covered
that. So the next part would be
most distributed um distribution
cooperatives in New Mexico are
members of larger interstate
generation and transition
cooperatives that fall under
federal regulatory jurisdiction.
So there is a federal
jurisdiction issue that Ener
took up with it. Is that
Is that addressed to the
substitute, Madam Chair.
It is and in two ways. Thank
you. Um, so first of all, Madam
Chair, in the
In section 1 of the bill, um,
you'll want to look at letter H
of section 1.
There's a ring-fencing
provision.
Which says that
Cost recovery.
Or any of these projects can
only be
Applied in 1 2nd I can. I
apologize.
Madam Chair. Um, so, Madam Chair
Representative Lujan.
We've tried to make a very clear
distinction that where FERC has
jurisdiction, the PRC cannot
approve cost recovery with FERC
has jurisdiction for rates, um,
and that would apply to those
generation and transmission
cooperatives that you were
talking about.
Um, our rural Electric co-ops
also.
Don't have to ever do one of
these programs. It's totally
optional.
Um, and the only additional
requirement that this bill
places on them is that they
Talk about whether they are
using these technologies or not.
When they submit their annual
reports to the PRC.
Thank you, Madam Chair. OK, um,
I'm trying to grasp you, that's
very general, um, information,
um, and this bill is very, it's
a, it's a heavy, um.
Regulatory bill, um.
All right. I'm gonna try to stay
consistent, Madam Chair. Mm.
Yeah, I guess I'll go to that,
the, the same question that I
had previously and in this in
relationship to other like
bills, what do you see with HB
90, well, your previous bill I'm
OK with Senate Bill 142 and
House Bill 13 again regarding
the beneficial electric
electrification plans with the
PRC. What's the relationship,
Madam Chair?
Well, with House Bill 13, I
believe that this is a
complementary relationship,
because this bill mostly
addresses the transmission grid,
the local transmission grid. So
like the transmission lines,
Madam Chair, representative that
PNM owns, um, or another utility
owns, and it's not really about
the distribution grid, the way
House Bill 13 is about the
distribution grid.
So they do different things.
Um, and
Madam Chair.
HB 13 is a distribution bill.
Thank you.
This bill is not.
Adam chair, um, and in terms of
Senate Bill 142.
I have to admit that I haven't
thought about how those changes
to the grid modernization Act
would interact with this, but
from my brief reading of Senate
Bill 142, which I haven't really
worked on yet.
Um, I don't think they conflict.
I think that all the changes in
Senate Bill 142, if they were to
pass, are about the evaluation
of grid modernization grants.
Um, and this is giving another
option for a utility, Madam
Chair Representative to
Apply through the grid
modernization process at the PRC
were a different kind of project
that wasn't explicitly
authorized before.
So I don't think there's a
conflict.
Man, um, in, in the amendment
and substitution, um.
I'm reading through some of the
things here too. You children no
longer have to file a separate
advanced grid technologies plan
through this. Is that correct?
Great. Um,
Is that a good thing or a bad
thing, Madam Chair?
I think that depends on um who
you talk to. I think, well,
There are reasons that we took
it out of the bill.
And one of those is because
Utilities have to do a lot of
filings.
And adding extra filings can
produce duplication.
Um, and secondly, after a lot of
discussion with both the PRC,
Madam Chair, Representative, and
with P&M.
We came to the conclusion that
The planning that needs to be
there is really in the
integrated resource plan, that
20 year plan, that utility is
already file and that what we
needed to do really was
Request explicitly in the IRP.
Section of law, which is in the
efficient use of Energy Act. Um,
what we're amending in section 4
of this bill.
Just to add a few words to say
that a utility, when they submit
their integrated resource plan
has to consider how they would
use or are using or plan to use
advanced grid technologies.
Thank, thank you, Madam Chair.
So, um,
Within the the advanced grid
technologies which include the
grid enhancing technologies like
dynamic line ratings and
advanced conductors are like
energy efficiency for existing
grid deploying them allows the
grid to carry more electricity
without needing to build new
lines. That's good. Um.
I guess what I'm trying to, uh,
I'm, I'm just confused because
of what I've.
had the concerns here and just
trying to put, put this all
together, what you did and I
just haven't had enough time to
do that. I will support the
bill, madam Chair, because I
want this to move forward and
have a, a more conversation
about this, but um I may meet
with you offline if that's OK,
Madam Chair.
Absolutely representative.
Thanks so much, Madam Chair
Representative. Good to see you
again. Hi. So, Madam Chair,
representative, a few questions
on this thing, this bill rather,
um.
Sorry,
sorry, it's very long.
Madamer, so, uh, I'll, I'll just
start quickly.
So Madam Chair, on page 2, line
11. So it says applications may
include requests for approval of
advanced grade technology plans,
so that's not a requirement,
however, above that in the
existing language, it says that
they shall include the costs for
grid modernization projects on
page 2. So,
So, and I know, and I guess this
question is going to tie into
another question because
Following this on page.
6.
It now has a requirement from
line 13 where it says when
considering advanced grid tech,
plans for approval of commission
shall review the reasonableness.
So, Madam Chair Representative,
when I'm talking, when I'm
thinking about this advanced
grid technology plan. And then
What they should do as a
commission to look for
reasonableness. How is that
really defined and how do we
know what, what reasonableness
means in the definition of
advanced grid.
Um, Madam Chair, Representative
block, so reasonableness is not
defined because it is one of
those terms of art in the Public
Utility Act. It is up to the
commission to determine what
reasonable is. There is a little
bit of definition of it
actually. Um, just in reasonable
rates have to balance the
interests of the public, the
ratepayer, and the investors in
the investor-owned utility. And
that is in the utility franchise
portion of the public
Fility Act manager.
Um
So that is the standard that the
public regulation commission
uses for all of their decision
making.
In this case, we've added all of
those shall consider these other
things, or specifically this
kind of project, what are
important parts that if
The utility proposes that they
want.
ratepayers to pay for this. Is
it a good version of the thing?
Is it a good project? How did
it, and we've provided some
guide guidelines to the PRC to
determine that.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you, Representative and
And I, I agree, I think.
When it comes to these laws,
it's all about, it depends,
right? It depends on the
situation, etc. So, Madam Chair,
Representative, I'm gonna
Keep going here on the
definitions from page 6 to, not
the definitions, but the
portions on 6 to 7.
So, Madam Chair Representative,
it says,
On page 7, be reasonably
expected to increase access to
and the use of clean renewable
energy with consideration given
for increasing access for
low-income users. So I know that
we just
Pass something regarding
low-income users. I'm not going
to ask about that, but I am
going to see about what this
means when they are in the
process of approving any changes
to these transmission lines.
What is the PRC looking for when
it comes to that, because it's
kind of
It's like the goal of what
they're doing, but it's not
specifically what they're doing
when it comes to ratepayers. So
how, how is that included in
that, Madam Chair. Madam Chair
Representative Block, I have an
example for you.
Um, so,
One kind of clean and renewable
energy is rooftop solar.
Um, or community solar. And I
want to talk about a
hypothetical community solar
project.
Not any of the ones that
actually exist. Um,
for the sake of this discussion.
Let's say that a utility.
Has through the solar process,
there's a community solar
facility proposed for a location
in their service territory. It's
one of the approved ones. It's
gonna be interconnected, but it
turns out that the transmission
line that would serve that new
like 23 megawatts of energy
doesn't have enough capacity.
To carry that.
Um, the, the utility.
And the community solar
developer have to pay for that
upgrade.
Um, and there's two ways to do
it. You could build a new line.
Or you could do one of these
advanced grid technology
projects like use advanced
conductors or reconducted the
line or use dynamic line ratings
to get that extra capacity, um,
and doing a project like that
would fulfill this one of the
criteria of something the PRC
would look at, does this project
increase the ability for
This community solar project to
come online. So that would be
increasing the access to cleaner
renewable energy.
Yeah, that, that makes sense.
Thank you for that
while you think of your one more
last question
I'd like to pause. We, um,
We need to hear from the
audience. So I'd like to go to
the audience for public comment
in support of the bill, please
raise your hands if you're gonna
comment, OK? We'll start with my
right. One minute, please, in
support of the bill.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee,
Melissa Bernardin with the
Sierra Cle Rio Grande chapter. I
haven't looked at the amendment
in detail, so I'm speaking on
the basic focus of the bill, the
underlying intent, New Mexico is
bringing on more and more
renewable energy resources, take
replacement of coal at the San
Juan Generating Station, solar
and battery replacement were the
cheapest alternatives and help
replace the local tax base, but
with that build out, we need
more robust.
mission. There are innovative
approaches like reconductoring.
That utilize existing lines to
increase the grid's energy
transmission capacity. We
strongly support this bill in
that it ensures that our
electric infrastructure keeps up
with the energy transition.
Thank you so much.
Madam Chair, um, members of the
committee, Jim Desjardin. I'm
with you, um, renewable energy
Industries Association of New
Mexico. We have 60+ members.
We've been around since 2004.
Profound changes happening in
the energy world. We're on our
way to a 100% carbon-free
electricity.
We also now can generate
electricity in our homes and
businesses and 50,000 people do
this already. And we're also in
the beginnings of a huge
increase in demand for
electricity with electric
vehicles, building
electrification, and now data
centers. We believe this bill
helps address this changing
world to allow utilities to file
plans to use alternative
methodalities to traditional
poles and wires.
This will allow us in a
cost-effective way to maximize
the efficiency of existing
transmission infrastructure. We
believe this.
Planning tool will help us to
achieve our goals for a zero
emission economy, accommodate
new electrical load and maximize
the minimize additional costs.
We do urge to do pass.
Good morning, Madam Chair
members of the committee, Carrie
Robin Bruder, I'm the registered
lobbyist with Advanced Energy
United. Uh, we support the
committee substitute. We think
that there was a lot of work
done on it, and we think that it
just makes a lot of sense to say
we have poles in the ground that
are transmitting electricity
right now. What can we do to
increase capacity on those
current poles and lines and make
sure that the utilities are able
to recover reasonable cost for
that activity.
So that we can bring more and
more projects online that
benefit all of the energy
consumers, um, and electricity
consumers in New Mexico. So, we
think this bill makes a lot of
sense and we urge its passage
today.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh,
members of the committee, Jared
Najar speaking on behalf of El
Paso Electric. Um, we just
wanted to thank the sponsor for
her tremendous amount of work
she's put in on this bill and
her willingness to work with all
stakeholders and for the reasons
previously stated, we support
this bill.
Thank you. Do we have anybody
outside?
OK, let's go to Zoom for
comments and support.
Tom Solomon, can you hear us?
Yes, I can. Can you hear me.
Great. Thank you. Uh, my name is
Tom Solomon. I'm co-coordinator
of the Climate Advocacy Group
350 New Mexico, and on behalf of
our 7000 members, I want to
speak in strong support of this
bill.
I worked with the PRC last year
to have Julia Selker, who's the
national director of the Watts
Coalition, uh, present to the
PRC on the benefits of grid
enhancing technologies, which
she did in May of 2024. The
three commissioners were
unanimously supportive of these
concepts after hearing her
presentation because they
fundamentally increase the
efficiency of our existing grid,
which lowers costs for all
customers.
A 2021 rattle Group study of
state level implementation of
gets technologies in Oklahoma
and Arkansas showed that the
money invested paid for itself
in about 6 months by a lower
congestion costs. This is just
smart legislation that will
strengthen the grid, lower
costs, and help speed the
addition of low cost green
energy to the grid, and we urge
a due pass. Thank you.
Thank you so much, Tom.
Ona Porter, can you hear us?
Yes, thank you.
Good morning again, Madam Chair,
members of the committee.
Uh, as the representative
Offering this bill suggested
this is more complicated than
the one previously, uh,
presented. However, it is
equally important.
The whole world of regulation
and uh utility.
Um
Production is very arcane.
Prosperity Works has been
intervening before the PRC for
more than 20 years on behalf of
limited income people. And we
know that without
The uh the grid enhanced uh
technology that is available,
there will be many.
opportunities missed in terms of
people all over our state,
wishing to adopt electric cars
and also solar. We urge passage
of the bill.
As is presented and amended.
Thank you.
Thank you so much, Ona.
Brian Condy, can you hear us?
Good morning, Madam chair. It's
actually Deborah Condit here
with uh I'm the registered
lobbyist for Inner West Energy
Alliance, uh, and we're here
today in strong support of House
Bill 93, in order to continue
the growth of renewable energy
in New Mexico. We need
additional transmission
capacity. In addition to our
goals of building new
transmission lines to support
the clean energy transition.
This bill will help existing
transmission lines carry even
more electricity. We are excited
by the
utilities consideration of these
advanced transmission
technologies, and this bill will
clearly tie that consideration
to the regular integrated
resource planning process. We
urge a yes vote on House Bill 93
in support of transmission and
clean energy. Thank you.
You so much, Deborah. Thank you.
Now let's go back to the
audience for comments and
opposition. Please raise your
hands.
Seeing none, let's go to Zoom.
Or comments in opposition.
Seeing none, we're back to you
represented a block. Thank you
so much, Madam Chair, and I'm so
glad we heard from the audience
and
Sorry that I, I, I, I thought I
missed the public comment and I
was kind of confused for a
second, so I'm glad that there
are folks here. So thank you
Madam Chair and Representative.
So,
What page was I on was I on? OK,
Madam Chair.
I think I was on page 7 and we
were talking about what the
commission shall consider, etc.
So,
Madam Chair Representative, I,
I, I do understand the point of
the legislation, and it's to
give them more options when it
comes to increasing capacity
when it comes to transmission.
So my my question and it's, I
guess it's technically
hypothetical because
I know when, when we're talking
about transitioning from certain
energy sources to others.
There needs to be more capacity
and I know in New Mexico we
don't have a nuclear power
plant.
Although
I've, I've read a lot about it.
I think it's in a lot of
transition.
Um, transition guidelines, etc.
and I'm just wondering if that
did someday, I hope it does.
It's a multibillion dollar
investment that could help our
state if it did come through,
would this help affect that when
it comes to capacity, because I
know it could really produce a
lot of energy, Madam Chair and
representative.
Madam Chair, Representative
Block, uh, yes.
Cool. OK, thank you so much,
Madam Chair and Representative
that is good to clear up. And
then next I'm just gonna go to
definitions real quick on page
9.
Madam,
Chair, we're talking about
advanced conductors, advanced
grid technology.
I had kind of dig to find that
word actually advanced
technology. So, um,
So Madam Chair Representative.
It's talking about reliability
of existing or new electric
transmission. So I'm just
wondering regarding costs.
How is this going to affect the
ratepayers. I know we talked
about the community solar
project, but in general,
Any kind of
New changes to the transmission
lines with this.
be a direct cost directly back
to the consumer. I know it's
going to be approved through the
PRC, but could it be, Madam
Chair, like any other utility,
um,
Operations and maintenance,
capital project, yes, um, this
is a kind of capital project.
What, um, one of our public
commenters mentioned that
Brattle study and I, I read it
too, um, and
I bring it up because Madam
Chair, representative,
It shows that doing this kind of
upgrade with these new
technologies tends to be
cheaper.
Then building a new line with
higher capacity to begin with.
And that's actually one of the
things that um initially drew me
as an energy policy person to
this concept is that we need to
expand the transmission grid.
How can we do this in the
fastest, cheapest way.
We're going to build new things,
but we should also, if it's
cheaper and better over time,
upgrade new things. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative, and I agree with
you, and I think I would just
use an analogy of a house,
right? If you, you have an old
house that has really good bones
built in the 70s, like my house
actually, it was flipped, right?
So they flipped it. It's a great
house and, and now we're using
what we already had in place,
but now it's been improved and
it's even better now. So that,
that makes a lot of sense to me.
And so, next, Madam Chair
Representative, I know your
definition of the advanced grid
technology.
It seems all inclusive, but are
we, do we see any other kinds of
technologies that could need to
change this definition in the
future. And I, and I know I
approached policymaking in like
a 2050 approach because I just
want to make sure that our laws,
we don't have to come back and
have to remake.
The definition. So I'm looking
at page 10 here.
And it just has thermal ratings,
grid enhancing technology,
advanced conductors, and I just
want to make sure that this
includes anything that might be
coming up the pipeline, Madam
Chair, representative.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative
Block, I think it does include
things that might be coming up.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
and Representative, and I
appreciate that and I'm going to
continue listening to the
discussion and uh I haven't made
up my mind on this bill yet, but
I, I mean, it sounds good and
I'll definitely keep listening.
So thanks,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, just
one quick question on this, um,
and, and representative Lujan is
right. This is a lot to absorb,
um, so.
In houseville 93.
We were
Talking about
I'm sorry, 91, we were talking
about, you know, giving some
benefits to the low income
folks, and then this one we're
talking in the title, it says
recover.
Costs customer costs for
advanced grid energy projects.
Um, just the other day I was
talking to my mom about her
Social Security increase, which
was very minimal.
And I just wanna know how
Like percentage wise, and I know
you guys probably haven't gotten
that deep into the weeds, but I
do when I think about things,
um, the percent of
You know, we give, we give
something to, to a group of
low-income folks and then in a
sense, we take it away.
And um
You know, what is the benefit to
the, to the consumer?
Madam Chair, Representative
Borego, this is a hard question.
Um, and it's a really, it's a
legitimate question.
Um
And I wish I could give you a
specific percentage or a
specific number, and I can't
because of the way the grid
modernization Act works, which
involves the utility bringing an
application, and then the PRC
determining whether the costs
they proposed to recover are
reasonable or not.
Um, so that will be different
every time it happens.
Um
But they we're, we're back to
what we were talking about in
the last bill actually. Is it
worth it? Does the PRC think
that it's worth
Charging this to get these
benefits. Does bringing cheaper
energy onto the grid, more of it
faster.
Result in a sort of net, it nets
out.
Um, that, and
It will depend on the project.
Sometimes these projects can
have, can pay for themselves,
not immediately.
But over a few years. And thank
you for that. And Madam Chair, I
knew and I know I knew that they
couldn't answer that, um,
because this has not been
implemented, first of all, and
secondly, because we have no way
of knowing until this gets up
and running, but I bring this
issue up, Madam Chair, because I
think we need to have this issue
sort of on the table as this
moves forward. I, I support
this. I want you guys to know
that.
But I think it's important and
it's imperative upon us as
legislators and the state, if
this is adopted, that these are
issues that the PRC really needs
to contend with.
Because, um, you know, we're on
one hand, we're passing a bill
that gives benefits and, and
subsidies.
And then on the other hand,
we're passing a bill that takes
those or, or maybe just evens
out those benefits. So really
we're giving the consumer or
the, the people of New Mexico,
nothing.
And so I think that these are
issues that, um, you know, as
this bill moves forward, um, we
need our analysts.
It really look at.
You know, what we're doing here
as a legislature because
It's kind of like
Um
I don't know, it's.
It's a really tough thing.
For consumers right now. And as
our tariffs increase as our
consumer price index goes up,
those are colas go down, um, I
think we need to really think
about these issues very deeply.
Thank you.
Representative Little.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
I would like to move a do not
pass on HB 93.
And a do pass on for.
House government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee
substitute for HB 93.
I have a motion for
They do pass. They do not pass.
And a do pass on um.
House government elections,
Indian Affairs Committee,
substitute for House Bill 93,
and a second, please call roll.
Representative Ona Nonu.
Yes.
Representative Block.
Pass
Representative Borego.
Representative Lu Han, explain.
Representative Mia.
Yes.
Representative, uh, Madam F
floor leader.
Yes.
Representative Zamora.
No
Representative block.
No, and I'd like to explain my
film.
Madam Vice Chair.
Yes.
Madam Chair, yes.
Representative Luhan to explain
your vote?
Thank you, Chair. I'm gonna try
to be really quick about this,
um.
I think this needs a little more
work cause I'm tweaking on this.
I'd love to work with you on
this outside of, of, of.
Committee because we're talking
more faster, cheaper, and we
have the infrastructure that we
have right now. We can't get
more faster, cheaper if we don't
have the other infrastructure
pieces in place, Madam Chair. So
I think that this is, this needs
more work. I'll just leave it
right
there. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'll be
super brief. And uh
I'm usually very good at reading
like every, every single word in
a bill before I vote on it. And
so my vote was not.
Because I don't like your idea.
I do. I just need to do a little
more research and that that's on
me, and I apologize for that,
but I definitely will do the
hard work on the floor to ensure
that I know what we're voting on
and I appreciate it and thank
you so much, Madamir and
Representative.
Thank you, Representative Ortiz.
OK. Do I see Representative
Kates. Let's move to House Bill
118, and I believe we have to be
on the house floor at 10:30.
Uh, let's do the best we can,
please.
No Saturdays.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Did the committee receive my two
handouts.
These two handouts were sent.
You didn't get them?
OK.
Um.
Hm
Madam Chair, with your
permission, while we're handing
out the handouts. May I start?
Just for the interest of time,
please. OK, thank you. So uh I'm
representative Kathleenates. I'm
here to uh present HB 118
professional recruitment and
retention. It is um uh bill that
will provide a housing subsidies
for licensed medical and
behavioral health providers. So
what you're getting right now
is you're getting a chart for
the 2024 150% AMI. I apologize
that the committee didn't have
readily available my other
handout, but they're making
copies right now. Um, so I'm
gonna talk you through it and
then you'll have it written in
front of you. So what it is is
if you're a licensed medical
provider.
Through either a doctor or a
nurse board or with the RDL, and
they have a list there.
You, um,
earn 150% or less of AMI in your
area.
You are working 3 quarters time
or more, which is 30 hours a
week or more.
MFA will give you a 5.5% loan up
to 10% on your home to cover
your down payment and closing
costs.
This loan will accrue a 5.5%
interest, but will not be rolled
up into your mortgage payment to
keep your mortgage payment low.
If you drop your license, move
out of state, sell your home, or
stop working 3 quarters time,
the proceeds of the sale of your
house will pay back the loan at
5.5% interest.
If you do the same from 5 to 7
years, you will pay back 50% of
the loan and 50% of the loan
will be forgiven.
7 to 10 years, 75% of the loan
will be forgiven and you will
have to pay back 25%.
And if you stay and practice in
our great state of New Mexico,
3/45 times or more.
For 10 years or longer.
You will have 100% of it
forgiven.
As you know, our residents, we,
we are, it's trying to attract
the residents to come to our
great state of New Mexico. Um,
we may not have um our splashy
movie movie star medical
facilities of like Houston or
the Mayo Clinic, but if you want
to practice the art of medicine,
we have work, and you can come
in and you can work right away,
where these other places you're
gonna put your hands in your
pocket for probably a couple of
years. So this is the place to
really
practice medicine. And we want
to be able to invest in you as
you invest in New Mexico.
Um, this program would allow MFA
would house this program, MFA
would be the lean, the second
lien on the property, it could,
uh, it will remove itself from
the lean once the loan is
forgiven after 10 years.
If you are a medical provider.
And, um, your 6 years into the
loan and now you are making well
above 150 AMI and you are want
to have children and you want to
have a bigger house, you can go
buy a bigger house and still
maintain this house you can use
it for income or have your
Adult children live in it or
your mom coming to live nearby,
um, and as long as you're
practicing in New Mexico, we
will accrue that time towards
the sale of the house.
Uh, this is one of the many
tools in the toolbox that we're
trying to develop currently to
be able to recruit and retain
professionals, um, I would just
want to address the professional
medical providers we have there.
We're looking at nurses and
doctors, uh, social workers,
behavioral health, um, we're
looking for medical providers
who have their license under.
RLD, so I always get my
alphabets messed up, um, and
that is why they were chosen,
but the way the bill is
Written as if the legislature or
the governor in the future want
to say we want to recruit rocket
scientists or we want to recruit
teachers or we want to recruit,
we can add other occupations
underneath that. And so I stand
for questions, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. We'll
now go to the audience and those
in favor please raise your
hands.
OK, let's go ahead and begin
with one minute comments from my
right, your left. Anybody?
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Brent
Moore. I'm a registered lobbyist
for New Mexico Association of
Realtors, and we stand in
support of this bill. This bill
promotes the recruitment of
professionals in the medical
area to New Mexico. We all know
that we have a provider
shortage, and it also promotes
homeownership, which the
realtors stand in strong support
of. We urge you to pass the
bill.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Quentin
Ampersand. I'm a law student
intern working for a registered
lobbyist, Juliana Kub, um, on
behalf of the behavioral Health
Providers Association. Uh, we're
here to stand in support of this
bill.
We all know that there's 2
problems to problems facing New
Mexico, not enough healthcare
providers to serve everyone who
needs medical care and not
enough affordable housing for
hardworking people, and this
bill addresses both of those
issues.
Uh, we need medical service
providers to see New Mexico as a
good place to stay, and if
they've, if they've gone to
school here and a good place to
move if they are looking to
move. Healing healthcare
professionals buy a home is a
great way to show that New
Mexico values and supports the
hard work that they're putting
into into um taking care of our
citizens. On a personal note,
um, I had top surgery two years
ago and I had to leave the
state. Uh, I went to California
in San Francisco in order to get
that medical care because
I could not find a provider that
was qualified and competent in
New Mexico, so we stand in
support of this bill and are due
to pass it. Thank you.
Thank you, let's go to Zoom.
Betty Schober, yes. Uh, yes,
Madam Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Betty
Cisnero Shover. I'm the
executive director of Nami Santa
Fe, also an advocate for Nami
New Mexico. Uh, we need all the
help we can get to attract and
keep providers, especially
behavioral health in New Mexico.
Um, so, uh, Nami New Mexico is
in strong support of HB 118.
Thank you.
So much buddy?
Richard Mason, can you hear us?
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Dick
Mason. I'm a board member and a
registered lobbyist for the
League of Women voters of New
Mexico and the lane stands in
strong support of HT HB 118. The
League of Women voters in Mexico
supports the healthcare system
that provides a comprehensive
level of health care for New
Mexico residents.
In order to provide um that
comprehensible, comprehensive
level of healthcare, we need to
address the shortage of
healthcare providers in New
Mexico.
HP 118 is one tool in helping to
address that shortage.
The league wants to thank
Representative Cate for
introducing HB 118, and we urge
the committee to give it a due
pass. Thank you.
Thank you so much.
Alison Riley, can you hear us?
Yes I can hear you. Good
morning, members of the
committee. My name is Alison
Riley, public policy director
for the New Mexico Chamber of
Commerce, standing in proud
support of HB 118. This bill
addresses one of the most
critical issues facing our
state, attracting and retaining
highly skilled professionals in
essential fields. The bill is
forward thinking in that
invested in Mexico's future by
providing low interest loans to
assist qualified professionals
with a down payment or closing
costs with buying a home.
That not only eases the burden
of affordability, but also
incentivizes these valuable
professionals to establish
long-term roots in our
community. Conditioning the loan
on a 10-year commitment to
practice in New Mexico and
ensures our state benefits from
the expertise and stabilities
these professionals bring to
their field and our local
economy. Our member businesses
re a strong and stable workforce
is the cornerstone of economic
development and growth, and
retaining professionals will
ensure we remain competitive in
attracting new investment.
This bill is not just an
investment in homeownership, but
also in the future of our state,
and we support the bill and
thank the sponsor for her work.
Thank you.
Thank you so much, Alison.
Thank you back to the audience
for comments in opposition.
Seeing none, let's go back to
Zoom. Any comments opposing?
Committee members
Represented a block.
Madam Chair, thank you,
Representative Kates, a couple
of questions and uh
First of all, I, I come to you
saying I support the bill.
I like the bill. I will vote for
the bill.
But I'd like some changes made,
Madam Chair Representative, and
the one change that I see that
would need to be made, in my
opinion, would be adding.
Optometrists to this.
Because Madam Chair
Representative, I see a lot of
other fields, it seems very
inclusive except optometrists
are also medical professionals
who we desperately need. I know
in in town where I live we have
two current
Practitioners, one of them is
booked up until next July, I
believe. And so I usually have
to book an eye appointment a
year in advance just for that
reason. And so, Madam Chair
Representative, to bring some of
those folks to our communities.
Would that be something that
you'd be willing to add to the
bill, Madam Chair and
representative.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representative and
thank you for that. Um, I would
believe, um, I would disagree a
little bit in the fact that I
think it's missing many
professions, not just optometry.
So what I tried to do was design
a program since it will be in
the beginning that MFA can be
able to easily vet and by having
them only look at two boards and
RDL.
For where that license that New
Mexico licenses. It's a quicker
way to make sure that they are
in compliance.
I think that you're absolutely
right. We do need to attract
other medical providers that are
not on this list, and I hope
that with the implementation of
this program, we can roll that
up. If you would like to carry
that bill, I would support that
in the future.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative. Well, I would be
inclined to carry an amendment
to your bill if, if that would
be amenable, I idea of language.
I don't know if we want to do an
ad hoc amendment, I'd be happy
to have the, OK, we don't want
to do that. OK, well,
What's your next committee,
Madam Chair, Senator
Representative.
Mm, Madam Chair Representative,
I believe it's judiciary.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. So I will get
with the folks.
From judiciary.
Maybe, or maybe I'll just work
with you to get an amendment
ready and, and get it ready for
you in the judiciary because I
think this would be really
helpful, especially optometry
wise, I know that we're also,
there's bills to increase their
scope of practice that are
floating around the legislature.
And so I know my my optometrist
is very excited about that, and
she expects even more demand for
her her services. So I will,
I'll just leave that there, but
I would love for that to be in
the next committee, hopefully,
uh, or else, uh I guess a new
but that it's so late in the
session, I, I highly doubt that
would be the smartest way to go
about it. Next, Madam Chair,
just quick questions. Is this
requiring the individual um who
is practicing to be new to the
state.
And could they currently already
own a home in the state? Is it
only for a new homeowner type of
thing and then I'll put another
question in that question to
make it easier. Does the person
have to be domiciled in that
residence, Madam Chair,
representative for the entire 10
years or whatever it is.
Thank you, madam chair and thank
you representative very good
questions. I, the general answer
is no to all those. So um what
is required is that at the time
of the loan that they earn 150%
or less of AMI. So this is the,
the chart that I gave you was
our 2024 chart. Obviously it's
little, little old, not too old.
Um, uh, but the, the home, it's
the idea is for behavioral, but
we did a salary.
survey, so most of our
behavioral health workers are
throughout their career earn at
that 150 AMI, most of them do.
Residents only make 60 to
$80,000 a year, they're well
underneath that 150% AMI nurses
for, for starting, uh, do that
as well. So as long as you meet
that income requirement, um,
the, uh, being, uh, housed in
that house is not a requirement
of the loan.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
Representative, and I just got a
text message from a friend here
who's an optometrist, and he
says that
They are under RLD.
So I just wanted to
At that and I can't wait for the
next committee. So that's all I
had, Madam Chair,
representative, thank you.
Representative Brego.
Madam Chair, I'm not going to
belabor my questions cause, uh,
representative block hit the
nail on the head. I just want,
would like to work with the
representative Kates and
representative Bloch to look at
all of our
Um, medical professions and
ensure that
They're all covered in this bill
for.
Maybe it goes to the next
committee. So thank you, uh,
Representative Kates for
bringing this forward. I think
it's a.
A really stellar bill, so thank
you.
Thank you, Representative
Little, Vice Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I would
like to move a due pass on HB
118.
Promotion for to pass. We have a
2nd, please call Roll.
Representative and you know.
Yes.
Representative Block, yes.
He was a borego.
Representative Lujan.
Representative Mcian.
Yes.
Madam Flo leader?
Yes
Representative Zamora.
No, and I'd like to explain my
book.
Madam Vice Chair.
Yes. Madam Chair. Yes.
And representative Zamora to
explain your vote.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Representative for bringing
this bill forward. I feel like
we have a problem in the state
of New Mexico that
needs addressing where people do
need housing.
And
I'd rather see these monies uh
from the state, be it.
To the, to the people that are
Living on the streets and, and
need help in a bad way.
And I feel like
This bill
could support
Somebody coming in and buying
just a real high dollar house.
Uh
And living in, in, in an
extravagant way where
The state of New Mexico would
be.
Funding that
Uh, I have a lot of issues with
this bill and, and
Just
Concerns that I have expressed
here today and thank you, Madam
Chair and thank you,
Representative.
Thank you with that on a house
Bill.
So is this one.
Thank you.
Mm
No.
We go to house, we'll we'll go
to the.
We, we're gonna adjourn.
I'm sorry, can you, yes. Uh, we
have to be on the house floor at
10:30, I believe. Uh, but if we
get off Zoom, I have some
housekeeping for our committee
members. Thank you for joining
us today.
Committee members, we OK, I
know.
that.
And committee members and staff,
we will have a committee meeting
tomorrow at 10:00 a.m. in room
in room 318. We have 5 bills to
cover.
10 a.m. Thank you.
That's.
There is food in room 303.
For us now, yeah.
