Roll call is closed. We have a
quorum.
Please rise for today's
invocation, courtesy of the
gentleman who's walking out the
door right now.
The implication today. Thank
you.
Heavenly Father. Lord, we come
before you today and just just
Come and thanks
Thank you for everything you do
for us.
Thank you for keeping us all
healthy and well.
And anybody that's sick. Lord, I
just ask that you bless them and
give them the energy for the
next couple of days.
To get us through the finish
line.
I just ask that we have civility
towards each other.
And Lord. I know we don't always
get what we want. But are
they're still our friends at the
end.
Lord. Thank you for all the
blessings that you give us.
And I ask that you give
everybody a safe trip home
today. Christ name, we pray.
Amen.
Jimmy from San Juan. Represent
Duncan lead us in the Pledge of
Allegiance.
I pledge allegiance to the flag.
And the general Lady from Santa
Favorite Scent of Romero with a
pledge student you Mexico flag.
Play ball generated from early.
Oh,
Mr Speaker. I move. We go to
that order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
businesses. Objection of this
ordered
Good.
Good morning members.
I haven't seen you all in a
while. I missed you.
Thank you gentlemen from Lincoln
Otero for pinch hitting. I
appreciate that.
Um
And you have an announcement. Go
ahead.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr.
Speaker. I have some guests up
on the rostrum that I would like
to introduce. And they're here
for higher Ed Day.
And Mr Speaker. I'm not going to
introduce this because it's
It's uh, Representative
Zamora's, but it's in EMU.
And I'm a Greyhound.
I am an alumni of eastern New
Mexico University and it's a
great school and we have one
there in community colleges in
Ruidoso.
And I've got some of my friends
up on the rostrum that I would
like to introduce.
And I'm going to start off with
Bonnie Torres.
And Bonnie's Our adult
Education. Uh,
Instructor and then coda
ominous.
Is our vice president.
And then Shawnee Walker.
Or adult education student
Alexia.
McLennan.
Elma.
Alright. Arrius and Lorenzo do
art.
And I've got two more that I
want to introduce, and they're
actually pretty special to me,
Mr Speaker.
So destiny, Taylor and Cheyenne
dawdle They are. They've worked
with the college I I actually
worked with them and those two
individuals right there. Mr.
Speaker are the heartbeat of the
college. They keep everything
running. So if you give me give
them a hand for me, I'd
appreciate it. Welcome to the
House.
And also Mr Speaker. I have some
guests in the gallery if you
would introduce them, please,
sir.
Absolutely, sir. I looks like
you have guessed for higher
education Day. Um up in the
gallery. If you could please
rise to be recognized. Guests
have representative Vincent.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen, and a big plug
in for adult education. Super
important, and so many of our
communities. I'm glad you're all
here. Welcome to the house.
Announcements. Let's go to the
General 80 from Eddy and Lea,
representative Brown.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Good
morning, everyone. I am so
pleased to have some guests on
the bench of the rostrum. These
are students and an adviser from
loving high school in loving,
which is a beautiful little
village in my district. And so
as I mentioned the name of each
student asked that student to
stand, Mr Speaker and
Will applaud for them at the
end, so our first guest needs Mr
Speaker is Michael Stone. He's
the president of the student
Senate at Loving High School.
He's a senior in in his senior
year right now, and then we have
no uh, Castillo. If Noah would
please stand Noah's a junior,
and he is the vice president of
the student student Senate.
Next. We have Natalie Galvan.
She's a junior and his secretary
of the Senate next Clayton
Westfall.
Yeah. Clayton is a freshman and
a Senate member. And then next
we have Josette Lion Smith.
Josette is a member of the
Senate, and she is a freshman.
So she's starting early in her
political career.
And the next we have Guillermo
Vazquez. Guillermo is also a
member of the Senate, and he is
also a freshman. And then I'd
like to recognize Mr Speaker.
Their advisor who is also a
science teacher, and her name is
Joanna Jones. And I'd ask you to
join me in welcoming them to
their state Capitol. Welcome to
the House of Representatives.
Gentle lady from Burleigh or
representative Herndon.
Thank you, Mr President. Mr.
Speaker. I just promoted you.
You never president demoted me
depends on your perspective.
So, Mr Speaker, we are proud to
have two distinguished guests on
the rostrum this morning. They
are from New Mexico's largest
inclusive media organization in
the state, The New Mexico
women's press and if you'd hold
your applause until after I
introduced them the first one,
The first of our guest is the
president of the New Mexico
Press Women. She is doctor
Sherry Burr. She's a former
tenured professor of law at the
University of New Mexico.
School of law. She is the author
of Complicated Lives. Free
Blacks in a In Virginia, 1619 to
1865 and Mr Speaker, she
received a nomination for a
Pulitzer Prize in history for
that.
For that novel, and she is also
if you're ready for this, a
descendant of Aaron Burr, the
third vice president of the
United States, So we welcome her
to our to our chamber and also
we have with us. Dr Regina
Griego. She is the incoming
president of New Mexico
Oppressed women. She was a
distinguished engineer at Sandia
Labs before becoming a writer.
Speaker and a coach, and she is
the author of the award, winning
a novel Sins of the system.
Let's welcome these two Amazing
women to our chamber. Welcome to
the House.
Mr Speaker, General Lady, we
have a surprise guests that I
just learned about today and I
would ask you to please welcome
him. He is the one and only
Portlaoise Orry it of the
street. He is known as the
street poet. Mr Robert Castillo.
Would you welcome him in the
gallery? Mr Speaker? Comm Mr
Gentle lady from Britain. Lior
presented Dixon. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. I would like to
introduce my shadow for the day,
Mr Barrett Weems, who is a
freshman at Cottonwood Classical
in Albuquerque. Um, and also a
constituent of mine. He's here
for the day. And, um
Just wanted to introduce him and
have everyone welcome him. Thank
you. Welcome to the house.
Remembers. I've got a couple of
announcements. First of all, um
Ash Wednesday. Services tomorrow
Wednesday, led by Archbishop
Wester, who have service and
distribute dishes from 730 to
830 in room 322 note. The room
changed 322.
Reverend
will be giving ashes at the
Westside lobby on the second
floor, beginning at 9 A.m..
Ash Wednesday tomorrow.
Also looks like we have food
coming tonight, courtesy of AG
feed.
And tonight we are fortunate to
be indulging any hot meal that
will be provided by the New
Mexico, A group consisting of
more than a dozen producers,
producers specializing in a wide
range of foods, fiber and wine.
Each item served tonight
symbolizes an exceptional
product cultivated right here in
our home state.
Members are decisions during
this session contribute to
bolstering the capacity of these
dedicated farmers and ranchers,
enabling them to continue
supplying high quality
affordable food to the people of
our state.
We hope that you all enjoy
tonight.
Dinner presented by the group
and I'm sure we'll hear more
about that when the time comes
for dinner.
So don't eat a heavy lunch.
There will be a big dinner
served by the group
announcements. Your lady from
Burnley your representative
Hochman be Hill.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Point of
personal privilege. Stage point.
Thanks, Mr Speaker. Mr. Speaker.
I want to take a moment to thank
all of the members of the House
Transportation, Public Works and
Capital Improvements Committee
this year.
For the work that we all did.
and all of you did to deliver a
responsible, functional and
helpful budget for
transportation in the state of
New Mexico. Mr Speaker, we were
able to begin this session with
a flat budget recommendation for
transportation and your house
includes, including the help of
House transportation.
And House appropriations chair
yourself and your leadership
team we were able to deliver.
$450 million in additional bonds
and real money for
transportation in New Mexico.
This is not due to bloviation
and bomb throwing Mr Speaker.
This is because of the people
who did the hard work, put their
heads down and did what needed
to be done for the state of New
Mexico, and I could not be more
proud of the work that was done
in this house to deliver for
transportation in the state.
Thank you and thank you for your
leadership. Leadership
Chairwoman Hug Maybe Hill.
General Lady from Berna, Leo,
representative, but soon
Thank you. Mr Speaker. I'd like
to introduce today My shadow,
Philip Aragua, He's 1/8 grader
from Santa Fe Indian School. He
is also in the National Junior
Honor Society, and he is the
president of his middle school
Student Council. So is holding
an elected position. He's also
an all star, basketball and
football player, and I'm really
excited to have him here today,
um, to shadow me.
Thank you, Mr the house.
I believe we have it.
A guest.
Of
Representative Riebe.
And, um
Are they in the restroom?
I'll have you introduced them
then. General Lady Mr Speaker.
I'm thrilled to introduce and to
an welcome some guests that are
here in the rostrum. We actually
have two guests. Um, Riley gains
Um, and one is policy. Scanlan.
They are both collegiate
athletes who also speak for
independence.
Independent women's voices, Um
and they're standing up right?
There are no many of you know
them. Riley Gains is a 12 time
all American swimmers, five
times sectional champion and two
time Olympic qualifier 2022 NC
double Women of the year
nominee. These are both great
ladies who go around and really
speak up for women's rights and
I would love for the chamber and
the roundhouse to give him a
huge welcome for coming into
Santa Fe today. Welcome to the
House.
Any other announcements.
Members. Today we have a lengthy
bill is that I believe has
already been distributed amongst
the leadership offices.
We're gonna grind through that
list will recess subject to the
college chair sometime in the
afternoon to allow committees to
go to work, and then we'll
reconvene.
Um, later in the afternoon early
evening.
Any other announcements.
Generated from Burma. Leo, Mr
Speaker, I move we go to that
order of business. Third reading
of legislation. Objection. It is
ordered.
Members. I will direct your
attention.
To item number 44.
Alright, folks, we're going to
start with item 32. That would
be Senate Bill 17.
Sponsored by the generator from
Dona Ana.
And we're going to give it a
minute to make sure we get the
From Dona Ana, already an item
32 am Mr. Speaker, Can you get
me to that point the record
reflect that all action
necessary for placing
Centerville 17 and final passage
has been taken and it is not
subject to debate amendment or
substitution digital lady to
explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Senate
Bill 17 is simply another
vehicle to help address the
health care crisis in New
Mexico. I am very honored to be
a co sponsor of this bill,
because I believe this bill will
adjust many issues facing the
most vulnerable members of our
community, Mr Speaker Hospital's
CEO s and staff leadership
From the Human Services
Department and staff from the
governor's office have worked
together to create a forward
thinking game changing proposal
that will not require general
fund to pony a more money to
implement this bill. Hospitals
will pay a self assessment that
will generate 1.6 billion
Medicaid dollars.
Mr Speaker. This bill will
provide a lifeline to many of
our smaller hospitals that are
struggling to stay afloat,
having additional Medicaid
dollars to keep and expand
services will keep the future
patients in the community
receiving healthcare services
they need and deserve. Mr
Speaker. You will hear more
about this important the
importance of this bill.
My co sponsors, representative
Padoan and representative
Harper. I look forward to
healthy, no pun intended debate.
I now yield to the gentleman
from Sandoval from Sandoval.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and ladies
and gentlemen of the house. Um I
will just remind the body that
we actually did something very
similar to this about eight or
nine years ago with regards to
nursing facilities.
Um And I think this is actually,
uh
One of the
Smarter things that we can do to
help improve healthcare in New
Mexico and I'm
Excited to answer any questions
on debate. Thank you, Mr
Speaker, right? Generated from
earlier but I hope
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Um, and
sponsor of this bill, Do I need
to ask you
Um there's a gentle lady yield.
I do. Yield. Mr Speaker. This
bill will be highly impactful
for the people in my district,
Many who are Medicaid and
Medicare users. Um I myself
stood in line in Medicaid in the
HST Medicaid office, um some
time ago and realize just how
important it is that we continue
to provide access for this vital
vital insurance, So I am also
very honored to stand with my
colleagues today, and, um and
Talk more about this bill. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Ready for
questions? Thank you, Mr
Speaker. We we yield for
questions. There is debate the
gentleman from Colfax screen
Hard and Queen Salome, Miguel
and Union Representative
Chatfield. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Uh,
Mr Speaker does the General lady
yield I do yield to my friend
from Sharpeville? Mr
Representative Chat, Phil.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. You know I Mr Speaker,
I saw this bill in committee. We
Talked about it long and hard,
and I just have to say that all
the hospitals are in favor of
it.
Our rural communities are in
favor of it.
Yep. Sets forth another source
of funding that just
Might help not do the whole job,
but it might help save our rural
healthcare. It's very much
needed.
Uh, we feel pretty strongly
about that.
And Mr Speaker, gentle lady. I
thank you for bringing this bill
Seeing further bait. They don't
learn from Lei representative
Scott.
Speaker will letter from Donna
and Health, please. I do yield
to the gentleman speaker,
General Lady is I understand
that this is leveraging
assessments on non Medicare
revenues. Is that correct? That
is correct and
They would be looking at
approximately
$400 million of those
assessments to generate the 1.6
billion and Medicaid
reimbursements or Medicare
reimbursements. Is that also
correct
Mr Speaker, That is correct.
Okay. Answer Mr. Any concern
that there's $400 million of
assessments or be passed on to
those non Medicare?
Uh, customers of those
hospitals.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, thank
you for the question. There's
been safeguards put into this
bill that says 75% of all that
is being brought in will stay in
New Mexico and for our patients
and for Medicaid patients, there
is a 25% of dollars that will be
at a state or that can be used
at a state to purchase um,
medical equipment, medical staff
and pharmaceuticals that cannot
be bought.
Here in New Mexico.
Okay?
Mr Speaker. Thank you, gentle
lady. There is debate generated
from Bernardi, your
representative Chavez.
Thank you. Mr Speaker is the
representative yield yield to
the lady?
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just
have a couple of questions about
this.
Legislation. My first question
is Mr Speaker representative are
in in our analysis that it, um
Talks about all rural hospitals.
My question is are are the real
hospitals who are owned by out
of state corporations also
qualify for this, Mr Speaker,
Representative, Mr Speaker and
gentle lady they do qualify.
Mr Speaker, Representative. Uh,
so how do we know? I know that
you mentioned I think Mr Speaker
representative that 75% of the
money needs to be spent in the
state. Is that correct? Mr
Speaker, Representative, Mr
Speaker and gentle lady. That is
correct. Mr Speaker,
Representative. Why isn't it
100%?
Um, Mr Speaker and gentle lady
because there are certain
pharmaceuticals that cannot be
brought here in New Mexico.
Sometimes there's outside
medical doctors that need to be
consulted with outside of the
state. There are things that
cannot always be 100% be local
here in New Mexico, so we wanted
to give that 25% of flexibility
to be able to contract out.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Representative. Um my next
question is, Is there any missed
Mr Speaker Representative
requirement that a certain
amount of that money go to wages
for the healthcare workers
inside each of those hospitals.
Mr Speaker and gentle lady.
There's not, but it is built
into the bill that through that
75% that it is. It's listed that
wages are part of that.
Mr Speaker, Representative. How
will we know?
And representing our Mr Speaker,
and, uh, gentle Lady H. S D. Is
overseeing that. And so they're
making sure that those Medicaid
dollars are being applied where
they should be. Mr Speaker
Representative Will, uh, the HST
report back to, for example, the
Health and Human Services
Committee during the interim
Um, I've got the HST secretary
here and she is saying that she
will be happy to do that.
Mr Speaker.
Mr Speaker Representative. Do
you know how often we will
receive those reports?
Mr Speaker annually.
Mr Speaker, Representative, Um,
when you say annually is that at
the end of the year, Can you
give me sort of a time frame for
that for those reports?
So, Mr Speaker and gentle lady
I'm being told at the fiscal at
the end of the fiscal year, But
I also know that this has been a
collaborative effort by by this
whole team, and we want to see
success. And so if we wanted to
bring it in through the interim,
I'm sure that we would love to
be reporting on what the status
is and and the progress of this
bill.
Thank you, Mr Speaker
Representative and I have one
more question. How
Mergers and consolidations. Um,
be impacted by this bill.
Mr Speaker and gentle lady. The
bill does not, um include
mergers and acquisitions. It's
not. It's not part of the same
bill. Mr. Speaker,
representative, Maybe I didn't
ask it correctly. So if, for
example, there is a hospital who
is bought out, um by an out of
state corporation, um will they
continue to be included?
In this bill.
And Mr Speaker and gentle lady.
All hospitals are included, but
they would be kept at the same
standards as as this bill, Um,
they would have to follow the
same rules and to be qualifying
for those dollars.
Thank you, Mr Speaker,
Representative. I look forward
to listening to the report in
the interim Health and Human
Services Committee. Thank you.
You know for the Beijing later,
too close.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I now ask
that SB 117 do now pass on final
passage of seven. It, Bill 17.
Did everybody get to vote?
I don't see anyone jumping up
and down, so I think everybody
got to vote.
The votes are closed by vote of
59 the affirmative one in the
negative. Centerville 17 has
relieved past his house is a
gentle lady from Ben Ali. Your
representative Garrett Ready on
Item number 44. Yes, Mr Speaker,
Can you please give me to that
point let the record reflect
that all the action necessary
for placing Senate Bill 239, as
amended on final passage has
been taken. It is not subject to
debate amendment or
substitution, the gentle lady to
explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Senate
Bill 239 is amended makes
changes to the lottery and
opportunity scholarship acts to
give students more flexibility
in how they do their scheduling
while ensuring that all the
guidelines are still in place to
set them up for success. And
with that I stand for questions
there is to be gentlemen from
Chavez, Arian Otero,
representative Townsend. Thank
you, Mr Speaker of the General
Lady Yield.
Mr Speaker. I kindly yield to
the gentleman from those three
counties. Thank you very much,
lady. Can you explain the
flexibility that has been added
to the bill?
Yes, there's two separate parts
for the lottery scholarship. It
changes the full time definition
for determining eligibility.
adds three summer semesters to
make them eligible for
scholarship funding. It removes
references to legacy students,
which refers to students from
2014.
It removes credit our limits the
semester prior to their
graduation, So if they only need
one class of three credits they
don't have to sign up for nine
credits.
Ah, it apportions 30 credit
hours between three semesters
every year. So according to
their course load and everything
they can do like 1212 6 or
something like that.
Um, so it supports students who
struggle to keep up with their
coursework, jobs and family now
with the opportunity
scholarship, dual credit courses
that students took as a high
school student don't count for
the cap on credits. So when they
dual credit student enters a two
or four year college, they have
a fresh slate of credit hours.
Students with disabilities may
have their definition of full
time adjusted.
Uh huh. And it, um
The amendment just provides
those guard rails to ensure
students are successful.
Oh, and one more thing. It
removes, Uh, New Mexico for
opportunity Scholarship for the
lottery scholarship. You have to
have a high school diploma or
experience in New Mexico for the
opportunity Scholarship, which
is addresses older students. You
may have moved here and not gone
to high school in New Mexico and
general Lady um
What flexibility has been added
to those
Students.
Who are
Educated in
A private or home school.
Mr Speaker and Kind Gentleman,
any, uh, new Mexican student
regardless of a home school,
private school, no matter what
their high school education was,
If it was a new Mexico, they're
eligible for the lottery
scholarship, which kicks in
basically within 20 months of
completing your high school
course. However, you did it.
And general lady does that
provide
The opportunity scholarship for
those that are attending.
A, um
A school that may not be
accredited.
Mr Speaker. The opportunity, Mr
Speaker and Kind Gentleman, the
opportunity Scholarship applies
to New Mexico Accredited
colleges, universities and
programs.
So, um
Mystic, Mr Speaker in General
Lady, so those students that
participate
In a non accredited program.
Are not allowed.
The the opportunity Scholarship.
If I'm reading a right is that
correct?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, can
you explain what you mean? By
non credit? I'm not sure. What
can you give me an example.
Well, Mr Speaker and General
Lady if a child is participating
in a private school
Um
Would they be, would they
Have the opportunity to
participate.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, they
could participate in the lottery
scholarship. The opportunity
scholarship doesn't
Concern itself so much with high
school because it's targeting
older students returning.
Like for career or high needs
areas.
So there are two separate
Audiences that they're
addressing.
Came a speaker. I just an F y I
do have an amendment. I'm just
gonna keep burning time waitin
on it, but I'll try to get it
back to you if you'll allow me,
sir.
Certainly. Yeah, if you want, we
can. Uh oh. Looks like there it
is. You have the amendment.
We can do a hand once or but
not I don't have one down from
Legislative Council, so I just
wanted to go to the next
debater, and then we can come
back to you when the user That's
what I wanted. Gentlemen from
Sundsvall represented Harper
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Does the
general lady from Bernie Leo
Yield Mr Speaker, I yield to the
gentleman from Sandoval.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and gentle
lady.
So my questions are going to
focus around the lottery
scholarship, which I appreciate
you explain to the body really
is focused on
Those who are
Recent high school graduates who
are entering, uh
Higher education. The
opportunity scholarship is
really focused for
Um, perhaps folks who are not so
recent high school graduates or
those who haven't graduated high
school to be able to have
education opportunities, higher
education opportunities.
So speaking, gentle lady, um
My understanding is current law.
Is that the very first semester
that they attend?
Um, University or, um
Or community college is not
covered by the lottery
scholarship.
That they have to maintain a 2.5
G p A and that semester and then
they will qualify for the
scholarship. In the second
semester. Mr Speaker generally,
is that correct? And does this
bill change that?
Mr Speaker and concealment. That
is correct and let me introduce
my two expert witnesses are
Secretary Stephanie Rodriguez
from the her Education
department and vv Diana
Cisneros, who is a Senate
Finance committee analyst.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General lady. So so it's correct
that that's current law, and
this bill does not change that
Mr Speaker and Kind gentleman
that doesn't change it.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen. Thank
you.
The next layer of that onion is
to maintain the lottery
scholarship under current law.
One has to be a full time
student.
Meaning 15 credit hours.
And they only can receive the
scholarship.
Up to
Um, seven semesters. Mr Speaker
generally, is that correct?
Mr Speaker and kind, gentlemen,
the seven programs semesters are
correct. However, the amendment
Um, allows the lottery
scholarship student to apportion
the 30 credit hours between
three semesters every year that
they receive it at a four year
college and, um, every year they
receive it.
Uh, 24 credits for a two year
college, meaning?
If you had a four year college,
you don't have to do 15 and 15.
You could do 12 6 12. That's the
flexibility we're adding so
students can be successful, no
matter what the rest of their
life involves dealing with.
Yes. So, Mr Speaker, General
Lady, you anticipated my next
question, Which was, you know,
current law is seven programs
Semesters 15 credit hours for
four years and then 12 credit
hours for two years.
And when we're changing here,
what you're proposing to change
Mr Speaker in general Lady
Is essentially to bring in
summer.
Semesters.
Mr Speaker. Kind Gentleman. Yes,
That's the amendment that passed
yesterday in health education.
Hi, Mr Speaker and General Lady.
And I also thank you for
explaining that we're taking
that 15 and 15 and essentially
saying you can
Take that total of 30 spread
that amongst
To program semesters and a
summer
Semesters 33 semesters during a
year. Miss Speaker in General
Lady Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
that is correct.
All right, Mr Speaker and gentle
lady, so
Um, I think there are some
reasons why that was not done
Prior to Mr Generally, I think
part of it was cost.
Um
I think, uh, part of it was to,
um
Encourage students to take a
full load and to graduate on
time.
Um, Miss Speaker, gentle lady, I
think
The reality is that even with
those incentives there are some
students that are going to have
a hard time doing that, and I
know a lot of my friends ended
up doing summer semesters.
Mr Speaker, General Lady.
Um
But when you were going through
this process of developing this
legislation, did you consider
The potential impact as we try
to make sure that we have a
decent for your graduation right
in the state, which we don't
As we try to make sure that
everyone who enters as a
freshman graduates, which we
don't generally have you thought
about what the implications of
this legislation might have on
that.
Mr Speaker and kind gentleman
that was anticipated. There's
$10 million left from the 130
covid relief.
That can cover any additional
expenses due to that summer
program. Credit counting
Yeah. Mr. Mr Speaker and General
Lady. Thank you. That was my
next question, Which was the
cost right? Because this is
gonna cost more.
But my question is
By changing how this is
administered.
Are we going to have fewer
students?
Finishing in four years. Are we
going to have fewer students
actually graduate?
Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
Actually, many of the students
will finish faster because
they'll be able to, um, use that
summer.
Time, so we anticipate they'll
finish faster.
And that overall they will
finish they will graduate
because this flexibility allows
them to integrate everything
that's going on in life that
sometimes causes people to drop
out speaker in general Lady I
I I think I actually agree with
you on that. I think this will
give more options to folks.
We may actually have more
graduates. Um, you know when
they're able to get their summer
semesters covered
Um, I will say, Mr Speaker.
Generally, I
This is a double edged sword,
though, right? I know. Um in the
field of engineering, it's very
important to go out on
internships and a lot of
My classmates who took summer
semesters to graduate.
Ended up having a harder time
finding jobs than the rest of us
who may have taken a little bit
longer to graduate but had
internships to put on our
resume. So, Mr Speaker,
generally I just again I think
this is a double edged sword. I
understand why this is being
proposed, and I'm inclined to
support it.
Um
But there were reasons why we
did not include the summer
semesters before one of the big
ones was cost, which I think we
can cover now. But then there
are also some others. Miss
Speaker and generally can you
just quickly summarize the other
changes to the lottery
scholarship that this bill does
now that we've talked about the
amendment.
Um
So it
Again, it removes the references
to legacy students, and we
talked about removing the credit
our limits that were formally in
place.
Portions of 30 credit hours
between three semesters.
For four years and then
For four years and proportions
that 24 credits for two year
colleges.
Um, I do believe those are all
the changes to the lottery
scholarship.
Um
Ms Speaker and generally just
I see you conferring with your
experts Does that cover
everything in the lottery
scholarship? Mr Speaker and
gentlemen, it does. We're
looking at the amendment. Okay,
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, Thank
you.
So, um
So we are adding summer
semesters, but it's still
Um, only for essentially 3.5
years. Mr. Speaker in general.
It is that correct.
Mr Speaker and Kind gentleman.
That's true, and I forgot
There's one more change if
you're in your final semester,
and you only need three credits.
You don't need to take 12
credits, for example, generally,
that's that's a great change to
thank you for mentioning that I
I heard there was something like
that. But I didn't
Here. This building committee,
So thank you for
Um, assuring that I think that's
a good change as well.
Um
Mr. Speaker in general Lady, Um
I believe that is the extent of
my questions. Thank you for
taking the time to help me
understand this legislation.
Right, Let's go back to the
gentleman from Traverse City. No
dinner presented Townsend within
a minute. Thank you, Mr Speaker
for
That indulgence of the general
later yield.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen, I will
yield
Lady. This is pretty short and
sweet.
Um so I know it'll be friendly.
Um
But if you look on Page three
line seven
This strikes only the public.
Were credited private.
And what I am trying to address
is I have had a group.
Contact me. Um, not all in my
district. Some another's
That are saying that
If
A child is attending a high
school that's not accredited.
They are not.
Subject to your bill.
And in times of plenty like we
are right now.
All time trying to do is make
sure that those kids all get an
opportunity to go on and go to
school.
Mr Speaker. Um, this I just want
to clarify you're talking about
the high school experience of a
new Mexican student. Is that
correct?
Yes, ma'am. That's right on Page
three of your bill.
In item H.
There is the definition of a
qualified student.
And it what I am proposing.
Is that we strike? Uh, the
public.
Or accredited.
So that it would read from a
private and a Mexico high
school. They would be included.
That's all it is.
Is this a friendly amendment, Mr
Speaker and gentlemen, it's not
a friendly amendment because
they're already included. If you
read section H on page three
qualified student means a full
time student who graduated from
a public or accredited private
New Mexico high school.
Or completed the requirements of
a home based or non public
secondary education program in
New Mexico.
Or received a high school
equivalency credential while
maintaining
Residency. New Mexico
So too. We don't need to strike
public or credited private kiss.
Those students are already
included.
Mr Speaker in general lady. If
that be the case, I would
withdraw that and because that's
exactly what I was trying to
address.
Very well. Thank you, gentlemen.
So the amendment has been
withdrawn.
We'll go next to the gentleman
from Lee representative Scott
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Will the
General lady from Burnley we
healed.
Yes, Mr Speaker. I reeled to the
count, Gentlemen. Um
Speaker in general Lady
Mexico is participating and
funding.
Two scholarship programs. One of
those is the lottery.
The other one is the
opportunity.
And could you describe for the
body?
What the target audience is for
Each of these programs, please.
Yes, Mr Speaker and Kind
gentleman, the lottery
scholarship targets. Recent
High school graduates from
whatever program as I just
described and
And within 18 months begins a
higher education program.
The opportunity scholarship
targets. Those new Mexicans who
are not eligible for the lottery
scholarship because they didn't
apply for it within that 18
months period.
Or specifically, they're older.
And so they can't qualify for
that lottery scholarship.
Most vicar, general lady, could
you describe how many students
or in rolled in each one of
these programs, please?
Mr Speaker, the secretary of
Higher education says that
approximately approximately
11,000 students are using the
lottery scholarship and 42,000
are using the opportunity
Scholarship.
And Mr Speaker, General Lady
with respect to the opportunity
Scholarship. What sideboards?
Uh, the gentleman from Sandoval
described the our requirements
for the lottery scholarship.
What sideboards do we have, if
any, on the opportunity
scholarship
Mr Speaker and Kind gentleman on
the opportunity Scholarship. You
have to take six credit hours
per semester. However, the
amendment allows you to take
less if you're in your final
Um, term of your program and
perhaps only need three credit
hours.
So, Mr Speaker in general Lady.
Can you describe typically the
number of years that would be
required for a decree was the
opportunity scholarship.
Employers and folks
participating in those levels.
Mr Speaker and Kind gentleman.
It completely depends on the
course load that any given
student takes student in the
opportunity scholarship could
take 12 units are 15 units per
semester.
And finish more quickly, or they
could be in a credit bearing
professional program. That's two
years long, so it depends on
their course load and the
specific program that they're
actually enrolled in. And Miss
Speaker generally to do we have
any data.
What
Demonstrates graduation rates.
That is how many of the 42,000
participating in the opportunity
scholarship actually graduated
last year, for example.
Mr Speaker and kind, gentlemen,
we passed the opportunity to
scholarship Act just a year ago.
But on December 1st 2020 for the
Department of Higher Education
will have their first report
examining exactly what you're
asking for, and this speaker
generated, be very interested to
see that report.
Because as I understand it from
literature, those graduation
rates or
Shall we say, below average for
Of college graduations. Now if I
could turn to, and I expressed
reservations about this in a
previous debate, could I turn to
the tuition rates hit the
various colleges?
Around the state. Is there any
cap?
On tuition rates that are
believe or set by local
Uh,
Boards.
Mr Speaker and Kind Gentleman on
page 12 section a lines 4 to 8.
Prior to June 1st of each year
the department shall determine
the maximum distribution to each
public postsecondary education
institution and tribal college.
Oh,
Based on the annual increase in
the higher Education price Index
for the mountain region.
Which will address tuition costs
and projections.
So, Mr Speaker and General 80
Does this legislation solve the
Mr Speaker and kind gentleman.
This legislation doesn't
specifically address that, but
as determined by the secretary
of the Higher Education
Department, there's tuition caps
for the next three years. Mr
Speaker General Idea graph to
repeat that I didn't quite under
understand the answer, Mr
Speaker and kind, gentlemen.
The higher Education Department
and the secretary will
determine tuition caps with the
opportunity scholarship in mind
for the next three years.
I think I said that right?
Good.
I think that might solve the
problem of increased funding,
resulting in increased tuition
rights, which requires increased
funding, which results in
increased tuition relates on and
on and on. So I can appreciate
the need to break that cycle.
Sooner rather than later.
Mr Speaker and gentle ladies.
Thank you for your answers.
There is free debate. Your lady
from Chavez, representative as
L.
Mr Speaker. Thank you very much.
Well, the general lady from
Burnley Oh, yield. Please. Mr
Speaker. I yield to the general
lady from Chavez. Mr. Speaker,
General Lady Representative
Scott stole a lot of my thunder
because I too had those
concerns. So thank you for
getting those questions answered
through his debate with you and
Mr Speaker in General Lady, You
know that during committee, I've
Um
I was concerned about what was
going to happen after 2028. My
concern was, Is this fun going
to be?
Solve it or insolvent. Could you
refresh my memory on what your
Mr Speaker and kind
57.9 recurring dollars.
Recurring and the lottery
scholarship. Um has 100 and 30
million ARP Ifans that will go.
Cover the costs through fiscal
year. 2028 and Mr Speaker,
gentle lady. Thank you very much
for those that answer right
there.
So the
Its upper to nitty scholarship
that has
157.9 million in my
understanding that right?
Mr Speaker and kind, gentle
lady. Yes.
Okay. And Mr Speaker, General
Lady said that Opportunity
Scholarship fund That's a
recurring experience is that
correct?
Mr Speaker and conventional
lady. Yes. Okay, So, Mr Speaker,
that 50% that over 50% that we
put into education already.
That's where that money is
coming from. Is that correct?
Right, Mr Speaker and Kind lady.
Um, if you're including the
higher education budget and the
P D budget, yes.
Okay, met Mr
Mr. Chair, Mr Speaker and
General Lady.
The lottery.
The lottery scholarship. You
said that there's 139 million in
it, and that's from where could
you repeat your answer again? I
couldn't quite hear. I'm sorry,
Mr Speaker. Engine lady, can you
repeat your question again? I'm
sorry. I missed some key doubt
of their
Mr Speaker is not because
We're aging a little bit, but
it's because it's just the echo
in here. My opinion, the lottery
scholarship, Mr Speaker, General
Lady said had $139 million in it
right now, is that correct? And
that money comes from where?
Uh, Mr Speaker and kind Lady.
First of all, we're ageless.
Second of all, it's 100 and 30
million from the AARP. If ands
that's been designated for the
lottery scholarship.
Okay, So, Mr Speaker, whenever
we are combined with whenever
we're talking about these two
Scholarship programs that are
available.
Are both of them going to remain
solvent at the end of 2028.
Mr Speaker in kind Lady will
have to address the lottery
scholarship. But the 2028 now
just a reminder that Senate Bill
159 establishes a higher
education trust fund.
Um, if that passes and then if
the governor signs that
That money would produce 50
million a year towards each of
the programs.
Okay, So, Mr Speaker, if that
particular bill does pass the
trust fund for education that
many will be held there.
And Mr Speaker. I guess I just
want to reiterate one more time.
And you know where I'm going to
go with this general Lady.
We are flush with money right
now.
And that money has come from the
southeastern corner of the state
in the northwest corner of the
state due to exploration.
And our oil and gas industry is
the one that is providing all
these scholarships so we can get
our our citizens educated, and
I'm not discounting that one
bit.
But we also have to keep in mind
that this industry that has
provided everything that we are
talking about right here in
these bills.
They are being attacked.
And Mr Speaker.
Whenever we look at what our
budget is made up of in funding,
it is the oil and gas industry
that has done this.
And yet we as a body.
Try to
Demonize that industry.
But whenever you stop and really
take a good look at it, Mr
Speaker, that industry affects
each and every one of us every
day in a positive way.
And I think it's about time we
learned to appreciate.
What they do for a state
statewide and for the
availability of the fans that we
have to be able to create these
programs and Mr Speaker when
they when the physical year ends
for 2028.
Let's see what solar is going to
be able to do to provide the
funding. Let's see what our wind
turbines are going to do to be
able to create this funding.
I think everybody will be
greatly disappointed.
Mr Speaker, General Lady. Thank
you for your responses further
bit your later too close.
Mr Speaker. I now move a do pass
for house Bill 239 is amended.
We are on final passage of
Senate Bill 239 as amended.
32nd Bowl clock. The vote is now
open.
What about the clothes?
The vote is not closed by vote
of 61 in the affirmative to
negative sent a bill to 39 has
amended easily passed this
house.
Gentle lady from Santa. Favorite
Percent from Meadow. Are you
ready? An item? 29 am Mr.
Speaker. Will you get me to that
point? Let the record reflect
that all action is a surfer
places in the Judiciary
Committee substitute for
Centerville, six is twice
amended on final passage has
been taken and it is not subject
to debate amendment or
substitution that generated to
explain the bill. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. This updates are
Cannabis Regulation Act.
And with that Austin for
questions, seeing no debate and
little clothes. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. I now move that Senate
Bill six is twice amended. Hold
on. We have a debate.
Okay, get press the button.
Let's go to Lin, general lady
from Chavez represent of the
cell.
Mr Speaker, that of
Thank you very much. Well. The
journal lady Yield will yield
Mr Speaker. That doesn't give me
much of a clue as what this
title says.
Cannabis regulation changes, and
with that I stand for questions,
Okay? I have a question. What is
it? Mr Speaker and General Lady.
Mr Speaker, General Lady. We do
a number of various updates to
our cannabis regulation Act in
this bill. Um, we've learned
through the interim session have
had many discussions with the
courts, corrections and justice
about what it is that we needed
to do to look at, Um not only
tightening up our licensing
program allowing for nonprofits
to move over from the health
department into the
Cannabis Control division.
Um, we criminalize and raised
penalties on trafficking
cannabis and do a lot of
cleanup. Just, um, working with
bipartisanly on various aspects
of what was in rule. What was in
contraband law to ensure that we
continue to do best by this
industry in concert with the
agency who endorses this bill,
Mr Speaker, General Lady.
Mr Speaker. Thank you very much,
Journal lady. I do have several
questions here regarding the
licensing whenever we first
implemented this bill, I'm sorry
I didn't vote for it. But
whenever this particular
Product was licensed to be able
to be sold to be able to be
distributed throughout our
state.
Whenever the licensing bureau
Regulation licensing.
Started issuing the permits for
these cannabis shops.
Did they do any sort of
background check And is that
covered in this bill? Mr.
Speaker? General Lady. Thank you
for asking. We update
relationship with the FBI with,
um, regulation and licensing
department. Currently, all
background checks are going
through Public Safety
department. This will allow us
to have a process in concert
with the FBI to get background
checks done at the federal
level.
Well, Mr Speaker, they gonna
have to wait 10 days, just like
seven days now, just like you're
going to have to with the gun
bill to be able to get that
background check done.
Mr Speaker, General Lady. We
don't know how long it takes at
this time since it's a new
process that we're proposing in
this bill. Mr. Speaker. I know
that if you're going to have a
gaming license in the state of
New Mexico, you have to undergo
that background check to I am
kind of curious as why this was
not set up in advance of as
passing legislation a few years
ago for cannabis to be sold in
our state. Why wasn't regulation
and licensing in place then?
To do the background check.
That's my concern, Mr Speaker
because I have already heard of
a couple of locations that have
had to shut down because of that
very issue.
Mr Speaker, General Lady, So
this was always part of the
proposal to begin with it
Really? It takes the extra
relationship with the FBI, and
there was assuredly waiting for
what they call like a routing
number verifiably that they can
actually work through in order
to get that, so this is already
this was the proposed plan to
begin with Mr Speaker. General
Lady. We've been tightening up
the language to try to figure
out the best way in which we can
move forward with that
background Check process. Mr
Speaker. It seems to me that we
have put the
Cart before the horse because we
were issuing
Licensing for establishments
before any sort of background
check was done. And to me,
that's deplorable. Mr Speaker,
Uh, does it does your bill
because I have not had a chance
to read it. We didn't know until
this morning. What bills? We
were going to be hearing and so
that's why I'm going to grill
you over. What is in contained
in this bill right here.
Are there provisions in here for
driving under the influence of
cannabis? Because you know that
is driving while under the
influence. It's it's a hazard to
the state of New Mexico. So are
there any provision in this bill
right here?
Regarding that aspect. Mr
Speaker, General Lady That's
already current law. And no, we
don't discuss that in the spill.
Mr. Speaker, we're going to
impose
Possible jail time and all sorts
of penalties on people that are
driving while under the
influence of alcohol, But it's
not going to be applicable. If
you're driving under the
influence of cannabis because we
don't have anything to stop that
Mr Speaker. I have a problem
with that, lady. Just just real
quickly. Um, that is all in in
The way I statutes but not a
part of this bill.
Mr Speaker and gentlemen,
General Lady.
There's a lot in this bill right
here that I do not have time to
go over unless we want to stand
here for three hours and my bad
knee won't let me do that. Mr
Speaker.
Has there been a problem with
the cannabis industry as far as
illegal product coming into the
state?
Mr Speaker, General Lady, I'm
sure you've seen the news. Same
as me. Um, that there were. What
we're doing with this piece of
legislation is ensuring that we
criminalize those who bring
cannabis across state lines into
our state and clarify what
trafficking is increasing Those
penalties and assuredly make
including law enforcement. In
that process, Mr Speaker,
General Lady where tightening up
how all of that operates.
Having learned from the various
criminal components that have
come into our state, Mr Speaker,
and I'm sure General lady
whenever you're talking about
that we have alerted the state
police. We have alerted the
Sheriff's department. We've
alerted the local police
department is as well as far as
illegal products. What happens
to this person if they are
caught with this?
Illegal.
Marijuana that has now entered
our state because that is
crossing state lines. Mr
Speaker, General lady, So we,
um, in the bill clarified how
that stair step approach to
bringing in penalties to that
trafficking will work. Um, so
that's a criminal offense. And
of course, we will go through
the process to ensure that not
only folks who are bad actors
within the cannabis community
Who are breaking the law who
have illegal products on their
shelves or going under the
auspices of having a licensed
product that aren't behaving
under the law that they are now
engaging in criminal activity.
And Mr Speaker, General Lady,
Um, looking at how how it is
that we criminalize trafficking.
And that starts on page 43. Mr.
Speaker, General lady, Okay. I
just got sidetracked there for
just a little bit. Thank you for
that response right there, Mr
Speaker and General Lady on I am
seeing that there was a
committee substitute in that
happened on page one line 13,
and you're going it was
stricken.
But the Senate Judiciary
Committee to prohibit drive up
windows at cannabis retail
establishments and Mr Speaker
for those individuals that do an
a liquor license whenever their
businesses were harmed with the
shutdown of the driver window. I
applaud
The
Senator for coming up with that
idea.
Mr Speaker, Gentle lady.
Whenever I see
Standalone cannabis facilities
that do have the lounge area for
the consumption of cannabis.
Will that be affecting?
In any way, shape or form the
ability for that person to be
able to get in their car and
drive away.
Mr Speaker, General Lady. We
don't talk about this in the
bill.
And it's probably something that
should be talked about, because
once again if those people are
consuming cannabis and in an
arena where they do have to
Dr Elsewhere.
That is driving under the
influence.
Mr Speaker, General Lady.
Now I've lost my page number
here.
Uh huh.
I noticed on page 43 that you
have trafficking cannabis
products, and that's under
section 13 here.
Yeah. So what is the maximum
find that can be imposed on
anybody that has been convicted
of? Or maybe maybe it's not
addressed in this particular
bill for trafficking, cannabis
or cannabis products, Mr
Speaker, General Ladies, so for
criminal penalties that follows
our criminal statutes, depending
upon what was found in the
course of trafficking.
And how that would be, um, of
course, assigned to the bad
actor, Mr Speaker, General lady,
But when it comes to the
licensure process under rld, Mr
Speaker, General Lady, it would
be up to a million dollar fine
for those bad actors who are
working under the auspices of,
um, a legit business.
Mr Speaker, since I have not had
a chance to read this bill until
I'm able to fess skin it right
now.
Because we didn't know about it
until this morning. Mr in this
bill is over 61 pages long, So
we do have a lot of business
cuss here. So, Mr Speaker and
General Lady, starting on page
43 going all the way over to 45.
It is talking about a person.
21 years of age or older who
traffics cannabis.
That person is guilty of 1/4
degree felony for first offense.
person who traffics cannabis
products is guilty of a third
degree of felony for a second
subsequent offense.
Mr Speaker and my missing it
somewhere. If it's there is not
a person. Let's see. I'm sorry.
Here it is on page 44.
Starting about online 18, a
person between 18 and 21 years
of age.
Who violates this section guilty
of a misdemeanor.
But Mr Speaker, would it be
possible? Here it is. I see it
now.
On page 44 line 10 and 11.
Person under the eight age of
18.
They shall be subject to
attendance at a four hour
evidence based drug education
and legal rights program at no
cost to the person.
Can you tell me why there is
that much differentiate Asian
between that person that is
under the age of 18. And then
those that are
18 to 21 years of age, Mr
Speaker, General Ladies, So you
recognize that, like alcohol?
Cannabis is not able to be
consumed legally in the state of
New Mexico until age of 21 and
so between the ages of 18 and
21 when you're a legal adult in
the in the state, what we do is
just clarify what those
penalties would be for those who
are trafficking in that category
and then younger than 18. Of
course, you're a minor.
In which case you go through the
juvenile system, and we assigned
the penalties for juvenile's
under this section, Mr Speaker,
General Lady.
Well, Mr Speaker, I think this
is
Quite confusing to me, because
if a person is under the age of
18 they have they are going to
be subject to attendance at a
four hour evidence based drug
educational legal rights program
at no cost to the person.
But if there is an inch or age
young person
That
Okay, let's take game and fish,
for instance.
If they are suspected of
harassing wildlife.
They have to do like 25 hours of
community service, Mr Speaker in
general Lady.
So why? Why the differentiation
there? Four hours versus 25
hours. Mr. Speaker, General
Lady, I'd like to point you to,
um, lines 10 and 11, in addition
to the penalties provided in the
delinquency act, So for that
juvenile, not only would they be
subject to the Delinquency act,
they also have to attend.
Four hours of evidence makes
drug education and four hours of
community service in addition to
a criminal penalty that would be
attached under the delinquency
Act, and Mr Speaker General idea
did read that, but it's at no
cost to that person. So, Mr
Speaker, whenever we go on over
here to a person that is 21, age
of, as or older, its fourth
degree felony for the first
defense.
And then for
Anything After that. Its third
degree felony for second and
subsequent offenses.
Mr Speaker. Is there provision
in here about contributing to
the delinquency of a minor?
As far as any sort of
Let me see. I'm looking here
real fast riffs best as I can.
as far as that offense give for
contributing to the delinquency
of a minor. Is it addressed in
this particular bill? Mr
Speaker, General Lady That's
already current law and that is
prohibited. And Mr Speaker,
Gentle lady, Is it relevant to
the Cannabis Act, Mr. Speaker,
General Lady under the Cannabis
Act? Yes. As an as an adult
Hrant. This would fall under
the, um, contributing to a minor
in that section of law.
Don't talk about that in this.
These changes here.
Okay, Mr Speaker. There's all
sorts of forms of cannabis. Now
we have the
Ah, the gummies. Okay, so
inadvertently if a child does
get hold of the Grammys and
ingest them or share them with
friends or whatever.
How was the person that
inadvertently left these gummies
out where young person could get
into? What are they going to be
facing?
Mr Speaker, General Lady again,
That's already current law for I
think what you're discussing. We
don't have that in this bill.
Mr Speaker. I am and
Going through this as best as I
can on page 47.
Of your bill or this bill
starting online five. It says no
material. When cannabis is Dean
misbranded, Can you explain that
to me?
Yes, Mr Speaker. General Lady.
This is for those that are, um
essentially misbranding their
item, which means that they have
false labeling on their item
That wouldn't be up to standard
that's regulated by the Cannabis
Control division, So we're just
clarifying under law, the way in
which their labels need to be
placed and how it is that these
the uniformity of the of the
The industry needs to enact with
their products on the shelves.
Mr Speaker, General Lady
And Mr Speaker General Aidid
does this also holds true for
medical cannabis, Mr Laws and
these regulations? Correct. Mr
Speaker, General Lady.
And
Mr Speaker.
I'm sure though, with with the
regulation licensing department
whenever they
Issued this license for it. This
establishment
Will that purveyor lose their
licensing and the ability to
sell retail, cannabis or medical
cannabis? If there is a product
found on their premise that has
been like mislabeled, Mr
Speaker, General Lady? Yes, that
is one of the essential
components of this bill is
giving regulation and licensing
the opportunity to revoke or
suspend a license for bad actors
who are not complying with the
regulation.
Mr Speaker, General lady,
whenever we you're talking about
the bad actors in this in
particular industry.
Uh,
Okay. Anybody make a claim
against one of the providers and
have regulation licensing, go
out and check or does there have
to be substantial proof? That's
correct, Mr Speaker, General
lady regulation and licensing
regular regularly fields.
complaints under anything under
their licensing purview, in
which case they follow up on any
complaint that comes forth
regarding cannabis.
Because so, Mr Speaker, General
Lady, If there is one complaint,
they go check it out, and they
deemed that there is no problems
here, but they receive another
complaint than a continued
complaint. What happens then? Mr
Speaker Because that is an
ongoing should be an ongoing
investigation that should
require deeper delving into
Figuring out what is going on Mr
Speaker, General lady, um so
they'll follow up on every new
complaint that comes through.
They're also looking at patterns
and practice of individuals or
companies that make see
consistent complaints come
through as well. Um so they're
always looking for how it is
that folks are doing and we'll
follow up on any complaint that
comes in. I appreciate that. I
really do because there are some
problems. We've seen a couple of
businesses that were shut down
by regulation.
Licensing.
Will those people
Be able to remake
Reapply for another license.
Mr Speaker, General Lady if
licenses revoked, there's a
three year prohibition before
that person can even attempt to
get a new license, in which case
they'd have to go through all of
the vetting process is to prove
that they've, you know,
rectified any wrong that was
flagged by rld to begin with, in
which case if they can't prove
that they will not be able to
get a new license, Mr Speaker,
General Lady
I appreciate that response, Mr
Speaker and General lady, I know
that there was a bill. I don't
know what's happened to it
because there has been just a
little
Few things that have getting
better getting people off track
up here this past
27 days, But Mr Speaker, General
Lady
There was a bill regarding
cannabis has contraband going
into a jail. Can you tell me the
status of what that is in regard
to what you're trying to
accomplish here in this bill?
Thank you, Mr Speaker. General
Lady. We worked in concert with
numerous folks through the
interim to ensure that
contraband in jails I want to
thank your colleagues are
colleagues for helping us
recognize that as we've gone
through every different section
of law that this is one that was
Is missed, and that we now
include contraband as cannabis
into jails for both juvenile's
and for adults, Um
Jails and prisons. Mr Speaker,
General Lady.
Thank you for that response, Um
I've also noticed on page 52
line 19 they're in is added
trafficking cannabis products as
provided in section 26, and it
goes on with that.
Um
Can you talk to me about that
particular?
Section.
Of our
Trafficking cannabis products,
Mr Speaker General Lady from
section 18 starting on page 50
where we add in trafficking
cannabis products. This allows
us to also classify trafficking
cannabis as a racketeering act
under, um, under our definition
of racketeering, so that those
bad actors again who are, um
It engaging in racketeering are
now subject to that law.
Thank you very much for that. I
see that that particular
Hold on. Just want to make sure
that it This is the same statute
that I'm referencing on page 55
Hold on.
Yes, it is. I see that That
particular statute is also added
on page 55 line 18 through 19.
Mr Speaker.
This is a very in depth bill
right here. I know have missed a
lot of stuff, but I know that
there's other people that do
want as Christians on this bill.
Um
I just wish that everything
would have been more in place
whenever we first past the
cannabis bill for recreational
use. Mr Speaker, I think it
would have been a lot easier for
law enforcement officers to be
able to get on board to
understand what their role in
this was going to be of what
Were set by the regulation
Licensing department would have
been
More in tuned for these
businesses to get started. But
Mr Speaker here we are today.
And it's what is it three years
now?
I think that's what it is that
whenever it was first passed
And, uh,
People need to understand that
even though we do have
recreational marijuana, now in
the state of New Mexico
We still have to be cognizant.
Of what we are doing, because it
does have rules and regulations
that have to be adhered to. Mr
Speaker, General Lady. Thank you
very much. Thank you, Mr
Speaker, General Lady Giulini
from Katherine Sierra Violencia
representative.
Armstrong and then in the room
will go to representative Lord
generated from earlier in
Torrance. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Will the gentle lady from Santa
Fe please yield. I will yield Mr
Speaker, General Lady. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. So I want to
ask you because I already had
heard this bill actually
supported it. It was kind of
funny because I ended up in the
news because I supported again
Amiss Regulation Bill, but it
was like had a lot of good
stuff. So
What I want to do is I want to
compare eight hb 128 to this
substitute and like the
represented before I echo the
fact it's very frustrating as
quickly trying to read this
because there's a lot of stuff
that we just found out that we
were hearing this so luckily I
also got my HB 128 so we can
kind of do a compare and
contrast as quickly as possible.
The main question. I have Mr
Speaker and gentle lady, um
before and and you know, I have
a lot of micro growers and my
district.
So in the other one they were
concerned about the fees being
increased for them and last and
the 128 there wasn't But then
there was also there was going
to be increased fees for more.
The big box. Is that in this
substitute, stop, Mr. Speaker,
General Lady? No, um, in concert
with both the industry and the
agency. We're going to work
through the interim to discuss
fees Plant count all of that.
Um, and so that was stripped out
of Senate Bill six as well as
house Bill 128. Okay, so, Mr
Speaker and generally swinish,
and there's no changes, So from
micro growers reach out to me. I
can tell them that nothing is
happening, so there's nothing
good or bad. Okay, So that's my
first question on that, Mr
Speaker and General Lady, um
Like I said, I tried to skim
this as fast as possible is the
human trafficking and this one
And in this SB six like it was
an HB 128.
Mr Speaker, General Lady. I
don't recall us speaking about
human trafficking in 128. It's
not in Senate Bill six.
Okay, I couldn't.
I guess what? Hold on one
second, because I don't I could
have sworn Mr Speaker, and only
there was a poor. I thought
there was something you would
added.
To the regulations to be tougher
on human try. I could have sworn
because that was one of the
things I really liked about it.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, Gentle
lady and I'll introduce my
expert Robert Sacks with the
regulation Licensing department
is their general counsel. He
reminded me that one of the
disqualifying acts to which he
would not be able to get a
license is if you human
trafficked.
Okay. And Mr Speaker in general
Lady is that now in this Senate
substitute it is Mr Speaker.
General Lady. Sorry, Mr Speaker
Jelly because that was huge for
me, because as you guys all
know, we had the human
trafficking issue in my
district. Can you tell me what
page that's on?
Mr Speaker, General lady, um the
substance of it is, um, between
pages.
Uh, 23 through
Uh, 31. And so what we do in
that area is just clarify how it
is, Um folks can be revoked or
denied a license. Issued a
license. Um, and look at the
various things that would
disqualify a person from being
able to obtain a license. Mr.
Speaker, General lady, Okay, So
Mr Speaker, generally just I
mean, look through that real
quick, So
Starting them because that was
one of the reasons there was a
lot of reasons, actually, on the
HB 128. There was a lot of
regulations. I really liked that
were needed. The only thing I
would like to see Mr Speaker,
gentle lady. It looks like it
stayed the same.
If you got a violation was three
years What I would like to see
if it's a second violation. We
up that because you know the
first time you do something
wrong. I'm not saying the minute
now, but I'm saying the future
that if you do something wrong
the first time, Okay, three, But
after that, I think we need to
extend it. But let me look
through this.
Madam Chair, Mr Speaker. I'm
sorry. I've only got four hours
of sleep.
It's so good. We were a little
tired
and then something happened. I
don't know what happened. Okay,
so point to me the part if you
want to help me out here real
quick about the part
specifically which is human
trafficking, So I don't have to
dig through this, Mr Speaker,
Gentlemen, lady that would start
on page 27 lines two through
seven.
Okay, Mr. Speaker. Jelly hold
on.
Okay, So you said lines two
through seven.
On page 27 opinion tickets are
filling in La Young 18 years
old. Okay, perfect trafficking.
Thank you. That was what I was
looking for is I was trying to
read it because I really,
really, really like that portion
there, Mr Speaker generally
because of the issues I had
towards county
Um, let me see what else
questions I had in comparison.
Well, I'm looking at this, Um Mr
Speaker daily. Since you're
familiar with the HP 128, Can
you tell me if there's any other
differences between the bill
that you presented before and
this one that are pertinent to
me making the decision on this
Senate Bill, Mr Speaker and
gentle lady.
Mr Speaker generally, so we've
been following both through the
process and trying to get them
as close to identical as we can,
Just yesterday. Mr Speaker,
General Lady, we amended it
further to look like House Bill
128 and we worked with, um,
representative from Berna Leo on
clarifying some of the data that
we would be able to collect with
the FBI.
Um, and essentially tightened up
some of the Ipra language that
we hadn't discussed in prior
bills that I believe you had a
chance to vote on in committee,
but that that would pretty much
I think.
Do it. Thank you, Mr Speaker,
Dylan, and then you also add it.
Yes. Still in Mr Speaker. I was
looking through my glasses like
Oh, changed.
Misspeaks generally, um
So we have the human
trafficking. Do we have caps? Mr
Speaker Julianne licenses, so
that's not in there. That was
also a big thing because that
changes the whole dynamics of
this, Okay, so mostly just going
back to the regulations and, uh,
imposing
Um
More penalties to summarize. I
think what I remember an HP 28
also, what I liked about is that
If you were doing bad things you
weren't going to be eligible and
license could be revoked or
suspended. So that's all the
same in this one. Correct, Mr
Speaker, General lady. Okay, I
think what I'm going to do at
this point to give other people
a chance to ask their questions.
I'm going to go back and kind of
compare and contrast on that, Mr
Speaker and generally, but I
support it last time if it's
very similar to support it again
because it basically is just
going through.
Cleaning up the regulations and
actually making it harder and
harder, making it that if you've
done some things that you
shouldn't be doing, and there's
some crimes that you've done,
you don't get to get a license
could be suspended. Revoking
which again goes back to my
human trafficking issue, and I
appreciate that. That's in
there, and that's why I made the
news on it before for supporting
that, which was really weird,
but
Yeah. So I'll look through and I
might support it. Looks like I
miss supported again. I just
want to go and compare and
contrast. So thank you for
answering questions. Thank you.
There is for the debate The
general linear from Bellagio and
Sandoval, representative Cates.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Just the
general Lady from Santa Fes
Yield Yield to my friend from
Bernie, Leo and Sandoval. Thank
you very much. Can you, um, tell
me and he did somewhat, but the
purpose of this bill is to Mr
Speaker. General Lady to tighten
up regulation, um, and to
clarify criminality does a
number of other cleanup bits
when it comes to licensing. Um
and looking at how it is that we
get law enforcement involved.
Okay, So thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. And thank
you, General Lady from Santa Fe.
So it is.
We know that we're young in this
business and and so it was
necessary for us to come back
into fight into tighten up some
of the regulation that would
reduce out of state bad actors,
which the purpose was to promote
local
Um, producers. Is that correct?
Correct. Mr Speaker, General
lady, Uh, thank you, Mr Speaker,
General lady, And so, um, can
you, uh and and thank you for
introducing your expert witness?
Um, but there is no uh, nothing
in here that has
Adjusted any of the prices on
licensing or plant crown. Is
that correct? That's correct, Mr
Speaker, General lady. So, Mr
Speaker generally so we are
tightening up the regulations
for out of state producers and
we're keeping it at the same
cost for our local producers. Is
that correct at this time, Mr
Speaker, General Lady? Yes.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. And thank
you, General Lady.
Are there any? Um, Are there any
conflicts of interest or ethics
version in this, Uh, bill
stating, such as legislatures
being part of the cannabis
business. Mr. Speaker, General
Lady? Yes, that was just amended
back into the bill on pages, 22
and 23. That was the intent of
our original legislation when we
passed this law, which will be
added, which was just added back
in yesterday and house
judiciary.
Um, that a person of the new
who's a member of the New Mexico
Senate or House of
Representatives, um, shall not
apply or be granted a license
until July. 1st 2026 Thank you
so much, Mr Speaker, General
lady. So, um, so this bill was
amended twice in the Senate and
three times and house judiciary.
I just want to understand.
Four times. Just Sherry. Thank
you. Um so there was still clean
up to the cleanup involved. Is
that a fair assessment? Mr.
Speaker? Generally, Mr Speaker
generally. Yes. Since we've been
working through the interim, um
and looking at all of the, um
the holistic sort of aspects of
the agency and industry at
large. It's it's a substantive
piece of legislation looking at
all different areas of how we
might be able to tighten things
up. Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Generally.
Just one last question just for
clarification. You said that it
was originally in the bill the
conflict of interest statement.
How did it come back out and
then house judiciary, put it
back in. It is it is the reason
why it's one of the reasons in
such a complex piece of
Legislature is it's been amended
so many times so
Mr Speaker, General Lady, That's
the sausage making process. We
take things out. We put it in,
Um and we'll see what's
palatable for this vote after
this, Mr Speaker, General Lady,
Thank you very much. Mr.
Speaker, General Lady, I'm a
bacon person. But thing is for
the debate. The General lady
from Katherine, Sierra County
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Does the
General Lady from Santa Fe yield
yield to the representative?
Thank you, Mr Speaker and kind
Lady. I have two questions.
Can you explain a little bit on
the clarifying that the license
requirement regarding legal
access to significant sufficient
water applies solely to cannabis
producers and cannabis producer
Micro businesses?
Can you? Can you talk a little
bit? Uh and explain a little bit
about what got changed.
Mr Speaker, General Lady. We
don't talk about any of the
changes to the uniformity of how
water licensing or how water
rates are required. All we do in
this section. It's page 24. It's
just look at, um
The conditions for licensing,
which are essentially it's
cleanup language. So these are
really the folks that have
always been subject to that. We
just clarified. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you, Kind lady.
Also, My next question is
Is there language in this
cleanup bill, giving the
cannabis Division authority the
Is it, giving the cannabis
Division authority to limit
licensure? Mr Speaker, General
Lady, so there's no limitation
to licenses as it pertains to
folks who are in good graces
with the regulation and
licensing and following all of
the various compliance is and
there's a list of the different
licenses in the bill.
But that said Mr Speaker,
General Lady. We clarify how rld
can revoke or deny a license in
black and white here for those
bad actors who are,
unfortunately not complying with
that those regulations Thank
you, Mr Speaker and kind lady.
And so as far as a new license,
someone who's applying that's
never had a license before.
We are not limiting the amount
of licenses for the state of New
Mexico in the language in this
bill, is that correct? We're not
Mr Speaker. Generally. That's
correct. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Gentle lady. I know that was
kind of a push. Uh before, and I
just wanted to make sure because
we don't limit licenses anywhere
else. And if we want to turn
this into the alcohol industry
That would be a good way to do
it. So thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, General Lady.
There is for the debate. The
gentleman from Lee
representative Scott
Thank you, Mr Speaker Will the
General lady from Santa Fe yield
I will yield to the man in the
corner.
Almost almost almost
Mr Baker generated to follow up
on the previous line of
questioning. I understand.
There's a lot of consternation
in the industry now with respect
to too much competition.
Is there anything in this
legislation?
That would serve to inhibit
Or make more expensive. The
issuance of new licenses, Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen, um, too much
competition as a good
capitalist. Come on, man. No,
I'm kidding. Mr Speaker,
gentlemen. Um the there's no
change in how it is restructure.
Um
Our laws when it comes to being
able to access the license nor
the fees, So all of that status
quo we decided that in the
interim would be a good time to
look at plant count fees,
etcetera and put that into a
place where we had some more
time in a 60 day to really
deliberate upon it.
That Mr Speaker and General 80.
I believe I saw in the F I r
that there was some advantage by
the large vertically integrated
producers.
With respect to license your
phase over no up and comers.
Could you describe that place?
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. So it
just if you're a vertically
integrated micro business versus
a vertically integrated, um,
business in the cannabis
industry you do you do you are
subject to different fees. The
micro businesses are allowed to
do different things, but they're
limited by plant count their
limited in scope as to how they
can engage with the industry. In
which case Mr Speaker, General
Lady, the larger producers have
various licenses.
As well that they have to comply
with our Capta in rule 20,000
plants.
So it would be
More expensive for a micro
Grower to expand, then it would
be the larger integrated
companies. Is that correct?
Mr Speaker, gentlemen, So it
really depends. And I guess how
on how which approach you're
taking? Um And so all of our
larger producers have various
plant fees, which the microbes
are not subject to, Um because
of the again there's a cap on on
plant count. I guess I'm trying
to understand what
What? You're asking it as far as
getting into the business or
what fees there are currently Mr
Speaker in General Lady, would
it be more expensive for a
smaller operator to expand their
operations from a licensing
standpoint than it would be for
a larger, vertically integrated
company?
Mr Speaker. Uh,
Gentlemen. So depending on how
many plants any micro grower
would grow if they hit the cap
than they now move into the next
year, which would make them a
standard operating business,
playing, paying regular plant
fees, etcetera, so it really
just depends on where they are
in the business and what fees
they would be subject to. But
Every license is consistent. You
know, we're not changing any of
the cost of that.
Okay. And last question, Mr
Speaker, Gentle lady did this
bill allow for the drive
through sale?
Cannabis, Mr Speaker, Gentlemen,
So there was a prohibition put
on drive throughs that was taken
out.
There was a prohibition that is
now taken out that was all done
in the Senate prior to coming
into the house. Correct, Mr
Speaker, Gentlemen.
Okay, So, Mr Speaker, General
Lady, the answer to that
question would be that we now
Under the What we're looking at
today would allow the drive
through sale of cannabis, Mr
Speaker. Gentlemen, that's
already current practice and has
been since we, um legalized
recreational cannabis.
Okay?
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you. Gentle lady and gentlemen,
there's to be gentlemen from
Belinelli Your representative
Ream. Thank you. Mr Speaker.
Will the General lady from Santa
Fe yield I will yield to my
buddy from judiciary, Mr
Speaker.
Mr Speaker in general Lady. I
want to clarify the issue
earlier about the drug driving.
So are you familiar with the
Burchfield decision?
Mr Speaker, gentlemen. Yes. I
believe we were just talking
about Burchfield yesterday.
Mr Speaker and General lady, and
that's what we're going to talk
about. And so for the rest of
the body, the Burchfield
decision
Said that and this is a U. S.
Supreme Court decision.
That you cannot take a blood
test.
Ah for a misdemeanor DW. I
Unless you have a search
warrant.
And so data so misdemeanor DW is
dwt 1st 2nd 3rd.
That includes alcohol or drugs.
The only way to find drugs.
Is to go ahead and have the
blood test.
New Mexico does not allow a
search warrant for a misdemeanor
D w I.
So since 2017
We have not been doing, uh,
blood test for misdemeanor DWS.
And that bill to fix it.
Is currently in house judiciary.
And was rolled over last night,
and we need to pass it to help
fix this whole problem.
Anyway, Mr Speaker, General
Lady, I'm not sure if you have a
response to that, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen, it's not in the bill
so we can talk about it when we
get there. I think Mr Speaker in
general lady, but we really do
need that bill that bill fixes a
lot of the DWP problems. Uh,
But thank you very much. I just
wanted to clarify that.
Thank you. Gentlemen. There is
further away gentlelady from
Chavez Courier. Roosevelt,
Representative rib. Thank you.
Mr Speaker. Will the general
lady from Santa Fe Yield? Yes, I
will yield
Um, thank you, General Lady, Mr.
Speaker. Um we worked a lot on
this bill and interim, um, could
you describe to the body? Um,
probably how many hours of
listening and
Discussions we heard from law
enforcement and people that were
strategic players in the area
over the interim period. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Thank you,
General lady. And thanks to you
for all of that hard work, the
many hours the drives down
south, the conversations with
law enforcement and really just
bringing a lot of what we needed
to clean up in the language and
put into law, both with
Um, packaging advertising and
looking at contraband and making
sure we were looking at all of
that holistically. Just want to
thank you for all of your
commitment to making this a
great bill.
And thank you for saying that.
And so I wanted this body to to
understand. I mean, I did bring
three bills. I think about three
bills last year, dealing with
things that are now included in
here in one was the safe
packaging for Children and
making sure that it would be
opaque packaging so Children
would not be enticed to get into
that type of product.
So, Mr Speaker, and and I know
that was a friendly amendment,
actually from you last year. Is
this now all included in this
bill? Correct. Mr Speaker,
General Lady it is and Mr
Speaker and General lady. I also
and I know. Um, The general lady
from Chavez County brought this
up, and I just want to explain a
little bit more about the issue.
I had brought a bill also, that
would make it a delinquent
offense for
Miner who was under the age of
18, because that's when you are
considered a minor to actually
be.
Charged under the delinquency
code. Um
And similar to alcohol be able
to use the juvenile probation
system to in addition to what's
in the statute of I believe it's
community service or training or
classes or whatever, but
actually to have the full
resources of the juvenile
probation offices office,
whether that be family
assistance, counseling
treatment, whatever.
Would benefit that child is at
now in this bill. It is Mr
Speaker, Gentle lady and Mr
Speaker, General Lady. Will this
also benefit the school staff on
how to deal with situations that
are arising in the classroom
when they have Children coming
to school that are under the
influence of cannabis and and
now they actually can call
somebody to help them deal with
a situation like this. Is this
now something that this bill
will address Mr Speaker, General
Lady under the the Delinquency
Act.
Those provisions are in there is
my understanding.
And thank you and Mr Speaker,
General Lady, also bringing
contraband into prisons was I
know a bill that representatives
of more and I cosponsored
together, and I think we heard
that on the floor, but well,
that has passed through this
house. That is also Mr Speaker.
General Lady fixed in this bill.
In addition, correct, Mr
Speaker, General Lady.
All right, And so I'll be the
first to say that this is a very
long bill and I was never for
legalization of marijuana. Just
just was never something I
thought we should do. But saying
that Mr Speaker, General Lady,
we are where we are now, um,
with this situation where it is
legalized, And does this bill do
a lot to clean up all the
mistakes or
Things that were left out of the
original original cannabis Bill.
Mr Speaker, General Lady, We'd
like to think we're just getting
better as we go along, um and
have learned a lot. I think in
the process, um as of continued
to learn and through the
interim, so what this does is
really clean up. Tighten up. Um,
what we've been able to learn
from rld and some of the tools
that they need.
To help us better regulate and
look at again holistically how
it is that we improve the
overall industry and the
efficacy of the opportunity that
we have here in New Mexico and
Mr Speaker. Generally,
obviously, this bill is still
probably gonna
Evolve as time goes on, and we
continue to work on this bill,
Would you agree? There's going
to be other things that we heard
about an interim That's probably
going to have to be addressed at
some point in maybe the 60 Day
session and after interim
I believe so, Mr. Speaker,
General Lady again, we'll just
hopefully keep getting better
and better.
And and lastly, Mr Speaker, and
generally you also addressed a
lot of concerns about law
enforcement concerns. Law
enforcement had, and also I
believe it was the attorney
general's office that came and
spoke about penalties and
enforcement and regulations and
different issues they were
having dealing with prosecuting
and arresting people in the
field.
Based on just a lot of confusion
with the code was that address
especially penalties in this
bill. It was Mr Speaker, General
lady and we delineate out how
all of that will work now.
Alright, So, Mr Speaker,
generally I want to thank you
also for working with me and
including my legislation into
this bill again. I think it's
going to be a work in progress.
But we are where we are with
cannabis and we've got to fix
these things. And I support this
bill and all the work that
everybody in the interim did on
it. Um and especially you taking
my
My suggestions into account in
this legislation may not be my
bill, but I feel like a lot of
my bills in here, so I
appreciate that. And with that,
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Generally, the good to know that
My bill is not perfect. Sorry,
everybody.
General men from Chavez
representative Hembree. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Will the gentle
lady yield I will yield to my
friend from judiciary, Mr
Speaker.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. General
Lady. I think we heard House
Bill 128 a couple of times in
judiciary and then heard this
one as well.
And, uh,
I had
A number of concerns when we
first saw it. I appreciate your
willingness to listen to those
concerns and to work on those,
and I think we have a much
better bill. I think what what
you have done on tightening up
The licensing and making it more
difficult for I guess what you'd
say bad actors to get licenses
and making it easier to get
those licenses away from them is
good, and I think the measures
to really stop, uh, cannabis
from illegal or illicit markets
coming in and being sold as
legal cannabis.
I really applaud that. So I just
want to thank you for your
efforts and, uh, support your
bill. Thank you See, no further
bit generated close. Thank you,
Mr Speaker. Thank you. Body for
a great debate. Um, I now move
that Senate joint Committee
Substitute for Senate Bill six
is twice amended, as many times
amended. Do you now pass?
We are on final passage of
Senate judiciary, not Joint
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Centerville six as twice
amended
The vote.
Is now open.
About the close vote is now
closed.
Mr Speaker. Let me announce the
vote by a vote of
We don't know what the vote was.
57 in the affirmative. Five in
the negative Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for
Centerville six is twice amended
as duly passed his House lady
from earlier and Torrance to
explain my vote. Thank thank
you, Mr Speaker. My yes. Vote
on. This is always going to be
that I appreciate, um, that we
have more reasons for issuance
and denial.
Suspension revocation, um
especially for human
trafficking, which has been
issued by District I like that
Now, if you're selling elite of
illegal product that becomes
something, lose your license tax
lien, certain felonies. My issue
is always going to be in a very
straightforward with this. We
still don't know how highest you
high to drive and when somebody
discovers that they become a
billionaire
And you still cannot produce a
firearm or carrying one when
you're impaired, So thank you,
Mr Speaker. Mr. Speaker from
Chavez. Mr Speaker, I'd like to
explain my vote. Please go
ahead. Mr Speaker. I do not
support this industry. I did not
vote for it. In the beginning.
The reason I did vote Yes, on
this bill is because it's about
time we came up with more
stringent red regulations.
That should have been put in
place whenever this bill was
first passed, Um, also in
protest of striking prohibiting
drive up windows that cannabis
retail establishments because
that industry along with our
alcohol industry does make for
impaired driving, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you very much. Thank you,
gentle lady.
Generally from earlier. Dixon,
Are you ready on item number?
35. Thank you. Mr Speaker. Will
you get me to that point the
record reflect that election
necessary for placing Senate
Bill 116 and final passage has
been taken, and it is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution. The general lady
to explain the bill. Thank you,
Mr Speaker. Senate Bill 116 is
LFC endorsed legislation it
removes the tobacco settlement
permanent fund balance from the
General fund reserves so the
fund may be invested with higher
Return targets, providing
increasing distributions for
programmatic uses and to
accurately reflect reserve
balances. And with that, I will
stand for questions. There is a
bit gentlemen from Chavez, Arian
Otero, representative Townsend.
Thank you, Mr Speaker of the
General idea. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Yes, I will yield to
the gentleman from those
counties.
Um generated. Can you explain to
me the rationale for doing this?
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. Yes, primarily
number one If we remove the
tobacco, um permanent funds from
the reserves, they can be
invested by the State Investment
Council and get a higher return.
Which means we will have more
funding down the road for
programs like tobacco cessation.
In general lady when you look at
the total amount of reserves
that we have, and this not being
a reserve fund, does it In
actuality, give us more reserves
than we have today.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. It will actually
give us the essentially the same
amount.
General lady. It won't be
calculated as a reserve fund is
that correct?
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentlemen. My apologies.
So, um
In net.
For House Bill two and all of
the things that we were doing,
we will have approximately the
same amount of revenues because
as we are making this change in
Senate Bill 116, we have also
passed House Bill 196. And so
the swap is essentially
equivalent the funds by removing
the tobacco settlement permanent
funds from the revenues.
Um, that will decrease the
revenue amount just by itself.
Reserve amount.
But Mr Mr Speaker, General Lady,
I want to make sure I got this
right.
We're taking the tobacco fund.
And removing it.
From a reserve account. Is that
correct? Mr Speaker, gentlemen?
Yes, that is correct.
In general lady, so that money
being the same
It will not be included in the
values that we now call
reserves. Is that right? Mr
Speaker? Gentlemen, that is
correct. That's what I was
trying to get at. Thank you, Mr
Speaker, General Lady.
There is for debate The lady
from Burnaby Orbs and Casey.
Thank you, Mr Speaker Will the
lady yield Thank you, Mr
Speaker? Yes, I will yield to my
colleague from Bernalillo
County. Mr Speaker and Lady from
Burnley. L also, um I just want
to say that what we really want
to be able to do with the
tobacco settlement permanent
fund is get it to a corpus.
That's large enough so that we
can start to use it as a number
source of revenue.
For health and education
programs. That was always intent
of it. Unfortunately, got raided
a bit along the way and to which
we had to consent we actually
had to pass legislation saying,
Okay, you can use the money for
Medicaid this year or whatever,
but it's
It's a huge boon to us if we can
leave it alone and let it be
invested at the highest possible
rates and don't use it for other
purposes in the future. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Thank you. Lady
from Burnley Debate Gentlemen
from Sandoval, Representative
Harper. Thank you. Mr Speaker
does the kind generally from
Bern will yield
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yes, I
will yield to the gentleman from
Sandoval County. Yes. Thank you,
Mr Speaker and General Lady. I
just want to stand and support
this legislation and maybe
Harken back to a question from
the gentleman of Chavez, Eddie
and Otero. So Miss Speaker and
General Lady
Ever since I've been here the
last 12 years. Whenever we look
at our reserve balances, it is
always just kind of been a head
scratcher as to why we include
the Tobacco Selman Permanent
Fund as a reserve and miss
speaker. Generally, the reason
is
Occasionally when we have a huge
budget crisis, we go and we
scrape dollars from river place
we can, and in the past, this
fund has been one of those
places where we've pulled
dollars. Speaker generally.
I I think that's a bad idea.
That's not what those dollars
were intended for Right speaker
generally, and so we've actually
advocated. I think many of us in
this chamber of advocated over
the years to have that not be
counted as reserve fund.
Mr Generally, so I love it for
that reason.
Speaker generally the I think
the question that the gentleman
from Chavez, Eddie and Otero was
asking is now that we're
removing that from the reserve
calculation.
We are actually
Representing more accurately.
Our total reserves right In the
past. You would say we had 20%
reserves, but we were including
the tobacco Permanent settlement
permanent fund. In that
calculation, speaker generally
Is that correct, Mr Speaker,
gentlemen? Yes, that is
absolutely correct. And I
appreciate both you and your
colleagues flagging that very,
very important item.
Speaker generally, thank you.
So, so now when we say we're
going to have 30 something
percent reserves, these are real
reserves that are accessible and
Are designed to be our reserves,
not something that we're going
to steal from in the event of a
bad
Economic
Uh, season in New Mexico and
speaker generally, so thank you
for bringing this forward, You
know, further debate generated
too close.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Um
I now move that Senate Bill 116
do now pass. We're on final
passage of Senate Bill 116. The
vote is now open.
What's about to close.
The vote is now closed by what
of 65 in the affirmative zero in
the negative Senate. Bill 116
has duly passed this house.
Is the gentle lady from Burnley
already and item 43.
Represented by Honda.
Mr Speaker? Yes, I am I ask
unanimous consent of the house
that the rules we suspended and
that the records show that all
action for placing Senate Bill
236 on final passage has been
taken in that it is now subject
to debate amendment or
substitution.
Overachiever. You did my part
for me.
Um, generator, explained the
bill.
Absolutely Thank you, Mr Chair.
Uh and members. Senate Bill 236
is a fixed to Senate Bill 251,
which was passed out last year
in 2023.
Senate Bill 251 enabled
Metropolitan redevelopment areas
to use something called tax
increment financing specifically
to allow for G R T in the use of
that financing.
Uh, having worked for the city
of Albuquerque For several
years, I had a front row seat to
see how the metropolitan
redevelopment areas ensure that
our city was addressing areas of
disinvestment by focusing
resources and building better
infrastructure. Addressing
facades promoting local
Retail shops and, most
importantly to me building
housing.
Um, this bill
This bill for irons out really
just some few technical aspects,
some fixes.
Those are one It cleans up the
language for how you
developments at the baseline
grocery seats taxes for these
areas to, um because of
destination sourcing. They want
the authority to create our our
tax and Revenue Department wants
the authority to create a
location code so that they don't
have to pull manually. Every
address.
Third. They want more clarity on
how the tax revenues the
distribution is made to the
areas, and finally, it is just
pushing back the effective date
from July of 2024 to next year
of January, 2025
The bill's sponsors worked with
the secretary of tax and revenue
to create the language in this
bill, and I have with me today,
my expert
Larry Haran, who is with the
city of Las Cruces. Thank you,
Mr Chair.
Right. I thought it was going to
get away with no debate. But
there is debate The gentleman
from San Juan Representative
Montoya. Thank you. Mr Speaker.
Does a general lady from
Benaglio yield to the general
men?
Mr Speaker. I just have one
question.
For the general lady.
Is this your first bill?
Yes, that is correct. Thank you,
Mr Speaker. I thought the body
should know that.
Members take note. So you know
for the debate and later the
clothes.
Mr Speaker. I move that health
Bill or sorry Senate Bill 236 do
now pass. We are on final
passage of Centerville to 36.
The vote is now open.
What about the clothes?
Mm.
Mr Speaker. Point of personal
privilege vote is now closed,
but I would have 66 in the
affirmative one in the negative
Senate Bill 236 as duly passes
house. Congratulations.
It is a tradition of the House
of Representatives for the
representative when they pass
refers Bill to buy lunch for
everybody in the chamber.
Um, Mr Speaker, I am and have no
money.
Saying, Okay?
But you don't have to.
Totally up to you.
Yeah. No project. Oh, thank you,
Mr Speaker. And thank you
members of the house. I'll
actually be wrapping.
In Spanish. Oh,
They sell the closet desk.
They had a party.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, right?
Gentle lady from Burnley or
Representative Thompson. Are you
ready? An item? 38. Mr. Speaker.
I am And unlike my freshman
colleague, will you get me to
that point?
Only if you wrap afterwards in
Spanish, Mr Speaker. That would
be a horrible thing to happen at
the record reflect that election
necessary for placement Senate
Health Public Affairs Committee
substitute for sent about 135 as
amended on final passage has
been taken. It is not subject to
debate amendment or
substitution, the generator to
explain the bill. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. This looks like a
really hefty bill. And and it it
is, but because we have to amend
five different
Sections of the health care
purchasing Act, the Public
Assistance Act, then in Mexico
Insurance code, the health
maintenance organization Law and
the nonprofit Healthcare Plan
Law. So what this bill does, Mr
Speaker is it further clarifies
a bill that I passed a few years
ago regarding step therapy and
what this bill does is
To make insurance companies
cover
Medications that will maybe
lifelong without having a prior
authorization every year, and
probably everybody in here has
had a family member or
themselves who have had to fight
with insurance companies to
continue on a medication that is
working for them. So what this
does is it takes cancer. Drugs,
drugs for auto immune disorders.
And, um it also includes, uh
Substance abuse drugs where the
provider in the patient do not
have to get prior authorization
every year. The prior
authorization that will that
comes into effect. Um
It will. It will last. Uh
Continuing coverage for the
prescription drug that is the
subject of the exception.
request for no less than the
duration of the therapeutic
generator clubs. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. I move that, uh, so
Senate Health and Public Affairs
Committee substitute for House
Bill 135 as amended, Do not
pass.
We are on final passage of
Senate Health Public Affairs
Committee, substitute percent of
Bill 135.
What about clothes?
What is enclosed by whatever 67
in the affirmative zero in the
negative Senate Health Public
Affairs Committee substitute for
sending about 135, as amended
has duly passed this house.
Israeli D from Santa Fe
representatives to Penske Ready
an item 31.
Yes, Mr Speaker. Would you get
me to that point that the record
reflect that all action
necessary for place in Senate
Health Public Affairs Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 15 as
twice amended with an emergency
class has been taken, and it is
not subject to debate amendment
or substitution, The general
lady to explain the bill.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. This bill
addresses the process. That
would, uh
Come into effect when a hospital
was undergoing a major
Transaction, including a merger
or an acquisition. It has been
the subject of a lot of
discussion and compromise. And
with that, I would stand for
questions.
See no debate articles. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. I move that
Senate Health and Public Affairs
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 15 as twice amended
I believe without the emergency
clause do not pass.
Stand by.
We are on final passage of
Senate Health Public Affairs
Committee. Substitute
Presentable 15 is three times
amended without the emergency
class.
The vote is now open.
What about the clothes?
What is that caused by what of
47 in the affirmative, 20, the
negative Senate health public
adverse committees sub 2% about
15 as amended with an emergency
clause without an emergency
class.
Has surely passed this house
members going to one more
building. We're gonna break for
committees this afternoon and
then we'll go back a little
later.
Direct your attention to item 21
is gentle lady from
Sierra Zucchero.
Valencia and from Katherine, Are
you ready on that item, Mr.
Speaker? I'm ready. Would you
get me to that point the record
reflect that election for
placing Senate Judiciary
Committee. Substitute four
center built 37 on final passage
has been taken. It is not
subject to debate amendment or
substitution, the generator to
explain the bill.
Um, Mr Speaker? Um, members.
This is a bill that we've been
working on for four years.
Uh,
Get a little emotional.
Because this is needed.
In the state of New Mexico.
And I'm tired.
Mr Speaker, General Lady, Mr.
Speaker, Um, audience members.
This is a bill that would create
a New Mexico Meat Inspection
Act.
And it's a first step to a long
road.
But we've been on a long road
and we're really ready to get it
passed. And with that, Mr
Speaker, I stand for questions.
Gentlemen from Colfax County,
Hard inquiries, and Miguel and
Union representative Chatfield
Thank you. Mr Speaker does
General later yield? Yes, Mr
Speaker. I yield
Mr Speaker. The gentle lady is
right. We started down this path
a long time ago. Many
Many years invested in it.
And here's the problem that this
Bill seeks to fix
The packing into the beef
packing industry, the
meatpacking industry in the
United States is controlled by
large multinational
Ah corporations.
They have hundreds of thousands
of employees.
And huge operations.
Cargoes plant.
In Kansas processes 5800 head
per day.
Passions plant in South Dakota.
Processes 7000 hits per day.
Ah, Any of these plants can be
shut down by a computer glitch
of fire some covid, so they were
shut down by Cohen wants
When when this happens.
It completely backs up the line
on beef so that the
Feedlots have no place to go
with their cattle.
So that this yearling operators
have no place to go with their
cattle, so nobody wants to buy
the calves from the ranches in
New Mexico.
So Mr Speaker in New Mexico
produced corn.
We ship that corn out?
To usually taxes.
Huge feedlots, not far from my
house, just across the Texas
line, thousands and thousands
Cattle as far as the eye can
see.
In New Mexico. We raised a lot
of cattle. We shipped them
cattle across the line into
Texas and freedom.
Some Texas corn something New
Mexico corn
Mr Speaker. Those cattle are
loaded on a truck hauled,
usually to Kansas.
Where they are processed.
And Mr Speaker, we buy the meat
back.
For New Mexico.
We have just shipped out our
agricultural products.
We have shipped out our jobs.
We have shipped out the food for
citizens.
Mr Speaker. This bill will able
in state beef inspections that
will end
Able, more processing plants in
the state of New Mexico.
Which means that we can grow our
own beef field, our own corn
process our own beef.
And consume good fresh New
Mexico brief.
Processed right here at home. We
can keep the jobs here at home.
We can keep the food here at
home, and we will not be at the
William bit huge multinational
corporations.
At the fluctuations in price at
the
Lack of meat. Uh,
Possible lack of
Protein should an emergency
occur.
So it's a win win situation. I'm
just
Really?
Ah enthused to see this bill.
Come to the floor. It's past
this house.
Without with no no Voting
committee and no no votes on the
floor for, uh, Mr Speaker,
General Lady. How many years
For years, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, I think
Mr Speaker, General Lady the
support of this house. I'm gonna
shut it down, but this is an
awesome bill for all of New
Mexico, not just our ranchers,
but for everyone that lives in
this state. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Thank you. Gentlemen.
There is a debate before I go to
the German from Lincoln and
Otero, if folks would like to
remove or need to remove their
coats
That is fine Gentlemen from
Lincoln Otero. Thank you. Mr
Speaker. Does the general lady
from Katherine Sierra, sick or
on the lynch the Lancia Yield,
please? Yes, Mr Speaker. I yield
to my friend.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank
you, gentle lady.
And I know you're tired. So I'm
going to tell you a story. So
you don't even have to answer
nothing.
Mr Speaker and gentle lady.
I don't know if I've told you
about my plan.
If this bill goes through, and I
did sign onto your bill, and and
I'm proud to
But Mr Speaker in general Lady I
represent
District 56 and I've got a
Personal pilot project going in
Mescalero.
And Mr Speaker and General Lady
this year I funded them a
greenhouse.
And this greenhouse is going to
be constructed.
And these kids in school are
going to run vegetables through
their cafeteria.
And if this bill happens to go
through, we're going to try to
fund them A meat lab.
And hopefully by the time it
becomes law.
These kids are going to be
running their own vegetables and
their own beef through their own
school.
And I just thought, man, how
could we get that to turn into
A model for all of New Mexico.
In all of our rural counties and
all of our ranchers being able
to sell their beef right there
locally and save on all the fuel
and everything.
So, Mr Speaker in General Lady,
I'm really hoping this goes
through because if it does,
we're gonna knock it out of the
park. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you. Gentlemen. There's a
debate. Young lady from Rio
Arriba Sandwell Santa Fe E.
Thousands. Representative
Aurora. Thank you. Mr Speaker.
Will the general lady from all
those counties yield? Yes, Mr
Speaker. I yield to my friend.
Um well, the general lady,
please introduce your expert
witness, Mr Speaker. Gladly.
This is Belinda Garland. She's
the executive director of the
Livestock Board here in New
Mexico.
Mr Speaker, Uh, and kind lady,
I'd like the house to recognize
this wonderful, amazing person.
Sometimes citizens in New Mexico
take it upon themselves to
tackle kind of our biggest
problems, and she did that She
stunned that for four years, and
it's quite extraordinary. That
One woman.
Looks at a huge problem and
says, Well, I guess I'll fix it.
And really, she has done that
single handedly, and we have all
worked with her. We admire her
and her work has been
outstanding. And I just want to
recognize Mr Speaker. What an
amazing job she has done for
this state, And this is a new
era of economic prosperity for
the ranchers and farmers in this
state, and I
I know that it has been the
biggest spill in the Agriculture
Committee for the last four
years, and we have all tried to
advance this and our time has
come. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Thank you, General Lady. There
is
What we generally don't clap
during third reading, but
So don't do it again generated
from brilliant Torres,
Representative Lord Thank you.
Mr Speaker. Will the general
lady from awesome counties
please Yield? Yes, Mr Speaker. I
yield to my friend from awesome
counties as well. Thank you very
much. Mr Speaker. I just want to
say what I was last time at the
New Mexico Cala growers they had
Democrat Congresswoman Teresa
Teresa Fernandez letter speak,
and she said one of her top
priorities where she wanted meat
inspection.
Here in New Mexico. So we got
support all the way from the
congressional level on this, and
if anybody has a number, they
should call and let her know
that this is about to pass.
Thank you, Mr Speaker.
There is a debate related from
Britain. NALEO representative
Matthews.
Thank you. Mr Speaker. Will the
general lady yield
Yes, Mr Speaker. I yield to my
friend. Um, Mr Speaker. Members
of the house. I'm I think I am
pretty sure I'm the only
vegetarian in the house. And I
just want to say that I won't be
enjoying beef New Mexico beef
with you all, but I am so glad
you are going to be able to be
enjoying
New Mexico beef, and I just want
to want to recommend that you
serve it with New Mexico
vegetables. Thank you.
There is debate, gentlemen from
Chavez. Eddie really,
representative Mason.
Hmm. Thank you, Mr Speaker will
the General lady yield? Yes, Mr
Speaker. I yield
Gentle lady speaker. I do want
to stand in support of this
bill. I've only been here two
years and I know we
Right it last year, and it died
on the Senate side the last day
of the session that everybody
was
It was. It was a horrible day,
and it's such a beautiful day
that it passed and we've got it.
My main
Like of the bill is for my
friends and neighbors and fellow
small ranchers in the Mexico
now.
We'll have the ability to feed
not necessarily the large
Groups of cattle.
That I can feed cattle and sell
them to my neighbors. It is it
has been most of our meat
packing plants in New Mexico.
They can.
I can take him a beef and have
them butcher one that I can eat,
But I can't sell it to my
neighbor to eat because of the
lack of inspection. Now it's a
beautiful day in the state of
Mexico. Thank you.
There is free to debate your
leading from Ben Ali, your
representative Borrego.
Thank you, Mr Speaker and
General Lady, would you yelled?
Yes, Mr Speaker. Gentlemen, I
yelled, Little lady Mr Speaker,
I would stand in support of this
bill and General lady, Um so I
probably people don't know this,
But when I was a kid we used to
my grandfather and my father and
my uncles who used to butcher
all the time. I wasn't a big
fan, but I enjoyed eating.
Um
As you can kind of tell, but
anyway, Mr Speaker, I just want
to say that you know, it's about
time that we start Stop
outsourcing our jobs, and this
really creates economic
prosperity for New Mexico, and
I'm glad to see that we're
bringing this back to
New Mexico and that I mean, we
should have never let it go out
of state. I'm glad to see that
people will benefit from this
economically and agriculturally.
We have so many wonderful,
wonderful farmers and ranchers.
My ex father in law who had 1500
acres are still does actually.
Ah in Tremont, AENA, New Mexico
and is a cattle growth group.
Yeah, Rancher. Um, you know, I
just think about the The Times
when we were out on the on the
ranch and, um
You know, just thinking about
how he was going to sell that
those cattle
Um, and often times he had to
transport them out of state just
to sell them. You know, in the
at the auction, Mr Speaker and
General Lady and and you know,
it's really great to see that
we're starting to bring these
jobs back to New Mexico. Thank
you.
Thank you, General lady. There
is further debate The gentleman
from Catrin Grant in Hidalgo
reports presented Terrazas,
Russia's Mr Speaker with the
general Lady from Katherine
Sierra, Sakura and Valencia, My
neighbor from the to the North.
Please Yield. Mr Speaker. I
yield to the gentleman from
Catherine Grant Hill Dog. Oh,
congratulations.
You finally made it. You worked
very hard.
And on behalf of all of the
ranchers in New Mexico,
Colistin in Bacchus.
Gracias. Yeah, no talk. Really?
It's you know, we you put so
much effort so much time.
And your heart into this
You deserve today and enjoy the
these are the fruits of your
labor. May God bless you. Thank
you. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
Gentlemen, you know for the
debate generator clothes, and
with that, Mr Speaker.
Let's get this. Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 37 off the floor of this
house and sent to the governor's
desk.
Alrighty. We are final passage
of Senate Judiciary Company
substitute for Centerville. 37
It's about the close vote. The
world's not closed by one of 16
in the affirmative zero in the
negative Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for
Centerville 37 has really passed
this house Lady from Brittany
over presented of Casey
folks, folks, folks, I'm just,
you know, I'm happy to but we
can't really do that, because
At some point, we're gonna get
mad at each other. If it's a
bill that not everybody likes so
Let's uh
Let's not do that. Generally
from earlier Mr Speaker, I move.
We go to that order of business
Committee reports objection so
ordered.
Mr Speaker, you rule
development, Land Grants and
cultural affairs Committee tomb
has been referred House Memorial
50 has had it under
consideration. Reports with
recommendations do not pass, but
that House rule development,
Land Grants and cultural affairs
Committee substitute for House
Memorial 50 do pass respectfully
submitted Christina or test
chair.
Mr Speaker move adoption. We are
an adoption when unfavorable
committee report on housing
Morial 50 but favorable
Committee report on House rural
Development, Language and
Cultural Affairs Committee
substitute for House memorial
50. All those in favor say,
probably say nine supposed name
a
The eyes. Have it coming
reported up today, Mr Speaker,
your real development, Land
Grants and cultural affairs
Committee tomb has been referred
to Senate Bill 169, as amended
has had an under consideration
reports with the recommendation
that it do pass respectfully
submitted Christine or Test
chair. Mr Speaker Move Adoption
were an adoption of our
favorable committee report on
Senate Bill 169 as amended. All
those in favor probably say no,
I
Supposing any committee report
adopted?
Mr Speaker. Your Judiciary
Committee to miss been referred.
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Health and
Public Affairs Committee.
Substitute for Senate Bill 129
has added under consideration.
Reports with recommendations do
pass as amended, respectfully
submitted Christine Chandler,
chair move adoption We are on
adoption of a Federal committee
report on Senate Finance
Committee substituted extended
Health Public Affairs Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 129.
All those in favor signify by
saying, I suppose, may
The I Select committee report
adopted
generally from burner, Leo.
Speaker and move we go to that
or to business announcements and
miscellaneous business is order.
Little lady from Catherine and
all those counties.
Congratulations on passing the
Meat Inspection Act. It's been a
long time coming. I think it's
now appropriate to give a big
round of applause and shout out,
especially on agday of all days.
Are their announcements.
Generated from Dona Ana.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. Consumer
and public Affairs will meet at
230 this afternoon in our usual
room Members. Take note,
Gentlemen from Dona Ana, Mr
Speaker, your house
Appropriations and Finance
Committee will meet at 230 in
room 307 note. Any other
announcements? Gentlemen from
civil McKinlay, Mr. Speaker,
your House labor veterans and
not do your first committee will
meet at 230.
Mm. We should be out of there by
Thursday. One o'clock.
Sounds like a long agenda.
Any other announcements.
Folks we're gonna obviously
break for committee will
reconvene subject to the call of
the chair, which will be five
o'clock that should give
committees plenty of time to
Um, to work.
And for all of you to maybe grab
some lunch before we come back
on the floor for some
concurrence and more third
reading.
Um
If there another announcements.
The general lady from Berna,
Leo.
Represented Casey.
Oh, Mr Speaker. I move the
house, then in recess, subject
to the call of the chair.
Alright, folks, we'll see you
