Representative Allison I am
here.
Representative brown here.
Representative ECL.
Press.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
President.
Representative Matthew Lewis he.
Representative small.
Here.
Representative Zamora there.
Representative vice chair
Herrera.
Your.
Chair Lindsay.
Here quorum has been reached
thank you for that can you
please then without further ado
let the state engineer and all
these folks into the meeting so
we can get started and for this
meeting folks let's go ahead and
we can let the state engineer
talk about his presentation
first and then we can allow for
Q. NA right after hit right
after he finishes and then if
Ralph with the Interstate Stream
Commission has for the follow
perhaps after he's done then we
can have committee for Ralph and
then there's any leftover
questions there after we can
address those at that point in
time so hopefully that that is
okay with everyone
you know what what if if there's
a point where you just you need
to ask a question about
something immediately do me a
favor and on the on the zoom.
Application just raise your hand
I think that's for us that that
the better way to approach
things as opposed to somebody
doing this deal on the zoom that
way we would if you raise your
hand I can just jot that down
and and without and and look at
who's who's first on that list
is Representative self.
Mr chairman thank you very much
is Ralph the heading up the see
I did Interstate Stream
Commission now I'd say yes
ma'am.
Okay and the who is heading up
the division down and picus area
do you now Ralph just joined us
run your chair Representative
result that is currently cannot
rise the whites I just couldn't
remember Hannah's name excuse me
for but then and I'll I have
notified her must LA did so she
might be available on this
meeting as well and I hope she
is thank you Mr chairman thank
you appreciate that
So what we're looking for the
state engineer in the attendees
list.
John he says he's not on yet
yeah hasn't been let in.
Okay he's going to be let in
Taylor let me see if I can send
Christina and either email with
the week.
Okay.
Mr chair just to let you know I
I had to wait a little bit to be
let into so maybe there's an
issue with the Sam.
Okay okay will note that.
and.
Just a second we got the email
okay.
And and for those of you all
that are joining us in the
attendees group thank you all
for for waking up in free
interest and and water
agriculture we hope that you
find this morning's
presentations helpful and
insightful and informational I
do see GDP Antonio in the
attendees Representative I don't
know if that's him.
Okay looks like we have.
We have Mister state done do
Antonio with the panelists.
Sure did you find this morning
presentations.
It is informational.
Engineer you there I am yes
Thank you appreciate it.
Me
Yes my presentation here and
share the screen.
So it says the host disabled my
screen sharing abilities.
Sorry I'm gonna make you know co
host right now signature.
Thank.
Okay so it also looks like in
the attendees list there is a
participant in the attendees
group that made mention in the
comment section that he's here
for
SB eighty eight I think he thank
you you mean HB eighty eight and
that will not be here today that
will not be heard until
Thursday of next week so to make
comment we will come back to
that building you're you're
welcome to make comment when
that bill is scheduled and her
which is which will be next week
Thursday thank you.
So.
Mr chairman are you ready for me
can you see my screen yeah Mr
state engineer the floor is
yours
and yeah there you go John we
were see in there you go okay
very good thank you Mr chairman
providing both Mr Ross McPherson
and I I today we have a joint
presentation so it's it's not
covering I. as C. or of state
engineer things separately it
sort of together it's based a
lot of it's based on basins and
other areas so we are we're
going to also sort of taxing
this presentation we've got the
the power point and again really
appreciate the opportunity to
set up for your your committee
this is a very important
committee Mr chairman and just
want to say good morning to all
the Representative setter on on
this morning that's going and
start off we do have a lot of
challenges here sort of the
The overview of what we're gonna
be talking about today of
providing essential services we
do have a.
A double emergency for the state
engineers office with the
drought and the pandemic we'll
talk a little bit about that a
John outlook in statewide water
administration talk about the
state budget process the our
agency trust fund solvency some
of the special requests that are
essential for us to be able to
move forward in our priorities
so taxes The New Mexico updates
on litigation of both on the
echoes and on the on the Rio
Grande any water rights
settlements so we'll talk about
the state engineer IC's fifty
year water planning efforts that
the governor's up at asked us to
undertake the lower Rio Grande
water conservation pilot program
the following program down and
in the lower Rio Grande we've
got the rate of bill grant is
not listed on there but we do
have real grand issues with that
because revert issues the
Colorado River basin a little
bit about there is our water
rights settlements and up in a
little bit on proposed
legislation so there is a lot to
cover.
So first of all providing
essential services during the
pandemic again water supplies a
critical component of their the
public health and safety all
right supported by all of our
staff the US droughts is
required a lot of direct
administration last year we had
a water masters out in the field
and multiple river basins we
were in not only on the Rio
Grande real time other echoes
the guiding is that member is
San Juan Amos a lot of shortage
sharing agreements we've got.
Folks in out there you have to
have a field presence when you
have such shortage shortages of
supply to make sure everyone is
only diverting other proper
amount of water we have seven
district offices around the
state as you all know we kept
them open for domestic well
permits of their water use
permits so well driller licenses
mainly that was really important
we we set this offices up so
that the phone calls could be
made applications could be
dropped off limiting some of the
face to face but we also had
some opportunities for people to
come in on appointments to look
at files so with we've been
trying to service the public as
best we can during this pandemic
because again water is an
essential service and we we need
to be able to maintain that
connection with the with the
general public at and your
constituents as well the I. C.
appropriations for because the
appreciate you Alaska you
reservoir the dance enters Law
School in the silvery minnow
refugium of those things don't
stop and they can stop during
the pandemic we certainly of our
our operating as best we can
given given the circumstances.
Our resource constraints another
critical initiatives when we
started with this administration
and we had a vacancy rate of a
little bit more than twenty
three percent with that impact
on the budget from the pandemic
we had a general fund reduction
in twenty one thankfully you are
the twenty two request that we
put in asked us to cut another
five percent we've had some add
backs in both the budgets not
quite getting us all the way
back to the five percent but at
least it's better than what we
anticipated again the state
revenues of picture has improved
a little bit we've also has a
lot of restrictions on filling
vacancies so we've got to get
clearance from both US state
personnel office and DFA in
order to make sure that they can
see that we feel are all or
actually
We can pay for that we can
afford them and that they're
essential for a a critical
operations within the state the
R. interstate litigation taxes
of the New Mexico the Rio Grande
thank those with that it take a
lot of us specially the
mediation he said although some
of the moderate and other things
of what I say I don't hide I
just because we have until we
were started by a over a million
dollars on what are litigation
needs work on that litigation
piece of so we've been paying a
lot of so that the contract
monies we have to keep up with
that particular.
Issue and we'll talk more about
that later of the fifty year
water planning developments
again resource constraints there
will speak more on that Arizona
water rights settlements at the
US Census diversion project of
reassessment on that going away
from the diversion project and
and going towards local projects
that are on the line the working
with the cap entity down there
are what we call not unit
projects other water projects in
the area so what will detail on
that in in our own what are
going efforts to negotiate and
implement multiple Indian water
rights settlements we tried that
we tried to get a dedicated
tribal staff in place we we had
actually in the budget right
expansion requested twenty one
would be revenue so we're gonna
be better we had an additional
seven folks that were in there
of five of them in order to
get an education program of
Google and the Interstate Stream
Commission approved actually
actively get involved with the
federal negotiation teams we
have to have the the the the
presence and the folks that are
available experts so that we can
move those with those and we'll
talk a little bit more about
those also the John outlook in
statewide water ministration.
Of god Task Force we we had a
meeting in September of twenty
twenty at that time I will show
some some ground maps but at
that time we we can see that
that that was going to really be
expanding within the state of
New Mexico because of the
forecast right now the states
over fifty four percent on the
on the T. four exceptional
drought status we received a
little bit of snow the last few
weeks that's two days actually
which were focused on creating
the precipitation of peace the
snowmelt runoff but still we
need a lot more and with the
land your forecast that we have
the winter of twenty twenty of
twenty one the one we're in
right now there's a greater
likelihood of a drier than
average conditions as the storm
track difficulty on a landing at
your local store of New Mexico.
Let me show you the view
abstract monitor monitor back in
July of twenty twenty some of
the key factors shared you can
say on the the colors here and
the.
Of
the.
Indicators here D. zero
abnormally dry is the other
color the the dark brown
exceptional drought you can see
in the category of exceptional
drought nothing in the state was
in in exceptional drought at
that time extreme drought we
were we were about fourteen
percent of back in July but it's
gradually gotten worse and worse
this week if you look at this is
that of January nineteen.
We went from zero to fifty four
percent of the state is that D.
for status which is the
exceptional drought the most
severe droughts you can see in
the state in Mexico this color
has really changed it's really
worse and that the three static
and looking back and in here
that the three status we had
about fourteen percent of now we
have eighty two percent of the
state is an extreme drought and
it's it's really not looking
good as we move forward
looking at more of a national
picture you can see the four
corner of the for states of
Colorado Utah New Mexico and
Arizona are really getting the
brunt of the of the drought of.
Really understand if you
understand the three month
outlook at the this no up what's
the three month outlook out the
the graph on the left is the
temperature probability of for
the next three months.
The A. indicated above average
and if you can see these I so I
utilized the sixty percent mark
we're we're greater than sixty
percent of the risk factor of
being above average in that
temperatures if you look at the
three month outlook on
precipitation is back on the
right hello average
precipitation and again that's
in the sixty at least a fifty to
sixty percentile and that bulls
eye is over New Mexico
consistently with with a low
average precipitation and above
average temperatures.
And again the the droughts
tendency during this period it
was released in the very end of
December again you can see
drought persists into almost all
of those the western United
States.
This little bit about water
resource management bases within
within the state and out some of
what we did in this past year we
we actually had a big presence
on the guiding as they came as
Rio Chama and the members
river when we talk about active
water resource management within
the state like New Mexico where
we practice priority
administration and good starts
shutting off junior users so
that seniors can get their
supply
typically what we've been able
to do around the state is
through active administration of
look at shortage sharing
agreements of rotation
agreements get together with
affected parties and we really
up in the successful in working
with the state test with tribes
and pueblos with the
agricultural community and
looking at opportunities to
share shortage instead of going
and and just cutting off users
will and that's that's what we
want to do with in the state of
New Mexico and all were active
basins is we we do have the
hammer of priority
administration but it makes a
whole lot more sense to be able
to work on alternative
administration put plans in
place so that we can actually
Have an orderly transfer of
water rights and and have some
short term leases essentially
that allow for
or a say farmers that might give
up an agricultural crop of the
year the transfer a water water
right in that that when water to
a.
Use us for a drinking water
users for another use but let
the marketplace work in that.
Area reservoir storage volumes
in New Mexico one word this a
lot but you can say on this this
the units there are thousands of
acre feet so for instance a
thousand seventy this means a
million seventy thousand acre
feet in Navajo reservoir you can
see what the current of values
are what last year's values are
and the third column is the
average it's not it's not the
capacity it's just the average
and when in many cases were at
twenty percent all average of
when we look at our our
reservoirs it it you know of
particular note if you look at
the the ones on the echo Santa
Rosa some Brantley.
Certainly for sixteen and eleven
of thousand acre feet last year
we are at twenty six twenty two
and forty two significant
difference and you can see where
the where the averages so far
below even what the average is
same thing on the Rio Grande
Aaron a lot abba Q. elephant
Butte New Mexico bio you can see
currently where we're at eleven
thousand acre or fifty three
thousand I I Karen wouldn't last
year was at one oh six so half
of what it was last year last
year was a bad year well and and
you can see what the averages
its US six of what the averages
so not going over all the
numbers are just drawing your
attention to elephant Butte New
Mexico bio the combined storage
there is one seventy five last
year we were close to six
hundred and the the key mark on
usable water storage in elephant
Butte New Mexico bioblitz less
than four hundred thousand acre
feet which up which it is we're
in article seven of the Rio
Grande compact which means we
can't store in any of the
reservoirs above that are that
are built.
later the nineteen twenty nine
essentially which is a lot of
hair and the Santa Fe was ward's
essentially makes it challenging
to be able to do water
instruction within state.
The state budget the given us a
lot of concerns and issues of
let me let me go back to hear
the special fund we talk a
little bit about this four
percent general fund we
reduction FY twenty one right
and I want to start off base
thanking the legislature that
wasn't the intent obviously and
we had a lot of us from the
state legislators supporting
some expansions that we had the
plan was to actually increase
our FTE by about twenty or
originally the plan of you that
the governor at actually
group that of this legislature
came back and of those twenty
four I think they approved us
increasing and an expansion of
about fourteen a wind up
happening is you know none of us
could for see the this the the
pandemic and other issues but
it's challenging because of the
hiring freeze of what's the
legislature's also done is
eliminated that the legislature
the DFA is eliminated positions
that had been vacant for over
two years which is problematic
because number one we had hiring
freezes we didn't have budget
the higher and then we turn
around and and get the of a
budget.
The positions eliminated so part
of a part of the three forty to
authorized personnel was reduced
to three hundred fourteen
authorized
so in January of twenty twenty
we had two hundred sixty eight
employees this year we have two
hundred fifty four so fourteen
less our book of business is not
getting any smaller we have
sixty vacant positions
originally this would have been
about eighty if those some of
those issues had been eliminated
so those the vacancy rates lower
but it's a little deceiving
because the FDA or or reduce
also we we have been working
through DFA and state personnel
office they've approved of
several key positions with that
twenty positions recruited for
since the hiring freeze for
positions are still pending but
we also have a lot of for over a
participate in a vacancies due
to retirements we've got a lot
of people with a lot of
experience that are going to be
that have twenty eight the
thirty three years of experience
are going to be leaving and
that's that's difficult when
when we can fill up behind them
and this and hopefully we'll be
able to rectify that as we move
forward this is just the
programs we have we have four
programs the water allocation
program which is all the water
rights division offices dam
safety water using conservation
and hydrology Department and
authorized at the of one seventy
one of agencies of thirty seven
of them are are funded so you
can see not going through all
the programs used Interstate
Stream Commission of program
again forty three FTE with an
authorized six
They can FTE look at the HSD
totals here three to fourteen
authorized sixty that are of
great institutions and
there's twenty of those are
actually funded really difficult
to hire those because of the of
the you have to go through
the the.
The hiring process and then
having a turnover rate that's a
pretty it's it's hard to keep up
as we hire we're also losing on
the back in so just up just
challenges for us.
The other thing that's really
critical four of four agencies
to support this through special
appropriations I think it's
really important for for
everybody to understand yes we
had specials the at the the
agent the agency has a.
Through the administration they
supported seven hundred fifty
thousand dollars for fifty year
water plant I I noted in red
with the LFC recommendation came
at an act which was zero
dollars.
the second bullet item of five
point three seven five million
for interstate water litigation
on the Rio Grande that's really
the taxes The New Mexico the
majority of that of the LFC
recommendation is only three
million hopefully we can work on
that it's it's really important
that we'll get into some of the
text the New Mexico issues but
we got a sole and separate
budgets from the attorney
general's office there's no
duplicate of of issues there and
if the if New Mexico's gonna
continue to put on a very strong
case which we think we have a at
which could lead to settlements
but we can't short of this this
litigation piece it's just not
it's just not smart for us to be
able to do that we've got and
exposure Senator some
legislators that are exposures
in the the one billion dollar
range I'm not sure we agree that
it's that high and we reduce
that risk exposure but to
continue to shortchange some of
the litigation this is.
Really ill advised the third
bullet item there's two million
dollars for the papal settlement
with the implementation
activities.
Of the LFC recommendation is
only a million are you we'll go
into that detail a little bit
but the shortages on the thank
those are are on me the
important piece there is a
settlement agreements working
great great but when you get
into really really bad years dry
years you've got to assure
according to the two thousand
three settlement agreements that
the senior user our cars better
education district at the end of
the project yes our water which
requires augmentation funding
and it's expensive the pump that
water but it's part of it's part
of our compliance and we're in
you know right Soto our
deliveries to to the state of
Texas of so it's not it's not
the issue of delivery to Texas
because we're at a hundred sixty
thousand plus credit status on
the pay goes it's about getting
water to the senior which is the
Carlsbad irrigation district and
then the operator thousand of
water systems software upgrade
so important to get our data
systems into.
It to the next level LFC has has
come up with the same
recommendation on that
particular piece again of four
or more information on these
the.
The trust fund is another big
concern of ours the.
The HSD trust funds are critical
to our agency operations we wish
they weren't we wish we would be
able to have general fund but
over the years
the legislature has so use that
these funds to help us with our
with our expenditures you can
see I I just gonna draw
attention to this is the
combined combined funds we have
the irrigation works
construction Fund
Representative groupement.
Commit to the Rio Grande income
fund here the here are the to
prevent of the Rio Grande income
fund and your nation works
construction fund.
Those those tables are
represented in this crap here
you can see the total fund
allocates really going down in
twenty twenty two so that it
becomes insolvent the century of
the yellow lights the total
expenditures over time you can
see from FY ten FY twenty three
the anticipated expenditures
they've gone off they they took
a big a big step up here and
I'll and I'll go over those a
little bit why with the revenues
being fairly consistent but but
changing anywhere from fifteen
you know to ten million dollars
on rent revenues are down it's
difficult to to make up for a
small revenues and.
And increased expenditures of as
you can you'll be able to see
and I want to go over a lot of
these but I want to draw your
attention to some of the
expenditures the new ones that
happen you're cation works
construction fund is now having
to fund the forestry fund which
job.
In FY twenty there's million
dollars that was a starting to
take it out on a year your bases
out of this particular fund of
the two and a half million was
really increased from one point
nine million dollars you can see
those numbers there and then if
you go back to the.
To the improvement of the Rio
Grande income fund there's
another million dollars coming
out of this one so when you when
you take a combined of.
Well you know three three and a
half million here and a million
dollars here for half million
extra it's the demise of those
funds is going down quickly
we're having to our use our bar
forty or a lot of the the
specials that we have to make
sure we need operations critical
to the Rio Grande and take those
especially and again we're very
concerned that that that those
funds are going down well back
in twenty nineteen there was a
general appropriations that and
this I I just want to draw your
attention to this particular
legislation there's a five year
plan to reduce the state
engineers reliance on trust
funds that was in here so it
just could just to read this on
or before October one twenty
nineteen we also state engineer
cell president of the
Legislature five year plan
covering the period beginning of
fiscal year twenty twenty one to
reduce expenditures from the
trust funds for operations by
replacing it with general fund
revenue and to address a long
term solvency of the irrigation
works construction on the
improvement of the Rio Grande
income fund we did do that we
put a five year plan together I
won't go into all this but the
five year plan you can see that
here a nine million dollar fund
replacements with one million
dollars the first year and two
million per year there after of
last year was the first year we
actually did get out an increase
of five hundred thousand but
the.
You know based on on the
revenues or work at within
within the state budgeting
process we know this is a
challenge we're hoping to to get
this in place you can that you
can see up this was the
operating budget base year was
this first one of the first year
was the million dollars which
would be this is number air and
increased three million five
million seven million and nine
million over the over that five
year period of time I'm gonna
have to redo that because we're
behind already and we're gonna
see you know what's the what
what temperature the legislature
has to be able to replace those
general funds given the current
funding issues at work and I
want to stress she stressed.
This statement here even if this
plan were followed the funds
will not be solved in the near
or long term acid additional
infusions or reductions to
recently instituted stature or a
divergence from the funds again
additional hands in the funds
for the forestry division or the
is thank you fund of our R.
eight.
My again our feeling is those
could be funded out of other
opportunities or replace the
general fund for the state
engineers office and and perhaps
those others those other Hanson
up.
In these particular funds are
warranted but somehow we've got
to make up for the funding that
the the state engineer and icy
rely on.
this is the New Mexico.
I was going to say for the for
the committee and for the German
we we have about we're about
halfway through our John is
there this might be a good place
to stop for a few questions on
the because of the information
above was a real good summary
big picture summary of what's
occurring I think from here on
we're doing kind of more deep
dives into some specific issues.
So there were questions be good
time to address.
Thank you for that
recommendation Rolf and and and
I don't mean to be a stickler
but let's make sure we go to the
chair to to make an objections
in the meeting but at this point
in time.
Mr state engineer if that's okay
with you I I can just look for
some heads up from the committee
we do have some to ask some
questions and before we move any
further we can do that
appreciate the recommendation
Rolf but let's go them first to
Representative a Representative
Brown.
Representative for.
Thank you Mr chairman good
morning Mr the Antonio I'm so a
couple of us were on this
committee serve on the house
Appropriations Committee and you
know we're building the budget
for fiscal year twenty to
just so I'm real clear do you do
you think that the
suggested of funding amount
sufficient for the water
litigation.
I agree with you Mr chair Mister
we don't want to under fund that
this is critical legislation or
of litigation so do need more
money and if so how much.
Yes Mr chair and representative
brown we we do need to get up at
five point three seven five
million dollars we have experts
to pay for we're actually
absorbing one of the attorneys
and administrative essentially
that sell us working on the
litigation these at.
and the attorney general's
office is.
Working.
And has their own budgets their
budgets six point four million
dollars and ours is a little bit
over five to five point seven
five that's total and we we have
a we'll talk more specifically
about those numbers but yeah
right now we're we're two point
three seven five million short
of litigation expenses that we
collect we do represent the best
case possible Mexico.
Okay thank you very much.
Thank you Representative Brown
any other representatives are
committee members with any
questions or comments before we
move further.
I see Representative is L. so we
hand representatives L. the
floor you.
Mr chairman thank you very much
Mr Dantonio whenever we are
talking about making sure that
we follow what the Supreme Court
has ordered as far as water
delivery to Texas I know that we
do have an obligation of the pay
because that two of.
To fulfill the obligation to see
a date.
And I know that we are in
extreme conditions right now the
southeastern corner of the state
is under extreme conditions and
I was just wondering
supplemental humping that is
well maybe that's a question
that I need to ask Mr Schmidt
Petersen I just didn't know if
there was going to be any will
work that needed to be completed
before we are able to pump those
augmentation wheels so you tell
me about if you would rather I'd
just wait and ask Ralph that
question.
Mr chair of representatives L.
are we are we have as a portion
of the presentation is devoted
to the the papers in the
building
and we'll get we'll get to that
also if you want to answer the.
Thank you state engineer Mr
chairman Representative result
yet yes we we're looking forward
into the summer and beyond when
these droughts take hold like
this one has we know we need to
be prepared to operate for more
than a year
and our goal had been trying to
get to the March one date we
know now it'll be much more
significant from that in that so
we have a number of activities
that will be doing in that well
field area that I can go into
more detail on in that part of
the presentation but I would
also just tell you that our
special request that two million
would definitely be needed.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for your response will address
that later on thank you.
Thank you representatives are
there any other questions or
comments from committee members.
Okay if not then I just a
reminder that we do want to be
able to wrap up at least by
quarter to eleven to make sure
that we are on the floor at
eleven or in the floor session
by eleven so with that being
said we have plenty of time but
the floors again yours a Mr
state engineer thank you Mr
chairman so let's get into the
taxes The New Mexico and
Colorado lawsuit the original
number one forty one action.
The United States
Sided with taxes as a plaintiff
intervenor on this discovery
closed in November we had over a
hundred days of depositions and
expert Act witnesses that we
identified Mexico seventy one
and while witnesses of the
parties are currently breaking
motions for summary.
For partial summary judgment
What are some judgment that were
filed on November yes and we're
working on briefs are due
February the fifth which is just
right around the corner and and
just yesterday or the day before
the special master amounts of
their oral arguments are going
to be on March the ninth on some
of the dispositive motions which
will cover on the next stage in
the trial scheduled to commence
on July.
Or August of this year coming
up.
Likely.
Mexico just to get a little bit
of the more detailed New Mexico
we filed three separate motions
of course one New Mexico's
contacted questions below
elephant Butte we think it's
really important in this
particular case we we could show
that New Mexico as the state has
a portion that's on the compact
and that the compact is really
is intertwined with the project
itself
the key piece of the Mexico gets
for fifty seven percent of
projects supply that's going to
be establishing the lank
everything's going in that
direction the judge needs to
rule on that.
Enforcement piece of the second
one is no damages in years one
asked number what we see I mean
there's a.
That's really really important
that.
To educate folks understand that
we don't feel Texas is really
been shorted maybe.
Maybe two three years in the
early two thousands and two
thousand three in two thousand
or could be a little bit there
and then maybe in two thousand
six R. off correct in those days
if you want to but but the the
damages of Paso.
Has gotten a full supply in
almost every year when we look
back at the record.
And and the third one kind of
goes with it in in a way because
no damages in years with taxes
fell to notify New Mexico of
their alleged shortages is never
once I've been an indication
from taxes that there were
shortage of there's a lot of
case law in Montana and Wyoming
that really are closely aligned
with what's going on there well
my can of of sales of okay ever
to call a priority or or say
that they were being under the
lever and the Supreme Court
rules of rules and such so I
think when we when we talk about
all these three in this is three
really important pieces of New
Mexicos case and we we feel
really strongly about them
what you want to say something
because you're of
you may want to just have a
little bit.
Yes thank you John I mean I
think of this goes back to even
some of the funding related
aspects for those
you all of those three motions
the technical work that we've
been supporting through experts
now for the last four to five
years with the attorney
general's office of the critical
in all of these motions as it
set up the fact based piece of
this that I think we're relying
on to say Hey look you know if
you look back at the overall
history in New Mexico's got
fifty seven percent of the
project supply everybody's agree
to that here the facts on that
here's a full supply here the
facts of those deliveries and
then the damages peas it's
supported with those types of
things so
you know the I I would just
highlight those specific issues
and say that the funding that
we're seeking it will ultimately
is for the technical experts to
support
those statements if necessary in
trial depending on what the
special master says here and
then for the mediation aspects
that John will talk about in a
moment.
So getting into the Texas
motions that will one of theirs
in New Mexico has no compact
apportionment below elephant
Butte which is just really could
be further from a hundred eighty
degrees opposite on on what we
think is correct the contact
requires of nineteen thirty
eight condition of which there's
no work in a contact that is
specified at thirty eight
recommendation in fact it's so
complicated that all states
reduce groundwater to augment
supplies of that so are there
motion the the US motion New
Mexico should be enjoying to
prohibit non E. ID groundwater
pumping from interfering with
project deliveries we don't
think that's the case of and
then the the makers priests of
that were filed in January so
couple weeks ago the there's
some that are supporting that
Texas in the United States so
oddly enough you the ID.
Is supporting Texas of el Paso
number one in the city of all
pass all of and then when you
get down into one of the very
idea are uses you can see on the
slide there that Mexico has no
authority over the project in
the EBRD's water comes from
Texas is compact apportionment.
Again New Mexico we felt very
strongly that New Mexico gets an
apportionment of on of.
You know from the compact and
supporting New Mexico you have
on growers
joined by diversified croppers
done growers or close to thirty
thousand acres down there
diversified proper's the same
about another thirty thousand
acres of supporting New Mexico's
case are also the city of Los
crucis New Mexico State
University on the Albuquerque up
but county water utility
authority excuse me John you
might as one thing and that the
United States motion piece of
this is is really pretty extreme
as a way I see it this up you
know the state engineers office
has a very robust groundwater
administration program in the
lorry Grandin has so for number
years Texas has nothing.
And yet the United States says
Hey New Mexico should be
enjoying your prohibit non EVA
ID groundwater pumping it from
interfering with project
deliveries what that means
really is they say anybody else
that's pumping ground water down
there in Los crucis
hatch
a domestic will user somebody
down along the border that the
state engineer should stop them
from pumping groundwater so I
mean I think that's a pretty
darn extreme position doesn't
exist anywhere else within the
compact positions and so it's
very important to be able to
adequately fight that.
If I may gentlemen eight
interject but of Mister Schmidt
Petersen if you guys gonna tag
team this presentation let me
know if not if you're gonna
present next please do again go
through the chair for any
comments to be made thank you.
Okay.
So.
This next slide the meeting so
there is a mediation the so
there's a retired federal
District Court judge in
California all over your we
started meeting individually
with the mediator in December.
Of the he's also started to meet
with the some of the other
groups unities involved.
He's proposing parties
participate in technical
committees
thank technical committees talk
about other he's also saying
some issues I think mediators
this is a lot more complex than
you originally thought of the
New Mexico attorney general's
office is managing our mediation
efforts I am involved with the
AG's office with the mediator
and the state engineers office I
see are working closely and we
have been working closely us
since I've come back in into
this position and we're on the
same page well we're we
coordinate our funding request
we coordinate with the legal
strategies and we thought we
have a really good unified
position as we move forward
against.
Texas in the United States.
Here we go again touch on the on
the funding case the five three
seven five million special
appropriation request for a.
R. twenty one and twenty two of
the Rio Grande it's coconuts the
majority of it you can see is
the Rio Grande our state
litigation one five million okay
for technical experts Services
on hydrology engineering
modeling other experts services
within within the compact story
in the comments.
Or in services documents records
record population other legal
services and and some of some of
the staff needs that we have
that we can take it out of our
own budgets collecting other
things of the rate goes another
interstate litigation
lots potential on on the
Colorado that happened that's
only two hundred twenty five
thousand well that that makes up
the full request of the five
point three seven five billion.
Yes so let's get it Indian water
rights settlements again of the
three that are ongoing the ones
that and we're really settled
within the the amendment to
thousands when I was state
engineer before we're getting
into obviously the
implementation phase of all of
these the Avid settlement
construction of the four million
dollar regional water system has
begun see that federal cost
share and say cost year the
state is appropriated fifty
seven and a half of that one oh
four point five so additional
forty seven million needed and
we have a FY twenty two to
twenty six capital request
that's been submitted and it's
been supported we believe a nine
million dollars a year to make
sure that the the state share is
up paid for with that particular
Madam the good news in the two
of settlements that followed as
the state's Koster has really
been that of the Navajo Nation
Nabil Gallup water supply
project that so bring in a one
point three billion dollar of
federal funds it's really if you
look at it just from an economic
perspective really a great way
that we of the leveraged state
funds get that projects not not
to mention the critical need for
water well into the chapters of
the Navajo Nation but the
federal cost years over one
point two million billion the
states was fifty million dollars
we've got some some final County
that needs to be done but
through all of the money that's
come through water transport
everybody else every other
appropriation we feel like we
met last year of the
contralateral Water System has
been constructed and the testing
it started on that particular
one and then the San Juan
lateral system of costs are
being reevaluated will touch on
that a little bit more later of
the town settlements twenty
million dollar cost years been
mad that's the state's last year
of the staff working with
parties on implementation of
certain projects.
We're trying to really figure
out roles responsibilities as we
get into the administration of
that the state engineers the the
the water master in that
particular settlements and I
personally sat in a number of
meetings with tells Pueblo the
last few months to start trying
to really applaud roles and
responsibilities on that
settlement but that's those are
those are the implementation of
the three I just talked about
implementing those we have
several that we still need to
finish that negotiations on
we're active with nine Pueblo
strides nations in six different
adjudications I will go through
all over there but you can see
that there are others water
right claims on on several of
the rivers and streams within
New Mexico involving a like I
said nine published tribes and
nations and it's really
important for the state engineer
to be involved in those
negotiations with the federal
negotiation team of and so we
you know we did ask for that
budget expansion that the
governor's office of supported
of again looking to get a couple
additional positions we can this
year to start making these more
fruitful discussions for special
for us to be able to work I'm
gonna turn Mr chair
This presentation these over to
Rolf Schmidt Petersen so we can
talk about the the fifty year
water planning efforts thank you
Mr state engineer very timely
because a Mr Smith appears and
mention the S. and comments on
the last subject you're talking
about and then there after Ralph
the floor is yours Sir.
You are muted.
It's thank you Mr chairman
matching that I but it hasn't
happened to anybody else
Mr state engineer could you go
back to slides quickly I just
want to mention something with
regards to the and that project
that's there the Pojoaque valley
regional water system just
wanted to to highlight for the
committee that our congressional
delegation really came through
and in a number of areas
actually with regards to federal
authorizations right at the end
of this last session and one of
the big piece that they were
able to secure for New Mexico
was the authorization for the
federal government to provide
that for federal cost share that
John the Antonio mentioned you
see here that two hundred
seventy six point eight million
that is of of very big milestone
because the previous federal
administration had had refused
to move forward with different
parts the project even though
they have money because they
didn't have enough to complete
some significant segments with
this authorization and with the
funding that the state
legislature and governor of
provided there is sufficient
money it's about a hundred
million dollars now to to
commend some very significant
construction work on that
project you've driven past the
of the center of the funds of
Pueblo in the last few months
towards Los Alamos new look at
on the right you'll see some
construction that's going on
there I was initial limited
construction that the state
supported in the icy does that
that will expand significantly
in the next six to eight months
going all the way up to Pojoaque
eight and and the state has
after the IOC has sent over
twenty one million
for our that the amount that
we've appropriated we have that
nine million dollar request.
If we're successful with the
legislature in getting that this
year will be able to put that on
the ground pretty darn quickly
second piece of that with
regards to the Navajo Nation in
a while the state has met its
cost year for this project
I cannot under state the value
of it from a possible water
supply standpoint for these
rural communities with the
pandemic and so on
the cutter lateral is pre
commission almost ready to be
operated that comes down the
eastern checkerboard and if we
have water and the federal
government can get water to
citizens in out that area I
think it'll help with the
pandemic but the San Juan
lateral piece has an estimated
cost overrun of about two
hundred fifty million dollars my
staff are involved in evaluating
that
gold king mine spill is part of
this with regards to the San
Juan river in where they take
water from that river and the
aspect there are being safe in
that regard is a really big
portion of this but long story
short Gallup has been working
with the nation and others to
try to continue providing ground
water in those areas while this
project moves forward all of us
are kind of concerned that it
will take more time to get
authorization to put things in
place and trying to help in the
Gallup area and within the
nation to continue to provide
ground water in those areas Mr
chairman that's all I had on
that piece and John if you could
move on to the state water plan
aspect we we do gentlemen Mr
also.
Percent Representative Allison
has a question is hand was well
yes absolutely Allison the.
Thank you Mr chair.
I'm gonna ask you a question
relative to the last slide
showing the.
Thanks Amanda who.
In Gallup water supply that last
bullet the San Juan lateral
system costs are being
reevaluated.
Does it in any way
I mean that the project is going
to be slow down because costs
are being evaluated or is the
project can continue going while
the costs are being evaluated.
So Mr chair representative
Allison the the project is
moving forward there is
approximately five hundred
million it has been authorized
and the way that work is going
on is it's centering in the
Gallup area moving off towards
actually Crown Point also with
pipelines that are supplied by
groundwater all of that work is
continuing
at the the issue though is that
the water treatment plant that
was planned for this Activision
has been looked at in the costs
in the operational costs were
just very high and what above
the original cost estimates
and then with the gold king mine
spill the need for some off
channel storage that you could
utilize if that type of thing
happens again as the water
supplies not affected has led
the federal government with the
with the support of the I. S. C.
and the Navajo Nation to
evaluate other opportunities
there
in any way we look at this
with the those aspects there's
not sufficient funding
are authorized to pay for them
so while the groundwater piece
of this will expand that larger
questions could take longer we
don't know how much we will know
more when the value planning
study is complete.
Okay thanks very much thank you
Mr chair thank you
Representative Nelson that's
going back to Ralph Ralph the
floors you are still.
Thank you Mr chairman
So Mr chairman members of the
committee
what I have a number of slides
here that are on the is fifty
years state water planning
effort
State engineer has highlighted
the funding request that we made
for the upcoming year the LFC
recommendation you all aware of
that piece I I would tell you I
think it's a very important
piece to moving this forward and
that this effort is not
developing a regional planner
regional plans by themselves for
the state water plan we we we
did those we did that two
thousand eighteen and a little
bit earlier this is a little bit
different this is an effort to
look forward over the next fifty
years and say if we can continue
to see warming affects and
warming in New Mexico generally
means aridity increase dryness
what does that mean for a water
users provide them information
to help to make decisions the
state and others and and if John
if you can move to the next
slide.
So I think many of you have
probably seen this type of a
graphic before you know from a
lot of them modeling
institutions are governmental
agencies and so on
this shows observed and
projected temperature change
with the New Mexico from
nineteen hundred up to twenty
one hundred the the the gray
line is the range of of
historical conditions and model
historical of the green and red
are the different missions rates
of relative to temperature and
and I think you know that's
called a hockey puck are the
hockey stick type of of of of a
preacher estimation and people
can agree or disagree about
those and and argue about on
what's harder to argue about is
the the Orange Line that's here
these are the observed average
temperatures within New Mexico
over of the essentially the last
hundred years and if you look at
that line is particularly from
around nineteen eighty five on
it the observed temperature
within New Mexico has been
increasing and I think you're
Representative Zamora was
talking when we started here
today a little bit about as
cal's in getting water and I
would definitely like to ask him
more about the difficulties in
doing that at different times
and I know Representative is L.
has similar issues and maybe
others do too but this aspect of
thirty years of average
conditions warming things we're
all experiencing.
And we seen it the the rangeland
areas this last year with the
range not showing up grant is
not starting difficulties
basically just continuing to
feed cows not having to
supplement them in a whole bunch
of other pieces
this is what we're trying to
explore with the with groups
that I'll talk about in a few
minutes if that is to continue
what does it mean and I would
just also say they want to get
back to the long term average we
do need thirty years of lesser
than average can to our
conditions they just get back to
that from where we sit right now
next slide.
So it but I want to put that
into perspective also this is a
graph of the annual flow of the
Rio Grande at the old we gauge
your Santa Fe.
And it has a long trip here to
record this is actually probably
for gauges in the United States
this is the longest stage record
of any of from eighteen ninety
five up to here to two thousand
and twenty and a couple things
to remark when when when you
hear from researchers and others
that compare the last twenty
years to the previous twenty
years you have to be really
careful with that because if you
look at the data set here from
nineteen approximately eighty to
ninety nine at the Rio Grande we
had over one point two five
million acre feet of water on
average Comcast engaged.
and if you look at the rest of
the time period that's here
nothing like that is actually
really occurred in that time
period suffer maybe their early
twenties.
Then if you look at twenty two
thousand twenty twenty the
average is significantly less
four hundred thousand acre feet
last.
Eight hundred eighteen thousand
two hundred acre feet up about a
thirty percent decline twenty
five thirty percent decline in
that time period any data you
said you put so this is going to
show a decline in and run off I
would just remarked that if you
knew in nineteen fifty five.
What the eighties would look
like any faster together there
would show you going up.
Because the long term average
here is still around a million
acre feet which was the long
term average beforehand we have
to recognize there's difference
between long term trends in
short term trends and we have to
be able to put those into
context John next slide.
So we're gonna do this time of
by really reaching out across
the state we're gonna do that
following the governor's three
guiding principles for water
resilience because that's the
idea here you know we're in New
Mexico are individuals are
cities resilient to the type of
change we might see where they
not and what could be done we're
gonna do that looking at the
framework of stewardship for
start smart water management you
know we must be good stewards of
our water supply and prepare for
the the change plan for the
worst right hope for the better
we want to be sustainable in
what we do where it makes sense
and we want to we want to really
evaluate equity and described
we're equity issues might exist
and how we address the next
slide.
So big slide lots of different
parts to this at this point out
to you bottom left hand corner
as state engineer indicated our
budget is tight we're using
taking trust fund monies that we
would normally use for the Rio
Grande or parts the rate goes up
to it to some degree or other
river basins putting into our
water planning
program through the Interstate
Stream Commission and then
trying to put forward in this
effort we can't do it alone and
we're not trying to do it alone
we're trying to match resources
with the Indian Affairs
Department as a grant that can
help in this for tribal outreach
or working with the New Mexico
bureau of geology and mineral
resources as all described in a
in a minute we're looking for
working with the hickory and
nation water administration
office who has lots of
experience on the Colorado River
with similar issues US army
corps of engineers has a water
planning assistance to the state
program that were met matching
fifty fifty we're working with
the New Mexico water dialogue
which is a volunteer group
statewide that addresses water
issues and then lastly we are
engaging also with the New
Mexico water resource research
institute which I think you're
all aware has been working on a
statewide water budget which we
think we can help in this for
all of those things we're trying
to accomplish the goals that are
set out here on the right side
and yellow.
We're gonna provided assessment
of a potential water resource
challenges very sectors of the
state and the state as a whole.
Looking as at continued warming
and what that would do right to
try to bring all the
stakeholders we can't to the
table to ensure inclusive water
planning we started that we
could do or two ago
Eight engineer gave a talk for
the governor a launching this
effort get the New Mexico water
dialogue.
Through it we're gonna describe
what New Mexico New Mexicans
themselves can do to help and
all of this is going to be done.
With the goals of reducing risk
improving water resilience and
creating a realistic and
sustainable plan for the next
fifty years that plan then can
be used by the regions and
others going forward.
For
eight phases to this we're just
now completing phase one or we
will by the end of February
which is the overall scoping
we've we've heard a number of
times by the tribes and pueblos
we're doing planning efforts
that they are concerned they're
not in from the very beginning
in this instance we brought them
and everybody else of that in at
the very beginning at in this
effort which is made it
interesting from because if you
talk to the engineers a lot of
the engineers will say you don't
have a in in goal right now that
you're trying to do we're
uncomfortable with that because
that's how we plan we're trying
to balance those two issues
will do work with New Mexico
tech and the group of New Mexico
experts in water and climate
over the next four to five
months to do this initial we've
had across the state here's how
temperatures are changing here's
how precipitation is likely to
change here's how your of apple
transported demand is likely to
change which hopefully will
provide some big help with
regards to ranchers and dollars
and then look at number of other
reach resources will do
extensive outreach and
refinement of the of this
information over the next four
to five months because we fully
expected a communication
problems with what we do experts
talk in certain ways the water
users and different ones we want
to bridge that at and we'll do
outreach to this group hopefully
interim committees and more
during the fall and then we'll
work and produce a final plan
for review under phase four in
early March of twenty two if not
yeah well late March early April
John next slide.
So it.
For the I. S. backing up on that
we have we have a a general
water planning process with
Lucius Sanchez who's my of.
Water planning manager for the
state.
The highlight she's heavily
involved in the Water Act that
New Mexico bureau of geology and
mineral resources leading
including people from the state
engineers office as well as the
forest and watershed health act
which we think are key pieces to
everything we're doing but this
this this fifty year plan is
focusing on the two circles that
are right there in the middle of
the education and outreach in
climate and drought.
Next slide.
So I won't go back over this
state engineer has already
talked about this we're doing
this with about three hundred
fifty thousand dollars of the
irrigation works construction
fund money both the of the the
fifty year plan our regular
activities we have two staff
positions to do this we're
trying to support from other
parts the agency but that's very
difficult and trout
and then we've asked for seven
hundred fifty thousand to match
funding from the with the US
army corps of engineers and
others to continue to support
and expand this effort next
slide John I think that's the
end of that one.
you want me to talk about this
one John are you one of those.
Okay.
Mr chairman so in the twenty
twenty one regular session the
state legislature appropriated
some seed money to the New
Mexico winter street Interstate
Stream Commission The funded
establish a pilot water
conservation program and the
lower Rio Grande and this Mr
chair is really a test process
for a number of different
aspects.
Seventeen million dollars was
originally appropriated no more
than two million of that would
be for our start up costs next.
So
within that also no more than
five million dollars could be in
this expended any fiscal year
twenty one through twenty twenty
three local entities and there
are a number of them should be
responsible for cost your
contributions beginning this
fiscal year
the in the special session in
June twenty twenty the
legislature reduce that
seventeen million to seven and
we're moving forward on that as
all describe next.
So within the program we have to
be made purposes their short
term is to establish a test
process for reducing groundwater
pumping in the lower Rio Grande
Valley irrigated lands and Out
term we want to use that and
other work to develop and test
water management actions that
promote aquifer health and to
set up an independent entity for
the long term program management
I would I would tell the
committee today that we're
working with the a group of
water users down there who put
in a lot of in kind related
activity on this includes New
Mexico State University Los
crucis pecan growers diverse
crop present a number of others
and I will for Representative
small I know he had asked
previously on this about D. B.
ID I'll just say very directly
with with the the ID's most
recent recent front of the
Supreme Court at the state
engineer managed we've done some
reach out we're kind of
coordinating and through this
effort with the B. ID of that's
separate from the overall effort
because there's such a big
difference litigation wise and
how those parties in the state
are looking at the U. S. Supreme
Court litigation.
With regards to status we have
begun the four term test program
over the fall of the I. S. C.
put out a request for
applications for grants
and those requests have a number
of different constraints on but
generally they seek to pay
farmers to stop farming on lands
with pump groundwater and do
that for full year
to to conserve groundwater to
assess that in the process so
far we had about thirty farmers
that that voluntarily applied
for grants
are commission gave preliminary
approval to me to sign those
requests and will complete the
processing in and sign grant
applications for twenty three
different farms and twenty
twenty one and and just to put
this into context with regards
to dollars because it's
significantly different here
than anywhere else I've seen in
New Mexico the applicants
applied for grants and fraught
five price tiers that range from
four hundred dollars an acre up
to eight hundred dollars an acre
and
and they they had a range that
they could do we prioritized
moving forward to requests that
were on the lower price range
and our commission approved
grants ranging from as little as
six thousand dollars to up to a
hundred sixty thousand total of
about nine million nine hundred
thousand of that seven million
dollars representing about
fourteen hundred acres of
groundwater irrigated land
and and so far the state
engineers office has been a
great partner in this also as
certified twenty three grantees
that to have valid water rights
we're verifying land deeds and
other needed documentations to
make sure our entry into the
agreements with the people who
have the on the ground
responsibilities and and we're
getting them the right.
Amount of money we're finalizing
those plans to have those done
prior to the beginning of the
season.
Ecosse river basin
I just say right off the with
the if you notice was state
engineer that that you mentioned
when it came to the Interstate
litigation issue we wouldn't be
spending money on the Pecos
river and that's because New
Mexico one in the U. S. Supreme
Court
over Texas on the rate goes
River compact issue that they
mostly a lot recently brought
that that means the Mexico keeps
the credit that the special of
the river master in this regard
appropriately allocated to New
Mexico and we maintain our
compact credit doesn't have any
other lasting impact than that
but I think it's a it it really
does reflect that the with the
court and others say they didn't
agree with any of Texas is
argument and and New Mexico in
this case was trying to be
helpful during flooding and this
report in my mind roled
appropriately.
Next slide.
So but even with that as I just
mentioned we won that case we
have a large accrued credit
under the Pecos river compact
but we have the drought and and
we began pumping from our
augmentation well field in late
October is I'll bring up and
this is all to help to improve
the supply of surface water for
C. ID in the upcoming year
we anticipate spending as much
as two million dollars this year
the Interstate Stream Commission
through B. A. R. requests a
number of other things has
already authorized one point
three million that we're using
for current pumping we have very
little ability to do more than
that this year and that's a big
reason why we've asked for the
spring special request for two
million which if authorized
would be available in may of
this year John next slide.
So
This is a new slide from some
other ones that we've been
talking with a number of parties
in the basin about our regional
intense year was to try to pump
into March in order to get C. ID
supply up to about fifty
thousand acre feet suffice it to
say with the drought that exact
existed last fall it continues
today is getting worse.
Of the twenty one twenty one
supplies going down and that's
why we submit the request next
slide.
Through these.
So for those people who aren't
aware of where this is occurring
want to point out down in the
bottom corner there you can see
where this photo was there are
aerial photos taken from our
Landsat imagery Carlsbad is
right there down by our slide
number fifty media Lee north of
that is Avalon reservoir that we
have Brantley that's just a
little bit off to the left and
then we if you look north from
there you can see Artesia lake
Arthur up parts of the pay
because valley are teaching
Conservancy district within that
the I. S. C. has to wealthy over
the lake Arthur well feel that's
highlighted in yellow the seven
rivers well field also in in
yellow a little bit further down
below these are the two well
feels that we initiated pumping
from.
And you can see there in around
a lot of other farmers in that
area next slide.
So it's with regards to pumping
we began at seven rivers and
late October of the of twenty
twenty we have a ten wells
operating in that area
delivering about eighty seven
acre feet per day that's not a
small amount of water it that's
forty CFS that's not you know
half the size of maybe the City
of Albuquerque's surface water
diversion so it's a big
operation
delivered about five thousand
seven hundred acre feet to
Brantley reservoir as of January
twenty first lake Arthur we
began operating that in early
November in that case we're not
hoping the wells this is an
artesian aquifer system so we
have four wheels there that are
open and they're delivering
about thirteen acre feet per day
with a total of about nine
hundred fifty so of our goal to
get about eight thousand acre
feet to ten thousand into
Brantley reservoir to eight
supply we've delivered about
sixty six hundred fifty acre
feet so far next slide.
but here's the targets so under
the settlement we have a March
one target for overall see IT
supply of about fifty thousand
acre feet that goes up through
the year up to as much as ninety
thousand acre feet in September
well feels alone will not allow
us to do that we need some rain
up up under the settlement we're
required to do our best to
continue to pop next slide.
And using the depiction on the
right about the exceptional
drought that's occurring and
it's just expanding I sure hope
for rain and snow but can't plan
for that.
so given this agreement you know
we we had a target to deliver
eight thousand to ten thousand
acre feet by March first we will
be able to to meet that goal.
however our estimate today
without significant rain or snow
in the pay because you can see
the upper part of the pay
because revert in here that's
the where the mountains are we
have run offices in exceptional
drought also we estimate we're
gonna be fifteen to twenty
thousand acre feet short of that
fifty thousand acre foot target.
John if you could move to the
next slide.
So that's the reason for a
request that's reason for what
we're doing
for Representative is L. just to
do we're we're very much aware
that as we move into the next
couple months will the farmers
in that area and ranchers and
others will begin their
operations we're monitoring the
well fields in those areas we're
looking at flexibility in
operations to be able to
continue to pop or will pay a
very large attention to those
things and try to balance that
those aspects of effects of the
pumping relative to our
requirements of the settlement
and I say that because you know
this Madam is really New
Mexico's strongest tools
supporting compliance with the
papers compact and this point
records agree it has done that
and it's done that because of
all the elements of it and the
partnerships in that area with
PVA CD the bureau of reclamation
C. idea others always see office
to put it together
and I just wanted to highlight
that well we're we're needing to
do this the last time we had to
was back in two thousand eleven
to two thousand thirteen happens
hopefully relatively
infrequently
but it's a we we feel it's
really important and I do too to
comply as best we can with that
settlement agreement next slide
jump.
So I guess I can take this to if
you're okay with that so that
Colorado River basin up until
three weeks ago I think if
people ask me about the Colorado
River basin I would have said
Hey you Miss basin it is in the
best position of any in New
Mexico when it comes to water
supply I think I'm still gonna
say that because of the some of
these most recent snows we've
got in the San Juan river basin.
But.
I'm all right is.
And for.
Here's.
The future of of reasonable
water supply.
You hear me.
Lost my internet connection
percent.
Your internet Ralph.
The so state engineer if that
goes in and out again if you
wouldn't mind taking over for me
that be great you go to the next
slide.
So on the Colorado River we were
just alerted by the US bureau of
reclamation that there are
revert modeling for the entire
Colorado River basin shows the
likelihood of like how dropping
below a certain elevation at on
their their most extreme low end
of their other modeling
probably year and a half to two
years out
the sorry that they're talking
about there is a situation where
thank how would not be able to
generate a lot of electricity
which would have lots of
indirect
impact with the New Mexico
because a lot of our citizens
particularly rural citizens get
their power from like pal
under that certain set of
circumstances if things got
worse there's a potential for a
call in the upper basin as a
whole that might be several
years away we need to plan for
that and we have plans in place
to do it and we're working on
but we really need to put more
resources here again to we have
a program called demand
management under the Colorado
River drought contingency plans
that John the Antonio signed off
on as the governor's
representative to this river
basin about a year ago
I won't go into the details of
on demand management is about
storing water and reducing some
of our uses short term so that
if things get really dry are bad
we have a storage supply
available for our users drought
response operations looks that
re operating reservoirs like
Navajo reservoir flaming gorge
to get more water into lake
Powell are up my staff John
staff for working on both of
these issues a big piece of what
we're doing right now is working
with the hickory Apache nation
and the nature Conservancy on a
lease of hickory Apache Water
that we go into street.
The water reserve on the San
Juan and really be the initial
piece of that storage supply
activate all New Mexicans in
that basin and also in the Rio
Grande we have the same one
recovery implementation program
which is in danger species
program for to fish that also
provides compliance to all our
water users in that basin of the
funding for that program is
starting to be threatened for
operations and we we in all
likelihood us the governor and
the legislature for support to
provide more funding to those
two to three years out and we've
already talked about the Navajo
Gallup systems I won't go into
that in more detail next slide.
I can do this one to state
engineer so Arizona water
settlement act.
Next slide on their I think you
all aware that in June of two
through two thousand twenty The
New Mexico Interstate Stream
Commission in reviewing.
The draft environmental impact
statement for a proposed New
Mexico unit up under the Arizona
water Madam acted in New Mexico
unit of the central Arizona
project they voted and and
directed Interstate Stream
Commission staff to stop our
efforts related to that activity
and there is a number of reasons
for that but I believe I
presented before and their
direction from which the staff
was for us to go out and close
that that process and take a
number of other steps we have
been doing those
The New Mexico cap Indian number
parties invoked dispute
resolution and we worked our way
through that dispute resolution
for close out want to make it
clear that the New Mexico unit
the the process and all of the
agreements associated with it
have now been terminated that
was about a six month effort to
do that at the same time we have
a federal law requirement under
the Arizona water settlement act
to coordinate with the southwest
water study group or its
successor about next steps in
the the lady age for that is the
New Mexico Capen in the they are
that successor group so we're
coordinating with them and our
commission directed us to focus
on the following line you to
drugs projects and after Luna
granted all Delco counties we
work with farmers in those river
systems to help them replace
their push up dance.
that that aspect there I really
haven't seen very many other
places where whenever a storm
comes through we got to put a
bulldozer in the river to
basically recreate that
distortion structure you know
that that's something that we
can help with and we're gonna
look to do that recessing
litigation risk for verdant
valley farmers in New Mexico in
their ability to pump
groundwater in the future
there's litigation and Arizona
federal District Court that is
attempting to restrict
groundwater pumping in Arizona
and if that were to happen they
could potentially extend into
the verdant valley because that
federal judge has jurisdiction
over New Mexico farmers.
we're assessing opportunities
say the town early and the tri
city area to address the I think
the you are all aware that the
wells that were drilled for the
early
water supply project don't yield
the amount of water that they
were rigidly projected to yield
and then one of them has water
quality issues and so as a
result we we have a project
that's been built largely but it
doesn't have the water supply to
actually provide the needs we're
looking to try to see if there's
anything the icy can do to help
with that and then and working
with a capital B. on their GPA
for looking at other projects
and how they'll be organized in
the future and then finally
we're working on grants process
that we would we would seek to
put in place to help projects
get become shovel ready because
that we're we're saying that
issue and almost everything we
do there's lots of great ideas
but ideas themselves don't
necessarily mean you can put a
project on the ground so what
can we do to help get more
projects on the ground and
utilize these funds to do that.
state engineer if you move to
the next one that.
if this point so John I think it
might hand to you Mr chair for
the Rio Grande we we do have a
number of slides in here and we
would want to tag team this one
that's alright with you.
Gentlemen it is fine with me but
before we do I do want to open
it up for for questions I know
that Representative is L. did
have a question and perhaps we
can take a short time to get
those answers so folks
representatives on the committee
if you have questions raise your
hand or comments please raise
your hand.
And we will go then to
representatives out to ask the
questions regarding the yes.
Thank.
Mr chairman thank you very much
Cheshire although I am a farmer
and I am a rancher and the
livelihood of these certain
people that try to feed the
world is of utmost importance to
me and therefore I do have not
just one not just table several
questions and our our guest back
with slide number thirty nine
Mister Schmidt Petersen when
we're talking about the New
Mexico water planning.
Yes Hannah Riseley point nine
visit quite often and she does
an excellent job of pairing my
concerns and then.
Answering my questions I have
for so I do have to give kudos
to hand the sheet as done and.
Have an outstanding job under
your New Mexico water planning
challenges you're talking about
inadequate infrastructure would
you care to expand on that just
a little bit because I do have
some concerns there.
Mr chair representative is L.
yes I I I can't I you know the
in the two thousand and eighteen
state water plan in part of that
effort Lucius Sanchez he's our
program manager in that regard
work with the region's to
document infrastructure needs
across the state in New Mexico
relative to water that those
regions saw as.
Needed elements there was three
point eight billion dollars
worth of infrastructure projects
across the state.
yes some of them I can I can
describe a little bit to you
you know the for example I I
think the the Navajo Gallup
water supply project lateral the
aspects of that work that are
not
for the Navajo Nation or the
hickory Apache nation are being
done by state of New Mexico
city's Gallup in particular okay
and and there is a a number of
needs for tie ins in that area
yeah Senator in the interim time
period before we get surface
water from the San Juan river to
it they're relying on the that
the aquifer system in that area
that has you know it can pursue
produce a lot of water for short
period of time but then the
wells don't work you got
arrested we gotta drill New
Mexico.
Eastern New Mexico water utility
authority and that you reservoir
pipeline system the other very
critical piece that the the
state engineers been doing a lot
of work on at and while within
my role with the Interstate
Stream Commission and we own and
operate you present for and so
we seek to maintain that
reservoir to aid that supply of
you've probably heard in the in
the news about the toll Hijli
Act line in the Albuquerque area
with that Navajo chapter having
issues and we could go on and on
there is deep these types issues
exist in many career communities
and they're largely rural yeah.
And and thank you for that
information yes I am up to date
on hotly part of it but when
we're talking about inadequate
infrastructure I am also looking
at.
dam structures here we go again
talking about the damn dams all.
This list of the New Mexico
water planning challenges on
slide number thirty nine.
There is one department that is
really glaringly missing from
that and that is the United
States Forest Service and we
have all seen what they have
created by not sending out the
force we give.
Catastrophic.
Forest fires and the amount of
water that is lost that is so
precious to the state of New
Mexico.
Is a big deal to me especially
whenever those four should be
sustaining our wildlife and it's
they're not and Mr chairman we
have seen what the Mescalero
tribe has done and as far as
their.
For standing goes and right next
door is the Forest Service.
The Mescaleros have done an
outstanding job as for as
has been treated for their force
and everything we have also seen
the efforts of New Mexico game
and fish what they have done to
help restore some of the poorest
health so our wildlife can
thrive and survive.
But I would have a real problem
with the US army corps of
engineers.
And I have been listed at length
with Mr Dantonio over what they
have created down in my neck of
the woods and I won't get into
that but.
Turning on over to us.
Forty five forty six forty seven
forty eight okay.
Forty five yes we did.
Of reduce the amount that was
sent and that that really
bothers me but anyway I'm
concerned though about your
statement right and your
headlines on slide number forty
five whenever it's talking about
local entities shall be
responsible for car share
contributions.
Those individual entities enter
into this contract.
Or was that the state of New
Mexico that entered into these
contracts and the reason I'm
asking that many many years ago
with former speaker of the house
said we need to make those
people down on the lower rate
because revert pay up that debt
to the state of Texas it was not
those people that undertook that
did it it was the state of New
Mexico so I'm kinda concerned
can you make in give me an
explanation right there please.
Representative.
It looks like on the state
engineer likes it work okay
that'll be fine Mr Mr chairman
Representative is L. yeah the
that so that was put in the
appropriation language it
wasn't.
Fine it was to provide fairly
loosely of the original
discussions with the David Abbey
and others were that up it would
be nice to see a local
contribution of one of the
issues down there was a rate
upon scenario where you bet
surely this could turn into of
folks that groundwater would
actually have to pay into a fund
the fund would help pay farmers
to fallow so that it would be
city of Los crucis of New Mexico
State University some of the
other users of the New Mexico
would be on the panel fund and
and pay that amount that's
that's one of the concepts
that's out there of the of the
actual cost care contribution
was left barely loosely open
with respect to that of the they
are now saving the lower Rio
Grande water users are
essentially making impact in our
traditions because their pain
attorneys they're paying water
folks out of their own pockets
to come up with with studies
associated with how to manage
the the offer down there so it's
not it's not a formal I share
these but the idea was to move
into individual cost share of so
that the lovers could contribute
and I think the locals are are
starting to tally up the numbers
and amount of money they're
spending because there's there's
a significant amount of money
that the book our growers the
diversified role propers the
other entities that are down
there that wind up having to
have their involvement with
their attorneys and whether
hydrologic hydrology experts
that are contributing to a
solution down there.
Okay thank you very much it just
gives me concern that the
farmers are the ones that are
trying to get there.
Protect their crops and their.
Bill to to be able to make a
living Mr chairman of and for
either one of the gentleman that
are given The presentation day
slide number forty six.
Whenever we are talking about
selling the land we have we saw
what took place originally on
the pagus riverside whenever
those farms were being.
But by the Interstate Stream
Commission and we fought and did
get the bill passed we're.
Interstate Stream Commission did
by the water rights but not the
land and and that made all the
sense in the world Interstate
Stream Commission does not have
any business trying to manage
land their job is to.
Take care of our water so we got
that one down but in the
meantime we had.
Dryland farms that had eight at
that time it was raining a
little bit and it was a foot
weeds that were over ten feet
high and I'm not line there I
have pictures of it that we're
effect on the farms right next
to him for whenever you're
talking about this follow
following pilot program you said
that there were
Requests that were given and how
was what was the application
process to receive one of these
requests.
Mr chair representative is that
all a couple of different pieces
on that we we had a set of
criteria relative to this
application process that the the
in that direction from the
legislature was to help this
local entity or groups stand up
programs into a value meet the I
want to start with the the
statement that this is a test
program for a number of
different elements and the and
one piece of that was aspect of
how will grant could be put in
place and what would be required
in order to to basically do a
failing program and have that
work well the the first pieces
that really work you know what
what is the water right what is
the status of the water right
for the apply for grants.
the the next pieces that we are
looking at here really have to
do with land indeed requirements
up as you're aware from a lot of
these areas a lot of different
business interests are family
interests that may be involved
in the lower rate grand there's
actually quite a few of parties
that own the land but are the
ones that farmland so we needed
to make sure that all of those
deeds and stuff for employees we
also at those are the two big
things that we're looking at now
then the agreements that for the
upcoming year of requirements of
essentially
showing that there wells are
aren't being utilized and
they're not applying surface
water on those lands either and
then we have the discussion
going on with the New Mexico
department of agriculture
related to just the issue that
you're talking about
which is let's observe of these
lands and let's talk with those
users about what can be on done
on those lands to reduce
nuisance issues very they
they just or issues with regards
to weeds and that and so on now
you're absolutely right that's
not something the IAC does we're
not land managers that's right
and but we're this is one of the
areas where we've been talking
with the the entities that are
involved in that separately
within FDA and also D. Ph.D
about how partnerships could be
developed to address those
issues four hundred acres in
that area with reguards the
following is is pretty darn
small especially how they're
your distributed so we're really
gonna just test and look at that
and look at who could take that
on the long term.
if this program shows it can be
viable and then would be
expanded into the future.
Okay thank you very much for
that X. explanation and I do
want to point out to the panel
that the undertaker's riverside
whenever the water rights were
bought the landowner could
potentially retain a percentage
of those water rights but they
could not go back in and start
drilling domestic wells to set
up a subdivision they had to
have those water rights in place
so as we were not allowing those
people to double dip and I hope
that's what you all are.
Keeping in mind on the of the
Rio Grande side of it
undersupplied number forty
seven.
You can see the like Arthur well
field and also right of of that
west of brawls will.
And Mr Dantonio yeah I couldn't
very well recall youth coming
out to my place whenever a the
army corps of engineers in their
infinite stupidity left the
gates open of the two rivers
dams and it literally washed out
that this is a personal one on
the.
Honda river.
And that was.
All the water that comes down
the Honda and Mr Schmidt
Petersen I don't know if you're
aware of that none of that water
that comes down the Honda so.
Belongs to Texas.
That was a source of recharge
for the R. T. hi because belly
artesian wells are the artesian
basin there under the Roswell
area.
I do have a water right out of
that river that dates back to
eighteen seventy six.
As it stands right now Mr day
Antonio you saw how upset I got
with those people when it will
there were six car lets people
to look at the damage they
finally said yep we're sorry a
applaud replace it.
But whenever we're also talking
about the like Arthur will field
which is down below it's right
below the Rio Felice.
About for all Artesia below the
Phillies that the like Arthur
will fill.
That water was is now being
pumped into the picus is that
correct.
Mr chair representative itself
though well heads are open there
but they're not only.
They are flowing right now
because of the are the recharge
basin that's right there the
artesian wells.
Is going to press yeah but it is
going into the Pecos river have
what what means of monitoring
are you doing between where it
goes into the Pecos river before
it hits up correctly what is
what is the measurement
mechanism you have replaced
mission that water Mr chairman
Representative is L. we have
river gauging down through that
area that
that can arise the White and her
staff look at very frequently to
look at what the loss rates are
between you know that the
location Artesia and Brantley
reservoir as long as those loss
rates and I don't know the exact
number state you know pretty low
then we'll continue to flow
those wells or pumps your fat
loss right in the river of was
was very significant we would
modify that operation.
Okay and that that I understand
that but in the past we have
seen that over ninety percent of
that water never ever made it to
Bradley.
But here in about I don't know
I'm going to say this is the end
of January February the mid
March those farmers are going to
be turning on their will so they
can make a living to pay off the
bank loans.
To make sure that they do have
some source of income coming
can't what is going to happen
they are one of those will cease
to flow.
Maybe Mr chairman Representative
is L. as I mentioned in the
presentation piece of this we're
gonna be looking at the V. P. is
a metric surface water levels
throughout this area assessing
both the drawdown impacts that
might have windows that point
things start.
As well as the loss rates in the
river and to the extent that the
drawdowns become excessive for
the loss rates get too high we
will we will.
Reduce are pumping okay good to
be worth the.
The state monies to pump water
when we can't get it to the
intended purpose that's exactly
right.
Because that is up to the
taxpayer right now that is
paying the cost of that palm
well but every you do right now
it is flowing but we are
dependent upon that so think
it's up there at zero o'clock in
the rid us area as well a lot of
a lot of these mountains that
do.
We we will plan on that snow
pack and unfortunately we're not
getting it this year.
Mr chairman I think I only have
one more question
Right now how many water righted
acres of Mr Dantonio you might
be able to better answer this
how many water ride today crews
are now in the COVID basin.
Is that just a few.
Hi I have developed my district
supervisor down there to see on
the water right it it covers as
far as as far as the idea itself
Broke you might you might
remember better than I do I
don't I don't know the exact
number I get that right.
Representative is all I would I
would just echo that we have to
get you the numbers okay I know
that quite a few of those water
rights have been retired.
An awful lot of but I I would
just like a member of that in on
slide number fifty four whenever
you are working with the
participate said of the New
Mexico office state engineer
Interstate Stream Commission PPA
C. D. C. ID and the US.
Bureau of reclamation.
Tell me what role they are
playing now and if they are here
to do some good or they hear to
pander the efforts of the
Interstate Stream Commission
like they have been doing in the
past.
Mr chair representative is all
your we're referring
specifically to the bureau of
reclamation thank they're trying
to be helpful to all of the
partners partners and eating
with the settlement I am not
aware currently of anything that
they're doing that would be
detrimental to that but I could
check back with the okay the
pandemic and get back with you
okay and the reason I'm asking
that in the past I have they
continue to pump a wealth it was
an artesian well but had held
and holes in the casing that was
depleting the shallow aquifer
just for the endangered species
that I think is but not shiner
that is the other Brantley.
And it affected all those
ranchers in that particular area
where they did not even have
water.
For their livestock and it took
a congressional effort to get
them to run a camera down that
will so no I have not used for
bureau of reclamation right now
especially whenever they will
whenever they're impacting it is
very important to me that we are
able to.
Help our farmers and ranchers as
because they are good stewards
of the land but whenever we have
entities that are impacting them
adversely they will have to deal
with me Mr chairman thank you
very much for allowed me all
this time.
Representative.
The for the questioning for
forty five minutes left to in
this session I do want to.
Representative Allison did raise
his hand you madam he would be
would skip over it if in the
interest of time but you know I
I think it's only fair that
Representative also you're able
to ask questions or thank you
Mr.
Need help with your.
in my head so hello.
I want to ask the question this
is relative to your slide forty
six as well you have made the
statement there that
I S. C..
At approve some requests
To assist us some individuals so
I'm wondering if.
That same assistance could be
given to an irrigation ditch
that also doubles as
drinking water supply.
I have an irrigation system and
the four corners area that runs
below.
If and it gets buried.
We get the spring showers and
it's happened almost every other
year we're trying to put that in
conduit and.
Concrete conduit and I'm just
wondering how you can assist.
Mr chair chair representative
yep this specific program
authorized by the legislature
specific to the lower Rio Grande
so in that context we would not
be able to to do that however
with it for the I. S. C. we we
we are charge of the acequia and
Community ditch infrastructure
fund program for the state of
New Mexico and we do grant
agreements out of that process
every year and and that would be
a place to look at that usually
has a cost share requirement
associated with it but we also
have a loan program that can
help and we will we are open to
outreach to any party to do it
we also administer the capitol
programs for a safety is in the
we have approximately sixteen
million dollars out on the
ground right now with us so we
could definitely talk with you
in more detail.
Okay thank you I will talk to
you later on thanks very much
thank you Mr chair
representative Allison let's go
in and out to Representative
Herrera.
Thank you Mr chair thank you the
panelists this is been a great
presentation frightening but a
great presentation I I thank you
very much I I want you to know
Mr Dantonio that the first
person I I met with after my
election in of two thousand
eighteen was a woman by the name
of the CS Sanchez Senator
Representative just a Sanchez
until then better I met with her
she handed over the water plan
that you've just completed a
wrist three volumes I had a five
hour flight that probably two
weeks later where I read the
state water plan and I was
pretty amazed by her work and
her knowledge and I continue to
be impressed with your staff I
want you to know
my hat's off to Judy Campbell
who's helping me with small
mutual domestic water systems
and also to Rebecca Roose of
when working with and and I
would like
Ralph if we could go back to the
fifty year water plant could you
put that slide I wasn't a
smartness
As Representative the cell I
didn't take on it
the one before their there we
are
here's what I'm worried about in
in the north you know we don't
have an organization like the
middle Rio Grande Conservancy we
don't have it yet do we when I
talk about water I have to go to
that you know twenty five
different people and talk to
them about what I should say in
a niche of the mystic water
systems in the second St and it
we we don't have any overriding
organization that that really
tracks this and and helps each
other out the we work informally
across lines
but I guess what I what I what I
see missing in this in the water
planning challenges I'd like to
see the the second Association
be involved in this in this
planning group hi in the north
every manager and every farmer
depends on this second system
that's just how we were in the
north and we need to I think
have a bigger role in this
because these are the people to
keep up the systems these are
the people they're all
volunteers they keep the systems
that they work closely with each
other and help each other it's a
it's a communal system and I
just I I guess I would I would
ask that we be included on this.
Mr chair representative
I would let you know that with
regards to the teeming pieces
here a lot of it is related to
different monies or efforts are
information that those
properties can bring to the
table for outreach and the
outreach is intended to go very
broadly and part of what ms
Sanchez is doing with others is
reaching out through the sticky
association is seeking a
commission.
To give the northern New Mexico
piece because we recognize you
know while the water dialogue
may have meetings are we do
stuff in the cities or not going
to be able to get out reach
those people and so the outreach
efforts is going to be way more
brought in this.
And that it will definitely
include those groups and others.
Well.
Mr chair and in off I guess I I
guess I would say average is
good but outreach after the
plans are made are not the same
as planning with.
And and that's what I worry
about.
I'm just saying I I don't even
know if anybody agrees with the
but I just gonna say I if you
don't have the people who who
are impacted by these decisions
involved in these decisions I I
I just don't think it it's it's
just not the best way to go
about the business side I found
and the.
I guess the.
I guess there thank you very
much Mr chair.
Thank you very much vice chair.
And move on up we do have
another hand raise
Representative Zamora with the
question Representative what.
Thank you Mr chair and the Mr
Ross earlier in the conversation
you talked about.
The western side of the state
were you mentioned Arizona.
Was I think you made a mistake
and and you mentioned Arizona
was.
Looking into ceasing some
pumping and you mentioned a
federal judge get into that.
The discussion there.
Was it that you meant that
Arizona was looking to make New
Mexico sees pump in or what we
what was a statement on the Mr
chair representative Zamora this
was a specific statement that I
actually wish I was wrong in
this regard but in the verdant
valley of New Mexico which is on
the fuel river I don't.
You know we can put it show it
maybe in that drought slide
right on the border with you a.
Okay this will work but in that
valley there's several thousand
acres of production agriculture
that's occurring within New
Mexico right near junk in
Arizona
as part of the global equity
decree and then later in U. S.
Supreme Court litigation that
does total that Arizona the
California.
Of the federal judge within
Arizona has authority over other
uses of water
in that virgin valley section
and so the low river itself in
that area has a lot of ground
water pumping and surface water
users and has a federal water
master that oversees those
operations including operations
of New Mexico water users in the
verdant valley
in those very valley farmers use
both surface water from to
community ditches that are down
there as well as significant
amounts of groundwater.
There is in that groundwater is
allowed to be pumped under this
air is on of the California
litigation so everything is
within the bounds of that in
state engineers Water masters
document that the report on that
immediately.
Judge.
In Arizona there are there is
litigation going on by the San
Carlos Apache tribe against the
number of farmers in the Safford
valley over their groundwater
pumping and the the issue there
is is that groundwater pumping
allowable under the surface
water framework that's going on
or is there an impact and and to
the extent that that litigation
resulted in those farmers being
limited with their groundwater
pumping it could expand into the
rest of the Kewa river basin
including the New Mexico portion
so that's what we're assessing.
Okay and and that refreshes my
memory on some of this the stuff
that we've reviewed over the
past couple years thank you for
that.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you representative Mister
move on then to hopefully the
conclusion of this presentation
for the next fifteen minutes and
then we do have some
announcement at the end of our
committee hearing so that
they'll influence again yours.
Thank you Mr chairman
of the to answer representatives
of former question is we got
sixteen thousand acres of
irrigated acres in C. ID that
was passed on by my district
supervisor down there and the
other thing I wanted to
Representative Herrera the
acequia of growth engines thank
you so ciation and and a state
commission you know we do have a
all of Garcia that's a member of
the IOC commission and yes ideas
are typically a huge part of the
state more funding process I
will assure you that I'm gonna
get into the Rio Grande now and
Mr chairman I think this one is
being a middle Rio Grande former
yourself this is really
important as we look forward
of twenty twenty one forecast is
gonna be very challenging again
we're hoping for the best plan
for the worst and I think it's
been probably four years since
you Mexico was in a similar
situation on a Rio Grande at
condition of being an of really
a large approved at the status
of the state engineer of the
office so myself and and
director Schmidt Petersen we're
recommending that farmers along
the Rio Chama in the middle
valley and the lower Rio Grande
that don't actually need to form
this year do not form or
alternately planned for a
shorter duration season of
emergency emergency is seeking
funding supports or additional
validated got a program that
they're instituting a
discussions with Mike and then
we've been talking about talking
to him about that additionally
all farmers should be aware that
irrigation water reliability
will be low after the run off
and will be very low with summer
rains do not materialise one of
our act one resource management
again it's going to be needed on
the trauma we did that last year
will go into that a little bit
it's if it's not priority
ministration it's it's so it's.
Is sort of a hybrid between
priority ministration and short
sharing but they are working we
feel like active water resource
management may be needed in the
middle valley also it's going to
be a difficult year for
endangered species are we have
a.
Significant efforts last year on
the Rio Grande.
With our dentist all credit or
or debit release that we have
and we'll go into that a little
bit but it's gonna be a bad year
we want everybody to understand
that I know my candid with
Conservancy district is getting
plans outs and permission
outperformers.
Of in the Rio Chama valley
is is also problematic and and
so let me get a little bit more
the details of those here's a
here's a graph and and this is
important graph on on Rio Grande
cumulative of departures
regarding regarding compact
issues of what's important here
is you can see a across the
bottom here we have nineteen
forty two thousand twenty so
eighty years of record on the Y.
axis here you have thousands of
acre feet.
Our concept a lot of people
don't know here's the zero line
on that credit New Mexico is not
into New Mexicos in compliance
on the Rio Grande well the
negative two hundred thousand
acre plot line this red line
here so anywhere about this New
Mexico's in compliance with the
compact if you go along what
we're we're not in compliance.
New Mexico the crew debits or
calendar year twenty twenty one
is going to be about ninety six
thousand acre date your about
halfway down to that that
negative departure last year we
ran out of that negative thirty.
Thirty nine thousand one of the
things I do want to point out is
this little footnote with this
note here that's in the middle
here of during two thousand
three eight in two thousand and
New Mexico was able to
relinquish over three hundred
eighty thousand acre feet of
a crew credits to Texas that's
one word article seven and we
can't store we can't store and
those a post ninety twenty nine
reservoirs by by being able to
release release credits to
essentially a project.
It allows us to the store in
those upstream reservoirs are
one to one basis we'll get to
some management flexibility if
it wasn't for for New Mexico
doing that would be a pretty big
credit status but we have
problems in the Middle valley
with the danger species Act
issues and other issues I'm
gonna get into some of the
operations that we have to go
through this year in our twenty
twenty was so dry that or water
master had to curtail divergence
by a lot of the state years on
the real Djamel Water Rights
dating back to sixteen hundred
that that's how severe the
drought.
Was last year and we're looking
at somewhere conditions here
there was so little direct flow
water in the middle valley that
the the river would have to dry
naturally probably in July of
last year
At twenty twenty one is setting
up to do
you have a similar condition
reservoir supplies are lower in
then they weren't twenty last
year and it's so right
production ditions not seen
since the nineteen seventies
Power Parities because I know we
were added running out of time
the real time administration in
our twenty twenty and twenty one
a secular Gainey as
are up there also that
particular group and others is
in the upper some of basin it
would district administration
from July through October of all
the ditches in the lower trauma
were required to shut off and a
number of locations except for
that three senior say yes which
were on the Salazar the
Hernandez that you needed inches
and twenty twenty one run off
will be similar to that in
twenty twenty I accept that we
have less even in storage so
we're really gonna be dependent
upon of the monsoon season this
this table if you're kind of an
idea of the
Seniority status and how how
dire the situation yes we do
have a ditch name here in this
column here of the seniors in
the system more energy.
Which is the of the Pueblo up
there and then you have
Hernandez to meet in the cells
are ditches are they have
sixteen hundred priorities we
actually went through a rotation
schedule work from Monday at
seven AM to Thursday the senior
Public.
Allowed to take flow the three
seniors this take years were
allowed to take welcome Thursday
through Monday and then and then
when the water was available you
had people that would be able to
take these test year seventeen
fifteen priority dates down here
the seventy thirty five one day
a week if the water was
available it's it was dire last
year we're gonna have the
involvement of people were very
cooperative they understand the
shortage areas use but again
it's it's it's quite a challenge
to be able to get in there and
manage of your trip to the
supply that we have which is
going to be again very small
this year.
The representative to contact
operations again we have thirty
nine thousand acre feet of water
that was retained and storage in
a lot and Nichols or treatments
awards and record their the post
nineteen twenty nine resorts
that are on the system and the
way that the article.
six requirement is is that if
you you have distorted to store
any water you have to store
water to the amount that you're
creating that yeah that and so
so of you know a lot of supplies
Rebekah service strict Nichols
of course applies City of Santa
Fe and all the Rio Grande
compact commission and I thought
this was a pretty big issue last
year the Texas commission or
even lower litigation agreed to
allow the release of that region
Devont'e water because it was
affecting the middle Rio Grande
farmers and the endangered
species act issues all based on
on call Colorado commissioners
concurrence and my parents of we
had we released about thirty
three thousand acre feet of
which which helped the former
state business in the middle Rio
Grande help the Endangered
Species Act of.
We'll have any issues there
there was a total of about fifty
thousand acres but if you see it
there call it down that included
other water systems that want
some water other water but but
essentially if it wasn't for
that
Farmers were last crops we would
we would be out of compliance
with our choose issues and again
it was a pretty big deal pretty
big operation of and pretty
amazing at that if the cop that
states were able to agree to
that even though we're in hired
investigation I put up a state
engineer order order number one
eighty nine directing how the
water would be released it
limited the the number of active
service to district a certain
amount of well over a period of
time not to exceed average when
there was a we were opportunity
of that water essentially that
the middle Rio Grande of farmers
use is
Is affecting this year's
administration essentially.
So when we look at the
What I really said that water
actually is reducing Rio Grande
project supply of for twenty
twenty one it's putting in
Mexico further in a group that
but that's why we went from a a
lot of of thirty nine thousand
acres with debit status to.
In the mid ninety five thousand
range somewhere around there
the
Well
water that wasn't yours was
released is being released right
now essentially on a lot so
there's about three thousand
acres at least more so that
water is being released from the
water reservoir St Santa Fe I I
believe of.
As of yesterday are probably
also released missing their
water in into the Rio Chama
there was some discussion about
the amber relates that to the
Santa Fe it sounds like
releasing that there that's
again to get that water that
wasn't used down to the to the
Rio Grande or could be up thank
you damn.
The the drought measures.
And water ministration and the
in the middle Rio Grande again
essentially because of the water
that was held that was released
for the purpose of the Rio
Grande the middle Rio Grande
Conservancy district this year
as the playing irrigation or
least one month normally they
started in April it marks the
start of April now.
This is gonna eight in
delivering more water in
elephant Butte reservoir and
it's it's going to.
you know we still have the
account for P. of what we call
prior paramount Water Rights
which is water stored for the
for the buffaloes and the the
six the Rio Grande pueblos and
other still possibility of
occur comments above the water
banking users within that will
grant we're also when I projects
Mr Jennifer go rescue through
these things but what I know
we're running out of time here I
want to what also stressed and
we manage the number of the
school uses of water the
Albuquerque water utility
authority of Rio Rancho we we
look around water popping the
service water divergence the
opposite we should County they
have underground storage and
recovery permits.
That are that state sure looked
at closely and then I'll see the
drought conditions.
Appropriate well we're kind of
liability forty and Santa Fe
they could tell and we do
surface water diversions
increase groundwater pumping
that's there got reserve and so
everybody is working together to
make sure we get through this
this year after that is that
your last year.
And then the service water for
farmers and lower requests if
you very low.
Twenty twenty one
estimated a lot maintenance will
be low even the upstream
operations provide more surface
water elephant Butte reservoir
and farmers and cities
downstream development you will
again need to rely on
groundwater which is one of the
problems associated with with
the the ground water supply and
of what's happened with the
operating agreement somethings
that have led up to the actual
lawsuit with taxes The New
Mexico the fact that surface
water is going to Texas and it's
working New Mexico farmers to
pump more groundwater.
Mr chairman I you you gave me
forty five as a date I have a
couple of pieces of legislation
that were us on that we're gonna
there's a sponsored Mr chair
would you like me to go through
those are what's lacking stopped
there I just want to be
respectful of your time.
Thank you for that the state
engineer I think at this point
we should probably conclude this
meeting I I know that the your
proposed legislation is
important but obviously we will
have a chance to hear it if you
have some coming to our
committee will hear at that
point in time one of the
committees other folks know the
committees will have a chance to
hear it as well so at this point
that's going to conclude just
out of respect for the committee
members that have to prepare for
their eleven o'clock floor
session as well and so gentleman
we appreciate your presentations
this morning I want to make sure
that for the benefit of
committee members and even those
attendees better joining us this
morning that if you two can
share that with with all of us
your contact information
telephone numbers and email
addresses now and then we will
also have our our Committee
secretary send that out to our
committee members as well but of
and John and and also if you
want to share with us your
contact information to be
helpful.
We will Mr chairman thank you.
Chair thank you muted.
Sorry about that those other
better technology in.
John if he if you can just
mention your your telephone and
an email address as well as you
Rolf so that we can for the
attendees benefitted are and are
budget we can know how to
contact you for the questions so
my my cell number every code
five oh five six seven zero.
Are you seven retail I think I
don't call myself that often.
Six yeah I think so six zero two
seven three two and
My
My email address is John dot.
Dantonio at states dot NM dot U.
S. I will I will send out well
Santo than the numbers
everything over your staff Mr
chair so that they can have it.
Appreciate that team member will
be on a notice about that Ralph
if you do the same for us please
Mr chair and Committee members
up first I have the legislative
my information I'll just mention
to Taylor which she can get out
to everybody but my cell phone
number is five oh five nine
eight zero four seven seven one
at if the if you were trying to
get a hold of me I would suggest
doing tax that been getting a
lot of robo calls I don't know
if you guys have so I don't know
a lot of numbers so texting
really helps me to to kind of
work through that piece and then
my email is Ralph dot Schmidt at
state that amendment that US
that's R. O. L. F..
Dot S. C. H. M. IDT at say that
in in the U. S..
Thank you gentlemen for sharing
the information with us and for
your presentation this morning
very thorough very informative
and I know that I have a lot of
questions and I want to follow
up with the both of you and I
hope that commitment committee
committee members is that a
create some questions for all of
you as well
create you gentlemen thank you
again a couple of housekeeping
for our committee is that next
Tuesday we will begin our our
hearings of bills and if you
look on the golden rod and for
those that are attendees if you
look on the website we have our
next to be meeting dates filled
up at this point with agenda
item so we will begin next week
Tuesday hearing house bill
thirty one of these use
effective dates house bill forty
eight statewide weather stations
house bill eighty nine healthy
soil tax refund contribution
options and house bill ninety
two safe drinking water testing
fund and then we will try to go
we will go through for bills.
Hey after that in each of our
committee hearings and so with
that being said I will make the
announcement at the on the floor
session the day prior this the
that we will have a committee
hearing and we'll be hearing
bills but for the information
for the committees that is it is
up on the website and again it's
a matter of transparency
anything that if the if it's not
listed on the website or in the
goldenrod we will not hear it so
that's just that's just the way
it's going to be and then also
if folks have amendments to the
bills if they do not get it to
our committee secretary within
twenty four hours of the hearing
we're gonna we're gonna roll
their bill that's just the way
it's going to be I don't want to
be any surprises for anyone of
us when we question
transparency or anything of that
nature so I know all of us are
looking forward to hearing bills
thank you all for your
attendance today thank you all
for your for your consideration
of of hearing both Ralph and
John.
Also water experts in our state
would likely have been and for
those on probation let's get
them more money.
So with that being said folks
think you all have a great day
and we'll see you again soon
about.
Thank you Sir.
