and Indian Affairs Committee to
order.
Please call roll.
Representative Black president.
Represented Borego,
Representative Lujan,
Representative Mejia, Madame
Floor leader, Representative
Zamora.
Madam Vice Chair here, Madam
Chair, Madam Chair, we have a
quorum.
Thank you. We, we have a quorum
and before we begin with House
Memorial 57 with a
Representative Hall the 2nd. I
would like to thank our
committee members, our committee
staff.
Uh, this session, we were
assigned around 216 bills. We
heard 135 bills, um.
As of this morning before this
morning.
And we rolled between 15 and 20,
so.
Working 33 meetings a week and
weekends, I just want to thank
you.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
Committee.
Um
I bring for you before the
committee today, House Memorial
57. This is, uh, I'm requesting
a study.
On the retirement system.
For those people that instructed
her in New Mexico law
enforcement Academy here in
Santa Fe.
And this transpired.
Out of realizing over decades.
Um,
People at the academy, there's a
constant turnover.
Uh, I attended the New Mexico
law enforcement Academy in 1990.
And at the time I was there, we
went through multiple
instructors, people just coming
and going.
This last year during the
interim, I went over there to
just find my old class picture.
Funny, I was a lot younger and
uh.
And
Was talking in.
You know, the director and I
served in the FBI together and
She, I said, you still have a
lot of turnover? And she goes,
we are, and here's, she says, we
just have had this problem.
And
She listed off a few things and
one of them seems to be the, the
retirement, so I kind of took it
upon myself to contact.
Perra and see if we couldn't do
anything. So it started out as a
bill. I ended up pulling the
bill and turning it into
memorials so we could do a study
with me today, I have my expert
Anna Williams from PERA.
And we stand for questions,
Madam Chair.
and Miss Williams.
Let's go to the audience. Do we
have anyone in the audience who
wish to speak in support.
Raise your hands in opposition.
OK, let's go online.
Anyone hoping to make public
comment in support of House
Memorial 57, please raise your
hand.
OK, see none. Anyone hoping to
speak in opposition to House
Memorial 57. Please raise your
hand.
OK, I see it, Madam Chair.
Committee members
Representative Madam Chair, I
move a pass.
for a due passed by
Representative Block a second by
vice chair. Do we have any
opposition?
Seeing that you have a. Thank
you. Thank you very much. I
appreciate your time. Happy
Saint Patrick's Day. Yes,
absolutely, for sure, yes. OK.
Senators Padilla and Senator
Trujil Trujillo.
Senate Bill 42 Committee
substitute.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Ready for us, you may begin.
Thank you. uh, good morning,
Madam Chair, uh, Madam Vice
Chair, ranking member, and
members of the, uh, the
committee, the, I'm sorry, the
um uh government elections and
Indian Affairs Committee. Thank
you very much for having us
today. I'm Senator Michael
Padilla, and I'm here with my
co-sponsors, Senator Linda
Trujillo, Senator Heather
Bergmans. We also have cabinet
Secretary, uh Teresa Quezados
and Cabinet secretary Gina De
Blasi, and we have a lot of
other interested parties. This
legislation.
has gone through multiple
iterations to get to this point
and to reach you, Madam Chair,
and your committee, I will tell
you that uh we started out with
about 7, well I'm sorry, closer
to 9 topics that we're gonna
land in this legislation. We did
settle on 4 solid points that we
believe were the highest
priority.
First, uh, enhancing foster care
prevention services under the
Federal Families First Act.
Services Act, excuse me. Second,
transferring programs and I'm
assuming that's why we wound up
in your committee. So I think
this is a great, great uh
assignment for us transferring
programs from CYAD to the
Department of Health, and that's
the CAA program, implementing a
multi level response system
requiring strategic plans for,
uh, of care for um for foster
services, foster care services,
and enhancing confidentiality
and data, um, sharing services
or information. Uh, that's why
we, you have all three sponsors
here right now. I do want to let
you know that we did
have um we do have house
minority leader, um, Gail
Armstrong is a co-sponsor of
this legislation as well as uh
Senator Crystal Brantley. I'm a
little tired, so I apologize if
I don't, I've not had anything
to drink this morning, Madam
Chair, I promise you, even
though it's Saint Patrick's Day.
Um, why would we want to do
this? Why are we here before you
today? First, uh, we want to
improve our foster care services
again through the Family First
Services Act. Family First
Prevention Services Act. Uh, we
would like efficient resource
allocation.
And we believe that moving the,
some of the programming to the
Department of Health will do
that for us because they do have
the capacity to do that as, as
well as the trained individuals
to do this. Also gives that sort
of separation of how this work
is done. Uh, we also want to do
this because of, we're looking
for expanded child safety
measures through plans of safe
care. And then as I mentioned
before, better, uh, data, uh,
transparency.
So, um, that's essentially what
the legislation does. We know
that there are multiple pieces
of legislation going around the
roundhouse and we believe that
uh they're all, they all add
value. So I'm gonna ask my
co-sponsors to say a little bit
here, and then we'll uh jump
into questions. Thank you, Madam
Chair and thank you members of
the committee for hearing us
this morning. I think Senator
Padilla has really kind of put
it into uh a nice neat little
package we're calling it the
omnibus bill, um, for CYFD um
improvement. Before, uh, I
I say anything else though. I, I
just wanna say that, you know,
the secretaries for CYFD and the
Department of Health have been
very communicative with us and
have cooperated, we've met with
them, we haven't always agreed
on everything, but I just want
to thank them for the work that
they've done. This is a tough
job, and, um, you know, having
a, a, a low, uh, or a high
vacancy rate makes this job even
harder and so I'm really
appreciative that they're here.
the table today and um I think
I'll just leave it at that.
Thank you.
Senator Bergens.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, um, I don't
think I have much more to add
until we get into questions, but
I just want to say that we have
been work workshopping this bill
line by line. We know the
policies really well and we do
think this is a very
comprehensive.
Ask the secretaries to give us a
little bit of a rundown on their
part, uh, in the, in this
effort.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Gina De Blasi,
Cabinet secretary for the
Department of Health.
Um, this bill does move as
Senator Padilla mentioned the uh
CAA program from CYFD to
Department of Health. The reason
for that is really we're going
to take a public health
approach.
Uh, to addressing this issue for
those uh newborns that have been
exposed to substance.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. I'm
Teresa Casados, Cabinet
secretary at Children, Youth and
Families Department. And again,
I really want to thank the
sponsors. We've taken an
approach where we really have a
safety net in place for
families, um, and to ensure the
safety of babies and I think
partnering with Department of
Health to be able to do that is
going to be critical in the
success of how we move forward.
So thank you.
Chair, uh, just to wrap up our
opening remarks, we just want to
reassure the committee that that
these items are budgeted for,
uh, Senator Trujillo and I both
serve on Senate Finance. We've
been watching this like a hawk,
as you can imagine. Each time
there was a new um uh substitute
which we've had to up to this
point.
And we anticipate uh not having
another one, but uh as we as we
did that we did have FIRs uh
recompleted and these dollars to
manage this project are in the
budget. That's, that's one item.
And then the last thing I'll say
is that, um, you know, we are
very grateful for all the, the
folks that have helped, as I
mentioned, we do have a
bipartisan effort here and
bicameral with both uh chambers.
Thank you.
Thank you. And do you have an
amendment before we hear from
public comment.
I'd like to
We've not seen that, Madam
Chair. OK. All right. Well,
let's go to public comment. Do
we have any um
Comments and support of the
bill.
JD
Thank you. Good morning, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
My name is JD Bullington and I'm
speaking to you today on behalf
of the Greater Albuquerque
Chamber of Commerce, that
supports Senate Bill 42. Uh, we
all know we have a problem in
every state with overdose now
among pregnant women. And the
LFC tells us that the rates of
newborns with substance
withdrawal symptoms in New
Mexico has climbed to more than
twice the national average, and
yet only 1 in 7 local families
with substance exposed newborns.
referrals for addiction
treatment, and we have to close
the gap on service delivery, and
this bill attempts to do that.
It's a complicated problem that,
of course, we want to try to
solve through treatment rather
than penalization. However, this
is very real child abuse, and it
has to be dealt with. So the
greater Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce strongly supports
Senate Bill 42, and we urge you
to support the legislation.
Thank you.
Do we have any further comments
and support?
In the audience.
Let's go online.
hoping to speak in support of
Senate Bill 42, please raise
your hand.
OK. Seeing none. Anyone hoping
to speak in opposition to the
Senate Bill 42. Please raise
your hand.
Right. Seeing none, chair.
back to the audience. Any
comments in opposition?
Seeing none, committee members.
Representative Block.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, senators and uh
experts. So I appreciate you
guys for coming together with
our chamber and trying to work
to, to fix CYFD which is like a
miracle to do, so
congratulations on what you're
doing. I do, uh, have some
concerns when it comes to the
last portion of the bill when it
comes to the
The uh section 17 when
It's the homeowner's insurance.
I've gotten some emails from
foster families who are scared
that their premiums will go up.
And uh I see in the FIR.
It does note that on page 14 of
the FIR that it could result in
premium increases or the loss of
homeowners insurance coverage
for foster families. So I do
have an amendment that I would
just like to float with you
guys. I don't know if you've
been able to, to read it. I'm
sorry if they haven't given it
to you previously, but OK,
great. So, Madam Chairsentative,
I guess I'll just move my
amendment for discussion, and I
can read you the two.
32 number if you'd like.
Go ahead, representative.
It's just 232-007.1.
Motion for discussion on the
amendment by Representative
block.
We have a second. Let's go ahead
and discuss the amendment.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, and
thank you, Representative for
the amendment. I, I will say
that, uh, first I want to
explain why it's not a friendly
amendment. Um, the purpose of
having this insurance piece in
it is because, so when, when I
have uh, when, when, when I'm at
my house and uh I, my children
are there and they live with me.
They don't anymore cause I'm too
old.
Um, and they live with me and
they get hurt. They jump on the
trampoline and they fall off and
break an arm. My health or my
health insurance is not gonna
cover that.
However, if I have the neighbors
down the street come over and
they jump on my trampoline and
they break an arm and my
homeowner's insurance is likely
gonna cover that. Um, and so
this is really to ensure that
foster children, they're foster
children are treated like family
and we appreciate that coming
from foster families. We really
do. But we wanna make sure that
these children also have
coverage for anything that may
happen to.
them, um, whether it's through
negligence or whether it's
through, you know, some
purposeful act that happens. And
so that's the point of this, um,
uh, having this amendment on.
And Madam Chair, I think the
other thing in my co-sponsor
here, uh, said it very, very
eloquently. But the other thing
is this is a new experience for
um the child to be in a place
that maybe they've never been
before, much like when you
visit.
Someone's home, you're, you're
in a new place, you don't know
all of the intricacies and the,
you know, the why, why the
furniture was placed there or
the whatever, and so, you know,
there's there's the likelihood
that we want to ensure that
these kiddos are covered in
every, every instance of the
word, and this is one of the
protections that would allow for
that. Thank you. I know.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you Madam, I guess we'd
have to say that that is an
unfriendly amendment. Yeah,
well, since, since it's
unfriendly, I'm just going to
retract the amendment.
But I do want to definitely put
that in your ear, maybe some
more conversations with some
foster families, of course,
because I don't wanna.
I mean, it's like a Frank and
bill maybe, like we've put so
many different pieces into the
bill, and I, I would hate to
like put a little wrench into
it. So, so I'll take that
amendment away. I appreciate
that representative. Thank you.
Of course, senators, of course.
And so I did have some more
questions on the actual
substitute for the bill when it
comes to the caraportion. So,
Madam Chair, senators, could you
tell me a little bit about if
the Carra program, is it, is it
an opt-in program that we're
That we're uh continuing here in
the state when it will be under
the healthcare authority.
Thank you, Mr. Madam Chair.
Sorry about that, uh,
Representative Block, the care
program is a program that's
been, that's been functioning
for many years. In fact, we did
some amendments to the CARE
program. When I was in the house
and um at the time, we made the
Carra program voluntary, because
the real, the, the reality is,
is that you want families who
are, are struggling with uh drug
or alcohol dependence, want them
to voluntarily
um,
go in for treatment to make sure
that the child's in a safe
environment. Unfortunately, what
we've learned is that that's not
always the case and what the
agency has found, and I'll let
the secretary speak on that, is
that um that there are times
when we just in order to keep
the child safe without having to
go to the extreme of saying
there's abuse and neglect and
now we're going to take the
child, because we really want to
separate out that kind of
substance abuse from abuse and
neglect.
very different, but they kind of
intermingle at times. And so,
um, it, it, it is, we need to
make it not voluntary. We need
to make it so that it has to be.
So we're just changing that
piece of it and then you may
have remembered that during the
governor's speech, um, state of
the state that she indicated
that she'd already for all
intents and purposes, moved Kara
from um the CYFD to the
Department of Health and, and
again, I just have to give the
secretary
a lot of credit to see that this
is really much more of a health
issue than it is a a child
safety issue, and when the child
safety issue needs to come into
place, then there's clear
guidelines that the Department
of Health Mm thank you chair and
thank you for the question.
Thank you, Senator Trujillo.
Yeah, so the other thing that we
need to consider here is it's
simply not working for us right
now. Some of the more, uh, some
of the worst crimes against
children, um, in New Mexic.
have happened more recently than
than than the first part of our,
our statehood here. And if we,
if we keep doing it the way that
we're doing it now, we should,
we shouldn't be surprised that
we would continue to hear of
issues like that. I think that
uh making it mandatory is going
to be
You know, we all know the
definition of of insanity,
trying to do the same thing over
and over again expecting a
different result. Well, we've
got to try something else, Madam
Chair, and I think this is, this
is a mandatory step, and this is
something that's going to say
we're serious about this and you
can't be doing this kind of, you
got to cut that out.
Well, we'll ask the secretaries
if they want to add anything.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative
Block, uh, thank you, sponsors,
um, exactly that one of the
things I do want to touch on is
that it's mandatory
participation in the safe plan
of care.
There'll be a lot of intensive
case management from the Kira
navigators at the Department of
Health.
And if at any time, uh, either
through uh our home visits that
will happen, but if at any time
we feel that the child, the
newborn, is, um, in danger.
That's when we would refer it
over to uh the.
You, Madam Chair and thank you,
senators. So, so when we're
talking about the CAA program,
so we're making it not
voluntary, which I, I think is a
good thing. I've been trying to
get that to be changed for a
long time to be not voluntary.
So, Madam Chair Representative,
when it comes to that, who would
be writing these safe plans of
care or
The families in this case,
and I'm thank you and
Representative. There, there are
a couple of hands in getting
that done, but again, that was
another great reason for moving
this over to the Department of
Health. They do have a role
within the department called a
navigator. A navigator would
work with the uh care
coordinator at the MCS.
Let me see if MCO MC MCO, yeah,
at the MCO to, to, to get that
documented. There are a list of
things that the plan would have
to have, but then there's also
other things. So I'll ask the
Secretary Dulasi if you.
that because this would fall on
her lap.
Yes, Madam Chair, Representative
Block, um, yes, says.
Senator Padilla stated, um,
exactly that. The other thing is
that there'll be a lot of
training that goes on with what
we're uh identified in
definition. So we'll be working
with them and their designees
within those birthing
facilities.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
senators. So when it comes to
the the actual program, will we,
if, if a baby is born drug
addicted.
Would it be mandatory that they
be removed from the care of that
mother.
In pending them getting clean
just for the safety of that
child, would that be?
Anything that we're changing in
this bill
and I'm sure, Madam Chair, a
representative, I think that's a
really important distinction to
make. And when I look at the car
program, what I see is like a
second chance, right? And again,
we're trying to separate out
drug and alcohol abuse, which
really is a health issue from
abuse and neglect.
Unfortunately, as I said,
sometimes that, that, that
health issue.
Leads to abuse and neglect for a
variety of reasons. So, no, the
goal here is to help this.
Parent
Um, in some cases it may not be
the mother. It may be a
guardian.
To help this family get back on
track.
And so removing the child, um,
is really, this is not the time
to remove it, but we want to try
to do everything we can to give
them that second chance. This
bill does not remove children
from their parents.
Great. OK, thank you, Madam
Chair and senators. So then this
would just mandate that they be
um a part of the Kira plan, and
then they'd have that, that, uh.
plan of care for them. OK, that,
that does help me. So, Madam
Chair, Representative or
senators, I did, I also did like
the confidentiality portion of
this bill.
I thought that was something
really
Important that we that we added
to it.
And so I, I like some of the
changes, you know, I, I hate
these omnibus bills. I really
do, because you like some
portions and you don't like some
portions and you have to vote
yes or no, and it's like, you
can't vote yes on some portions
and yes on other portions. So, I
will continue to listen to the
debate, but I really appreciate
the thoughtful process and all
these committee substitutes are
proof positive that you all have
been working very hard. So,
thank you, and I don't know if
you have any other comments on
that. Madam Chair,
I would just say that's kind of
the point of an omnibus bill is
that
some of us get something, others
get something else and we've
blended it all together, so that
really is kind of the point of
it. And I do also chair and
thank you for your questions.
They were excellent. I want to
give kudos to Senator Bergmans,
who is our, she, she might be
known as the confidentiality
queen of the state, the entire
state legislature. So we were
like, there's no way you're not
coming to the meeting with us
this morning. We were saying,
yeah, so thank you very much,
Senator Bergmans, for your work
on that. Thank you, senators and
thank you, Madam Chair.
You representative Lujan.
Thank you, Madam Chair. um,
thank you to all of the sponsors
and all the work, um, as I'm
just going through this, just
one,
One thing I'm not seeing, um,
And it's, it's could be a simple
fix, maybe or maybe not, maybe
uh determine what you think,
where, uh, looking at birthing
facilities, I don't see a
definition.
Madam Chair.
Yes,
definition of birthing facility
and um we purposefully, so
you'll see in the general
definitions for the children's
code, there's a definition for
Kara because we weren't sure
where Kara might come up
somewhere else. But if you look
at the more specific definitions
on page 12, uh-huh, in section
3, then we've got the definition
and this is the actual care.
is under the voluntary Placement
and Family Services Act is one
of the programs. So we've got
definitions here. Thank you,
Madam Chair. I'm, so you have
definitions in section 2 and
Section 3
because the first section 2 is
the overhaul Children's code.
I understand, Madam Chair, I
understand that's what's
confusing why I prefer not to
have omnibus bills just as a
preference because as we're
looking at all this and, and,
and trying to get
This is great work. I'm not
gonna.
I'm not gonna not say that, but
that's, that's the crux of us
getting to all this information
and I mean, there's
I was just underlining all the
different acts that are
Um, underwritten here, Madam
Chair and um, so, OK, thank you
for correcting me on that. Madam
Chair and just very quickly. So
I just want to remind everybody
that this started out as 8
separate pieces of legislation.
We tried to, so we, we did our
best to bring in the definitions
that absolutely had to be here.
And I just want to make sure
that, you know, when we do
things like this, we're not log
rolling and having those issues
as well and uh seeing that this
is, this came from Senate
Judiciary. I'm sure that was
addressed.
um,
but I
do want to also point out that
we have taken the time, like
taking a lot of time to go
through line by line on the
House bills that address the
same thing, to try to make sure
that we haven't left anything
out, Madam Chair, um.
Senator, I understand that, but
I'm just saying I prefer not to
have an omnibus bill, and I'm
sure you got that in.
And it judiciary at length, but
I just, you know, I just want to
put that on record. It's really
difficult when we do these
things. And I really want to
stress that that I would rather
have, you know, and I understand
we're trying to put all these
bills together because we had a
lot of questions about them, but
I want to commend you on doing
that as well, but I just like
You know, I just want to make a
statement for the record that,
you know, it's, it's difficult
to move through, um, omnibus
bills as it is, and I'll
continue to be critical of it
just as I think of the chair of
judiciary Senate Judiciary,
um, but great work, um, the
physical impact, like you said,
is all covered, and this puts
it, I like that part that it
puts the finances all together,
I'll say that. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Representative, uh, vice chair
Little and then Representative
Brego.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'd like
to move a do pass, please. Yeah.
Before we uh called a vote,
let's hear from Representative
Barrego and then representative
Zamora and then Madam Floor
leader.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator and, and senator
and Senator.
And all of your witnesses, um,
department heads.
Um, so,
First of all, I just want to
commend you guys for doing this.
Um
I mean, CYFD has been
So much in the news and um you
know, it's just a a difficult.
It's been a really difficult um
Situation because it seems like
the legislature keeps putting
more money towards CYFD, but
Press just um
Somehow
Finds ways, I guess, um, to
Let the public know that we're
still not moving the needle.
And that and that's concerning.
It's concerning to all of all
New Mexicans, I think, um.
One of the questions that I have
is, uh, and I, and I just wanna
also commend.
Senator Padilla, because I know
that he's had some history, um,
in his own family with um.
You know
Adoptions and things like that,
so I, I just want to commend you
for that.
Um
I think one of the questions
that I do have is on page 56.
Um, where it talks about the
Indian Family Protection Act.
And um basically in, in the
Discussion in the analysis, it
talks about uh the, you know,
Native children are excluded
from this.
And I know that there's
situations where, um,
Um, native children are
involved.
Especially when it comes to
adoptions and.
So I just wonder how that works.
I mean, how do you exclude
Um
You know, that seems very
complicated to me, so I just
want to know how that.
How that
Is affected, Madam Chair,
Representative, thank you.
That's, that exclusion, um, that
nothing in the actual apply to
ICA or IFA is throughout the
bill, and that's because um IA
is the platinum standard.
That everyone has adopted and
goes by for native children and
so we want to make sure that
nothing in this new, in these
new sections of law, will affect
if uh since it's already
considered the platinum standard
for dealing with native
families.
And Madam Chair and, and
Representative, thank you for
the question. Um, as the
legislation swam through the
different places in in the uh in
the Senate are, um,
Our Native American colleagues
there in the Senate had a lot to
do with a lot of the additions
that were made for that
particular topic. So I just
wanna make sure that you know
that there was a lot of vetting
of that particular piece.
And because I am not familiar
with that piece.
Um, can you give me like an
example like if, OK, let's just
say in Albuquerque, for example,
um, you have a couple that has
adopted a native or or fostering
a native child, um, how would
the police and CYFD deal with
that. I just don't understand
that completely. So, uh, we're
actually, Madam Chair and we're
actually not addressing law
enforcement directly with the
legislation, but I'm gonna add
as an example you could give
her.
That's
Yeah
And I'm sure, uh, senators, I
bring that up because it just
seems a little complicated, you
know, and I like how would they
determine that and how, I mean,
how is that? Well, by and large,
Madam Chair, so we just wanted
to make sure that we're being
compliant with if IFA and, and
the other statute as well cause
those are federal requirements,
want to make sure that we're
addressing those but sector.
Representativerego, so under IFA
we have very strict requirements
of how we engage with the hobos
and tribes wild and so they have
very.
Um, so if in fact they came to
us from Department of Health who
have been born substance
exposed, and they had concerns
about abuse or neglect, we would
follow the guidelines under IFA
to ensure that we're working
with the tribes and public
placement and treatment for that
family member.
OK, so they would be notified
and immediately that there was
an instance where that needed to
happen, I guess.
Yeah
Yeah, and Madam Chair
Representative, that's why we,
we have the exception and or the
exclusion for in this
legislation is to make sure that
if
OK.
All right, well, that helps, um,
In my mind, sort of clarify that
a little bit, but I just, I, I
didn't know how that worked, um,
because you don't always know if
you're dealing with.
You know, a native born child.
So I, you know, I think that
those are important, um.
Circumstances that would require
that, that kind of care, so
thank you for that. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Representative Zamora.
You, Madam Chair and thank you,
senators for bringing this bill
forward and, and all your.
You brought your whole army with
you. It's a, it goes to show how
much support you have for the
bill. So, so my question is, and
I believe I read it in the bill,
I didn't reread it this morning,
but I read it thoroughly
yesterday, and my question is,
So, so we're talking about all
the stuff if, if everything goes
right.
But if something goes wrong,
And there's an issue brought up.
That the child is in some kind
of danger or being mistreated in
in some way or another or
abused.
This still
Goes back to CYFD and then, and
then procedure takes, takes on
from there. Am I correct,
Madam Chair, that's absolutely
correct. In fact, Department of
Health has 24 hours to report to
CYFD and CYFD will jump on it
immediately. So there's a 24
hour window that if the parents
are not engaging, they're
refusing to engage or they're or
they're not engaging in the, the
care plan that they're supposed
to be doing. So if they don't
engage with the
Navigator coordinator, they
don't, um, they refuse to and
then they don't follow through
with the care plan, then that
information, that child's
information is immediately
reported to CYFD.
Also in the plan of care
requirements for safe sleep, uh,
the, the, the home environment
and then the navigators and the
care coordinators who actually
will wind up doing home visits.
There's a number of steps that
are going to trickle down just
to make sure that things are
caught quicker than they are
today. Thank you for that and
Maur and that's always
concerning that, and, and it
seems like
Every
Bill either, I don't really
wanna say CYFD bill, but every
child bill that we see that.
That I see
Ever since I've been here is, is
Do we have strong enough teeth
in it.
And this one seems to take care
of an issue, but if it, if it
If it doesn't
Happened, well, then we go back
to CYFD and stronger enforcement
will be taken care of, or, or
whatever, or other enforcements
that need to be taken care of
will be there for the child.
Madam Chair, Representative, I
want to make really clear that
that 24 hour response time was
the recommendation and the
request of the secretary. So,
um, they're on board with making
sure that this is followed
through on.
chair that concludes my
questions. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Madam Floor leader.
Kansky.
Thank, thank you, Madam Chair.
Good morning, senators. Um,
I am really just focused on the
car portion of this truly um
appreciate the rest of this
legislation very much. Um,
I see quite a few differences in
the Kara piece then then
legislation that we have
previously reviewed, so I just
wanted to understand that. Um,
So on page 16 line 8, we are
removing evidence-based
Screening uh from the screening
tools. Um,
And rather just basing it on
standards of professional
practice. Can you talk about why
that changes there, or is it
somewhere else in the bill.
Thank you, Representative. Thank
you, uh, or Madam Chair, um, um,
Madam Flo leader, so that was a
conversation that we had a lot
of discussion about and the
challenge with evidence-based is
that it narrows what can happen,
makes sure that whoever's
involved in it, that the
professional standards of their
practice, whether you're a
physician, whether you're a
social worker, a psychologist,
and I, I, I actually had dreams
about.
last night, oddly enough.
But, um, uh, if you look at
their professional standards,
each one of them have
evidence-based requirements that
they have to adhere to. Um, we
don't always have specifically
evidence-based. Sometimes we
have best practices. And so in
those instances that are best
practiced is actually better
than an evidence base and we
want to just pin it back to the
professional standards. And
that's why that got changed. I
see.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair,
Senator Trujillo, I, I would
just suggest you all continue to
look at that, um.
I just know from uh
My background in public health.
Standards of professional
practice often far lag behind
evidence base in their entire
collaboratives dedicated to.
Uh, publishing meta-analysis,
tenure systematic reviews
because a lot of times, medical
professionals don't have time to
read.
Medical literature.
Or social work literature or
etc. and um
It's, it's incumbent on agencies
like the department or um
You know, agencies like LFC to
put out those.
You know,
practices and really ensure that
that's getting out, um, and so
sometimes it takes, yeah, it's
one of the reasons why the US
Public Health Service Task Force
exists is because
Physicians, for example, that's
the target audience of that are
just going through their day to
day practice, you know, and they
don't necessarily know, oh my
gosh, we should now be, you
know, screening everyone at the
age of 40 for X, Y, Z, um, so I,
I would just
As you move forward, um, just
really think about that. And
then can you, um, Madam Chair,
and, and
Senators, just describe, I'm a
little confused between the
dual, uh, dual roles of.
Or triple roll, I guess HCA DOH
and CYFD.
Um, because they see DOH has
rulemaking and
Uh, navigators.
HCA has care coordinators.
That I assume are through the
MCOs and then CYFD has
rulemaking as well as DOH, I
believe so, if you wouldn't mind
just summarizing that
um we brought the secretaries is
they're the experts, they're
gonna line up the trains. So
we'll start with the Secretary
Casados.
Um, yes, thank you. Good
morning, Chair, um.
House leader.
We worked diligently on really
how this would work.
As a continuum, and so I think
part of the problem before is
that a lot of that
responsibility, all of those
levels fell on CYFD. And so
we've worked with each of the
different responsibilities so
that we can line that out. As
you know, HCA oversees the MCOs
and the care coordinators are
critical element in ensuring
that from the very beginning
that we have a safe plan of
care.
DOH and with their care
navigators will be very involved
with them right up front. And I
think that was part of the link
that was missing is that we had
the care coordinators doing this
work previously. And then when
something didn't work, they were
notifying CYFD but it wasn't
necessarily within a certain
period of time, sometimes it
was, you know, 1 month, 2 months
later, and so having all of
these individuals at the table
with very specific rules.
That will work on together to
codify, um, I think we'll show a
program, which is what we've all
been talked about. We don't have
a sufficient program to do this.
And so having all of these
different entities at the table,
lining up what they're
responsible for doing and
ensuring that we have that in
rules so that that sustains even
after this administration is
really what we were working
towards, and I'll let, um,
Secretary de Blasi add to any of
that with her role.
Sure, thank you, uh, Madam
Chair, um, of our
leadershippansy, um, the one
thing, there, there's a couple
of things I wanna, I wanna touch
on here. One is specifically
related to what Secretary
Casados just stated, um, the
rulemaking will not happen in
isolation at any one of the
agencies, it will be a
collaborative effort between the
healthcare authorities, CYFD,
Department of Health. We will
also be pulling in um ECECD and
aging because we've got
not grandparents raising
grandchildren as well, so we
want this to be extremely
comprehensive. So we'll be
working very collaboratively on,
on that piece of this. Then the
other thing is it relates to the
Kara navigators and the care
coordinators, uh, the care
coordinators as is Secretary
Casado stated is that you know
they're they're a product of the
managed care organization that's
written into the turquoise care
contracts, um, that they're
mandated to have them, the Kira
navigators at the Department of
Health will be the intensive
case management.
oversight uh with to support the
care coordinators and those
families and the newborns, um,
where we've had them, um,
exposed to uh.
Thank you, uh, thank you, Madam
Chair, that's super helpful, so
the, so the care coordinator is
there at the facility, they are
overseeing the.
Let me just walk this through,
Madam Chair and and senators,
um.
Madam Secretary.
So the care coordinator is at
the hospital.
They are ensuring that the
discharge plan occurs, the care
plan.
Occurs
And then
The
Kara navigator.
Makes arrangements to do.
A home visit, a family
assessment.
Um, updates this plan of safe
care.
And so the care coordinator then
goes to a role of making sure
that
They are getting coverage for
the services. I'm just a little,
you know, we have a preliminary
assessment that, that the
newborn will have a safe living
environment.
Based on a DOH tool, but I'm not
sure who's doing that and then
how are these how are these two
individuals basically who are
assigned to the family like in
working together.
Madam Chair, for Sapansy, yes,
um, as you just stated is
exactly right. We, the uh Kira
navigator will be making the uh
home visit, uh, post discharge
to the home to ensure that the
plan of care is being followed
up. We're talking about having
case reviews with the care
coordinators as well, so that
there is, like, as I stated um
previously intensive case
management. So we'll be working
collaboratively together on each
of these cases.
And, and Madam Chair and, and
Madam Leader, I will tell you
that, uh, the three of us to the
left over here, we absolutely
have the same questions that you
do, you do right now, and, and
it, when it was completely laid
out for us, it made a lot of, it
made a lot more sense, but, and,
and I think it gets confusing
when you hear the term navigator
and care coordinator. Well, who
does that? Where, who do they
report to, who pays them and
what makes, what, where are
their motivations coming from.
So thank you for asking that
question, but I do believe that
the departments have
And Madam Chair Representative,
um, I'm trying to find it really
quickly, but we do have one
section in the rulemaking
responsibility for Department of
Health that requires the care
and navigators and the care
coordinators to work together.
Um
Thank you. That's, that's really
helpful, I think, um.
Sorry, Madam Chair and Madam,
yeah, I think it might be
important to point out.
If you look at uh page.
21, yeah, so if you look at
really the bottom of page 20
flowing through 21, it sort of
lines up how everyone and whose
roles are where so and I see
where it might get a little
confusing, but it's played out.
Thank you.
Um, Madam Chair and
Representative, I would just,
you know, I think one of the
issues with Kara.
Has frankly been that no one
really has known what they were
responsible to do.
Um, and so the, you know, it,
it, it, it concerns me a little
bit.
You know, I applied a lot of
this legislation that a lot of
the.
Obviously, very hard work that
has gone into this bill. Um, it
really leaves me with a
lingering concern that there
isn't one clear agency or entity
that is responsible for the
individual follow up with that
family and I
I, on one hand, feel like it
could be great to have two
people involved in two different
agencies involved. On the other
hand, I also just have a concern
that
Something's gonna get lost in
that translation, um.
Uh, and
I think in the rulemaking is
going to have to make very clear
what each.
Entity
I responsible for what each
staff person is responsible for
and, you know, we just in that
rulemaking section, um.
You know, it's it, I just looked
at line 12, page 21, line 12,
where it says car navigators and
care coordinators.
That's the kind of thing that
Um, it, it's sort of that two
sides of the coin where.
It is great to have two
individuals involved with a
family that's going through um
something like uh substance
abuse and a new child. On the
other hand, like, does that mean
that maybe neither one ends up
doing it because the other one
thinks one thinks the other one
is doing. So I, I just
Raise those. I, I, I plan to
support this legislation in this
committee, but um just uh I
would love to continue that
conversation. Thank, thank you,
Madam Chair, and thank you.
If I could just say like the way
that I kind of got it into my
mind is a coordinator, like make
sure that everything happens and
the navigator is kind of like
overseeing to see that that's
happening, that's the only way
that I could like in my brain,
like make a difference of it.
One more thing, madam Chair.
Madam Chair and Madam Fleur
leader ultimately the response.
Representative Luhan.
Yeah, Madam Chair, um, such a
big bill. I'm just gonna go to
the FIR and I actually.
That's an information from folks
that have some concern about.
Um, the confidentiality, um.
The exception, so I'm trying to
find it in the bill, so could
you direct me to where that is
in the bill, we brought our
expert here as we said, but let
me just make sure that we're
looking at the FIR dated March
4th, is that correct? Is that
the one you're looking at? March
14th March 14th, OK.
And what page of the FIR are you
looking at? I am looking at page
16.
So over, uh, madam chair, of
what raises concerns about the
new exception and
confidentiality in the case of
the death or near death of a
child, stating that it
Serve no purpose other than to
allow the public to know where
the parent guardian.
custodian of an injured or dead
child lives or how they can be
contacted thereby broadening the
public's ability to vilify and
harass.
The parent or perhaps worse,
this would be the case even when
a death or near death of a child
is not.
The result of abuse, neglect, or
other wrongful conduct. These
concerns could be addressed by
further restricting the
definition of identifier
information.
So focusing on food, yeah, so if
you can address that, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative. We do also have
an expert on the confidentiality
clause on Zoom,
that is
in the bill, that this, it
starts on page 42. Thank you.
Easily from page 42 to 56 is the
confidentiality section.
And that, that part of the bill
and the confidentiality bill in
general is one that has been
introduced many times in the
legislature. It's been
introduced in both chambers for
at least the last 3 sessions, if
not.
5 sessions and each iteration
has evolved through those
sessions in this version, excuse
me, is the um
The most current version from
last session.
Um, and, but why it's important
to keep, to have this
confidentiality clause in here
also is
Currently, as our
confidentiality clause is
written, it's most likely
unconstitutional.
Based on a 10th Circuit court
case from Colorado and then a
subsequent court case filed here
as well. And so currently, the
confidentiality part is not even
really being enforced because of
that court case in New Mexico.
And
The way it's the way the bill is
drafted is to follow CAPTA,
which is the federal standard
for these types of situations,
and nothing, nothing in there is
intending to harm families. It's
really just trying to be
constitutional and follow the
federal standards and
guidelines, and I'm not sure if
my expert, Sarah Kreka wants to
add anything.
He's on Zoom.
Uh, Sarah Kreka, C R E C C A is
that the name?
Was that her name?
OK, great.
Sarah, can you hear us?
So?
If she's not there yet, did, did
that answer your question,
Representative.
Um, Madam Chair, um, thank you,
thank you for that explanation
and, and that's.
We need to hear that so we can,
you know, this, this will
probably come up again and I
just want some uh some
information so that we're having
a uh an open conversation about
some of the issues that are in
the the FIR and
Um
I might have some other
questions, but um,
It's a hard one, Adam Chair, and
to, to read that in the FIR is,
is it just needs to be addressed
for me and I addressing this,
and these are the reasons why,
but if we can get the expert
witness later to, to help us see
that a little bit better. That
might be a good idea, Madam Cha.
Thank you.
She said she's switching laptops
because her audio's not working.
So I don't know if there's other
questions.
Representative Thank you, Madam
Chair, and uh sorry to ask
questions again, but they, they
raise more questions. So Madam
Chair representatives, or I'm
sorry, senators, pardon me, uh,
on page 12.
I'm wondering why we put Kara
under the voluntary placement
and Family Services Act. I was
under the apprehension that
It was not voluntary. So I like
reporting is voluntary. I see
that on page.
Page 18, but is the actual plan
voluntary when it comes to
actually monitoring, ensuring
that these people are protecting
the kid and does this also apply
to people who are addicted to.
Cocaine, heroin, and fentanyl.
I know it's a loaded question,
so I'm sure you can handle it.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you representative. So I
wondered why it was under that
too, but the reality is that in
order to like remove it
completely from that section of
the Children's code cause that's
where it resides right now.
And so in order to fully remove
it, it would take a whole lot
more energy, um, and because
it's kind of all over the place.
So we're leaving it where it's
at in statute, and it just so
happens to be under that. But
the care plan itself will no
longer be voluntary.
Um, and, and it will apply to
any kind of subs um misuse and
that representative, the bill
probably would have been doubled
in size, maybe more, but that
doesn't mean that we shouldn't
do it. And, and, but the thing
is, if it, this is not the first
time we're gonna crack open this
section of law and make these,
so let let's take the no pun
intended, but the baby steps to
get it right, rather than
throwing everything, you know,
into the air, so.
Thank you, Madam Turian
senators. Could you point me to
where it says it's mandatory in
the bill. I'm sorry, I'm just
trying to track along with you
guys here.
Madam Chair, Representative, if
you look at page 19 lines 1
through 6, and specifically on
line 3 it says, uh, the
creation, the creation of a
written plan of safe care that
shall be created prior to the
substance exposed newborns
discharged from the birthing
facility, and then it goes on to
say who it would be sent to and
what information has to be
included. And again, this is.
making, but that is what the
rules must include.
Shell versus May, so there's,
there it is right there.
All right, thank you so much,
Madam Chair and senators. So,
OK, so requirement for birthing
facility to participate.
And they shall create.
That safe plan of care, but I, I
still don't see that where it
must or shall be implemented in
the home.
Where, where do we require that,
Madam Chair and senators.
So, uh, so the, the reason that,
again,
This part is the role part. So,
so most of what you see in this
cara section is telling the
Department of Health what kind
of rules they have and this is
the part that we're saying to
them, it has to be um provided
and then we'll go on in this, in
the rulemaking section. If you
look at section
Another section, um.
Uh, section 5 that starts on
page 24, uh, the Department of
Health shall notify the
department within 24 hours, and
the department shall conduct an
evaluation to assess whether the
substance abuseed newborns
immediate needs and the family's
ability. So, um, if you go to
page.
26, you'll see what that means
that they, that, that this has
to happen.
Number one
They refuse to engage in a
family assessment.
2, they disengage with the Kara
navigator. Number 3, they failed
to adhere to the plan. So those
are the three reasons that um
the child uh would be reported
to CYFD at which time CYFD would
then begin an abuse and neglect
investigation.
Thank you, Madam, I'm sorry,
senators, pardon me. I'm so used
to see representatives, but all
your bills are coming to our
chambers, so I got to get used
to that.
Well, you used to be both, so
there we go.
I know I, I kept on calling you
secretary and you were
superintendent. So Madam Chair
and senators, so then would
there be any instances where a
child who is born.
And they are in the Kira.
Network, let's just say, is
there any instances where COYFD
would remove that child.
Because it is in grave danger.
Like, they're addicted to
fentanyl, for example, or, or
something like that.
Um, Madam Chair, Representative
Block, yes, absolutely. This
doesn't remove in any way the
requirement for um reporting of
a issue where they felt like a
child was in danger. So if at
any point in time when they're
still in the hospital, if
Um, personnel of the hospital
feel that the child is at risk,
they would call that in Sky, um,
and that would immediately
result in OK, perfect. Thank
you, Madam Chair, and then
quickly, uh, does this also
apply to cannabis?
Use as well.
Or nicotine use.
Madam Chair Representative
Block, yes.
Cannabis is, is the list of.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
that's all the questions I have
right now, and I hope no one
else has any questions because
it'll fling more questions at
me. So thank you all senators.
Thank you secretaries for your
answers.
Uh, Representative Luhan for a
second question.
Madam Chair, I was just
wondering if the expert is on
now so I could.
Get a quick response. Yeah, the
experts on now.
Sara, can you hear us?
Yes.
Are you able to hear me? Thank
you. Yes, we can hear you,
Sarah.
Uh, if you could repeat the
question, please, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, uh, thank you. My
question is regarding the
confidentiality um where Ofra
has raised concerns and focusing
on the fatality this is in the
FIR uh page 16, if you, you need
to reference.
Yes, ma'am. I'm just wondering
which section, Madam Chair,
which section of the actual act,
it's referencing.
Madam Chair, it is a, the
exceptions and confidentiality
regarding.
Um
The case of death or near death
of a child.
Section 10. Thank you.
Thank you. So,
I'll read this portion of the
FIR, the last paragraphs,
focusing on the fatalities and
your fatalities section of a
similar bill Ofra stated that
reliance on a physician to
determine the seriousness of the
injury by statute rather than
accepted best medical practices
may create a conflict between
the two standards.
This definition is vague.
And subject to confusion and
different interpretations. It
should be reworked with the
input of physicians.
Can you respond to that?
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, representatives,
thank you and thank you for
allowing me to speak this
morning. So the section that I
see that requires um
certification of a physician. It
requires the treating physicians
so that we're not talking about
uh a doctor that hasn't actually
seen or treated the child and
then treating physician is a
term of art. So that actually
really tightens which physician
is able to render an opinion and
um we really want to be precise.
We don't want folks just claim
near fatality when there's no
evidence based in the medical
science and turning to the
actual treating physician to
certify that. I hope I've
answered your question, Madam
Chair.
um, if there, you're referencing
a treating physician, then the
treating physician should be
able to make those, those, um,
determinations.
Yes.
Yes.
Thank you. And so what, so
In reference to the FIR, what
is, what is the contradiction of
information that we're, are we
over
Prescribing what is in federal
law or what is the crux of the
issue with that, um, concern in
the FIR.
Madam Chair Representative, I'll
take a
It's in the definition of near
fatality, and it says that the
child's physician can be the one
to make that determination as
well. And I believe that is
clear.
And
Yeah
Don't want to say I disagree
with the FIR, but I think the
statute the way the bill is
written is clear.
And I don't know if Sarah has
anything to add. I, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, Representative Lu
Han.
The CATA is the federal law, and
in this confidentiality,
confidentiality section 10, um,
indicates that at all times if
there's increased protections of
privacy by federal law that will
will preempt this section, but
the fact is that even with these
recommended changes, there could
still be challenges to um the
confidentiality Act as amended
in front of you, because it is
quite restrictive compared to
most of the
other states.
That's all I would add there,
Madam Chair and Representative,
and thank you, Sarah, our
expert, is, you know, you, you,
you could say that about pretty
much all of the work that we're
doing with every single bill,
you know, that you, that we work
on here. That's number one. And
then I do want to let everybody
know that um uh before its
first, uh, I'm sorry, before its
second hearing, we had a full
captor review of this
legislation done from top to
bottom by 3 separate independent
sources just to make sure nobody
was talking to each other wanted
to get the same, you know,
what's really going on here.
They are all capped and
complied. They all said this was
cap to complaint.
um
Senators, um, I'm just.
A little concerned there because
if you're saying this is more
restrictive.
Than what is in federal law.
I mean, there's, there's an
issue there, otherwise you
wouldn't have that in the FIR. I
just want you to, if there's any
chance for review and really
talking with the physicians if
that is what is, it's not
implied, it's what's stated, and
that's maybe something we need
to do. Thank you. I have.
the bill, just so you know.
Senna Barrio.
Madam I was just gonna suck the
bill if there was a motion.
Thank you. Before I call the
vote, I just want to thank you
for bringing this bill forward.
I work in a hospital. I work in
the ER and advocacy.
And I work with newborns all the
way to elderhood.
And I think this is a whole list
on the phone for hours, which
extend into days.
And I think this is gonna help
the plan of care a great deal,
and I think um the holistic
approach is gonna do the cross
checking, take care of the
accountability, so just wanna
thank you for this bill, and
with that, please call Ro for a
motion for a do pass.
By representative vice chair
Little and a second by
Representative Lujan.
Representative Waa Nordin?
Representative Blanc, no with an
explanation.
represented Borego.
Representative Lujan.
Mejia? Yes.
Madam Floor leader.
Representative Zamora.
Madam Vice Chair.
Madam Chair,
Madam Chair,
by a vote of 8 to 1, the motion
passes. And represent a block to
explain, Madam Chair, so I'm
sorry, I just, I got so many
questions during this committee
hearing, and I, I just like to
vote on things when I've fully
understood it, and then when it
comes to the rulemaking with
Kara, I believe in 2019 when
this passed, it took a couple of
years to just get the rules
done. So I just would hopefully
if this passes, uh we are a
little quicker when it comes to
those carer rules, and then also
the
insurance portion. I am still
kind of concerned that that
foster families may lose their
home insurance policies, and I
would hate that. So that's my
novo explanation. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, senators and
secretaries.
OK, Senator Souls.
All right, Senator.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, this
committee has heard this bill in
the past, uh, I think it died
for lack of time last year, I
was just informed that there may
be a concern with the, the, the
legislation, which is a little
frustrating with drafting who
should have found such things,
but what this bill does is it
updates the per diem that
legislators and the official
people get, uh, by changing
instead of using the IRS.
S per diem rates, it changes it
to the government service rates.
The reason it comes up as many
people know, I don't make any
secret of it as I fly my small
airplane when it's convenient to
do so, and the rates for small
airplanes have not been updated
in about 20 years, uh, and so
this was set up to move those
rates for cars that's now at 70
cents a mile in airplanes at 88
cents a mile where if in through
inflation when it was last
there, it should have been up at
about $1.76.
Trying to make it smooth and
easy to change everything to
government service agency
numbers, but uh the floor leader
indicated that IRS is actually
in the Constitution that that's
what we have to follow. I
haven't been able to verify
that, but I have no reason to
believe that's not the case,
which puts things into a bit of
a quandary for this bill that
has had no opposition all the
way through and trying to get
some parity with things, um, and
so I'm not.
Quite sure exactly what to do,
but let me leave it to the
committee if there's a way of
solving it with some simple
amendments here, or I'd be happy
to take it back up to drafting
if I could be first on
Wednesday, for instance, uh, and
some help in getting it pushed
through to the floor because of
the delay.
Thank you, Senator, Madam Fle
leader.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
senator, and I didn't want to
surprise you in the committee,
so I, I, uh, last night when I
was reading the bill, um,
Realized that.
In the Constitution, it says
that legislators.
Must receive the IRS.
Mileage and per diem rates.
So the
portion of, uh, your bill,
senator that deals with the
legislators.
I believe is in violation of
Article 4 Section 10.
Um, and it is very frustrating
that that wasn't caught before,
um, so I, I really sympathize
with with the situation. Um,
the, the portion dealing with
staff can be adjusted.
Uh, so, uh, that, that's that
your legislation is
Uh fine on that point, it's just
the piece about legislators
because it specifies the IRS per
diem and mileage rates and then
says for interim committee
meetings that legislators must
get the IRS mileage rates as
well. So, um, and I've sent you
the section, so, um, I might
suggest that um if.
You could see what options are
available with counsel.
Um
In drafting and.
Maybe there is a creative way to
work around it, um.
Otherwise, the remainder that
would be constitutional would be
just be Madam Chair, you know,
if I might, some of the problem
is the IRS does not set a rate
for for airplanes.
And so you can't just put in, I
mean, that would be fine if they
did, but the IRS, you know, the,
what I have gotten as far as
analysis does not set a rate for
airplanes. Some of what could
happen is essentially you look
through the bill is
You know, leave out all of that
other stuff and then back and I
believe it's on the very bottom
of page 5.
Which is where it's in.
The statute already of 88 cents,
which, as I indicated, has not
been updated in a couple of
decades, um, is put in there
that mileage shall be paid at
the GSA rate for air travel.
Uh, some of what's happened is
on more than one occasion, I've
gotten a letter from one of the
committee groups or whatever,
and even though I circled
private airplane on those little
forms to try and make it
obvious, got paid at the wrong
rate and had to reimburse money
and that takes time and effort
and problems for everyone, so
I'm trying to make it so that
it's, they only have to work.
Look one place, but certainly we
could there at the bottom of
page 5.
And the top of page 6, just
changed that.
Or travel by
I think it says airplane there
somewhere, privately owned
airplane is just put in at the
GSA rate for in that portion.
I guess I'm asking, does that
make sense to people?
This has been a really simple,
straightforward, easy bill for 2
years. Thanks, Madam Faloli.
I'm, I'm teasing. We, I, I
always want to make sure we
write good legislation, but
Senator, are you requesting to
amend this in this committee?
Now.
If it were the will of this
committee, I'd be happy to amend
it here, which essentially is
all of the strikeouts and
additions in the early part of
it.
Take all that out.
And down at the bottom of page
5.
Just put in at the GS rate for
privately owned airplanes, so
where it's got scratched out the
88 cents is put in at the
federal GSA rate.
United States General Services
Administration.
For privately owned airplanes.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So I'm
wondering if um
Uh, having taking a look at
those options that are
available, that's definitely one
of them, uh, that, that's
possible, and I'm wondering if
the uh.
Uh, LCS staff would be able to
research this more to see if
there is another option that
might also be.
Uhm.
Dare I say simple fix.
Towards this
And, and I'd be happy to do
that. And like I said, if you
want to roll it over, if I could
be first on Wednesday, I will
work on trying to come back with
something that's cleaner that
fixes all of that again, kind of
the frustration seems like
that's but
council service is supposed to
be looking for those kinds of
concerns, um, Madam Vice Chair,
I mean, Madam floor leader. Um,
Madam Chair and Senator, I
wonder if council service could.
do an amendment where you leave
the automobile mileage at the at
the IRS rate, because that's in
the Constitution.
And you add
Airplane and you, it's at a
different, uh, that might be,
um, and Madam Chair, Senator,
um, when you do that, I would
suggest that you specify what
type of mile is it nautical
mile, is it statute mile? Is it
you put that in there, um, just
to reduce confusion with when
the reimbursements are of the
piece, Madam Chair, for doing
this.
is when you put in a set number,
it's always wrong forever on.
Uh, and so by putting in
something where it automatically
escalates when this other number
of changes, keeps you from
having to come back every year
to fix something. And so that
was some of the main point
behind doing it.
Let's go ahead and roll this
bill and we'll hear it first
thing Wednesday morning. Thank
you and, and hopefully then
you'll help me in getting it all
the way through as time is
running short, as we all know
you.
committee members, please help
yourself to cupcakes.
In celebration of Saint
Patrick's Day. Compliments from
Deidra.
