and and go from there.
And I don't know about you all
legislators but I'm exhausted
it's.
I'm sure you all are fill in it
as well so hang in there.
Mario I don't we have veteran
down on it if you want to
promote them I don't have Mexico
those capabilities right now.
Thank you.
Good morning everyone can
everybody see my screen.
Good morning yes we can see your
screen and.
Thank you my name's I damn
random with the New Mexico state
aviation Division
been with the department
transportation for about sixteen
years and I'd spend it all with
the aviation division I I
joining us also is that director
pager out.
I'll be
as going through most of the
presentation and they're saying
sometimes when when when P.
would like to to join in I was
in specific comments
so with that.
I'm again thank you
for allowing us to give this
presentation.
And I would like to move
forward.
Thanks for your.
Okay.
So to give a little bit of
history on non.
Some of that that aviation
stories in New Mexico I just
wanted to kind of start at that
what would you consider maybe
the beginning and just give a
little bit of history I thought
I'd that I share kind of a neat
little long story about the
Lordsburg New Mexico airport is
been identified as the oldest
airport.
In the state of New Mexico.
It's also had some superstar
will skip significance there.
Charles Lindbergh landed there
in nineteen twenty seven and has
cross country tour the United
States after the solo across the
Atlantic.
And then a couple years later a
millionaire heart landed at the
airport in March so just from on
this day just any note from
history on on some of the people
that have been through Mexico's
bashing some of our small.
What I'd like to talk about now
is is the airports in New Mexico
that currently have commercial
service it is give you guys a
little brief background on.
Some of that historical points
and then kind of where they're
at right now.
Given what we have here I'm
probably gonna read mostly from
the side so I do apologize a
little bit
I'll try to go up about some but
most aspects of the slides I
just wanted so the out the
Albuquerque airport.
Originally opened in nineteen
twenty eight but there was a
second airport that was built on
the west mesa in nineteen twenty
nine now that one was was really
the first marshals service
airport actually kind of went by
the name to W. airport present
FOR D. WA on their cross country
trips were landing and and
feeling more.
In nineteen thirty five through
the work progress administration
money
governor king thing we broke
ground and build what we're at
now is that the property where
the current some part in
nineteen thirty seven.
So now currently today the some
port has twenty three nonstop
destinations served by ten
different carriers from legacy
carriers down to what's called.
Part one thirty five charter
service our on demand starts.
As you know we've been we've
have had a hat in this industry.
A fairly hard in the last year
but to give you an idea of where
the sun was in twenty nineteen
verses what they reported twenty
twenty
one from five point four million
passengers through the airport
down to one point eight million
in twenty twenty.
About about sixty six percent
decrease in the number of us.
The next busiest commercial
service airport in state is that
Santa Fe municipal airport which
began as the Santa Fe regional
airport and opened in nineteen
forty one.
Right now Santa Fe is serviced
by two thank you secretaries
United Airlines American
Airlines and they have nonstop
flights to Dallas Phoenix and
and.
The next airport NXRT airport
the pharmacy are part of what is
now known as the four corners
regional airport opened in
nineteen forty one.
And started its first venture
into commercial passenger
service in nineteen forty seven
I flew routes from two
Albuquerque Denver and Salt Lake
City.
Farmington is also one of the.
Airports that is looking to get
back into air service they were
scheduled to start air service
back in April of twenty twenty
it's been postponed for now but
is still we're still planning
forward I'm at program.
from has a.
federal air traffic control
tower so it's a it's a tower
airport
they're undergoing some terminal
upgrades as we speak through
grants with our aviation
division to improve the terminal
to have.
Capacity for TSA screening and
passenger waiting areas we've
also been working with the FAA
on a major upgrade to their
primary one way.
In parallel taxiway to provide
the.
Proper separations that are that
are being required by the FAA
for for that type of aircraft
that they are looking to get in.
And it would be a big jet
service one more when we get
through all this and they can
get going.
The next busiest airport that we
have in state is at Roswell at
one time was originally known as
Roswell army international
airfield and then later Walker
Air Force it's.
Basically forty six hundred
acres and all of that land was
then turned over to the city of
Roswell which turned into at the
time the Roswell international
air center.
After nineteen sixty seven.
Russell has several large
Aircraft type companies down
there there's
Helping out the wall involved in
painting that literally repaints
aircraft from the outside so you
Johnny hangers to get these
issues commercial airplanes and
so they can get on stripped down
repaying and there's some other
companies down there that do
refurbishing of the aircraft
every once while stuff like that
and they also have
Service right now nonstop The
Dallas for work they did have
routes to Phoenix but those
routes have been suspended right
now.
Again because of the.
The reduction in overall.
traffic.
Next on our list is the
Airport.
Lea County regional airport
It was a richer the regional
airport I think is now we're
that we're the golf courses
there and then a that the county
acquired land to the east of
that which is now where the the
county regional our state.
the right now it's services I
nonstop route to access they had
scheduled air service and were
set to begin our service to
Denver but again that
With what's going on that that's
been postponed to a later date.
so eight this kind of shows a
picture where we were we were
moving and I in a real positive
direction with increasing air
service in a lot of our
communities and then our last
year with what's going on it's
it's we really taken out.
Some of the other of course we
have air service added that
house regional airport opened in
nineteen sixty six and it's had
fair service intermittently
going all way back to nineteen
seventy four.
they just restarted care service
in winter season only in twenty
eighteen and had.
Was highly successful then just
expanded that to include
Outside service Dallas Austin
San Diego Los Angeles and then
they're also looking to move
that to a full time year round
service.
Right now given what's going on
it's also been temporarily
suspended but.
As things return to normal it
they're pretty positive that the
service should come back.
Pretty good.
Next we have the the Grant
County airport at Silver City
that opened in nineteen fifty
one I am guy and and serves as
sort of a regional airport for
Lordsburg and Deming for
commercial service.
Both the damning in Lawrenceburg
have.
Smaller G. airports but that the
airport Grant County is the only
one in the area that has
marshal service.
There are what is there the
route that's being operated
there is a.
all of the central air service
route that they the community
applies for with the federal
government and so that
particular route is subsidized
through this D. A. S. program by
program.
Similar situation and that
Carlsbad.
The airport down there I also
has a the essential air service
route with a.
Excuse me are the are the sort
of the middleman on a hopscotch
fraud that goes from Albuquerque
to Carlsbad The Dallas are as
bad Albuquerque
The air carrier down there had
just started an additional lag
on their own from a would anyone
Albuquerque Carlsbad el Paso
which
Many you don't know there is no
air service there's no direct
air service routes from
Albuquerque to our past.
And so the quickest way to get
there would be through this
Albuquerque Carlsbad del Paso
route.
Next one that we have air
service centers Clovis
we reopen airport open ritual in
nineteen fifty nine it is also
an EA asked route they just
started the rout last.
Spring right around the time
where everything.
But they do have nonstop service
from Clovis to and.
We've had several communities
over that over the over several
decades that had err service on
and off and that includes Los
crucis Gallup Alamogordo Sierra
Blanca which is read also
they've had
At nine scheduled charter
service in and out of there
especially during the ski season
and then our Los Alamos has had
air service of the bill I think
it it stopped about two years
ago.
There.
Is a kind of a visual
representation of the current
state of air service in New
Mexico the.
That picture on the left is the.
This is the son for show all the
routes going out of some point
to points around around.
And then the slide on the right
hand is our sort of our regional
our smaller communities and the
lengths to air service that they
currently that we currently
offer.
there's different types of
carriers service and there you
are listed here you see the
green line with their line and
redline with that legacy
carriers may the other ones the
ULCC is the ultra low cost
carrier.
And then on and slide on the
right you'll see why are there
certain points that are that are
serviced by by legacy carriers
and then there's the difference.
Federal distinction of.
It's called part one thirty five
charter in may have on demand or
commuter
I'm not going to go to a whole
lot of detail on that those are
those are federal requirements
by the air carrier.
And how they how they are.
License are certified with the
with the FAA on operating
charters.
This next County shows some some
passenger throughput numbers
have as of twenty nineteen
through.
Our.
So are are smaller.
The the outside of the sun for
the.
The A. axes is the annual number
of passengers through the
airport and then you can see
there's a there's a conversion
and based on that the population
that for which is which is
determined as.
The area around that community
that would most likely service
so they use a thirty mile radius
Act percent catchment areas they
go off maybe fifty miles off and
and the report they use thirty
miles so that we've been very
miles of the airport and in
Santa Fe.
Almost a hundred ninety thousand
people.
But they put through almost two
hundred seventy five thousand
people through that airport we
nineteen.
From my airlines and airports
stand standpoint that's that's a
pretty good number one eight
nine you have that right ratio
greater than one.
as you see that the largest
ratio is at the Roswell airport.
Santa Fe has the most traffic
but Santa Fe is a
What what is considered a
destination market because of
that.
Skiing from any of the seasonal
activities that go on Santa Fe
you know nationally and even
internationally Santa Fe is a
destination.
You'll see that we go down some
of the smaller communities are a
little bit more business related
business travel probably more
out of this.
And then some city office how
they get into the.
Service no service but also
service by.
Much smaller those.
The three.
Is there all service by nine
passenger.
Next
And then I I was gonna be comes
up and zero but if you look at
that the population catchment
area around.
Not Farmington and given sort of
the other numbers that are being
produced by some of the other
communities when we get going
with air service environment
then it should be a fairly
successful mark.
If we do correct.
Next I'd like to kind of bring
everybody up to speed on
this is a at current statutes on
the books
For the aviation division and we
have a program without air
service assistance program.
I and it was created in nineteen
ninety nine our.
The state to be able to help
communities and.
In bringing regional and
community air service into
their.
Many administering programs
since nineteen ninety nine
some of the have.
The original.
Administrative all those put
together.
We think N. as follows.
Some of the smaller communities
to not.
Be able to see for requests
because of some of the
restrictions
it absent that two hundred
thousand dollars a year for
single brand but it also
requires fifty percent match by
the community.
For any funds spent and that's
been kind of a high bar for the
smaller communities like the
Silver City.
Our own back to be able to even
apply for marketing.
To help the community.
We're taking a look at that and
maybe we can go ahead and.
Make some changes to the
administrative code to make this
a little bit more user friendly
especially for some smaller
your.
with that I'll stop for a second
here because he wanted to the us
comments at this point.
Great things stand go ahead
people.
We.
Yes yes we can hear you.
A slide but I do have something
that that's in addition to what
Dan has done in his presentation
I'm glad my comments are
directed to the we assess Senate
bill one thirty three which has
to do with enhancement
increasing their services to the
smaller airports in New Mexico I
want to thank you for have for
having us present I am the
director of aviation for the New
Mexico department of
transportation I am a forty year
pilot I have a commercial rating
and I have an instrument rating
and have a ground instructors
rating is so I'm quite familiar
with all of the person we're
talking about flying and what's
required
The Senate bill getting right to
the point here is and my
profession before I started to
do something fun which is this I
was an attorney and then I was a
district judge but does Senate
bill one thirty three.
Is to enhance or to increase its
not like the one that we have
right now that does mostly of
promotion and advertising this
one is actually to enhance to
make more available passenger
services to our smaller
communities in New Mexico.
And that is what it does is it
provides opportunities through
the aviation division for New
Mexico cities and counties that
own an airport and I can think
of at least five of them there
may be more that are kind of
targeted to establish new
services that do not exist now
and to serve new routes Dan
mentioned some of them that are
not being served for example
this is just an example
Farmington and Gallup have no
air service at all and there are
no air routes to Phoenix for
example from those places.
This simply apply as usual for
for for other requests that we
but we run page and stuff but
they would actually apply for
grants to establish.
services.
Good part to the aviation
division the
Requests for based under her
house bill thirty one thirty
three on demand for our services
matching funds and economic
impact and of course job
creation is be going to be an
important consideration
regarding the economic impact.
Nation division would have
continued oversight regarding
implementation of any.
More services.
The state you have been shown
actually was
commissioned by the aviation
division and it shows real
possibilities for new air
services around the state.
R. and there's also been by the
way in by knowledge of this and
experience that that that has
been acquired in being part of
the aviation division because of
COVID there's been a subtle but
noticeable shift of travel
habits in regional air travel
regional meaning the entire
southwest.
People are going to smaller
airports to avoid large crowds
and the and I've had several
reports tell me that they've
noticed either no downtick in
their service or actually an
uptick in some of the Texas
smaller point they've had huge
increases in in small in this in
the smaller airports.
And
It's because people are trying
to avoid this the large crowds
And I think that with that an
educated public as to how much
fun it is to find a smaller
airplane how convenient it is
and that is just as fast at
least regionally and I mean it
Miss Iglesias the entire
southwest.
It would region would be just as
fast is getting into regular
jetliner like United and and
those big big airlines that at
the Georgia ports like
Albuquerque international.
I come with my last comment is
directed at one of the issues
that up.
That is comes up and it's ready
and and one of the slides that
is presented by Mr Moran.
in this the entire duration
clause that's been a kind of a
an issue that has been discussed
many many times the anti
donation clause I want to tell
you at does not prohibit
assistance to businesses all
donations that's that's very
clear requests are going to be
based through the aviation
division and and Senate bill one
thirty three if it passes on a
contract basis and not on a
donation basis.
All the contracts where services
will be based.
Because Dan and I would be
formulating the requirements.
Based on the statute would be
based on a contract requiring
consideration of quid pro quo or
an exchange.
There there is no hint of any
donation in the way that we
anticipate that it will be set
up in addition to that is the
key Attorney General in our own
legal department have given
opinions that the services
rendered on a contractual basis
do not have anything to do and
do not do not bring into play
the intake donation Clause.
And the division is going to go
by it by those opinions in
implementing the.
The the act the bill if it goes
through that closes my talk on
this at potential enhancement of
our services which is in my view
because I'm a pilot it's very
exciting and it would be a fun
thing to do that's just my
personal comment are there any
question to me.
Thank you federal and.
we'll go ahead and open it up to
questions of the committee well
first on the list is Garcia.
Thank you madam chair
thanks for the presentation of
director Mr Moran I got others
questions for a mistrial.
You mentioned that you would be
giving out grants how do you
come about.
We choose or qualify for a grand
I will rather say.
The.
Requirements under the act one
is that the airports with under
service will be for a such as
mention some of the ones that
have nowhere Services Farmington
Gallup
Let's crucis.
There may be another one
somewhere in the mix that have
no service at all would be
forgiven because they get a
easier.
Matching funds.
And and they also would be
entitled to a higher dose the
tab and our service should be
entitled to a higher
amount of funds that would be
those that already have their
service such as Santa Fe hasn't
Hobbs has some.
Okay this has some Carlsbad has
to services Silvercity has the
services there are six of the
have a they would not get as
high an amount and matching or
not as high a percentage hi
there and what would be
Mr representative Garcia would
be based on a on a.
on a contract basis the money
would be issued in the same
manner as other context these
cities or the counties would
actually get the money we would
not be dealing directly with the
airlines the cities and counties
would deal with their own
airport in their own airlines we
would just help them and review
what they've got and make sure
that all the guidelines and the
requirements of the statute are
being followed so that's the way
it would be if it furthers the
non existing service at airports
that have no at that have in our
service.
Thank you for the director of
madam chair another question Mr
director always sexual Liz
service to our communities
discussion of well let's just a
western part of the state
anywhere in the state all almost
excluded from the communities
that don't have it right now.
So.
I was.
Is the service.
To to director two of the
committees that don't have.
Okay that question is one that I
am not able to answer for you
immediately well I can tell you
is that overall the the trend is
to.
For more services that are going
to be needed not only to the
communities that also to the
entire southwest.
We would depend upon and the
statute requires Mr
representative that we assess
and evaluate the demand by each
city or county that applies for
grant and then once we look at
the demand in the economic
impact on that on that
city or county that would go
play big time into the
evaluation of whether or not
they are actually entitled to
receive a grant for purposes of
establishing scheduled air
service.
Thank you madam chair director
of.
If you want to director of when
you to a direct question would
you Kristin and chair on your
what your address please.
I truly apologize for this I
have actually madam chair
written down on my notes but
it's on the page that I already
went over so I didn't see it but
that.
Thank you madam director madam
chair that's all of which they
have right now thank you Mr
director madam chair.
Thank you vice chair next we
have Representative Garrett.
Thank you madam chairwoman thank
you director I just have one
question this is what I've
learned now in my third year in
the legislature I see I have
Senate bill one thirty three in
front of me which is Bobby
Gonzales and and her Garcia and
it has an appropriation of nine
million dollars has that been.
Has that been addressed to House
Appropriations yet.
Or to Senate finance yes.
That I'm not I'm not certain if
the specific amount has been
addressed.
Okay madam chair women would
representative Garcia do you
know the answer that question
because I think it's a terrific
bill
So I want to make sure it gets
funded.
but I'm sure if I may
Representative Garrett
I don't know I do not I think
it's going to be addressed in
the Senate finance here real
shortly as far as fashion not
past a movie role but the if you
will please madam chair and
representative again I will find
that answer for you real shortly
here okay thank you madam
chairman thank you
Representative and and thank you
director for the notifying of
the notifying us about it.
Yes Representative thank you
very much madam chair thank you
to.
Thank you all and thank you
committee members are there any
other questions for
Dan and federal.
All.
Representative you're.
This.
You're on mute.
Thank.
Madam chair one because I do
have a question and we're
continuing.
I mean they're they're they're I
think they're done with their
presentation from what I could
tell Dan if you can just confirm
but yet you all just have what
we're opening it up now for
Committee Adams.
Go ahead Mr madam chair we
actually there's about a dozen
I'm more slides I could.
If they would like yes please
you're you're not for this
morning.
Okay I will pick it up from
there
as as director al had stated hi
we've gotten
tutored to different opinions
just recently from the NM DOT's
office of general counsel as
well as the attorney general's
office I wanted to give a little
just a quick slide of what has.
Had taken place historically
just so that everybody is aware
At of where this.
We have two different opinions
once fifth from fifteen years
ago one from now but how the
division have been operating off
until we receive this new
opinion had to do with a and
this is we had an air service
carrier that have routes that
was servicing Gallup in house
and Alamogordo and Las Cruces
and Albuquerque all kind of a
round robin.
Around the state and we were
getting invoice directly from
this hair care at this point and
as they have kind of stayed
inside here we have discussed
with that with the office of
general counsel staff the time
into all that what we were doing
we could no longer go I and that
way and the company came back
and said well we can't we can't
qualify for the subsidies any
longer as they're being given we
can no longer provide service so
they they they where server back
in two thousand five and some of
these communities have not had
it.
Any our service since.
Moving along I just to give
everybody an idea what we have
done with the program since its
inception in.
Nineteen ninety nine two
thousand as we've we've given
out approximately twenty three
grants to communities totaling a
little over four million dollars
and and most of that since two
thousand five or actually all of
that since two thousand five the
direct exclusively at marketing
and promotion of care services
in the community.
just to give everybody a
Perspective on it that.
State Wyoming and that and that
Wyoming aromatics office has a
similar
program what's being discussed
now and it's been in place since
around two thousand early two
thousands and they've invested
over thirty five million dollars
into that program as compared to
what what we've invested here in
New Mexico is to kind of give
you a just a bit of a
comparison.
To go back to their given soon
some information on air service
and the types of air carriers
that operate in the state these
are the different classes
Of service the network carriers
are the legacy carriers are the
big ones that that work out of
the house United Airlines the
American Airlines that delta is
that operate in the in the hot
now.
Right now we have those
operating at some point Santa
Fe.
Roswell Hobbs and hopefully in
the not too distant future.
And we have what is considered
the lowcost fair or value.
Marshal service and that would
be that the Southwest Airlines
the frontier airlines I like
that also low cost carriers are.
air carriers like spirit
airlines Foreign Legion airlines
that have they do have some
routes that come out of from
Albuquerque servicing some
points
the next one is the smaller
cares when we get into the are
the smaller community like this
of our cities and our ads and
they how's the tension like that
that service
you know right now The Dallas
air operates under part one
thirty five on demand service
and that is the same type of
service that is being offered in
closed
then there's the what they call
part one thirty five commuter
which that is sort of the is the
service scheduled for House bad
and Somerset.
A lot of the the information
going forward here was CYFD
developed by a company that that
completed an air service
marketing a statewide marketing
strategy
for us and we did this in
conjunction with the New Mexico
department of tourism
we do have a.
The study available
electronically as well as an
executive summary that our
office would be more than happy
to provide to the entire
committee or anyone on the
committee that would like a copy
of this if you if you want so
you can just email me and I can
send that out or I can randomly
sent out to all that the
committee issues
but they broke out.
Thank the description for for
the air service ecosystem at in
more money to prices three three
essential groups there the
development of it the marketing
are and any incentive programs
and maybe a lot.
Write that down a little bit
further
they give some examples of that
of how in different things to
look at and developing.
service programs a good start
with how how the programs maybe
funded hi is there a grant of
this through.
Private contributions events of
their public private partnership
any sort of taxes that would be
allowed on it
these call be organized under
our.
What they call service or or in
in some places and this this PMR
which is a a destination market
organization.
so air service or an example in
New Mexico that already exist in
several of our communities is
in Santa Fe they have a group
that's called fly Santa Fe.
We're we're very we're very
unique and naming these things
and have that's called fly Hobbs
in Roswell it's called fly
Roswell.
So we're very creative in naming
some of these things are but the
the they act as I organizations
that help the the community to
work alongside with the the
community in the airport to
develop
err service in these communities
in conjunction with you know
that in this case they're
they're talking about state
tourism or in our case with the
department transportation.
May develop some components are
that would be
conceptual marketing strategy
for communities to use to help
engage and promote the air
service and there are they
revolve around what they call
these five channels I will spend
I will want to much detail on it
but it is available in the in
the executive summary and the
full report back to provide.
What they did give an example of
this is an idea of how to I.
Conceptualize some of the some
of the marketing or even just
some of the organization of how
to
LFC and promote this air service
so they gave to ideas of of of
you know the title of the show
and arts and adventures Santa Fe
house comes to the arts
communities involved involved
there you can fly into one fly
out of the other you can find
the ball but what they're what
they're suggesting is that
develop a partnership with it
with these regional partnerships
with different communities that
we could all benefit from this
is this is sort of at a
conceptual level but when
communities start wanting to
develop or expand their air
service this is the type of
Information that will help them.
It be successful at that moving
forward and and.
And growing their air services
markets.
There is a then the other one
that they brought up as
developing community incentive
programs we've got we've talked
about this already we've had
we've gotten information says
there are certain things that we
can do we should be okay I would
just need to make sure that we
do it properly but there's a
different concepts here in there
funding programs and support
programs and sources that that
that can be identified in use at
the at the local level to help.
Support these programs.
If you're on a further slide on
some funding considerations on
how
again this is more more deeply
developed in the in the full
report the talk about
identifying your your optimum
budget identifying your
different funding mechanisms and
then building your programs.
Are based around those.
Those categories that you're
able to about.
One of the possible funding
considerations that day they put
forward would be the the concept
of an air service improvement
tax and they give a brief brief
description of of what it could
be used for
and and help develop.
Programs at the end of
motivation this is just a a a a
consideration that that could be
used to help.
Insure that the success of a of
a and their service program in
two years specially in some of
the smaller.
Another hi and director Alan
touched on this as when it comes
to the contractual part of air
service is if we're if we're
buying service from them at a
fix the verses
Avoiding the any sort of a
direct donation but again there
is it just me it would need to
be set up correctly but they
have the service got a capacity
purchase agreement worrying for
you contract for a certain
amount of are certain level of
capacity and that could be.
That that so that's of waxy that
would be paid to the airline and
there would be the office that
would be any tickets sold by the
air care would reduce whatever
that offset.
Hi this is I just included this
because it shows graphically
over the last fourteen years of
how of this the gradual success
of air service and and introduce
community that Santa Fe Hobbs
Roswell that they've had up
until you know what what is
after your twenty twenty but we
are.
All of these communities were.
Trending in a positive direction
and they're all in the I have
either recently added routes or
considering adding different
destination.
Which brings us to.
Kind of where we're at now in
reality that we're facing.
I have published just recently
here add that that US airlines
Kerry sixty two percent you were
scheduled passengers in December
of twenty twenty this is the
December twenty nineteen
and that trend has been pretty.
Pretty standard even locally
here because we saw the numbers
of the cell for your over here
about sixty six percent.
so we've lost a lot of market at
this point and they going
forward what we hope to come out
of this is with a
to be able to bounce back with
the robust.
Program we have some advantages
where we are in New Mexico it is
it's a destination market for
the most part most of our
communities some a little bit
more than others maybe Santa Fe
in house.
Our definite destination point.
but I was was also pointed out
earlier is smaller destinations
are a growing
market and I and.
And I and a lot of people
commented that has as we brought
up that some flying into smaller
communities.
And avoiding the needs the
larger of markets are something
that that people are looking for
that something to fill that
niche.
There's some ideas and impose
pandemic approach to what we may
or may not be able to do and in
helping bring air service back
to the level that it was in and
honestly state impact going
forward.
So.
One of the things is if looking
to implement some some
campaigns.
Some marketing campaigns you are
at a statewide level and and try
to take advantage of the
upcoming.
Travel season for the summer.
And and look at getting.
People back in interested in air
travel and on that note I've
I've got a there's a link here
to a an ad that was developed by
the New Mexico department of
tourism it's about a minute and
a half long and like that what
often planets and it's care
that it's.
If the dress by the secretary of
tourism and she's kind of given
some
information on how they are
going to look to proceed
in the coming months.
Yes go ahead and you can do
that.
I did it come up on the screen
correctly forever on.
Yes it did yeah toward.
Hi.
With the department of
transportation commission
strategic plan on how to
position the aviation industry
to capture more market share
after.
We have made several strategies
that will help us build stronger
aviation.
Intrastate whites more
accessible ground transportation
more viable billable and working
to generate more means increased
direct flights availability on.
Twenty five million dollars
special appropriation which
personal coverage.
Senator Stewart and one of the
highest revenue range
advertising he five markets this
will also stabilize Marshall
airport director right.
New Mexico needs just New Mexico
sticking point.
What makes New Mexico.
Learn more about.
US Mexico border slash and.
Thank you with that
All that director on I would
that stand for questions of I
presentation.
Great thanks so much
And first on the list we have a
vice versa.
Thank you madam chair just to
answer the question and
Representative Garrett asked
earlier the nine million dollar
furnaces bluish Services in
section nine health bill.
Special transportation
appropriations that's in a
contingency to with the bill
passes it'll be funded.
Thank you madam chair
representative Gary that hope
that you question.
Thank you for checking in on on
that next we have Representative
Crowder.
Thank you madam chair can we
take down the power point madam
chair.
Yes we can do that it's it's
done.
Thank you madam chair.
Just three quick questions ma'am
sure I'm curious about the
relationship.
Between the sun port in Kirtland
airforce base and how that
partnership this structured as
are other individual ownership
says other lease agreements
between the federal government
in the state our budget I just
like to understand that
relationships madam chair.
Representative Crowder.
Yes.
This is Peter.
I can just as easily answer and
then maybe.
Don't have someone to follow up
with but the aviation division
that that that that and are
working with or for our.
Nothing to do with that with
Albuquerque international nor
Kirkland Air Force base they
have the the City of Albuquerque
has an independent aviation
division what do a motion
division for New Mexico
department of transportation
that we represent run every
other airport in the state of
New Mexico which is some fifty
one so that information to me is
largely unknown maybe Dawn can
illuminate that and thank you
madam chairwoman and
Representative Crowder.
Representative Crowder madam
chair there's a at a cooperating
committee between the City of
Albuquerque and the U. S. Air
airports my understanding of it
in the runways all of the
runways and taxiways are owned
operated and maintained by the
City of Albuquerque.
The airforce base has their own
section and there is a a a
cooperating agreement for the
airforce base to use the wrong
way.
There is a there's a strict
separation of
What is that.
Available are and and can be
used by commercial service as
far as accessing different parts
of the of taxiways they they are
restricted to stay on what is
considered some poor
Property and cannot access any
of the.
And more there's there's
markings out there designating
when and where the the property
for the Air Force base starts
but there is that an operating
agreement as far as the use of
the runaways but everything is
maintained by the SEC.
Thanks for the response I I
appreciate it sounds like most
things that we deal with it's
complicated all
right but I I appreciate the
response I I had no idea how
that relationship was put
together.
My second question is and the
gentleman of presenters I
represent the Clovis area.
And the the city commission and
in Clovis regionally voted to
change the name from Clovis
municipal airport to Clovis
regional airport.
That does that affect or.
Have any.
Impact on their relationship
with the O. T. or how things are
handled is it change their
status as far as access to
funding or anything of that
nature or do you know.
Madam chairwoman and
Representative Crowder the
answer is very short model.
Okay so.
For them to change it it doesn't
require anything that it just
it's okay if they do it.
It overseas that naming of
airports are changing from a
municipal to original there's no
state involvement in that
process.
Madam chairwoman and
Representative Crowder the
answer is no because the city of
Clovis actually owns said their
own airport and the question of
what they want to call it is
strictly a matter within the
city fathers.
Okay great thank you thank you
Sir my final question is.
In relation to the the nine
million dollars I believe it is
in not yeah yes funding within
the house bill two budget that
just went over to the Senate.
Can you explain to me how and
and I understand there's a bill
I was not aware of that but I
understand there's a bill that
will produce but how do
communities apply for our access
those funds and and for what
purposes.
Representative Crowder Madam
chairwoman of the Senate bill
number one thirty three.
Has a specific list of
requirements they have to meet
certain minimum requirements
like population.
And they have to meet the and it
would they would be better off
if they had no prior service.
And then and then the amounts of
money that can go to them.
between one point two five
million and or expanding one at
two point one point two five
million for those that already
have in their service and up to
one point seven five million for
those that do they do not have a
a new service they also these
are entitled to apply for that
they have a new service or not.
The
they just apply and if they have
to succumb to suppress certain
amount of information collected
just example they have to
supply.
A justification for the route
they have to chair the economic
impact to the community they
have to show the specific demand
of FY two attempting to do I am
sure of course that they meet
the minimum requirements of
twenty thousand people within
fifty miles of the airport
those those are the things and
the the the one that kind of
encompasses tomorrow
Representative Crowder is that.
Each application will growth of
a come from the city to the
aviation division which is us.
And then we evaluate those
different
matters that I'm telling you
about and the big one the
biggest one really is
justification highlighted
justify that the need more than
other cities the.
An expanded or a new air
service.
The basics.
Okay and then thank you for your
sponsor in in the I'm sorry I
don't know on the on the screen
it just shows up as federal and.
Sorry my name is Roy R. E. L.
all right thank you Mr rail I
was hesitant to just call you
so.
I guess I do have one more on
your a.
Your services systems program.
The where you for up to four
point one four million dollars
It and that's as I understand
the presentation was just for
marketing and promotion.
What process do the
municipalities go through to see
if they qualify for that
promotional or marketing
funding.
Representative Crowder Madam
chairwoman I would a past that
to dance because he's been doing
that for fifteen years and what
I was talking about is the the
new bill is a brand new program
but that when you're talking
about it's been around and
dentals the ins and outs of it
better than I do all right and
and thank you for your
presentation Mr rail it down I
madam chair that's my final
question on the sit back and
listen thank you.
Representative Crowder madam
chair the air services this is
program what we require is that
the community but submit the the
proposal that they're that
they're getting from the air
carrier that shows
that they're they're getting
more service in in the case of
call was for example they have
the A. asks proposal and we ask
for for a copy of the of the
proposal that was awarded for
that in order to make our
determination
what we're really looking for is
that is it we we don't want to
give a grant to community that
comes and says you know we're
going to get air service down we
want them to be able to show us
that Hey we have air service
coming in we want to develop the
marketing so they they submit
that to us as a matter of record
and then there's an application
that fill our contract that we
fill out a grant agreement at to
move forward depending on the
level of funding that community
wants to commit.
Chairman all right thank you
well as.
I wasn't sure what was happening
there that thank you Mr thank
you Representative Crowder next
on the list we have
Representative Garrett.
Thank you madam chairwoman and
thank you everybody for the
presentation I have two
questions that are related to
each other the first as we have
a New Mexico spaceport Authority
overseen spaceport America what
is there any relationship formal
or informal that takes place
between New Mexico spaceport
Authority and the D. O. T.
department of aviation.
Representative and madam chair
women I have stated that very
question and the answer is that
the aviation division mmhm that
we represent has no relationship
to the spaceport whatsoever and
the reason that we don't is
because we are limited by law to
deal with public use airports
the space but by the way is
listed on the charts and by
agreement with with another
state department to come I think
it's Economic Development I
don't remember.
This is I'm sorry.
Yeah that is it is listed as a
private use.
Good part because they believe
it is on lease to a private
outfit so therefore we don't
have any relationship with them
whatsoever with the prohibited
by law from dealing with private
airports they're not public use.
Okay and and madam chairwoman
and director then my second
question is
You know space cord virgin
galactic so I think something
like six hundred two hundred
fifty thousand dollar tickets
hundred fifty million dollars
how.
I don't know which airport
people are using but it seems
like this is a good time to
develop Los crucis as as opposed
to el Paso as you know as a
regional airport that's going to
definitely see increased traffic
as space port of America
develops has there been any work
or researchers study on that
aspect.
The chairman and Representative
Garrett the the the I think
that's one.
A good idea that you that you
brought up but to answer your
question directly I know of no
actual study that has been done
and that would be up to the city
of Los crucis to acquire that
information of course we would
help them if they would well if
they are looking for the
potential impact on their
airport of of a of the enhanced
your service under this Senate
bill one thirty three a day you
may have something to add to
that.
Yes Representative Garrett madam
chair we are we're working with
the the city of Los crucis are
always on and developing
improving airport down there the
airport manager there has has
made great efforts in moving
that that airport forward he's
doing a lot of planning towards
this potential.
impact from the spaceport hi on
the ground things that we are
currently doing is we're in the
environmental assessment phase
expanding extending the primary
runway and taxiway at the
airport we've just done a major
apron reconstruction project
down there at we're looking at
retrofitting are one of the
buildings on the airport and
being able to convert that into
a a full use airport terminal
building and these are all
things that have that are moving
forward at the airport as we
speak.
Thank you very much at
chairwoman and and thank you to
that today Pedro this is very
exciting that's all my questions
a chairwoman.
Thank you Representative Garrett
next we have Representative
Powdrell Culbert.
Thank you madam chair just to go
back to our question that
Representative Crowder ask about
the lease agreement.
That the
Some Korean Albuquerque has with
the base and I'll that have that
agreement for a long time the
one of the benefits I think and
and and
mistrial correct me if I'm wrong
but because the of the
relationship between them and
the base.
Because of the type of planes
are jets that fly in and out of.
the Albuquerque area because of
the base doesn't.
Albuquerque gets federal funding
to help maintain.
The landing strips in that area
because of the type of
Please use by the military.
Madam chairwoman I think of.
That is correct the specifics of
it I'm sure Dan has it is not
intimately familiar with them
can give you some more detailed
information that I can on what
those amounts are we again have
nothing to do with but up with
may have the knowledge no I was
just bringing up the fact that
it saves us money by the the
agreement that the between the
base and City of Albuquerque
because of the federal dollars
that the base gets.
The City of Albuquerque gets
excuse me to maintain those
runways and so it opens the door
for us to have better flights
you know because they have to
keep the runways up to a certain
to meet specific requirements.
Representative Representative
madam chair woman that of course
is is correct in a very as a
very general concept of but the
aviation division is
specifically.
Limited to the fifty one
airports outside the Albuquerque
international and current so
that in a door in a direct way
there is really no savings
twenty nine general taxation way
around the state in the nation
actually but that but it doesn't
directly save anything.
Oh okay okay what we don't have
to put money into this the point
I was making it.
That's correct yeah that's
that's where I was one with that
that is they don't come to the
legislature madam chair and
mistrial to save money to keep
those run was that we've had to
do over the years with some
other smaller.
Four
and the other thing I know
Representative Garrett a number
of times has mentioned
spaceport.
And having been here so long I I
think the spaceport.
It is one of the few.
Airport the lack of a better
word that has restricted flying
space so if you're able to pull
up and look at the flights that
are flying over that area there
is a dark cold.
And when this started out I
thank you very much second the
third session you know they work
real hard to get restricted.
Space just for spaceport America
so this this this some
information of the the question
that I would have.
Is does.
The aviation department or is it
in any way.
Involved with the project down
it lost well that Russell has
been trying to get off the
ground for a number of years.
Question to Dan he's been around
the airport so we actually deal
with and Dan do you know
anything about that.
Representative Bonner covert and
madam chair what's the specific
project at Roswell that you're
referring to we you know madam
chair
The.
Report this right there in the
city of Roswell they've been
it's.
Been on.
Accompanied for lack of a better
word that the fix is plays their
plans come in from other parts
of the country for maintenance
and that have different a post
rain and all that kind all kinds
of work done it used to be a
airforce base and I couldn't
remember where they're not.
The aviation Department had any
involvement in that.
Representative boulder covered
madam chair yes we did it said a
public use public on airport and
it is one of the fifty plus
airports that we work in
coordination with we've done a
lot of work there is there are
several companies down there one
of them I think I'm insurers of
the involved with painting and
they hate the large aircraft
there there's another company
that does exactly what you're
speaking to as far as re doing
add the interiors they're
they're called
MROS is the abbreviation for
maintenance repair operators and
there's one of those out budget
down there as well as
if anybody is ever seen pictures
of of Roswell it is also in a
large aircraft storage area they
have hundreds and hundreds of
jets
stored out and on the apron if
you if you can remember that
that the old Walker Air Force
base was a strategic Air Command
base carry it had it house the
big B. fifty two bombers and
that and nuclear arms back in
the day so there's a tremendous
amount of
Area down there that hi the
community has has come up with
this alternative use for and it
it is a large large I.
storage area for jet aircraft.
In addition to all the other
things we are that we do down
there with.
Okay thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative is
there anyone else you'd like to
ask any questions.
I'm if not then and and and P.
thank you so much for your
presentation Dan I really
appreciated your anecdote about
millionaire her and large Berg
airport because I was kind of
obsessed with the millionaire
her when I was a little kid
little kid so that was really
fun to hear I did want to make
mention about the importance of
regional airports because I
would say even prior to COVID
and the global pandemic there
was and there was a lot of
I think just the convenience of
flying in and out of these
airports is always so much
better
I know that when I first moved
back to Los crucis I grew up in
the southeastern part of the
state my family lives in and
around Roswell and so I would
instead of flying out of el Paso
because I'm kind of antisocial
don't like to actually be around
a lot of people is that I would
just drive draws will leave my
dog with my parents and fly out
a Roswell anytime I ever wanted
I needed to fly out and it was
always super convenient I never
had to wait around very long and
and I think it's just a really
nice
thank you to provide as in in
that amenity for many of our
communities and so I think
you're you're right in terms of
as people go back to traveling a
lot of the smaller airports are
going to be so important because
people are going to want to
minimize their exposure to
larger crowds both because
of the pandemic of not getting
sick but also in in my case just
trying to social distance as
much as possible
but I also wanted to mention it
to Representative Garrett's
point around the space port and
the Los crucis airport I did
text our city councilor who
represents the airport here in
Los crucis there is a very
expensive master plan for the
airport and so there is some
activity around that and any
Hume is the person who oversees
the airport here in Los crucis
so if there's any questions that
you all might have I'm I'm happy
to connect you all and and and
and provide any details about
that so I know that vice chair
Garcia you have your hand up did
you want to ask a question and
so does Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair normal
question I just want to thank
the bill.
Director of aviation rail used
brand and I'd also like to thank
all of the in the cabinet
secretary Michael Santa for
allowing these people to come in
presented front of us today
that's all I have madam chair
thank you.
Thank you Mr Representative
Crowder.
Thank you madam chair I I too
want to thank them this is one
of the first part point that
I've actually had a copy a color
copy my district even this
morning and that was nice I
really appreciate that I was
wondering madam chair if through
some way that you could get the
contact information for Mr Moran
and Mr right all in in
disseminate that year members I
would very much appreciate
having the ability to chat with
them one on one when the
opportunity arises.
That's thank you madam chair
right thank you Representative
we can certainly get that to you
all and to to Mr Bryant Ryan and
to Mr Moran thank you all so
much for presenting today we
really appreciate your time
and to committee members of
there's no other questions we
will be back on Tuesday Tom and
I are working on some
presentations for some of the
some of the issues that some of
you have reached out to us about
potentially presenting if you
can
if you have any thoughts or
ideas please feel free to reach
out and let us know and we'll
we'll try to get that
accommodated over the course of
the next week or so so with that
will in turn and and we'll see
you on the floor it at eleven.
Thank you madam chair.
