Two minutes per person.
I don't I don't know how much
debate the be on the bills
they're pretty simple and
straightforward well I don't
know if they're simple they're
pretty shortly but that way
but we will of course take of
the before we head down to the
floor which I believe we're
expecting on the floor and
eleven in unlike some past days
where we ran over into the floor
session.
Today's for session is third
reading it's not the limited
four sessions so we do want to
get there on time so we will
take a vote of one or that or
the other at the end of the
hearing.
any questions announcements from
anyone on the committee.
So I should be can you see if.
Representative Dixon is in the
waiting room.
I'm here now.
Sorry missing text.
So we all set.
Okay first up we have well first
of the.
There two doing resolutions
Representative Baldonado are you
presenting both Garcia resent
because well.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'm I'm
gonna do money and and and
Representative Google do is H.
J. R. eight I believe okay so.
I appreciate you guys you
together of course
In addition to explaining what
your resolutions would do of the
year you also might highlight
the difference between the two.
whenever you're ready while we
go to Representative Baldonado
first.
Thank you Mr chairman you ready
for me Madam yes.
So Mr chair.
Although Mr them onto it yeah
we'll I'm sorry we didn't call
the roll.
Thank you Representative are
what would I do without you.
we could you please call the
roll.
Your capital gains thank you for
catching that we do have all of
the members here but I will go
ahead and call the rules
Representative Chandler.
Representative Dixon.
Representative Ferrary here.
Representative.
Here.
Representative Ortez.
Here.
Representative Sari√±ana here.
Representative Scott here.
Representative Strickler here.
Representative Townsend.
Here.
Thank you Representative vice
chair states for excuse me.
Here thanks and chairman of
clean.
Here we have a quorum.
Right thank you for that Shelby
and thank you Representative
Montoya I do appreciate that and
with that we'll go to
represent the Baldonado with
each there are five and then
we'll hear from percent cookies
J. R. eight and still goes to
the public so I won't forget
that.
Representative Baldonado.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee that
are that ever been in front of
the Energy folks all my friends
on this committee good morning
everybody
today we have house joint
resolution I and as the chairman
mentioned just a minute ago it's
quite short page in just a
couple lines on page two
It's a a joint resolution to
amend the New Mexico considers
and obviously Mr chairman and
members
this would appear on the ballot
on the next general election and
we're we're simply wanting to
add the language on line
eighteen page one that reads the
people the state have a right to
hunt fish and harvest wildlife
in accordance with the laws and
rules established to manage
well like that right so much
because directed district I'm
sorry to impair laws established
Bridget trespass or to protect
property rights
Mr chairman members it's it's
there's not much to explain
other then we as a hunting and
fishing and sports men and women
community are with would love to
see this amended in to our
constitution and ensure the
rights are of the citizens of
New Mexico
for all the years to come the
opportunity to at and fish
harvest Pueblo so I mean it's
it's that basic Mr chairman of I
know this down.
Your members will have questions
and I guess if that all all all
you'll to Representative Cook if
that's appropriate now so you
can
basically do what I did was
there's more talk.
President.
Morning Mr chairman and
committee many members and.
Representative Baldonado.
My resolution
Is basically the same that
Representative Baldonado is is
except.
For the first time after years
of listening to Baldonado
humble brag about how great this
resolution is I finally read it.
And.
Kind of like here's a lot more
money.
I would use my because my
neighbor down the street is a a.
Is a guy and he knew that they
had done this in Utah and other
states so.
He asked me to carry it and I so
I did.
More words are missed.
A lot.
Cleaner and I think they both.
Do the same thing just
established.
In the constitution the right to
hunt fish so
apparently it is a lot more
controversial and I had.
Anywhere to sell before
introducing it so I look forward
to the committee's comments and
the public comments Mr Chairman
thank you.
Okay so we're we're gonna go to
the public and we're gonna do a
couple things with public
comments first we're going to a
poll of the people who
are here in attendance and then
we'll do
support for the bill and it will
do opposition to the bill and
we'll do a maximum of thirty
minutes on each side of the
that's not a minimum that's a
maximum so if we get done sooner
that's great also will be two
minutes per person also not to
anymore but the maximum so if
you we have a lot of people that
want to speak and you
keep your comments short that
then more of the people on your
side we'll be able to speak.
So Shelby can you run the ball.
So here's the bowl and we're
let's do this for like thirty
seconds you can log in support
or opposition.
So do ten more seconds.
And we're done and we have a
twenty six in opposition and one
in support that's ninety six
percent to four percent.
Okay.
So now we're gonna do public
comment we're going to support
first so if you're in opposition
to the bill please lower your
hands.
And if you're in support and
would like to speak you don't
have to if you would like to
speak in support of this bill.
please raise your hand.
Okay so first we're gonna get to
ed.
In.
And I'm gonna remind you were
doing support for the bill right
now and I I if I had several
people I more people raising
their hands to support the
building voted in support of the
bill so I'm thinking some people
might not have heard me so first
we have at.
Go ahead and if you support this
bill.
It can you hear me.
So if you're a needed in radio
if you're there.
Hello we can hear you can you
hear me yes yeah this is our
thank you chairman members of
the legislative committee for
granting me the opportunity to
address you all.
I'm Edward alone of from
Springer a past president of the
New Mexico wildlife federation.
Addresses great concern to your
reconsideration the table H. R.
fired.
As a longer outdoors many I
believe funding information is
not a right but a sacred
privilege to be subject to rules
and regulations sportsmen
throughout our country hundreds
of thousands spent thousands of
dollars in the economy in the
land of enchantment in regards
to rates are paid I urge you to
reconsider to kill this bill
president I stream access across
it justifies a broader
privatization of public streams
waterways in their access those
are not in the best interest
from sportsman.
This bill is a brought a product
of proposed amendments to the
state constitution to codify age
New Mexicans right yeah hi
Division our state the largest
challenge The New Mexico sports
raised his public address to
public lands and waters I'm not
alone in believing that this is
the biggest barrier faced a
hundreds and fishermen I urge
you to reconsider kill H. R. I
and H. R. H..
And that we've had these are
access issues for many many
years in our state and
especially in the Yellowstone of
New Mexico which is a wide speak
and we were able to protect
those public lands for the
sports in the state in New
Mexico please reconsider leaving
these public lands open to the
public so that they can enjoy
and harvesters wildlife to feed
their families.
And I really respect your
consideration on this issue
thank you and have a blessed
day.
Okay thank you I'm talking about
as an opponent not to support is
there is there anyone who would
like to speak in support of this
bill.
Okay seeing that and we're gonna
go the opposition you can raise
your hands now if you're on the
phone if you press star nine
that apparently has the effect
of raising your hand
and we will still limit even
that we didn't have any support
we will still limit the
opposition thirty minutes and
two minutes each and first up we
had to Nelson.
From Atlanta can you hear me
yes.
Mr chairman committee members as
the New Mexico this and gain
Commission would confirm hunting
fishing and harvesting well let
our doctor to be not a right but
privileges regulated by law and
this activity is under no
constitutional Representative
will we next see a proposal to
amend the New Mexico state
constitution to guarantee the
right to drive motor vehicle.
Neither of these proposed bills
as anything meaningful to the
New Mexico state constitution
both suggests some discredited
motive on the part of the
Sanchez
both of them thank you.
Okay next we're gonna go to the
trying to find out I will remind
members of the public we're not
gonna question the motives of
the sponsors or members of the
committee
let's talk about the effect of
the bill
dreaded perk up.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is
Joanna program I served twenty
six years with the New Mexico
department of game and fish to
terms of cabinet secretary of M.
nner three terms on the joint U.
S. department interior USDA
wildlife hunting heritage and
conservation council and I'm a
past chair of the state game
commission I'm here today to
oppose both house joint
resolutions I and eight I
despite what you just said Mr
chair I urge you not to be
fooled although on the surface
these resolutions appear to do
great things to secure the
future of hunting and angling in
New Mexico the Sanchez goal is
far from that their goal is to
expanded secure private property
rights for landowners at the
expense of the average New
Mexico citizen in another time
and manner I'd like to be in
favor of an amendment to secure
the future our New Mexico
hunting and fishing heritage but
not with this language and not
with these underlying motives
these resolutions are directly
related to a very important
constitutional question
currently before the New Mexico
Supreme Court regarding article
sixteen section two of our state
constitution which says that the
wires of every stream within the
state of New Mexico are declared
to belong to the public based on
my background in public service
on this issue which manifested
itself because of game and fish
from nineteen thirty one twenty
two adopted in twenty eighteen
which is about certifying
sections of public stream is as
close to the public it is my
firm belief that these two
resolutions are specifically
designed to circumvent the
Supreme Court case the issue is
public access to public water
including that schooling over
private property clearly this
important constitutional
questions must be resolved
before any consideration of
amending or negating
longstanding Lang outstanding
language in the constitution
rule nineteen thirty one twenty
two just as far led to the
closure of five sections of New
Mexico reverse all closures on
private property belonging to
non residents these resolutions
are an attempt to subordinate
the public's existing.
Constitutional rights to the
loss of trespassing private
property these resolutions
cannot be suitably amended
please vote no on moving them
forward thank you.
Thank you for that next.
Mr Chairman.
Representative Cook before I sit
to thirty minutes of testimony
about what my I'll tear your
motive is here I'd like to
repeat to you and to the
committee that what I said in my
opening that my motivation for
bringing this legislation was
because that twenty five year
old kid down the street from the
who's a guide ask me to carry it
so I don't know I don't I
haven't read the pleadings in
the Supreme Court case I have no
motive to protecting bodies.
Property rights are denied
access to anybody I just thought
it was a good idea so I'm happy
to listen to anybody in
opposition if the effect is.
It is nice to blacks and and I
want to hear about it but I'm
not here to protect one class of
people to that to the detriment
of other people.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Representative Cook
and I appreciate that I I think
the you know the the impacts of
the the resolution so the
potential impacts should be well
bedded
And I hope that you know.
With again remind the the
members of the public.
To discuss the bill without
attacking the Sanchez.
Thank you Representative Cook.
Our next member of the public is
Steve Harris.
Steve you're needed on your end.
Thank you Mr chairman I'm Steve
Harris the executive director
Rio Grande restoration and I'm a
professional and have occasional
river runner on the miraculous
little rivers which grace the
lives and landscapes of every
New Mexican including Rio Chama
and the real Pecos which US
secretary prove cough as a
described as having been subject
to non navigability certificates
and therefore subject to
closure.
I'm here to oppose oppose both
house joint resolutions I and
eight.
For boaters stream access is a
perennial issue and it's been
fought in statehouses court
rooms and it good point on river
banks throughout the country so
excuse me if there's a little
extra motional kind.
Since twenty fifteen I have been
following with great interest to
somewhat stealthy campaign in
this legislature to close
sections of river we're public
waters of New Mexico passed over
private property.
As secretary proved up mention
the constitutionality of this
the particular scheme is
currently in education in the
Supreme Court of New Mexico.
I want to offer that it's not
too difficult to manage imagine
a system that satisfies
landowners fishing guides and
the rights of the public without
revising the constitution but
getting there requires the
proponents of these up of H. J.
R. eight in particular to
negotiate in good faith with
citizen recreation just like
myself instead of seeking
sleight of hand political
advantage with limitless lawyers
in campaign donations up please
kill this bill.
So.
Thank you Steve.
So for the fourth time I'm gonna
ask the public.
Not to tech.
Enrollment.
You know this you know what
maybe Representative Cook then
nobody is getting into this is
also a obviously a very
emotional bill for a lot of
people because of its potential
impacts and I get that and I
truly appreciate that.
But let's talk about those
impacts was not talk about the
Sanchez.
Next we had Mike Kearney.
Yes okay I'm speaking today in
opposition four to at house
resolution five and eight the so
called right to hunt in minutes
do nothing to protect the rights
of New Mexicans to hunt fish
trap or otherwise recreate
outdoors but instead only allow
the not elected came commission
to create rules that become
instantly constitutionally
protected regardless of how
constitutional they are how good
or bad they are for New Mexicans
this resolution will prevent
public access to public waters
this is already happened is
being challenged in New Mexico
state Supreme Court.
The New Mexican fish commission
called the so called emergency
meeting to pass rule that
allowed for the privatization of
New Mexican rivers and streams
in direct violation of article
sixteen section to the New
Mexico constitution all without
public comment since this
meeting was declared such an
emergency.
These rules would be only if
this resolution would only
benefit private landowners to
allow them to effectively
transfer public property to
private individuals and would in
no way help the average Mexican
be able to enjoyed hunting
fishing or otherwise recreating
and our public lands please kill
this bill I do not allow this to
move forward thank you.
Thank you for that we have John
Crenshaw.
Thank you Mr chairman committee
members I'm John Crenshaw
president of the New Mexico
wildlife federation I
respectfully request on behalf
of the sportsmen and women of
the federation your project H.
R. J. R.'s I been date this may
seem like an odd decision coming
from lifetime are hunter nine
we're in this person is devoted
most of his working life to
wildlife conservation and the
service to the hunting and
fishing public as I am are are
first is a career game and fish
department employing and for the
past decade is volunteer with
federation.
The proposed amendment would
misguided Lee elevate hunting
and fishing for privileges to
ride and Miss guardedly elevate
private rights but
constitutionally guaranteed
Pueblo rights.
Elevating hunting and fishing to
absolute rights would compromise
legislators came commissioners
wildlife managers ability to
regulate madam chair while our
game and non game a lot.
Just that second big issue The
New Mexico constitution states
that the waters in New Mexico's
natural streams Wong to the
public the state Supreme Court
ruled years ago the private
rights could not quote destroy
your in any manner limited right
to the general public to enjoy
our uses of public waters these
bills would flip that conclusion
on a check the federation
strongly opposes the cell.
Mr chairman members the
committee there's no fixing of
those bills even if the
technical flaws in
constitutional catastrophe were
corrected the core element
elevating the privileges to
rights remains the wrong thing
to do.
This is no time for the
legislature to surrender riches
orgy or to allow the game
commissions and wildlife
professionals has to be tied by
the some necessary
constitutional amendment again
we respectfully request that you
reject these bills thank you
very much for your time.
Thank you Mr current job next we
of the New Mexico wildlife
federation.
Mr chairman members of the
committee this is Jesse to built
executive director of the New
Mexico wildlife federation and
the next one liberation is is
president of the federation job
instructor stated is the oldest
and largest organization in the
state representing the interest
of hunters and anglers as you
mentioned we stand strongly
opposed to build H. three R.
eight and H. three R. five I'm
gonna keep my comments short
since much of the sentiment but
I would like to convey has
already been expressed but I
would also like to say that I
thoroughly appreciate the
honesty and transparency of both
the bill's sponsors when I first
read H. G. R. zero I I contacted
Representative Baldonado and we
have to
in depth discussion about this
resolution and I wholeheartedly
believe that the intent was
junior aligned in pure and
authentic and the goal was to
protect hunting and angling Act
as these joint resolutions are
written however there are
individuals who will take
significant advantage of some of
the language at the detriment of
the residents of New Mexico so
the New Mexico wildlife
federation stand strongly
opposed H. T. R. I N. H. G. R.
eight but thanks again to the
bill sponsors for their interest
and protecting the activities
the privileges of hunting and
angling in New Mexico thank you.
Thank you for that I I actually
skipped over
My screen scrolled I didn't know
this cemex we have just.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee for the
opportunity to provide comments
my name is sherry Barrett and I
tear the New Mexico paddlers
coalition I'm an avid kayaker
after and I oppose H. J. are
five and eight K. A. R. I ate
would adversely affect our
ability to paddle New Mexico's
rivers and streams by elite by
legally enshrining private
property rights in the New
Mexico constitution to override
the public's constitutional
stream access rights public
access to and enjoyment of
natural resources is deeply
ingrained in New Mexico's
culture history and is in stride
in our constitution which states
the end appropriated water of
every natural stream within the
state of New Mexico is hereby
declare to belong to the public
these resolutions before you
today would allow the
privatization of stretches of
river throughout the state we're
those rivers run through
privately owned land if enacted
this would mean that our
overriding constitutional right
to use public waters.
Would now be supported private
property rights interest passed
laws are constitutional right to
enjoy our state's rivers would
be taken away and we're there
once was open revert it would
instead be fencing and signs and
barricades.
Your body would be profoundly
affected we would lose access to
the incredible and unique
natural resources that New
Mexico provides B. R. rivers I
respectfully request that you
vote no on H. J. R.'s I and
eight thank you.
Thank you for that we have
WildEarth guardians wildlife.
Can you hear me.
Yes.
Chairman the queen members of
the committee my name is
actually Chris Smith not
WildEarth guardians wildlife but
I do Representative WildEarth
guardians and are thousands of
members and supporters across
New Mexico we strongly oppose
both house joint resolution I
and house joint resolution eight
of the nine interpretation of
these resolutions would see them
as unnecessary a more cynical
perspective is that they confuse
it Lee and basically codify
something that is currently a
regulated privilege as a
constitutional right along side
monumental freedoms like speech
and religion.
And doing so could lead to
extremely problematic iterations
of hunting and fishing from an
ecological and societal
perspective just taking off my
WildEarth guardians had I'd like
to speak to as a native New
Mexicans who spends
an abundant amount of my time
utilizing public lands and
waters pursuing fish as an
angler I see two big problems
with these resolutions first
hunting angling should be done
with reverence and with
responsibility that corresponds
to privilege a privilege can be
taken away when it is abused and
everyone I know who hunts or
fishes recognizes what a
privilege it is that makes them
hunt and fish in a respectful
manner according to the law
second the tress passin property
rights language in these
resolutions may conflict with
article sixteen section two of
the constitution which states
that streams belong to the
public the wrong resolution to
this conflict could exclude the
public from miles and miles of
streams and rivers which is a
terrible outcome for the vast
majority of New Mexicans
including myself you're not a
private property on streams I
urge you all to oppose these
resolutions thank you.
Thank you for that except we
have a looking glass that.
Morning thank you Mr chairman
and committee members.
my name is long last time on the
staff attorney for the New
Mexico wilderness alliance.
Mexico wild opposes both have
house joint resolution I and
house joint resolution eight.
we are concerned to see yet
another effort I will have the
effect of stripping everyday
recreationists of their
constitutional right.
Like access I'm also concerned
that packaging this fact within
a quote right to hunt bill will
have the effect of fish during
the on going efforts to protect
wildlife water and public lands
in New Mexico as those efforts
are happening as a coalition
effort which includes hunters
anglers public lands advocates
bird watchers and animal rights
activists.
is amendments will create
uncertainty within the game and
fish department and its efforts
to carry out its mission I
encourage the committee to
discuss exactly how the game and
fish department will make sure
it will deal with extreme
violations of regulations in
light of this new a right to
hunt and fish for example the
department still be allowed to
prohibit extreme violators from
obtaining hunting and fishing
licenses in the future.
it's it's worth noting that the
constitution does find that the
on appropriated water of every
natural stream perennial or
torrential is hereby declare to
belong to the public.
And.
These bills will have the
effect.
Of turning the the
constitutional provision on its
head since the previous
commenter stated
that rights is this that right
supersedes any interests of
private property owners to keep
streams running across their
property from trust passed
these amendments would flip that
hierarchy placing the interests
of many recreational just
subordinate and subject to the
interest of a few private
property owners this would cause
immediate constitutional
congruency and require yet
another Supreme Court
intervention I see my time is up
we just once again The New
Mexico wild stands opposed to
both of these house joint
resolutions thank you.
Thank you for that next up we
have a great Peters.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee thank you for the
opportunity I'm not any interest
allowing others to to also speak
will be brief my name is Greg
Peterson the public lands model
advocate for conservation voters
New Mexico here in behalf of CVM
to stand strong opposition these
two measures we respectfully
request that the committee vote
no on HR I H. T. R. eight thank
you for your time.
Thank you for that we have a
phone number the last four
digits are eight nine six four.
Yes thank you chairman of
Matthew McQueen and members of
the committee on traces scenes
Care and I'd like to speak in
opposition to both of the HA are
five and eight for the following
reasons.
New Mexico game and fish already
issues more than four hundred
thousand fishing licenses and
over ninety three hunting
licenses annually.
For LFC alone there over thirty
seven thousand licenses issued
and only forty percent of
hunters are reporting a
successful hunt.
I'm a constitutional right to
hunt could seriously infringe on
the department's ability to
conserve and protect help and
dozens of other game species
that are currently being taken.
If you make hunting and fishing
a right it would undermine the
current system of quotas bag
limits and methods of cake
and these are designed to
protect to healthy and
sustainable population of
wildlife.
Also making hunting and fishing
a rate could also open multiple
new challenges regarding access
to public and private land and
water as many people have
already spoken about.
Also giving one group of
wildlife consumers the right to
take wildlife would
disenfranchise outdoor non
consumers of their ability to
enjoy the benefits of abundant
living wildlife on New Mexico's
public and private lands.
Finally just taking a look at
the impacts of climate change
temperature rise and habitat
loss from multiple New Mexico
species shows that there cannot
be any kind of guarantee
constitutional or otherwise that
a given species will survive to
be hunted and fished and our
state of in perpetuity thank you
for your consideration.
Thank you for that we're just
gonna Johnson.
Good morning Mr chair.
Members Jessica Johnson with
animal protection voters and
with respect to the Sanchez we
propose H. J. R. as I and eight
currently our state's wildlife
management takes place using a
variety of approaches with
restrictions including licensing
and education requirements
seasons bag limits prohibitions
on various wasteful or unethical
methods measures to comply with
federal wildlife conservation
laws and license revocations
upon rule violations it's
unclear which of these current
restrictions might violate a
purported right to hunt also and
quickly note that a similar
constitutional amendment passed
the Arizona legislature and
twenty ten or I believe that was
the year that went to the ballot
but nearly every Arizona
newspaper editorialized against
the measure and it was rejected
by Arizona voters at the polls
thank you.
Thank you for that next up we
have Janet Carter.
Thank you chairman with clean my
name is Jenna Carter.
I'm speaking as a private
citizen and as an avid outdoors
person I live in Santa Fe New
Mexico I I do agree with all the
previous speakers I do believe
that this.
This particular legislation
would.
I do agree that this particular
legislation.
Gives a right to something that
truly is not a right.
It is a privilege people can
violate that privilege and this
type of of constitutional
amendment goes too far in in
attempting to give everyone.
Freedoms that may not always be
available that may not always be
practical that may not always
be.
The consider.
The land in the wildlife I
believe that the fish and game
department is capable of
regulating hunting and fishing
in such a way that all can
participate.
As appropriate and I believe
that it's it is wrong to put
such a small.
It appropriate item into the New
Mexico constitution thank you
for your time chairman.
And I again I oppose this bill
strongly thank you.
Thank you we have Gabe Vasquez.
Thank you are chairman queen
members of the committee my name
is Gabe Vasquez some a city
council done in the city of Los
crucis as well as the founder of
the rest of the other
conservation project I myself am
a hunter and angler and I think
this bill just goes too far as
previous commenters mentioned
here hunting and fishing is a
privilege it is one that takes
much to care to continue the
type of traditions culture and
heritage that comes along with
the sporting activities and
simply simply said this
constitutional amendment
promotes a rate that that does
not exist in addition this also
clears the way for the
privatization of streams with
potential implications for
public land access for hunters
as well now in New Mexico as you
know we're not he a rich people
we are not a rich state in fact
our use suffer from some of the
worst outcomes in the in the
nation due to poverty in the
home and poverty in their
community and so what we do have
is the opportunity to go outside
to enjoy our natural waters to
enjoy our public lands and for
many families and for many used
it does provide a rest by a way
to deal with some of the impacts
and effects of poverty and so
taking away access to streams
during the time which is
critical for our youth to be
outside is the wrong move and I
think this committee has the
single best chance to stop this
bill and so I think from the
fact that you're hearing from
sportsmen and other hunters were
largely in opposition this
should be a clear sign that this
resolution is problematic and
although we we aren't supportive
of hunting and fishing this is
just not the right way to go up
so I stand in opposition to both
H. E. R. I N. G. R. eight thank
you chairman queen members of
the committee.
Thank you for that
Representative run short on time
we do only have three more
people wishing to speak so apart
are prepared public members
Public participants you can keep
your comments short we can get
to everyone so next up is the
phone number last four digits
are one zero nine five.
Your muted on your end.
There you go.
Can you hear me now yes.
I'm so sorry about that my
name's Mary Catherine right I'm
calling from the back of the
court County the wildlife chair
for the Rio Grande chapter of
the Sierra Club Sierra Club
supports regulated hunting
consistent with science based
management goals but the two
proposed amendments by making
hunting and fishing a guaranteed
rate elevate these practices
above scientific management and
the proper regulatory authority
vested in the state game
commission and the state
legislature the state must have
the ability to at times restrict
the killing of wildlife by such
means as limiting license sales
and acting quotas and closing
certain areas to conserve
wildlife and to protect the
public these proposed amendments
are both bank and their
definitions the word harvest and
traditional means are not
defined is it possible these
measures could in fact protect
unpopular and questionable
practices such as trapping.
Nevertheless even if the
definitions are clarified
hunting and fishing are not
right there privileges that
require the purchase of a
licensed and the privilege can
be revoked.
The state constitution is meant
to be a document that preserves
fundamental rights for all New
Mexicans and provide legal
guidance through the generations
it should not be used to
politically further and protect
the interests and desires of a
narrow segment of our population
I urge you to oppose both
measures thank you.
Thank you the next step in again
August people to be brief norm
come.
Thank you Mr chairman.
New barricades were erected on
two of New Mexicos classic
rivers following the Martinez
administration state came come.
Could you introduce yourself
Liz.
My name is norm Gaume I'm a
native New Mexican and I've
enjoyed New Mexico's rivers and
streams for my entire adult
life.
New barricades were erected on
two of New Mexicos classic
rivers fall in the Martinez
administration's.
A state game commission issuing
a legal privatization rules and
non navigable certificates one
barricades on the upper Pecos
river built in posted by an
absentee Texas landowners trust.
cages constructed of pipe
interwoven with barbed wire
flanked with concertina and
barbed wire fences with
aggressive no trespassing signs
at the river banks the sign say
operation of watercraft is
prohibited if an unsuspecting
kayaker were to encounter this
barricade.
He might become entrapped and
die.
A new steel cable blocks the Rio
Chama below the village of
trauma.
Both both rivers are part of our
popular with voters and are
listed in a nineteen eighty
three state park parks division
New Mexico whitewater guide book
that promoted public use of New
Mexicos rivers I use this guide
book weekly to explore New
Mexico's rivers and streams I
ask you to protect public access
so my grandchildren can enjoy
the same activities that I did
H. E. R. I N. H. G. R. eight
would be jeopardized
recreational this constitutional
screen access rights.
Please do not pass H. J. R. I N.
H. a R. eight.
Thank you for that.
We have Stewart what's.
Yes I can hear me yes okay thank
you Mr chairman and committee
members for the right speak my
name is to what summer retired
physician Albuquerque a longtime
resident of New Mexico and for
the second time I just like to
say that I support all past
speakers of the clear well
spoken and I'd like you to
reject these amendments thank
you for your time and
consideration.
Thank you for that in our final
speaker in opposition to these
bills is Marco Gonzalez.
A good afternoon Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Marco Gonzales and registered
lobbyist for the New Mexico
habitat conservation initiative
and we were involved in the
passage of the statute and the
rule that was been adopted and
that many of the speakers have
talked about today I'm not here
to talk about that I just want
to say that we are also opposed
to both of these resolutions for
vastly different reasons but
nevertheless repeat state stand
opposed these have come up in
other sessions I don't believe
that they've been heard before
but we were also opposed to
those and so with that Mr
chairman and members of the
committee thank you for your
time this morning and I
appreciate I appreciate all the.
Okay we have we had one more
hand pop up it Glenn Griffin if
you could be decreased please.
Yes good morning this is Andrew
Griffin Silver City New Mexico I
would like to voice my
opposition to H. J. are five and
eight they're not needed please
table the resolutions and save
taxpayers the election money but
please drive to better regulate
the taking of our wildlife thank
you from Silvercity.
Okay and that's it for
The public comment thank you
everyone who participated.
and that like to go back to the
Sanchez before we get to the
committee Representative do you
have anything you'd like that.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee and
members of the public eye you
know of course
A lot of the.
A lot of the public testimony
with some.
Directed directly at at the
sponsors of the images it's it's
frustrating Mr Chairman to here
folks feel like like these are
intended to do something against
What these folks are talking
about but but never the less I I
do want to say that you know
hunting fishing and trapping are
definitely part of New Mexicos
history trapping is a method of
of population management and
that it's not it might be
unpopular with some groups but
it's very popular with others
and it's not to mention that and
and say that the you know this
resolution came about two one to
transfer of that right for for
the next generations and
hopefully we can have a
discussion about it down and get
these bills moved on thank you
Mr.
Further Mr chairman thank you
thank you representative
going to the committee first up
we have Representative
Strickler.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
R. Sanchez a Representative
Baldonado Representative Cook
and and what you know
The way I read this.
The people of the state have a
right to hunt fish and harvest
wildlife in accordance with the
laws and rules established to
manage wildlife so this doesn't
take away those regulatory
rules and and laws.
The way I read it so I
understand the opposition it
sounds like
Their thoughts that that would
be some have taken away but
that's not what that says can
you can you help me
turbot that.
The gentleman.
Thank you Mr Chairman
representative there if you you
know that exactly I mean this
isn't an intent to to change
existing law it it's it's not
going to circumvent the the
regulations that came in his
department has in place you know
in the game fish in the state of
New Mexico has done in the
nominal job over the the years
of a population management in
was times where L. Kurds and and
things of that nature we're
almost nonexistent in the state
now we we we are flourishing
because of the good men and
women that are working at in
that department but this one
circumvent anything that exists
you know obviously there's
there's a lot of conversation
about stream access and water
axes and things of that nature
and that's working its way
through the courts we we had a
bill in two years back to the
the put that into play and and
this doesn't change that are
amend that so but but obviously
there there are others that the
feel that it does thank you Mr.
Thank you for that Mr chairman
and and Representative to.
the game and fish
You know with their scientific
station one not I know we we
we're kind of blessed with it
over over abundance of L. can't
so I know there's been a lot of
the.
Request to you know increase the
tax and and so forth to the
better manage those hurts and
and and the they they lot
alfalfa and and you know and
it so that they they're
plentiful so let ME automatic
that is good I know the deal
deer population is as well and
So we're we're in good shape as
far as that goes so yeah I just
want to emphasize to the
committee that
this is not it to our
with the laws and rules
established to manage wildlife
which I've heard the audience
cites a privilege and
absolutely and that this doesn't
do away with that we still have
to deal with the.
you know with the vision
licenses in the hunting licenses
and also the draw system I know
I have a lot of friends in
height and and San Juan county
and surrounding areas and could
and for a you know tag each and
every year and and if they're
lucky maybe every five years so
they'll get some you know look
at some taxed will never give up
and.
Popular in our area at least and
I'm sure it is around the state
so and in other states have done
this to.
Is that right I think there's
twenty twenty three states that
have that implemented shimmer of
language so this is a native of
our surrounding states we have
Texas Utah and Oklahoma have
similar statutes
the the most recent is and you
Utah and Utah very similar to
two minute Mexico I mean they
have a lot of federal lands in
fact they have seventy six
percent of their their lancer
federal so I think were around
forty forty three percent so.
Appreciate you bringing this
forward you know I I do
understand you know the concerns
but I just I think you're the
language and I haven't gone to
the house resolution eight but
I'm.
I was pretty pretty
straightforward it all the rules
and rags to stay and stay in
place.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you for a Representative
Baldonado and Representative
Cook.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Next up we have president Scott.
Thank you Mr chairman
representatives.
Both bills.
In front of me and.
Then.
Significant consternation.
Over the impact of this.
Constitutional amendment on
stream access.
A plain reading.
Confuses me a little bit I see
here I'm looking at H. G. R. I.
Right should not be construed to
imperil laws established to
prepare us for to protect
property rights would user of
the representatives care two
address this so.
Stream access issue.
Could you explain to me how this
line which might affect.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Scott you know
the we we do included that
language specifically to do not
tread on on what was existing in
terms of of what exists in state
law already you know there's
there's quite a quite a the
fight over over those dressed as
rates and things of that nature
and in in crossing near rivers
that go to private land I don't
feel like with this amendment
that we we change any of that we
we try and leave it alone and
that with folks just have that
opportunity in the constitution
to to do what they want to do
and enjoy the beautiful parts of
the state that that we don't
always get on C. so.
I mean I think it's it's the the
languages is short and sweet and
very concise and doesn't doesn't
try to amend or change anything
that's existing a lot just
simply give that right into the
constitution.
Representative Cook you many
scientists.
I don't have anything further
beyond what Representative
Baldonado just explained.
And then it seems like another
big question was the.
Right verses.
H. O..
Language which.
Which which does give me pause I
guess it would still be possible
to take what.
A hundred licensure for.
French monopole on existing
rules and regulations it looks
like that would be true
given the language in this could
you could either of you address
that concern.
Mr Chairman representative I
wasn't clear on the.
Distinction that was.
Implied maybe by.
By the people who spoke in
opposition it seems to me that
they were saying that rights are
absolute.
And this would make hunting an
absolute right.
Of course rights are not
absolute I have a right to speak
but even my local government has
a right to restrict my speech so
I just I don't think that.
By doing this we're creating
some absolute right and people
to.
To hunt and fish just there will
be regulations on on the way
home fish as there are now.
It's just establishing in the
constitution that Mexicans have
a right to hunt fish.
Chairman representatives both of
these pieces of legislation
appear to be subject to.
Here's language in accordance
with laws and rules established
to manage wildlife
It looks like a.
Right.
Explanation of.
How hunting and fishing could
still be.
And would still be regulated
would you agree.
That's what it looks like to me
to Representative Mr chair
Mr Chairman representative.
Mr Chairman representative it's
my understanding that a number
of states.
Somewhere in the mid twenties
have already established
of constitutional provisions to
preserve hunting and fishing in
their states can you shed any
light on that activity.
Mr chairman and Representative
Scott Representative Strickler
had some have some data for us
and and and most recently in the
state of Utah that that did pass
one of these resolutions and in
the fall of last year and that
was probably the source of
motivation and on my part
because that read about it and I
thought well let's do that here
in New Mexico I know that it's
been done several other states
in this the in the United States
there there's a very big
distinction of of.
Places that you want to hunt and
fish back east it's not as if
that is you know desired this in
in New Mexico and Utah and
Wyoming and Colorado we have you
know much more vast open spaces
much more public land available
to to sportsmen and women for
that purpose of hunting and
fishing and and and managing the
wildlife so
you know it's I think it's
mostly western states that have
done this but but it exists and
and over twenty Mr chairman and
Representative Scott.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative for your answers
that's all I have.
Thank you Representative Scott
except we have Representative
Ferrary.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
representatives
I this could be from either
because I think it's covered in
both
of bills but when you talk about
preserving the right to use
traditional methods
Do you realize or did you intend
to reserves the right to hunt
with specific hunting of methods
that includes dogs and trapping
and baiting and stocking and
diversion of streams to strand
fish and
Those are all really
controversial hunting methods
but they could be with your bill
Used.
Madam chair I mean sorry Mr
chairman and Representative
Ferrary
the short answer is yes you can
Andrew into a into the weeds of
some of the the the the idea of
of diverting streams and things
of that nature but if it's
trapping that you're talking
about yes trapping is a
traditional method that's used
in the state it's on maybe not
popular with some folks but
again it is popular with others
and the intent is to preserve
that method as well.
And I'm Representative did you
want to respond to that no madam
chair I would just agree with
what Representative brought us
that okay and Mr chair and
representative
My concern is that by elevating
hunting and fishing as a
preferred method of managing and
controlling wildlife that could
be interpreted to prevent the
use of alternative wildlife
management tools like wild like
contraceptives like is being
proposed for wild horses that I
support very
wholeheartedly but also moving
individuals to new areas where
habitat you know what
The quality limits populations
you know such as sometimes with
even the wild horses but also
bighorn sheep so this
Is in contradiction with of
wildlife management and I was
wondering if what you would say
to that respond to that thank
you Mr chairman Representative
Ferrary I I do I do they don't
envision that came into office
is going to go out and.
Somehow capture elk and deer and
bighorn sheep and play some sort
of contraceptive on on their
bodies in some way maybe wild
horses that's that's not a of
of.
An animal that some that's
managed by the game and fish and
so I think you're comparing
apples to oranges there you
know.
When you talk about heard some
populations of of of animals the
method by which you you manage
those is is to take in harvest
and put those those animals to
use you put them on your table
you feed your family with you
don't you don't waste came you
you you know even the smallest
drive or drive whatever it is
that you harvest you you you
take that me and you use that
and that's what the sportsman of
the State do are there some bad
actors obviously yes there's
going to be a few folks and
that's why game and fish has you
know quite a few words on the on
the street out there on in the
in the wilderness out there
taking care of of those folks
that are are breaking laws and
in doing so so I do take
exception to that I mean they I
just honestly I could again just
imagine that came in fiscal
manage populations of
contraceptives Mr Chairman.
Mr chair Mister speaker and
Representative Mr speaker I'm
sorry Mr Chairman representative
I'm afraid that your bill is
going to elevate hunting and
fishing above that
wildlife from at management and
just leave it up to the hunters
and
this year and that.
We'll have higher
Control over wildlife so again
this a constitutional protection
is the right to hunt fish may
conflict with N. or negatively
impact other state initiatives
that promote non consumption
outdoor recreation as was stated
by quite a few of the people in
opposition
and also
My other angst is that this is a
model constitutional amendment
that has been promoted by the
NRA so I will not be able to
support your bill thank you
thank you Mr chair thank you.
Thank you Representative Ferrary
next up with Representative
Montoya.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Representative Baldonado
Representative Cook.
I'm having a hard time reading
into the language.
The the two.
Constitutional amendments.
A hard time.
Finding.
Where we're.
Private property rights will
need to be expanded or denied I
mean it seems to be completely
neutral.
On the issue of private property
rights as far as the streams go.
The way I understand current law
you can you can.
Navigate a stream or river that
goes private property you just
can't venture off into the
private property.
While you're navigating a
streams I mean obviously thank
you get off I think I I
understand the concept is the
wet foot concept.
But I don't see anything in in
either one of these measures
that.
Either increases or decreases
private property rights you
speak to that a bit.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Montoya
again you know looking at the
language the.
The residents are not allowed to
read there it's there for the
short sweet and you know we we
specifically included language
that would protect would exist
in current state law so to your
point Representative that is
absolutely correct.
Thank you for that
representative about another
also I am having a hard time.
We're we're either one of these
would
to do what has been suggested
that somehow.
You would increase or make it a
preferred method.
For hunting and trapping and
fishing I I'm reading it
specifically in the bill in
accordance with the laws and
rules established to manage
wildlife that is not ambiguous
language.
Once again I'm I'm seeing things
to read into both of these
resolutions that.
That go far beyond the actual
words in the resolution
So obviously you're not looking
to supersede wildlife management
when it says here in accordance
with the laws and rules
established to manage wildlife I
don't see that you're taking
away any ability from game and
fish department.
factory I see what you've done
here is just codified in my no I
missing something.
Mr Chairman representative I
think you're you're reading it
exactly.
As you just articulated we're
we're we're not.
Presenting anything right in
terms of languages it's it's.
Very clear that we're trying to
protect and.
If you exceed that rate on this
but not not card once just you
know but you know folks just
tread on wherever they can go
over this and this is an attempt
to so.
Keep the gaming press
regulations and private property
on rights intact but yet you
give those folks the opportunity
the state has as Representative
Strickler mentioned quite a bit
of of federal public land but
also by the bit of state public
land that we have an agreement
given this as an agreement with
the state land office to to
trespassing use those lines for
for hunting and fishing and you
know folks that the commented on
in public comment I've I've been
out hunting some of those folks
on public public lands and and
that's something that we need to
protect and continue to and be
able to enjoy Mr Chairman.
Thank you are Representative and
I and I'm I know that Senate
bill thirty two which is
interest introduce this year
intends to ban trapping on
public lands.
if there that's just one form.
It is strapping.
And today the attempt is to
restrict that but as was a
mention earlier
There are other activities that
that.
Traditional.
New Mexicans have held dear
and it appears that some of
those things now are.
The focus of people who'd like
to restrict The New Mexican
traditional way of life so I
understand why you would bring
this site is that the folks many
of the folks who I heard speak
after the at the beginning
getting public comment there are
concerns that you want things to
they don't want rights to be
lost.
And what I see it in in both
these resolutions is to protect
the very rights.
That
They're afraid of losing so yeah
I plan on supporting us
You know you and quicker.
Pretty shady in other areas I
would buy a car from either one
of you guys but I just don't
read it in this legislation any.
It's just a real big stretched
and trying to figure.
something areas you're just not
there it is just pretty much
takes what we are able to do
today and basically says that we
want to protect that going into
the future and
It.
And my little confused here Mr
Chairman representative I
wouldn't into this I've spent a
lot of time in this legislation
a lot of time on on Land Grant
Committee and summer with with
with German Garcia and we
talked.
A lot about protecting
traditional uses for Land Grant.
People folks that are part of
being answers to language and as
well as native American uses on
where we want to we in that
committee we talk about
protecting that in giving those
folks the right to this would
and and clays and things that
they use for their religions are
there you know whatever
ceremonies or whatever things
are doing their in their
traditional uses and it's
encouraged me that we're trying
to do the same thing here just
for a different group of people
yet the push back is is is from
the centers but I do appreciate
your comments are thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you.
I I don't to appreciate some of
your comments but others I do.
Percent could I've warned us
Representative Montoya attacking
people.
we have Representative Dixon.
Thank you Mr chairman and
representatives Baldonado and
cook for bringing this before
the committee I'm I wanted to go
back to specifically
how straight resolution I and I
know that
What's representatives Scott in
Montoya
Brought up the question of the
second sentence.
But more specifically Mr
chairman and representatives my
question is if you can share
with me some specific examples
of the laws and rules that you
believe fall within the
category.
The sentence
Is that the right shall not be
construed to impair laws and
rules established to prohibit
trespass or to protect property
rights and so I'm looking for
some specific examples of what
those would be thank you very
much.
So Mr chairman and
Representative Dixon
At the end of the quite
understand what you're looking
for in terms of you know a
specific example but you know so
you have maybe a rivers streams
water that that flows through
private land on we take the Rio
Grande much of the program is
managed by governmental agencies
like emergency down in my area
south of Albuquerque
but you do have let's say the
the biggest burden that the does
flow on the eastern side of the
state crosses to many Britons
and I think the big rob that we
talk about with with that trust
me.
The water.
Is is accessible to the people
in New Mexico but that private
property it owns the land of the
cross crisscrosses on is trying
to protect their property from
maybe it's damage maybe it's
just they don't want other folks
on and things of that nature
that I believe that that
probably is the biggest robin
this bill and with your public
comment on I don't know that you
have situations where hunters
will will will maybe
inadvertently or intentionally
cross onto private lands without
permission on but most most
sportsmen and sportswomen are
very very small although the
seek your written permission to
trespass on property before they
go funds or or this but it does
happen that you have folks that
will do that.
Intensely on because maybe
that's where the big LFC is
whatever you do and that's why
we give this you know exists and
and you know that.
The state of New Mexico with the
fifth largest landmass State and
with that we have I want to see
about sixty five
conservation officers out there
so you talking men and women are
are way up the middle of nowhere
by themselves in in situations
that can be a little bit no
parents at points but on you
know their job is to enforce the
funds and so we we've given them
those opportunities again
commission has.
Quite a bit of statute and in
quite a bit of will that that
impact on you know what we do
out there in in the field of
that answer question Mr chairman
Mr Chairman representative.
I'm thank you yes and just to
follow up on that would how
would that then relate to sort
of the constitutional right of
for New Mexicans to access the
public streams I mean it would
is there any conflict there.
Mr Chairman representative I
don't read conflict there but
this is some folks do the the
strain access issue is before
the courts now and I'm I'm I'm
not entering the Representative
Cook and expanding the programs
raised millions of cases but no
one's is built with this
resolution was introduced I have
several phone calls from folks
that that a new relations is in
litigation right now and the
intent wasn't to supersede that
are are up in that litigation
whatsoever but you know like I
said early on in the
presentation this is simply
something that I do in my spare
time and I simply want to
protect that for for generations
going point of that.
Thank you representatives and Mr
chairman thank you.
Thank you.
Representative Ortez.
Thank you Mr chair
representative Baldonado and and
Representative Cook
Really grateful that you're here
to highlight the on the issues
and the importance of hunting
and fishing in our state my
district inTaos is filled with
hunters and fishermen and
guides.
On a macro level on many rely on
on these traditional practices
to you know they were there
businesses they feed their
families sometimes they provide
me with the LFC that they
harvest I'm very very very
grateful for that and as we
heard in the public comment
you know these hunters and
fishermen they really regard
this as a sacred.
Which really you're not as a
right but as it as a privilege
that is use that is regulated
and there's and subject to rule
they're concerned about those
bad actors
goes on ethical sportsmen and
women and and that you know that
would be held accountable for
bad behavior should should
something like this the the past
so all right I think that the
the best thing that we can do to
protect our hunting and fishing
traditions in the state is to is
to protect our public lands
protect our waters to invest in
programs you know the outdoor
recreation programs for for
young people so that they can
get out and you know and enjoy
our our beautiful state and you
know take part in the traditions
that make up there in the core
values of their family and and
the places where they're from we
should continue to involve
hunters and fishermen and
stakeholder process sees to
ensure that management plans
make sense you know so I I thank
you for you know for bringing
this to light I I I am sorry to
say that I cannot support this
but I I thank you for your
commitment to to hunters and
fishermen and let's figure we
can do together to protect those
livelihoods and to protect these
traditions thank you thank you
Mr chair Mister chairman and and
Representative Ortez I've never
met you in person but it's it's
great to see on committees will
it some day when life gets back
to normal we'll get to hang out
but I do appreciate your
comments I have a few friends of
one comes to mind that but
nothing major an individual
that's I think he's out in the
bill more than that home but he
has some programs that engage
children games on backroom
things of that nature you you
pointed out outdoor recreation I
think the work if I'm not
mistaken it was
Representative ostracism which
is chairman now statement.
My mind her name but that was
able to pass legislation that
created the the office of the
outdoor recreation those sorts
of things we need to work
together on and I know
everything wells of that opposes
bill today would would love to
be part of that conversation so
I appreciate that man know that
you want you have plenty to do
up there and house in terms of
about recreations I do thank you
for those comments and you Mr
chairman.
Thank you Martinez
Any further questions from the
committee I do a quick Google My
on.
so go ahead Representative
Baldonado attendance should
understand the structure of your
bill and.
I think
You know say it's been circular.
Because it's a bit circular
people can argue it both ways is
it seems to say to me that you
have a right to hunt unless we
pass a law that says you don't.
So
we
how does that work.
Thank you Mr chairman and
I think you know we we in our
constitution there many things
laid out and and you know
through the years of of of the
state's in existence.
Maybe two to to the point of too
much at some point but we we do
have statute that governs
certain things in this the on.
Whether it's hunting and fishing
or were.
My real estate business in the
license that I have is is
regular governed by things
within state so I do I do
understand what you mean by
circuit I I completely
understand that it was amazing
to me that one's one is injured
when this was introduced that I
had.
Both sides of the fence the the
the stream access folks and and
the folks that are on the public
lands under so it was never
intended to to on certain bins
anything as we said before but I
do understand on the to make
constructive.
I'm.
Representative Baldonado
Okay so there I guess there's
that so let me ask it this way.
What what do you think would
change is this is this bill
passed and went to the voters I
was adopted and it was in our
constitution what would be
different than it is now.
I think Mr Chairman is the short
answer is nothing to be honest
with you this is more of a of a
on an opportunity to to elevate
something that goes on within
the state that many people enjoy
to do
and quite honestly many people
come from out of state and spend
the transfer money in our state
funding in addition.
You Mr chairman
so I don't think anything would
potentially change but it would
it would actually give us that.
That piece in the constitution I
think sportsmen would appreciate
Mr Chairman.
Okay.
That's the that's it for my
questions of the Representative
is we would you like to say
anything before we solicited a
motion.
Mr chairman thank you for the
the the the vigorous debate I
appreciate the members of the
committee that have chimed in
and and I know that like
mentioned before was
Representative worked as that
this might.
Some of the conversation between
both that we can continue to
improve on twenty additional
cases that in the next on and
preserve those opportunities but
also you know highlight on the
wonderful the state that we have
in terms of probation or the
summit comes Mr chairman thank
you.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the.
Committee I just would like to
close by saying that we have.
In our state constitution the.
Bill of rights that
Gives us the right among other
things to keep and bear arms we
have right to repair his
corporate so that we can go on
for rejection clearcase why we
you know or have the state
determine why they've arrested
us.
this religious freedom in there
we have a trial by jury.
Rights regarding excessive.
The excessive fines Bill Clinton
usual punishment.
Right to trial right speech and
press and.
No there lots of rights that are
built into our constitutional
right now that are heavily
regulated you know we have a
right to habeas corpus but right
there in that section of our
constitution says.
And unless you know certain
things are happening you do you
don't have that right so just
like our right to comparing our
keep and bear arms it says that
we have a right to bear arms but
we don't just get to keep and
bear arms however want to.
And I think this bill
This resolution would be the
same way it's just saying that
we have a right to hunt but we
have to do it in accordance with
the rules.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Representative Cook what's the
will of the committee.
Representative your I move to
table.
Bills the let's let's do this
one at a time why we the chair I
first.
I need to table STR I.
Their second.
Second.
Second from Representative
Chandler chili can you take a
vote.
Representative Chandler yes.
Representative Dixon.
Yes.
Representative Ferrary.
Yes.
Representative Montoya.
The table.
Representative Ortez.
Yes.
Representative Sari√±ana.
Representative Sari√±ana.
She's presenting about okay.
Representative Scott.
The table.
Representative Strickler.
No.
Representative Townsend Here.
Vice chair Stansbury yes the
table and I'd like to explain my
vote on both bills at the very
end.
and chairman the queen.
Yes.
And that is a due to people with
a vote of sixty four.
Representative Ferrary would you
like to make a motion on each
day our eight.
Yes I would I move to table S.
J. R. eight.
Their second second.
sure we can take the vote.
Representative Chandler yes.
Representative Dixon yes.
Representative Ferrary yes.
Representative Montoya.
No to cable.
Representative Ortez.
Yes.
Representative Sari√±ana.
Representative Scott.
Representative Strickler.
Representative Townsend noted
table.
Vice chair Stansbury yes to
table.
And chairman the queen yes.
And that is at the table with
the vote of six to four.
German thank you for your
presentation of culture built
seven table Representative more
Stansbury Meister Stansbury to
explain about.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you gentlemen for bringing your
built today I think is the both
public testimony and discussion
hearing committee revealed that
we as new Mexicans hold dear our
ability to hunt and use our
public and private lands for the
purposes of hunting and
gathering and things that are
critical to culture and
sustenance and recreation but I
think it's really important to
just emphasize that there is
language in both of these bills
that appears whether by
intention or not and to be an
end run around our
constitutional right to have
access to our rivers and streams
and the waters at the state
which date back dates back to
time immemorial and was put into
our constitution in New Mexico's
founding so it's critical that
we maintain public access to our
rivers and streams and I think
that's why we heard the
testimony that we did today and
just want to appreciate the good
discussion.
Thank you Representative
Stansbury and thank you everyone
I will see you on Thursday we
are adjourned.
I have.
