of Lujan, Representative Meia
here.
floor leader, Representative
Zamora.
Madam Vice Chair. Madam Chair.
Here, Madam Chair, we have a
quorum.
OK, thank you.
And with Senator.
52. Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for putting me back on
the schedule quickly, um, little
bit of stories about this. I
went up and talked to council
service about making an
amendment that, and the
amendment that you have in front
of you just strikes the whole
first section which deals with
legislator per diem, and the
concern was it's in the
Constitution.
And everybody looked at it it's
like, well, that's stupid to
have it in the Constitution
written that way, with that
level of specificity, but
regardless, that's what we have.
Um, and so the amendment just
strikes the whole first part of
the bill and just deals with the
second part, which is mostly
focused.
On
Public employees that are
non-legislators, though it does
include legislators, and this is
where things get very confusing.
Uh, but if you strike out the
first part, then the bill just
becomes part on page.
5 of the original bill.
Um
Where it talks about the
standard mileage rate and
changes from internal revenue
Service to sit by the United
States General Services
Administration, um,
It
Directly to aviation or the
aviation was set at 88 cents.
What this now do is just set it
in the.
8.
With legis.
He
Hello
In
The
The rules set.
By the Department of Finance
Administration, which refers
then to the second section.
Um
and the
It
the
Thank you, Senator.
Uh, do we have a motion to
discuss the amendment?
OK.
A second. So discussion on the
amendment.
I was just gonna move to adopt
the amendment. OK. So do we have
any opposition to adopt the
amendment?
OK, uh, amendment, um, with the
0.232029.1 amendment number.
is um adopted. Do we have any
opposition, seeing them?
You have an amended bill.
So now we'll go to the audience.
Do we have anyone in the
audience?
Um
Let's go online.
Anyone is hoping to make public
comment in support of the bill,
please raise your hand.
OK, Sing none. Anyone hoping to
make a comment in opposition to
the bill, please raise your
hand.
Say no, Madam chair.
OK, committee members,
represented a block.
And I'm sure I move a do pass on
Senate Bill 52 is amended.
The motion for due pass by
ranking member block, a second
by Representative Lujan. Do we
have any opposition?
Seeing none, you have a pass.
OK.
Senate Bill 480.
I need to take this call. OK, go
ahead.
Good morning and welcome.
You may begin if you're ready.
Good morning, Madam Chairwoman,
members of the committee, I'm
glad to be here with you all
today at Buenos Dias.
I missed her, I miss uh Madam
Chairwoman and members. We're
here to present, um,
Senate bill 480, um, and
Senate bill for 80 really
focuses on graduation rates,
which have hovered between 75%
and 80% since 2016. A typical
cohort is typically about 30,000
students, which means
approximately 6000 students do
not graduate from high school
every year. Every year we
appropriate millions of dollars
to our institutions of higher ed
and work for solutions to
implement programming that
provide pathways for our
students uh who may not have
graduated from high school and
our public schools also offer
re-engagement programming for
students who may not have
graduated.
These programs, high school, uh,
diploma re-engagement, high
school equivalency and workforce
credentialing are all extremely
important in providing pathways
for future success for our
students who have struggled. The
problem is that all of these
students, all of these programs
have no centralized list of
students from which they can
recruit, meaning that they can
directly contact students who
are non-graduate students to
encourage them to enroll in a
program they are offering.
That seems very inefficient, and
that's how we came to Senate
Bill 480. Senate Bill 480 would
require that every summer, the
PED create a list of all
students who were in high school
in any of the last 4 years, who
did not graduate within those
four years. That list would be
available for the higher
education department, public
post-secondary educational
institutions, school districts
or charter schools in New
Mexico-based adult, adult basic
education providers or workforce
development programs that
provide programming for out of
cohort students attaining high.
school, attaining a high school
diploma, a high school
equivalency credential, or
workforce credentials. The hope
is that with a specific list of
students to recruit from, these
programs can be even more
successful than they've been in
the past, and we can streamline
enrollments.
Overall, we want to ensure that
all of these recruitment efforts
remain in New Mexico, so that
it's a return, a direct return
on investment and the
information that would be shared
would be specifically and only
uh data shared with uh
institutions in the state for
purposes of re-engaging folks
who have not graduated, uh, with
that, uh, Madam Chair, I will
pass it to my colleague and also
include that this is a fully
bipartisan effort, uh, from
Senate and the House, and I'll
defer to her now.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Committee, um, just a couple of
things to add. Um, this bill has
had bipartisan support on the
Senate side and um passed with
bipartisan support on the, in
the education committee earlier
this week, um,
And uh LCPS other public schools
have created a re-engagement
programs in, uh, in their school
districts. Um, there's one in
Hobbs that uh is a CTE uh uh
technical education, um,
training school that folks can
re-engage in, and so, again, we
have the data we're just not
using it. And so this bill would
propose using that data. So with
that, uh, we stand for
questions.
Thank you so much. Uh, let's go
to the audience first, please.
Was there anyone in the audience
to speak in support of the bill?
Wonderful. Thank you.
Uh, please go ahead and we'll do
one minute comment. Thank you.
Hello, Madam Chair and members
of the committee, Carrie Robin
Bruder with Public Charter
Schools of New Mexico. We want
to stress that this is not a
charter school bill. Um, this
bill really came into existence
from a brainstorming session
over the summer where we were
trying to figure out how can we
better connect students to the
programs that are already being
funded by state government to
connect them either to adult
basic education, another diploma
opportunity or workforce
credentialing so that if our
students do leave high
school before they graduate. How
can we get them more integrated
in the services that we already
have, and what was told to us by
independent community colleges,
workforce solution programs was
we don't have a list of students
that we can actually look at,
make a phone call to those
students and ask them, would you
like to come participate in
something that we're offering.
That's all this bill does is
create that list of students so
that we can have all of these
great programs throughout the
state, have a place where they
can direct recruit from.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, Stan
rounds with the school
superintendents Association. I
was the superintendent in Las
Cruces, New Mexico when we
started the program that was
mentioned as a way of being sure
that we reach our graduation,
uh, needs for the community and
get our kids from high school
into the workforce or into the
next step. This is the best way
to do business. The problem is
the anonymity that many of the
students had while they were in
our public schools but worse yet
when they drop out.
they fall completely off the
radar.
So Madam Chairman, members of
the committee getting a list of
those sharing among our New
Mexico institutions is the right
thing to do. It allows us to
focus carefully on who we serve
and be sure nobody slips through
the cracks. Thank you.
Thank you.
All right, see you know their
comments in the room. Let's go
online, please.
Right, so anyone hoping to speak
in support of the bill, please
raise your hand. Up first, we
have Vanessa. Vanessa, can you
hear us?
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Vanessa Hawker. I am the
executive director for the New
Mexico Independent Community
Colleges. And as you've heard in
a testimony, uh,
We, we are missing a significant
number of students that we know
that we can provide workforce
training to, and we simply ask
that the public education
department pulled together this
information so we can help
target those students that we
know that we're missing, that we
can provide services to. Thank
you so very much for your
consideration.
Vanessa. Up next we have Linda.
Linda, can you hear us?
You there, Linda? Can you hear
us?
OK. Hello, Linda Siegal here.
Go ahead, Linda, you have one
I'm
having trouble with reception
out here, Linda Siegel,
representing Santa Fe Public
Schools and also a longtime
board member of the Santa Fe
Community College, and we, we
stand in strong support of this.
It's a, it's a great opportunity
to help us find those people and
bring them back into whatever
type of educational system that
any of us.
offer and, and workforce and
academic or whatever. So we
strongly support this bill.
Thank you.
Thank you so much, Linda. Anyone
hoping to speak in opposition to
the bill, please raise your
hand.
Saying none, Madam Vice Chair.
Thank you. Is there anybody in
the audience who might want to
speak in opposition to the bill.
All right. See then, committee
members.
Representative Luhan.
Madam Chair, thank you. Uh,
sponsors for the bill. I just
have a few questions. Um, this
is, I mean, we've been
discussing this issue for quite
some time, um, and how we can do
that. My a couple of questions.
How, how far back were the
records go for that we use for
PED to make contact with those
students.
Um, Madam Chair, Representative
Lujan, my understanding is, is
that anyone who, any student who
is of school age, so um that is
currently not enrolled in school
or in or is working um or in a
career in technical education
program. So, um, right now the
state of New Mexico um requires
the state to provide public
education to a student up to the
age of 22. So it would be any
student who is not in
en ro ll ed in school currently,
um, that is of school age up to
the age of 22. Um, what we'd go
back at those lists. So, um, and
I, when I look at my sponsor,
that's correct. OK.
Madam Chair, so that would be
Any, any student not currently
enrolled in a in school.
From ages, I could say 17 to 22.
Is that correct?
Uh, Madam Chair, committee, uh,
I think it goes even younger
than that, so 13, um, that are
not enrolled in in school.
So Madam Chair, would you
contact the parents first,
especially those um under 18 or
18 and under manager.
So the uh Madam Chair
Representative Lujan, so the
list that gets generated would
have um their name, phone
number, uh, recent, um, address
and so they would get targeted
male to the student's home to
that address that's listed.
OK, Madam Chair, um,
As a parent.
I'm here.
I would want to be, I wanna, I
would want to have the contact
and especially if I have a, it's
my child and they're under my,
my supervision and under um
under consent age.
In the state's 14, but for, for
many things. So, um,
But under 18 really, um, as
guardians.
And for 18 and under. So.
Is
So releasing that information.
To parents or to that address,
that's your, that'd be the
primary um
Way of contact. Is that correct,
Madam Chair, Madam Chair
Representative, that's correct.
And um and I would offer, you
know, as a parent of a 17 year
old, we currently get a ton of
mail from colleges looking to
recruit, um, and so that's
already practiced what this
would would be though is that
accredited schools within New
Mexico. So this is only for New
Mexico schools, accredited
schools. Um, so parents would
not be getting out of state
material. Um.
that accredited schools would
reach out to students and um and
inquire whether they want to
enroll, re-enroll in some sort
of educational program or CTE
program, uh, post-secondary. And
so, um, so, um,
Yeah, so I'll leave it at that.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
more
um
prudent if uh for the school.
Um
registered
perhaps.
And those students. I have a
concern.
Especially if it's been brought
up, this is not.
I
That this is not a um
Charter school effort, but.
As I've known and as I've, I've
been aware of, especially in
In Texas, for instance, that
charter schools have and take
the the better um of um
Opportunity to approach these
students and advertise and use
that as a function for them to
increase their
Um
Your enrollment numbers, Madam
Chair, so I have a problem with
that. I just wanna, I wanna let
you know that. So I think it'd
be more prudent and I don't know
if it's dressed.
But I think the function of the
state in doing, and, and
And providing and bringing up
this type of legislation is for
them to take the actionables,
not to rely on uh the schools
per se, especially those that.
That have um
Did they do that type of work,
madam chair.
Can you respond to that, Madam
Chair?
Yeah, Madam Chair, uh,
representative, committee
members, um, I share that
concern. I think it was um it
was brought up in in a different
way in education and um
There wasn't enough of a concern
in education that they didn't
pass it um in a bipartisan way
unanimously and but I will also
add is that
Schools that wish to use these
lists of students have to go
into a data sharing agreement
with PED and so, um, if a school
did want to share, uh, get a
list, um, for example, Las
Cruces public schools and say,
where all our students that um
that haven't come back. LCPS
could certainly ask for that
list and, and, um, re-engage
those students, um, the same in
Hobbs as, you know, their.
Public schools are looking to
expand their career in technical
education, and they want to
reach out to all the kids in the
southeastern corner, uh, sector
of the state. Um, but right now,
it's just a broad net and they
do blanket advertising, um, on
billboards and in other ways,
and that's not a targeted way to
re-engage um students that have
disconnected from school or
work.
Um, and I don't know if my
sponsor wants to say anything
else.
I would, I would just add, Madam
Chair and uh Representative that
the first version of the bill.
Provided a much broader, uh,
perspective in terms of access
of the data for sort of
nationally, which was a concern
to us and we wanted to ensure
that we
Made this an opportunity to
create return on investment in
the state of New Mexico to
ensure that these folks, because
whereas we wish we didn't have
to address these issues. We can
only control so much in terms of
folks who may not graduate
within that time span. So we are
seeing this as a mechanism of
support, um, and we, and I
absolutely acknowledge your
concern because I think it was
brought up in terms of within, I
think in the House Education
Committee, but it was addressed
and that is certainly not the
intent.
We just know that these folks
are not getting the resources
that are needed and we're trying
to ensure that we create a
system that can re-engage them.
Thank you Madam Chair. Uh, and I
appreciate all your efforts, uh,
but the bottom line for me is
that then there, there is that
access and there is that, I
don't, what would the data
sharing agreement look like?
I don't see that pet, madam
chair, uh, representative, uh
that is one of the things that
PE does normally, uh, data
sharing sharing agreements, um,
are just, I think they're,
there's something that they,
they're used to doing. I don't
have the exact information of
what it would contain. Madam
Chair, again, uh, our students
are protected with federal, um,
confidentiality.
And I would, I would assume that
they would uphold that but in
creating lists and creating a
data sharing agreement.
Um, for our students in our
state, I think it, I think we
are.
Without that in your bill.
I think we are opening up these
doors, and I can't support that.
I would like tighter, you know.
Um
Information. I mean, these are,
these are juveniles. They are
protected and, you know, out of
state.
And in colleges and they have a,
they do have agreements too, but
when we're looking at what we're
doing within our own state. We
need, I would like to see um
better guidelines, to be quite
honest with you. I think that um
also as a parent, uh, I'd be
very concerned. I'm already
approached.
And how some of these um
Um
You know, commercialized way of
introducing education and
education institutes to my
children.
You know,
have been presented to me and I
have some concerns with that
because I stand by our public
school education and the
principles by which we, we have
um that institution, Madam
Chair, um, I think this is
opening doors that way. I love
that we want to, and it's been a
long discussion, really long
discussion and how we do reach
that population. But if we are,
if we're not going to give the
proper guidelines, um, and I
don't see that in here,
especially, I mean, our
children's
Our records and and their
information should be really
protected and we've been looking
at many bills identifying or, or
uh looking at how uh
confidentiality is addressed in
our legislation and I'm just one
to uphold that and I wanna just,
I want assurances. I hear that
you're, you're moving towards
it. So thank you for that, but
I think I need, I need some
further assurance, Madam Chair.
Um,
But I do understand what you're
doing and I really appreciate
it. I would like to see this
come like during COVID to be
quite honest, because we knew we
were gonna lose, and we have
lost a big population. I know
that the university's madam
chair and HED.
Do an outreach.
But those are just for their
students that have been
registered with them. So these
students have been registered in
our public schools.
And, um, that is sensitive.
The data and information that
PED has, Madam Chair, is that
correct? They hold that
information of all of our
students registered in all of
our schools across the state. Is
that correct? Um, Madam Chair,
uh, representative and
committee, um, so,
One is if a, I'm gonna try and
get this right because I'm also
learning about this, um, all of
the ins and outs of, uh,
directories, but under federal
law, uh, under FERPA directory
information is already available
to share with our, with students
if that student has attended
that school. Um, but this data
sharing agreement that they
would enter into with PE, which
is their standard procedure for
sharing data. First of all, it
is not subject to IPRA. So no
one.
can just grab that information.
Um, and then it's more limited.
So if that student did not
attend that school, um, the
information that they would get
is name, phone number, and, and
address and any extracurriculars
they may have, um, participated
in, in the time that they were
enrolled in that school. So
that's all the information they
get in order to um to say, hey,
can you come, can you come back?
Are you interested in coming
back and re-enrolling in school
or uh some other career
technical education program.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, OK,
I, I really am trying to wrap my
head and, and help you out here
too, because I, I do like the
idea, Madam Chair, but
If this could be, I think there
needs to be some more
limitations, um.
Uh, that is for privatized
information for minors,
particularly and getting that
out to, you said it would go to
the HED is that correct? Can you
list the
Those that would have access to
the data sharing.
Yeah, Madam Chair and
Representative, actually, I'm
wondering if I could phone a
friend and ask um if Stan Rounds
might be able to, to answer some
of these questions.
Please. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, I'll take a stab at
it.
I'm, I'm not purporting I'm
their expert, but I will purport
that I have some expertise. So
in Las Cruces, we had some of
the similar concerns about how
do you track your students,
right?
Our notion was we didn't want
them to become anonymous.
Because in the system when they
get anonymity, they don't get
service.
So we want to be sure we data
share.
So what we did is we data shared
with our uh Donian Community
College fellows. We shared it
with our early college high
school.
Which we, which we owned, it was
our deal.
We also did after.
Age, I'll call it programming
for students.
So that they could come back to
school.
Because we have the provision to
22 years old as far as the
funding.
Which in the past had been 18
years old, by the way.
And it gave us an opportunity to
re-engage students who had
stepped away.
We have several alternative
programs in that we fed that
information to.
We felt like we needed to
contact those parents if they
were under 18.
And, and in many cases, even
with the over 18 students who
were living at home. We want to
engage the family.
So we had a a joint effort to
get them back into the
schoolhouse, provide the provide
them the training so they could
get to the workforce.
Because at the end of the day,
this is a workforce development
process that we're trying to be
sure we had happened.
So in the discussion you have,
uh, I will sure, uh, Madam Chair
Representative Lu Han, the data
sharing agreements of the state
has are very restrictive.
Remember with me this is only to
state institutions.
So those that would be already
have that information available
to them under FERPA rules.
It's not IPA accessible.
When they're less than 18 years
old.
It probably is after they're 18
years old, unfortunately, I will
tell you that I have a personal
problem with that.
And so there are protections
that are in place inherently by
how they do it they would be the
distributor of the information.
Remember that we have a, we're
providing a statewide y they
call it, student information
system.
All these are being dumped into
that from the local districts.
The idea is that once they
disengages your student.
They don't disengage from that
data set.
They don't get anonymity.
Of which we have targeting that
we can do with the right
players, Madam Chair, members of
the committee.
Now that isn't defined in bills
we read the bill, but it is
what's the infrastructure is
sitting in the in the pad. I'm
sorry we don't have somebody
here from PE that is an expert
in their system. I can only tell
you from the user side as a
superintendent, and now my role
with the state superintendents
Association. Thank you, Madam.
Thank you very much,
um thank you back to the
question, please. Thank you.
Thank you. And so, um,
So that is what is currently
available, but what this is
doing is this is, this is
expanding upon that, is that
correct?
So, um, that's where my concern
is, and thank you for, for your
uh expertise there. Would this
be what you would expand upon
that and create a data sharing
agreement with
Um, the more, um,
Madam Chair, I'm gonna listen to
the rest and try to stay here
for this, uh, for this vote even
because I have to get to another
committee, but I'd like to just
continue this conversation. I, I
have some, I do, my concerns are
slow, um.
there. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Next we'll go to
Representative Aa Nonu.
I have uh Representative Barrago
on the list.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um.
Thank you, Representative, um,
really interesting idea. I think
it's I like the idea. I do think
there are some deficiencies in
the bill, um, and I think, uh,
Representative Lujan.
Already stated some of my
concerns, um,
And questions.
But I do have a question about
um.
Confidentiality, especially.
Is there like a process where
the print the parent would sign
a release to allow this to
happen, um, and only because,
you know, I mean, you start
getting mail at home.
And
I would hate for that child to
feel like they're targeted,
like, oh my God, you know, I
mean, they're already dealing
with some issues, it sounds
like. Um, and
That to me,
Um, unless the parrot is kind of
good with that, um, further
exasperates that sort of
Um, negative.
Sort of
You know, light.
And I, I, I'm concerned about
that. I have to say that.
Um, and I think that
We need to be really careful.
With um
That population of people.
At our, our students that are
trying to find their way,
especially at that vulnerable
age.
Um
And then the other thing that I
that I wanted to know about was
um
Madam Chair and and
representative.
Was, um.
What exactly the services that
would be provided. So if
somebody contacted that student,
so there's really two questions
in there. Um, if somebody
contacted that student, say PED
or whoever that.
That is
Uh
Responsible for that.
Um
What kind of services are they
going to offer that student. So
those are really two questions
that I have.
Uh, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Borego and
committee. So part one is a
parent or guardian can opt out
of the directory, um, at the
very beginning when they
register their student for
school. So there's already an
opt-out option. Um, and then
that's standard registration
procedure, uh, at schools and
are covered under FERPA, um, and
so,
If you opt out, then no
information can be shared,
period.
Um, and I know like having two
students in public schools, um,
I can always update that opt
out, um, registration. So it's
not just like a one and done. If
I decide, like my 17 year old is
getting too much mail, I can go
back and opt out of that.
Um, and then these are programs
that are all already being
offered, so if a public school
or say I have 3 Donian Community
College branches and House
District 53 alone, Donana
Community College could mail
out, um, information about all
the programs that they receive.
And that's, and that's all that
that a student would get is,
hey, we see you, we know that
you're not engaging in school or
work right now. Here are the
opportunities that are close to
home.
And it could be a program, it
could be an alternative school,
um, so someone that could finish
getting their diploma, um, if
there's still of an age that
they could receive a diploma or
their GED or some sort of career
and technical education program
that like don't need a community
college would offer.
Madam Chair and representative,
I think just additionally, I
would add the hyper focus of
this was to be able to provide a
vast range of opportunities. We
know not everyone wants to go to
a four-year institution. We know
some folks may need
opportunities in a CTE program
as a community college grad and
the UNM grad. This was
specifically, this was important
to me. I don't, I don't just
take up bills to take them up.
And this one was specifically a
resource that I saw for many
folks who went to school with me
and didn't actually have the
ability to graduate for whatever
reason.
So I think the way that we're
seeing this is absolutely
ensuring that data is protected.
We know that we are at times
where data is, I mean, where,
where a, at a stage and and
point in life in this time where
it is extremely important that
we're cautious about who we're
sharing this information with,
but this is a resource. That's
what we're trying to bring to
the table, and I understand the
parameters that you're all
bringing up, but I think from
the sort of articulation of the
bill. It was really just to
ensure that we are providing
access and
information to students who may
not have the want to follow the
same pathway that some of us
have followed.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair, um, and Senator and
Representative, um, I think it
would be really nice in in my
mind to vote on this. I would
like to support it, but I think
the bill itself right now needs
to be tightened up just a little
bit to talk, you know,
The way I read it, it just says
no later than July 15th after
the school year, the department
shall create a report, um, I
mean, you talked about um data
sharing, which I didn't know
about, um, and I don't have
kids, but.
If I did, I would, I would want
to know.
What that is and then uh on the,
on the confidentiality, I, I
really think that there needs to
be a section in here that talks
about confidentiality for the
students.
You, um, enlightened me in terms
of
What the schools do, but without
having kids in the school
system. I have no way of knowing
that. So I just think that
there's a few little things that
could make this a better bill,
that would, you know,
would help
People that
Like a parent that hasn't a 9th
grader or a 10th grader or
something that maybe doesn't
know all these things. I mean, I
think we know, you know, not,
not myself, but other
You all know these things
because you're in the system
where you've worked in the
system, but for people who don't
or haven't, Madam Chair and rep
and senator and representative,
I think that that could, it
could be a better bill. So
that's just my, my thought.
Thank you, Representative Anna
Noo.
I'd like to move.
We have a motion for a due pass
and a 2nd.
Uh, is there any opposition?
Seeing none
All right. Uh, we have
Representative Lujan in
opposition.
My
Representative Arin.
Representative Block? Yes.
Representative Borego
I would like to explain my vote
as well. Representative Lujan.
No, I'd like to explain.
Representative Mejia. Yes.
Madame Floor leader
Representative Zamora.
Madam Vice Chair, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, by 8 to 1, we have
a due pass.
And as Representative Lu Han.
Thank you. um.
I hate to take a vote against
your goodwill efforts.
Um, I'd like to say that I, I
really support what you're
trying to do here. I think that
Um
I think we're, we're entering
into some unchartered places.
And when I see that in this
bill,
We are opening doors here, Madam
Chair, the, the, I feel like
they need, we need better
guidelines upon. So if, if
you're willing to work with me
or, or, or
My vote if this gets to the
floor, could possibly change,
but I, I really, um,
I'm really just not comfortable
with, with, um, without those
guidelines in this bill and, you
know, thank you for bringing it
forward. Thank you, man.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam.
Thank you, members.
Uh, Representative Barrego, you
wanted to explain your vote. I
did briefly, please.
Um, thank you as briefly as I
can I'm sure, um.
I, I support what you all are
doing here, but I think what I
mentioned about the
confidentiality portion of.
Needs to be contained in this
bill because I don't see that
and I think that.
Um, that troubles me and then um
also, um, sort of the discussion
about the data sharing. I don't
see that in here either. I think
that that needs to be somehow
spelled out before it gets to
the floor. So thank you for that
maam chair.
Thank you.
Thank you so much. You have a
due pass.
Have a great day ladies.
Hey, let's move on to
Memorial.
60. 0, OK,
go right ahead.
Madam Chair, committee, thank
you. So House Memorial 60, um,
basically is was written to
answer questions, um, that were
raised regarding House Bill 396,
which was a spaceport bill, um,
that adjusted GRT rates, um, and
the bonding, uh, language for
the spaceport, and it was heard
in house commerce and economic
development, and it resulted in
a 10 to 0 tabling vote.
And so, uh, this memorial is
requesting the science,
technology, and
telecommunications and revenue
stabilization and tax Policy
Committee interim committees to
study the issues that were
raised in, um, in the previous
committee, uh, regarding the
previous bill and for with that,
I'll send for questions.
Thank you. Uh, we'll go to the
audience first. Do we have
anyone in support?
very.
Our opposition? No, we'll go
online, please. Thank you.
Anyone hoping to speak in
support of this memorial, please
raise your hand. OK, say none.
I'm hoping to speak in
opposition to House Memorial 60.
Please raise your hand.
OK, Sina, Madam advice here. All
right, see you then, we'll go to
the committee members with
questions. Yes, Representative
Blan.
Thank you Madam Chair and thank
you, uh, representative. Good to
see you. So just a couple of
questions. I know that the
memorial references.
House Bill
396. I know it's a tax cut, I
believe, and does it hold locals
harmless in that bill, or is it
just?
Is it both state and local.
That's a great question, Madam
Chair, Representative block
Committee, um, so the original
bill as it was written, um, did
not hold locals harmless and so
there were a number of school
districts that received, um,
revenue from that bond that
would have lost money and so,
um, and there's a number of
programs that were supported by
that, that, um, those funds. And
so that's what led um to, I
believe, to the tabling of the
spill, um, and so we wanna, this
memorial wants to figure out a
way of how to hold harmless
school districts, while also
trying to look at, um, ways in
which Donana County isn't
perpetually paying a higher GRT
to pay for the spaceport. um,
and, and other, and in other
counties as well. Um,
Representative, Madam Chair.
Right. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. Yeah,
I would just think when we're
having discussions in the
interim, talk to those local
folks and uh see how we can
Make them whole and uh that's
all I had on that. So thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative.
Uh
Hello, representative. Would you
like to offer any comment before
we go to the next question?
Um, I will. Thank you.
Presentative Lujan.
I'd like to make a motion
manager.
Uh, uh
I make a motion to do pass.
Thank you.
We have a motion for due pass in
a second by Representative
Barrego, um.
Is that
Mm
Uh, representatives, I have
never been to this place.
So
I just see it in my imagination
and what I actually see on
photos, so I'd love to have um.
If you guys have a tour or
something in the near future,
I'd love to join you.
Thank you. All right, we have a
do pass motion, uh.
Is there any opposition?
Seeing none, there.
Still has a due pass. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you.
