Are you in which.
Choose years.
You are ready.
Thank you Mr chair committee
it's good to be back in front of
you Sir I landed on my bills
here to have one additionally on
the list today this day I mean
for you House Bill three thirty.
As amended and.
It's a very it's a clean bill
sensually so the house
agriculture sake is ordered
through sources and then miss is
what you have before you this
amended bill.
Does this
very simple please it just puts
this in line with the federal
law and I would have
My expert witness here
introduce yourself and expand
upon that.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Michael
general counsel for the workers
comp ministration.
A couple days ago another bill.
This this bill
six to conform statute.
To Mexico Supreme Court decision
in twenty sixteen.
The twenty sixteen decision.
Hello Sir vision of workers
compensation act
unconstitutional.
Action grounds that dealt with
employers of farm and ranch
labors so the
The bill six straight filling
with from the act of the
business it seems now if is in
conflict with that twenty
sixteen.
So really no other changes
there's a few cleanup changes
that will drafters did
ones they were amending this
provision of the workers
compensation act.
So that's.
For that Mr chairman Senator.
The other thing that this
is a huge part of this bill.
Is there anybody in opposition.
But we got.
Mr chair.
For the largest.
There is.
Compensation act and also.
All of those benefits should
system.
And this bill statute.
Also there.
Sanchez.
This is the support.
anybody else.
The screen.
Of hello.
This is Michael Dorn site it's
under my white screen I'm a
workers compensation attorney
I've been practicing for fifteen
years I think this bill as it
yes we're Mr holes said is
really important it cleans up
the statue so there's no
confusion between the case law
on the Supreme Court and the
statute the price somebody just
look in statute was saying
farm workers and ranchers are
excluded when they're not so I
stand in strong support of this
thank you for your time.
Chair and committee members.
Well more the.
G..
Yes thank you my name is George
we thought I'm also a workers
attorney in Albuquerque I've
been representing injured
workers since the late nineteen
eighties
I'm is support of this bill
because in addition to the
reasons that you've already
heard
I just finished trying this case
our the week after Christmas
involving some farm workers and
one of the defense's was the
statute says the farm workers
are not covered by workers comp
and the employer did not have
insurance and therefore K. ended
up I hope we're waiting for a
decision from the work comp
judge but if if it's decided in
favor of the workers in this
case then the uninsured
employers fund of the state of
New Mexico end up paying the
work comp benefits that should
been paid by an employer and the
employer I don't know if his
supporters would have bought
insurance had he known that he
was required to have it but he
claims in good faith you believe
he did not have to have work
comp insurance so this would
prevent innocent people from
being left without work current
coverage thank you.
Everything else that Mr up Mr
chair just I want to thank all
those is that came out in favor
of this bill today and for their
reasons you have to just clarify
the law the statute itself this
is why would reduce fuel for.
Check.
Members of the committee.
Emergency Chairman
representative of some of.
Question.
Kind of.
Sure is why.
One.
And then.
Send a line seven.
Three.
The struggles of the farm and
ranch labour's.
Why not the domestic workers.
The thank you Mr chair thank you
for the question of this is
exactly what this does introduce
to to clarify farm and ranch
labors and.
Are you Mr chair representative
us online to private domestic
servants or you because they
were in the the only ones.
Mr chair so the the provision
here's
section B. states start on line
one and the.
Alleged to be subject to the
workers compensation act by
employers of private domestic
service and that's just part of
the the act what the coverage so
if my expert wants to leverage
on the definition of that.
Mr chair
Representative.
The.
Purpose of this bill is is is
really
we were narrowly focus just
addressing that Supreme Court
decision
Mr with us correct one of the
proponents that we have this
conflict in the statutory
language relative to the case
law
it could cause confusion on the
general public for maybe
transition because of the
statute book and gives advice to
a.
Poorer farm and ranch labor
labors that they don't have to
get workers comp coverage when
the Supreme Court says yes you
do
so we've we've not gone after
any other potential exclusions
that's an existing law including
the the exclusion for for
provide for private domestic
servants of sin.
The question the other aspects
of the statute just for
simplicity reasons.
Mr chair representative I just I
support the bill I was just
curious about.
White just perform workers.
I
was referencing the the Supreme
Court decision.
Mr chair representative that is
correct.
Thank you Mr the representative
you.
There's no other questions of
the committee passed.
Proper motion fifty percent of
perspective Representative.
Representative Garcia
Representative.
Finished a motion I can speak
of a second by Representative.
The legislature Rafael my into
a.
This time representative Garcia
chair thank you isn't enough
Myself and representative of.
The schools is kind of a
decision.
To
Basically bring the of farm and
ranch flavors into the workman's
comp.
Programs and
and we were successful.
In terms of legislation even
though we did have support from
the labor business coalition of
the workman's comp.
And
other entities it never happened
but that the fact of the matter
is that workman's comp he can
process
workman's comp claims.
Right now.
Four of the farm and and
Legislators so it regardless of
what this is an existing statute
so that's that's a that's a fact
that.
That is going on and that is
being those claims are being
processed.
Really this bill is just kind of
clean up.
and even if this bill doesn't
make it through the Senate.
Branchen and farm labors are can
still make claims with workman's
comp for injuries suffered
experience as a former French
leader says change of one is
that correct Mr chair person.
Mr Mr chair of representative
for clarification reviews for
your state is currently if
there's a claim from from our
ranch.
Industries that they could they
can make that claim now and we
can.
They they can they can make the
claim but what would happen is
as we said there's confusion so
that's just gonna take it to a
further point make a decision
because what is claims is
unconstitutional on from the
federal from the federal side
that our state is
Is not in compliance with.
Constitution.
Thanks for the expert to also
function.
Mr chair.
Representative Garcia.
you're correct because of the
Supreme Court decision of twenty
sixteen of a farm and ranch they
were.
Could proceed forward today
with
worker's compensation case
before our of administration and
in front of one of our judges
and this is one of those
Anomalous situations that the
bill passes a lot of the changes
that makes sense because the
judicial branch is already
declared what the law is.
we have the confusion that we
have words in the statute that
may be of one of these employers
or insurance agent of one of
these employers to give the
advice that well the statute
says you don't have that workers
comp coverage and that may
proceed forward and don't get
the policy so we are trying to
conform with the statues to the
case law here
and and that's why we think it's
important is to prevent.
Education and also to prevent.
Henschel that there's a lack of
insurance when it's required in
there for the uninsured
employers fund has to interim
pay out.
Thank you thank you Mr Jeff I.
Yes buddy.
Mr chair I just want to I think
it funding acting up it's it's
basically still be locked up the
this this it just came up with
the Supreme Court already said
we have to do so I I mean
there's a good bill
Mr chair
thank you.
I guess I'm just confused one
thing I didn't think this law
which is.
Related decision two thousand
sixteen and we'll just have to
get about Mr chair
I think that there have been
other attempts and that is what
I heard and I think this is the
the pharmacist got I think I was
chair of vice chair has his
noted we can try to get this
accomplished as well three.
Thank you.
Homes are here at the million
requests as we speak.
To.
Thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Mr chair so it from
one of the attorneys
Representative that gave us a
lot of support.
It becomes apparent that unless
the workman's comp this town.
Then this doesn't runs right
unless there's a claim that it
is really for the benefit in the
end of the employees they need
to understand that even though
their employers for whatever
reason lack of knowledge
whatever the reasons may be I
don't have it if you're a family
farms and ranches
You have to know that you have
the right.
The file a claim and so I see
this as being very necessary for
the plan which
to Health.
What those employees who for
whatever reason may not have
been informed and who may have
gone.
Injured or had any other reasons
for not being able to.
Work because of an injury and
then find out that they should
have been covered and sometimes
often times unless something
this challenging four long.
These kinds of things don't
become informed and what I think
our objective is to inform as
much as possible and enable the
employee to understand what
their rights are and that is
correct and member
representative Garcia
and others carrying this bill
previously when we met lots of
opposition
more for you and caring
legislation to try to change
that.
So I'm glad that it's happening
and I just wanted to make sure
that we were.
Only doing this particular
cleanup for this particular
reason and hearing the testimony
for that reason as well it was
going to frame it in terms of
questions and I remember that
testimony was given already
thank you Mr chair.
Can
you would be for the.
We have proper motion about per
second do I have any opposition
to that love.
C..
Show all members pro ration.
To all members present voting in
the affirmative.
We can go on.
Thank you Mr chair and I'll be
back for another.
Representative Moran
House bill four fifty for the
high issues.
Your.
Good afternoon Mister chair and
members of the committee my co
sponsor one of the creation
Representative I guess the short
problem for older one will.
Mr chair committee
House bill two four fifty four.
Before start of want to go
through the the budget process
each year the state agent.
The state agency budgets for the
term for since the process.
overseen by the legislature and
particularly House
Appropriations finance at the
end of the.
The committee hold hearings with
each agency were member review
in detail the budget
recommendations for the
executive for and for LFC and
here the eight other ship on the
budget needs and priorities.
Agency budgets as they appear in
hospital tour mostly divided
into three categories.
Personal services employee and
employee benefits.
Contractual services and others.
As part of the agency process
the committee takes its time to
consider how much the loss in
each of the categories of
spending outlined in a speech
in.
Ultimately the committee decides
for each agency how much to
appropriate within each
category.
However even after this lengthy
process and after the
legislature's approve the budget
current law allows agencies to
turnaround rewrite their budgets
in a way that was not approved
by this legislative body.
Process goes by the technical
term budget adjustment request.
Well the agency from spending
one category to without the
permission fifty.
We do know the process will
consider doing so to spring to
build.
Mr chair you have to know the
process for percentages of the
bill of health I'm happy to do
that.
Mr chair of the like we have
people webcast think is for the
roof this was for real most
people understand the process so
if you go to the.
Mr chair this is the session of
what state the members of the
House Appropriations challenge
agencies other transfers for PS
in the.
To other categories.
Through.
Thirteen thirty one major
agencies and a hundred thirty
one.
For you here today and what
you've seen.
Chairman committees.
This
HSD analysis.
Telling you why this is a bad
idea.
One FIR that can bring it to a
and are you here today that
these agencies can't live
without the last two you'll your
comment as an excuse to hear
federal funds.
You'll hear all kinds of
different excuses you will read
Representative for everyone of
these two of Representative all
of those different excuses well.
Mr chairman and committee and
vice president will orders in
regions the third largest
material supply company in the
world.
Every month I was required to
defend my piano in front of the
other states.
With no notice.
With no experts.
In one point I under performing
is my budget targets I was but
the tax.
The ability of holy and balance
sheet is critical.
Mr chairman committee members
are average secretary salary
with benefits almost a quarter
of a million dollars our average
division director salary and
benefits the hundred sixty two
thousand five hundred
representative federal sorry can
you go to the bill would like to
hear the bill first and then if
you want to go to a distance and
everything else Lynch Mr chair
for the bill Mr chair Senator
that what he's talking about
history and I want to know
what's here before we in the
screen she.
Right here for you in the spring
chief Mr chair.
Posted is here for you in great
need of moving the ability for
our agencies and our agency
codes to move money from
personal from yes and be.
For more that.
With the fiscal year twenty
twenty two and we lived almost
fifty five million dollars from
PS the.
With no responsibility to the
legislative body with respect to
that.
The only time we hold them
accountable Mr chair is when we
come back in front of our.
Budget process again this
process is if you read the FIR
you read other things this
process we've used by many
people in the public is as this
is been described.
And what I was trying Mr chair
to describe for the rest of the
public is listening in.
This process circumvents the
legislation legislative
appropriation process Mr chair
this needs to stop.
The the the the center for sure.
Thank you.
The ideas of.
As for those in support of this
bill right hand.
The.
Support of this bill.
To see the in I will go to the
audience and ask for those who
are opposed to this legislation
by race if you have fewer than
so start the very back.
Go ahead we speak.
Chair members wanted to false
the secretary for the department
of information technology and we
do the splits.
and I do understand the concern
about on going it's who will
legislature certainly don't want
to do that but some of latitude
is required as a sample I go the
other way.
I have of the positions that are
not that I am authorized to hire
with they were not funded.
And what I have to do is go out
to market and go get what's
called staff augmentation.
To help the needs of my
customers.
The vote for stability simply
have.
Sorry we can't.
R. as opposed to this field.
Sir.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
committees to see you all what
is one Propst secretary for the
department of finance and
administration as you know Mr
chairman of the office
responsible the state budget
version our responsible for
reviewing all budget adjustment
request the state agencies in FY
twenty two we received
approximately seven hundred
forty a budget adjustment
request less than twenty percent
of those working I
for research points out of.
Fire no sense about fifty five
million dollars I only about
forty staffers General Fund.
And about forty million one
state agency accounted for over
half.
Approximately twenty one
million.
And that was the department of
corrections.
Mr chairman of the department of
finance administration tax
review of budget adjustment
request seriously there are
multiple layers of review.
We take particular particular
attention to one's personal
services employee benefits into
other categories I don't know
in as far as chairman of the LFC
also has all we're seeing or
a budget plus they're required
to DFA us are respectfully
suggest Mr chairman perhaps this
is a solution in search of a
problem.
This is the fourth state agency
that are.
In a charge of my eighteen years
of state government.
I don't know if I've ever been
apart personal services employee
benefits into another category
I may have a certain number of.
but I would only do so not to.
Poured over sites or in any way
to circumvent a little less.
About to be critical needs I
certainly want to speak from our
friend calling from apartments
for actions which is the hardest
job in state government.
I think this bill specifically
are not only for HSD a very
negative way of of virtually
every state agency while also
found those reasons Mr chairman
members very very respectfully.
Close this legislation.
anybody here.
This is the legislation.
Seeing no hands up there K..
The thing that whether the
committee.
Mr chair this bill does not
remove any of the agencies these
funds and to continue to work
their business.
This is a process the needs to
be fixed.
If you set the same.
Month and a half of of
testimonies and budget request I
did from all the agencies you
understand you see this part as
well.
Eighteen members continue to
talk to each agency about their
return over sixty four percent
of our state agencies make.
Hundred thirty one.
The codes transferred funds from
salary and benefits.
After last year asking for more
money in salary and benefits and
this year asking for more money
again and salaries and benefits.
There are still ways within the
system.
That.
And I finished my talk to begin
with.
I would have gone through.
The state each agency still has
the ability to transfer funds.
Send questions.
The committee representative.
Schools thank you Mr
Representative thanks for
bringing this up I'm gonna start
out with this this is a bill
obviously that makes a lot of us
a lot to us a lot of people
comfortable but in all reality
Mr chair representative
there are I have heard us talk
between other members of all of
fire the house say that they
would have wanted to say.
and and and then I've also heard
of from some constituents who
always are wondering about
spending and overspending that I
I just see this Mr chair as a as
a as a way of good conversation
it at least to be put up to the
public for those
and I'm be the first one to say
Mr chair representative that I
have learned a lot in my in my
this my third year and so as an
act if you know your average of
citizen out there that wants to
responsible and and respectful
to to taxpayers
sometimes don't understand the
process so.
At minimum I think it's great
that we're at least have a
discussion about this chair
representative really as wanted
to hear
your exemption on page up to
session the you so the edit
section so that they could be
all.
For the.
Funds if you could just explain
that a little bit more Spence
was announced again I'm still
learning so I appreciate.
You're you're a.
Additional.
Thank you chairman thank you
Representative for questions.
Part B.
simply put still allows movement
between contracts and other
expenses while ensuring the
amount to.
Our body.
Find for employees pay this is
for the purpose of employees I
Mr chair representative I mean
just to answer those in the
office I want to give you the
opportunity to to Nestle waters
to put down with the other
John we're talking about and and
department heads so this is not
for me Mr chair representative
is not for me for the billion
plus just for educational
purposes not only for myself but
for the public
explained of the bills they
referred to a few things that
why the movie and how rarely the
long and and maybe you have more
than seven.
Mr chair and and.
And Representative and thank you
for that
the the purposes were for
variety of things in some places
I can get to the bottom of in
some places like that some of it
in the but we got too much money
from fence with respect to
comment so we uses to do
something else.
At the end of the date chairman
and representative.
The amount of money that they
spend within personal salary and
benefits
personal salary benefits
business benefits and they don't
get their typical five percent
increase profits off the next
year.
So Mister chair representative
the only other thing that I
heard is of the Russian of
vacant positions that one of the
departments of.
And I'm sorry because.
The same I apologize for our you
can after that by the they were
able to fill those positions and
And I don't know to see that
pertains dollars as part of this
this.
All conversation that we've had
for agencies that meet us with
the the employees are being paid
enough so the do they have the
discretion of the budgets to
raise salaries and so forth to
maybe help please we retain them
or it from the unused funds
let's just say there's federal
twenty positions they finally
feel ten available to to in a.
In efforts to right hold on to
the do have I was able to move
that money their adjuster
budgets that way Mr chair
representative.
Mr chair representative thank
you for that
If provided by and once was
signed by the governor is what
determines how much the state
employee gets a pair of school
and so I believe maybe with
changing position titles
changing experience or not
changing experience with
changing their job pass that
flexibility and that way the.
Salaries.
And and so yes we've we've had
had problems with that continued
last year Mr Chairman
representative week we gave
races this year we're we're the
those raises of an added into
the house bill two again this
year
providing some flexibility with
respect to that.
The
It is hard right now to provide
employees as you and I both or
where Representative chairman
It's very hard to find
employees.
When we look.
Mr chair and and
representatives from the may two
thousand and twenty two report
from from LFC when a family of
four can can taking care of all
benefits given to him by the
state and federal government as
a that we have a base and come
not working have a base and come
of a hundred four thousand eight
hundred got a hundred dollars I
mean straight out of the LFC
report it's really hard for some
of us find some somebody to
employ somebody at sixty
thousand.
Mr chair representative that's
maybe this is why this is just
good conversation for for the
public to hear what's going on
the last thing I just want to
ask Mr chair you sit on
corporations option yes okay so
you know the that is a really
interesting committee Mr chair
representative that that I think
you guys approved a lot of
information I I think.
I I should go to more of those
meetings at the correction
because you're out of the inside
of what's going off of state
thank you for answer my question
Mr chair.
She.
Representative is thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you Representative bring
this forward.
So my background was working in
local government.
And when we had our budgets we
were.
We need to stay within our
budgets and if we would if we
went over our budgets then we
usually got some is to the
manager's office to get to.
And what I want to know is how
frequently do state agencies
request for a fun change.
Well.
Chairman representative thank
you for the question I think we
just heard from the DFA with
respect to how many that is
going to how many of my actually
get approved and and we have
moved from salaries and benefits
versus other movements can very
and and.
The.
To be honest with you on the
right numbers I don't have all
of what I do know is that
chairman and representative.
We should be held to task when
we go outside of our budget.
And we should as those specially
with with the.
With the requirements that we
put on on these different
departments we should be able to
hold them chairman and
representative accountable for
that.
Yes the executive puts together
a budget yes of because of our
budget hello you fight for that
and how will you get that done
determine what that is the fact
that the your year funding
chairman and and Representative
For PS and be this set.
And for your other funding
within that of of whatever that
number is.
What you're given the number to
responsibilities stay within
that.
There is still nothing in this
bill that stops them from being
able to go back and get another
budget adjustment.
It's just not gonna come out of
salary and benefits which Lujan
at.
This whole session chairman and
and Representative all I heard
is we need more money more
people.
Well if you need more money
left if you want to take money
from.
Hopefully that answers your
question Representative did and
Mr chair representative so you.
Of there was fifty four point
eight million dollars was
transferred.
So.
So some brand new state
governments I'm asking
questions.
If I'm of former cabinet
secretary and I have.
Thirty introduce.
Can I inflate that.
So thirty five of forty.
And they use that money.
And have a little slow should be
here.
Mr chairman and and
Representative thank you so that
question and I don't we have any
cabinet secretaries out there
the that the yes but the answer
is yes that could help.
At the end of the day
you can request your FTEs get
approved for those FTEs and if
you don't feel that right now
you can move that money into
another category and use of
money in several.
Thank you Mr.
Vice chair number.
Representative Marty.
Chair representative
you will.
The ball park home which was
reverted this year.
I did not have a memorized seven
till this year this last year
over but sorry chairman Chairman
representative thank you for the
question and what was reverted I
don't have the exact number
right now.
In the reversion call for with
this bill dealt with deals with
specifically Chairman
representative is what was
transferred from the S. and B.
and other categories but.
That number of fifty four point
eight million fiscal year twenty
twenty two.
Really we don't still have the
number we won't till after June
thirtieth for fiscal year twenty
three I could be in excess of
sixty million this year.
And so and with the twelve
percent budget that we have a
few continue to add those
numbers that number if we close
to seventy and in in fiscal year
twenty four.
Mr chair representative thank
you for the the reason I ask.
Is cause for.
Fifteen sixteen so I was one of
the ones that would develop
budget come over here and fight
for one of the things that we
would do was try to revert as
little as possible.
And one of the ways we would do
that Mr chair representative.
Is hold the latency savings.
And right around the end of the
legislative session when the
for.
Window would open up again we
will move that out.
And spend like crazy fully into
the fiscal year.
Mr Chairman representative.
Is that what you're trying to.
Deal with in this bill Mr chair
representative thank you for.
Phrasing you did I specifically
the approach that we can I'm not
here at tech for cabinet
secretaries or agencies that is
one of the things yes Mr
Chairman representative trying
to stop.
Mr chair representative it was
we were trying to reach this.
What they're always projects
that you want to get done at the
end of the year.
Senator.
Mr chair representative that was
one of the ways we were able to
work.
Mr chair representative all back
when I would come here and fight
for budget.
This is the.
Representative from Santa Fe
first question every year was
what as you can see.
Mr chair representative and.
With that question would be
asked you would see cabinet
secretaries where.
Because his next question was
why the interview come in three.
Mr chair representative I think
this is a great bills I think
it's.
of Bill in a move toward
transparency in the budget
process.
Mr chair representative and I
for me to support this.
Thank you Mr.
By Jeff.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Representative.
Just a clarifying question.
Representative.
Is.
Are we using personal services
or for tuning person Sir Senator
so is that correction has to be
made or you following the letter
of the secretary delay is
retired now.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
madam vice chair for that
question hi this person is P. S.
em be specifically and that's
defined as personal.
Personnel services we that.
So person P. R. yes hello in in
the service.
You know
Question chairman vice chair
We make sure more money from
four to reduce.
Personal chairman and madam vice
chair P. E. R. S. of.
In A. L. I just needed to make
sure Mr chair and madam vice
chair that.
Software did important.
That's fine Mr chairman and
Representative.
Is confusing because.
The way I read the entire even
the fiscal FIR and everything
related.
Talking about a person.
Maybe it's a technical thing
that I'm not aware of the
lawsuit anyway Mr chairman and
Representative so the way I
understand budget.
And and I was of public
administrators CEO CFO for those
of the tribal security from
forty five years of experience.
we were required every year to
develop budget and the budget
was to.
Obviously every operational item
that we needed to include.
including overhead Senator.
But we also had a rule of thumb
and the rule of thumb was that
we also kept.
Ten percent is usually the
amount that we would keep in the
operate operational
Fund to anticipate changes if
that were to occur within a
budget.
Ten percent some some some
entities required larger.
But my point being that the
budget was presented to our.
Mahdi's whoever our bosses were
on time because the budget is a
framework it's kind of a plan
it's what we planned a year in
advance or sometimes depending
on the entity two years three
years of what we plan to how we
plan to operate and how much
money is going to take to plan
to operate.
It's not meant as a
constraint it's a way to give
your on your board.
Your responses this case the
administrator account set
secretary sensor to the governor
and that's the administrative
exam.
Of the of the of our state.
And they have and and so Mr
chair representative it's given
as a as a guy.
And so.
We were always given flexibility
to line items we refer to them
as line items around.
because sometimes unforeseen
things occurred during the year
increase the cost maybe in other
areas we were surprised because
we would decrease we had less
costs in certain areas.
And all we were required to do
Madam a report whatever our
monthly financial reports for we
would indicate we had a column
that was a vegetarian out and
then we had a call on with what
the club monthly cost for then
we had another column which was
the year to date.
The financial statement
basically it's used in the
private sector as well as the
public sector they just Mr chair
called different things.
But we as administrators always
have the flexibility
to administer our purpose that's
why we were paid that's why we
were the heads of our of our
agencies and our entities that's
why I carried those titles.
I was given I the hiring whoever
my boss was hiring body the
flexibility.
As long as I kept them apprised
of what those changes work
however way Mr chair they're
reporting requirements require.
Some entities required monthly
other every three months you
know they're just different.
Different requiring.
The reason why the bodies hired
me.
Was because they hired me
because I knew what I was doing
they have faith in what I was
going to execute on their
behalf.
And then I would keep it within
budget in if I couldn't keep it
within budget I would be able to
report inappropriate twenty to
how the required it so my.
We have to tread very carefully
Mr chair and representative
because we do have we're
legislation we we have.
The overall oversight.
Responsibility you and you you
in your capacity.
It is that you Sir I am money
in the interim we have we have
our those those times and
parents will have to ask the
hard questions
but each this is the executive
administrative arm and they
have.
Their rules and the regulations
and then they have their
processes and procedures that
they have to follow.
And that's why the report to you
you're you're you're lucky to be
on House Appropriations I think.
No I don't sometimes I think
you're you know you we get the
positive responses from
committee members and others
feel overwhelmed but the bottom
line is that's the reporting
process that's the and to take
that's why they're called before
you Mr chair on a regular basis
whatever that might be you know.
Other sessions.
special session ever to answer
those questions that's why
they're there.
But I think that we I believe Mr
chair that we overstep or
someone mentions circumvent what
we set up we set up these
process.
And we we said enough so that we
can maintain the statutory and
legislative
Responsibilities that we're
charged with.
To take away a four step on the
fringe of pond or circumvent the
administrative or executive
process and so I have complete
faith in the hiring.
Of these.
Of heads of of their departments
complete in who hires these
individuals.
What salaries they receive.
And the skills abilities
knowledge and experience that
they bring to the table to be
able to administer and manage
their departments and when they
report to us as required
statutorily provided we have
what we want to phrase that to
us then that subject also
questions but not to impose.
Mr chair and representative and
I think that although I
understand your your and I think
I of the school you know I was
willing to listen to your tier
history but it was I think it
would have been well never mind
it's not a lot of.
Understanding the rationale
behind the bill you finally got
to and and I would like to get
well you you've got to explain.
The white is that you're if you
saw a problem and why it is that
you're proposing this
legislation and it for me it it
just this out of.
The important it doesn't have a
place with us because again
these are administrators these
are executives however we want
to call it private sector have
certain names public sector have
other names and titles but
that's what they're having to do
and our job is as long as they
keep within the confines of the
fiduciary responsibilities to
the bosses.
Fiduciary response they don't in
any way send up any red flags
about any improprieties in this
checks and balance
then we let them do their job
right now Mr chair I services
and national treasure for the
national.
I always get it mixed up
state legislators at national
spending council state
legislators which is associated
with the policy is to.
Sell it's a huge body.
I'm the treasure as if I were
provided I I listen and receive
these reports.
Highly improper for me to turn
around and go to the body
circumvent that and then not go
through the process is that we
set up ourselves it would be
very improper I take an oath of
office as a national treasure I
was the national treasurer for
the national the left
organizations league of the
United American citizens it has
over twelve hundred councils
located in.
Thirteen different countries of
the world.
And the same thing the board of
directors trusted me and
overseen as their representative
the administrative law and as
long as there were checks and
balances in place and as long as
they reported to us regularly
why they had to make budgetary
adjustments.
And those budgetary is
adjustments were not any red
flag of malfeasance who are you
know hiring of family members or
outsides of the the law
legalities or are rules and
regulations that we had bylaws
or whatever then I signed off
reported to the body need to the
The executive body so it's the
same thing and so I I would just
tell you of Mr chair
representative that I think we
have to have a fair amount of
trust in our executive and in he
or she is hiring of patterns in
hiring responsibilities.
And unless we have unless you
came to us and said I see a
pattern.
A pattern of.
And then you just gave us all
the reasons why we saw a pattern
that could probably would have
should have raised it in the
appropriations before coming to
us but if you see a pattern of
any of those violations.
Then there's ways of which to
address and not have to do it
the way that you're proposing to
do so.
Mr chair representative.
Other than that one question to
clear.
Thank I just don't think that
this is the way to go about it
if we have concerns or
for things that we have to raise
that could improve.
Not imposed that could improve
the processes to make it much
more transparent to us if that's
what you want much more
accountable to us if that's what
you want in the proper way to do
it is to work through the
systems that we have set up in
place so for that reason Mr Mr
chair for those reasons actually
I don't see this as being an
important piece of legislation
it's your your bills important
you understand but I don't see
it as something that
That we should be
Addressing.
You might I agree with the
comments that were made and
there are reasons why things are
done and Mr chair I think it is
suspicious maybe maybe you
didn't use that word.
when we have vacancies things
are moved around instead of
filling vacancies you think that
is an example of somebody else
in that is an example
but you know that's just the way
it administrative processes part
and if you have an immediate
need operationally that you have
to fill the gap in and you still
haven't been able to fill a
vacancy then.
Please do use the funds to make
the transfers or adjustments
that you have to do because we
already know that you're already
building your next year's budget
and the following year's budget
the following year's budget and
we already know that we're
coming back with a recurring
budgetary of requests the only
thing I would say ministers
would be and I've been saying
this to them in different ways
is that bill then that that.
I don't want to call it race day
fund or that that ten percent of
whatever it is that you need to
build in we need to get a custom
to doing that in the state we
haven't done that well as far as
administrator administration is
we haven't done that very well
we haven't been able to because
we always have we were always
short of money we never we never
had any kind of.
Surplus.
All of the services yeah surplus
of revenue so I would just
suggest that but again we have a
right to make suggestions and
find
improvements but not constraints
and not impose thank you Mr
chair and thank you
Representative.
It's a second shot thank you Mr
chair and representative so just
just to come back for with where
we were talking as far as
transparency in what you've got
in your bill.
So I I managed a six million
dollar budget and as a fireman
you know that's that's a lot to
the fire how to get us on the
six million dollar loan money's
always that really care.
And my both my my supervisor
told me to come up with creative
ways to make money because there
was no money to put into my
budget slide to come up three
eight ways.
And when you come up with
creative ways you're always
within the law it's not immoral
or anything but you when you
come up with creative place what
your bill is telling me is
you're just trying to put some
checks and balances in their.
To where we're not revert well
we're not of not reverting but
we're not taking our fifty four
eight point eight million
dollars and as the other
representative stated going on a
spending spree at the end of the
year because we need that money
and of.
Being transparent to our
constituents as well as the
people in New Mexico I don't see
how of you know what checks and
balances and transparency could
be bad.
And I just wanted to reiterate
that I do like you feel because
I like to see I like to save
money I don't like to give out
money and as one of the people
that did go for the H. B. two
field I liked I liked it
wholistic leave there was just a
few things in there I did not
live I couldn't vote for.
Thank you Mr chair.
No I.
Here is a Representative that
you introduce procreation
correct yes that is a your main
committee.
Some areas that have you thought
about the.
This as a policy proposal in
appropriation.
Thank you for the question
chairman and yes actually
discusses with the chairman of
corporations and many members
and the intent of this bill is
to do exactly what we're doing.
Engaging have intelligent
conversation and get get
thoughts from other legislators
I didn't expect this bill does
this believe this committee.
What what I did want is is
positive committee back and
forth.
To to get perspectives from
other people that may not have
ever had a chance to sit on
probation and allow them the
opportunity to engage in
conversation with respect to
that yes we've had that
conversation and yes our way so
we can do it.
And put it inside a house bill
two.
And we can do exactly that by
just saying Novartis.
And it's been done in the past
the chairman and but for me.
with respect to this I've I've
managed to create and manage.
And then responsible for budgets
in excess of a hundred million
dollars a year.
More than ninety concrete plants
fifteen asphalt plants forty
some on aggregate the this Smith
cement production.
And
Fifteen hundred over the road
truck.
I've had to do that not been
responsible for that an account
for that and with each one of
those.
Not.
Taking away from the want the
that is our most important asset
which is our employees.
And that's what I look at with
respect to this when I have to
sit there and listen chairman
to.
All the different agencies
come in and talk about the
importance of needing more
employees needing more money for
salaries needing this and then
looking at what they reverted in
not yes twenty twenty two I've
gone back and looked at us and
we go from our two thousand ten
census to our two thousand
twenty census The New Mexico on
our numbers here our state's
crossing point zero nine
percent.
Governments grown by over thirty
five percent but my question is
so what would the proposed
station chairman those is
called.
That's what I wish to do us.
Chairman misunderstood your
question so this comment was we
continued through legislation or
we change the switch for the
piece of legislation and didn't
ask anybody else's silos and
since he is highly debated bills
and I'm okay with I have a
strong shoulders.
A little foreigner exploits good
that.
So but there are other ways to
handle this but if we can get
and engage and have a good
conversation about how we can
make peace with legislation
right.
Intend that that's what we do
then ninety percent of the time
in the state legislature is
impose our will on other people
thank you.
there's my fifteen see on the
legislature I have never even
thought of wanting to show
appropriations.
And you at nine to note that
some are you I'm sorry that's
just not me.
I don't like numbers and we will
I think you taxes and my
family's income taxes but I do
not Segura specially with
regards to the minutes of the
William of.
I think chairman I'm a numbers
guy so I'm not sure that since
no on the dollar to two dollars
and.
Is that the cool.
But so the question is see I
also work as a person of.
And the I hear Dylan speaking
about renter's fire departments
and how do that of the lady
manager whatever your state.
Those are.
In the course the manager didn't
this call is to.
The manager didn't have to go
and find a way to adjust that
budget governor wherever he
admits that.
Okay because he is not allowed
let that agency.
Operate read it any place in
that but my question is in the
state of New Mexico are a
variety of the allowed to
operate in the red in in the a
line item.
F. on in chairman on the line
item on any line item I believe
they are their last rotate
within line items so.
So you're telling me that this
agency can overspend I would use
up since I got.
Please accept supposed to
overspend just graduated on few.
State this is the issue right.
Close to what does he do.
Rotate chairman thank you for
the question he would rotate
that the direct expenditure from
somewhere else.
Two totally different.
Concept salary benefits and
different than direct.
School.
So do something like this would
this allow him to do that.
Chairman I appreciate that very
much because what H. before
fifty four doesn't do is stop
the agency from being able to
do.
Requests the only thing for
fifty to fifty four fifty four
does it stops HSD from
transferring for PS and be into
other categories.
Does not stop any other
transfers.
Basically what you're saying is
he can play around with this
budget all over the place except
for personal.
Chairman of that would be.
Probably to provide the point
yes
This one to get to the bottom.
Here that this is not the most
intelligent person in the world
to explain things to me.
Okay so you that's what you're
telling me he because that just
didn't bring money from
Each year into it to issue.
Not from version that.
Chairman that would be the
intent of the bill yes
So.
I.
I understand I just think this
is the place that's what my
problem is I'm interested to say
here you can do this which can
do that would lead to do this
much like to do that was.
I think we need to go live to
appropriations.
I that is in front of our our
our desk on the house floor and
sit in my office and other
people's offices a whole list of
statutes the the we created.
That do exactly that tell
agencies how they can work with.
The others that rely heavily
motion motion would do this.
Part of the.
Services.
Those.
Four fifty.
The substitute motion to table
second
I motion for substance.
The first substitute motion
table
Hey would you call them on the
table there's.
Yes.
What was approved in the motion
yes Representative T. Rowe
said the Chavis a secretary for
the table.
Okay
Representative Chavis mon.
Representative Figueroa.
Representative Donna yes.
Representative Garcia yes.
Representative Johnson.
Representative Martinez no.
Representative right now.
Representative that also
explain.
Representative methadone no.
Representative vice chair Roybal
Caballero is to table.
Chair of going yes to committee.
What what.
The motion of a vote of six four
years we've been able to
Representative this is
development.
Thank you Mr chair lashandra
explained a lot of the day so Mr
chair representative I still
reason I wanted to say that is.
That this is just a good
conversation for for
transparency and to show the
people that we that is a good
conversation and and I I really
think that's sort of gone
committee after this system for
that can continue compensation
thank.
Thank you Mr thank you thank you
thank you chairman thank you
vice chair and committee for the
good conversation.
Be able to use the.
Since learning that can move
forward with.
Mr chair
I also got representative for
she has set up a little.
The the two of.
Mexico.
Representative will you.
Of.
The two on
Right there.
Yes.
I.
Hey yes yes.
Here's the cops are here for
thank you.
Because.
Labour hi to this year's
whenever you're ready.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee Representative
Pamela.
And I'm here with my expertise.
Robert Scott.
We're here to present health
field for fifty five.
The.
What will be the I.
Workers compensation additional
workers compensation here.
Is brought about.
With a worker a worker falls ill
R. is in it is as of the drive
to work this is.
And we saw some problems.
That need to be cleared up.
With respect to the bill and
that's what's important today.
I'm gonna tell you why about the
changes that we've made and the
reasons why the.
If I can disagree.
The.
A real mild.
The first item is with respect
to the feeding at.
So the amount that attorney's
are being paid thank you for
staff to twenty two thousand
five hundred dollars.
And what we've done is we've
increases by two thousand
dollars and if you want to buy a
what did you do that.
What we look at is the fact that
the last time that fees were
increased it's been almost ten
years and how many of you are
working and haven't had a pay
increase in ten years this is.
All right.
Is it a remember that would
attorney's fees that I just
wasn't sales depend for their
staff they're paying for the
rent for a lot of things
electricity all that's coming
out so I just wanted to the
attorney's office and so we also
looked at what was the inflation
rate for the past ten years so I
looked at it for the past five
years did averaged about five
point six percent and multiplied
by ten to look at what the rate
would be if we were taken into
consideration inflation so
that's how we came up with the
ten thousand dollar increase to
come to the right degree head
turn is up to where they should
be with respect to the fee that
has been in talks and the
problem that we have is that
we're losing attorneys because
people assume we can make a
living doing this this is a
matter of access to justice so
we want to have it make sure
that people have representation
when they're coming but for
the of the board and looking at
workers compensation and I'm
gonna have my experts talk about
some of the other fees some of
the other increases and what we
make and tell a little bit about
your.
You do that Mr chair members of
the committee I appreciate you
giving me time to speak on this
bill I think this is very
important I've been representing
injured workers solely since
nineteen ninety five I became a
lawyer in nineteen ninety one I
worked suggests this might come
as a clerk for a year and then I
worked as a defense workers
compensation lawyer and the fire
that job and became a workers.
And I think my my personality
and I will be much better and I
am honored to represent injured
workers they are some of the
most.
It was a media is the wrong word
I think they need help.
Right away they get her.
Wages often stop sometimes they
don't get money benefits right
away.
That's when they need a lawyer
sometimes they don't get medical
treatment that's what the
utility.
so.
I agree with everything that
Representative heard it has said
about the ten thousand dollar
increase we have structured
another.
Increase in that the one of the
issues with your prompt in New
Mexico is that once the lawyers
especially the workers lawyers
reach the calf.
Chair often stop representing
the work of.
One of the keystone or contact
our lifetime medical benefits.
Nineteen ninety one the that was
before.
My my opinion workers gave up a
lot one of the things that they
could not giving up a lot was
lifetime medical benefits.
And the problem with the cat.
Is once you reach the cap.
And a worker has additional
needs after it and it's usually
medical needs I have to give you
an example of it.
They don't have an attorney to
represent.
And most of my clients are great
people unsophisticated.
We don't want to deal with and
can't deal with litigation and
the needle I have a client.
Refugio and he's in his late
twenties about five years ago he
lost his leg in an oil field
that hello the need.
He will need.
Static.
More or less every five years.
He will need sockets.
To be replaced.
I lives right now I am trying to
get in a socket replacement.
I'm not being paid.
So
There is a provision once the
thirty two I the new limit has
been reached.
And both sides can do this
defense lawyers work for free to
difference between defense
lawyers and workers lawyers is
they expect.
More work from their clients
from their insurance company you
know there that they represent
and they usually get
a worker's attorney what you
don't that worker I mean you
don't want to see them because I
was able problems you wanted to
get on with your life and move
on and get on so there we are
requesting and it up to an
additional twenty five thousand
by a work comp judge making
certain findings and that's on
page eight so it's not like all
you and as we get ten thousand.
There has to be a.
The other issue with workers
comp in the past ten years is an
explosion and education and I
can give you my opinion as
providing.
But litigation he set the terms.
And often there's more
litigation once you've done the
initial resolution and if you've
reached the twenty two five of
thirty two I decisional.
issues.
This is kind of but that escape
hatch I don't know if that's a
good time I agree with that but
it gives the parties and their
lawyers some breathing room to
help their clients.
I am we've also as
Mr chairman and committee
members increase in costs the
work comp that provides that the
insurance company
must advance up to three
thousand dollars in litigation
costs to the work.
That's primarily to pay for
doctor's deposition to
mitigation you can pay for other
things but primarily doctors and
you can do about one and a half
drive step pose with three
thousand dollars if the worker
loses features coming to try to
get that money that.
Because of the marked increase
in litigation.
The cost of increased
significantly.
I have colleagues who work in
federal court and District Court
doing big PI cases and they
can't believe the amount of
litigation work opportunities
both sides have to deal with.
we're asking an increase from
three to ten thousand dollars.
and I think that is
justified
And then
say the fed raised legislative
in New Mexico in New Mexico
where compact
Page eight make some changes as
to how this rate
Right now reached three thousand
for each violation of section
fifty to one twenty eight point
one which is the path face
section of her work compact
there have been some last minute
amendments we have one two weeks
ago which I think is before this
committee yesterday and today I
have conversations with
representatives of employers and
insurers and
I think we have made amendments
that address some some of the
concerns that not all of their
concerns and one of them was
this this line fifteen eight
eight eight eight line.
And H. two it will be we think
we can have a committee today
and go to the next committee
three thousand dollars for
violating section fifty to one
twenty eight point one and that
is an exception.
For the judge to exceed the
thank.
And.
To be honest with you
that face the has long been a
form in both sides mostly
workers sites because.
There's not a lot to in the work
compact and it's limited to the
work comp.
but I don't want to get into
that I don't think I want to
address
the interests of the entities
that oppose anything in this
bill and that's when we have
done to address photo sure.
The please continue thank you
bye.
Yes Mr.
Good
deal of.
We want to address the minutes
for the illness.
And I would like to move the US
would likely.
Okay.
I have a motion to.
It is.
For a discussion about the
second so but then the long.
Of course page nine and this was
a mistake times twenty twenty
two.
The language essentially said
that non lawyers could represent
clients before the New Mexico
workers compensation
administration but could not be
paid the.
for some reason and I don't know
why was taken out of this
amendment puts it back in now
there are two more amendments
which enough before this
committee.
No which I will not talk about.
Thank you.
okay.
Basically what you do is just
take not for practical.
That means that if I want to
representative
committee.
Let me say that I Mr chair
members.
We don't want to practicing law
that's what.
There was a problem okay
Representative dass of the
amendment
I heard Mr chair that we have
multiple amendments but the one
talking about it is the only.
For us I understand Mr chair my
question is why are we talking
about other amendments that are
also good portion of it I don't
tell people what to do with
their troops to do okay provided
the that's that that's well
is that we're not getting the
full picture.
Trying to understand repeated.
Before us.
Well I'm I'm responding to what
I heard Mr chair so you
understood that he was not going
to discuss.
Thank you Mr.
This is the only member worked
up about that anybody has.
We have the level.
He offices that.
The the the the the.
So there's yes Representative
also can I just ask a question
about human.
Was open about thirty we go
ahead.
Really voting on is not just our
right.
Go ahead.
If it is available to go ahead
you can go ahead.
Mr Mr chairman or
Representative.
Can you explain to me why if I
choose to have my brother.
Representative made.
Why that's not allowed.
This is a committee
representative and I'm sorry
questions.
It's
not these are the way the
amendment is taking the field
back to within the reduces
disapproval statutory provisions
and so what the the bar have
requires that people were not
licensed attorneys if they would
not get paid for doing of work
as a practicing attorney so with
this bill was written at that
one that is before you that was
in the state that never should
have been taken out so
sustaining back in the place
that which was already there.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative.
Options to get you.
Okay well.
But it.
We have the proper motion
property tax.
No offices into the the
amendments and I'll go back to
the community.
Mr chair representative
committee I don't think there's
anything else to add
based on the amended bill.
Ready to answer questions.
The only audience this fund is
there anybody you in support of
this legislation.
There is going to be in
opposition to the legislation.
We started right back to work my
way for.
Use a German.
As a result of the lack of
cooperatives association.
And the person that got more was
the fiscal impact report states
that an increase in attorney
fees owed for less money and the
injured worker facit.
One year award is given to the
injured worker fifty four of
those to the.
What were the numbers off.
So we self insure our lips are
businesses participate Peter
lives on is very risky.
And so.
We have a fund that we
Hey are.
And we've been doing that since
nineteen eighty six.
You want to know what are the
what are deductible is Roger I
was about six years.
We pay our own way.
Close of always pager always
nineteen eighty six this fund.
Our largest claim.
Was not limited.
That claim.
It is very expensive
Representative one it is we have
purchased report status within
your.
What.
So what is there another
Senators cases that you get all
that.
What are markets I wanted our
legislative is an important
safety for.
And so I think that is
increasing costs one wonders a
ripple effect and that ripple
effect is it affects our member
owners because our our focus on
rural areas all of the law.
The members of the flow of the
river.
So those expenses are are sent
down to the call off was very
very.
Of those reasons is that in
opposition he would.
Yes Sir.
Gentleman Committee members my
name is brought to the court of
the New Mexico coverage we're
Senators opposition an
additional twelve reasons
already stated but also online
for you to understand that the
agriculture side of this one.
The misconception is people
rolling in the dough and then
whatever we have attorney fees
that we have to now all of a
sudden they and other ten
thousand dollars on top of that.
Like what was just stated that's
taking money away from the
people that come out to help and
workforce whenever an accident
does happen because agriculture
industry insurance industry
whatever something does happen
the expectation all feeds is
going to take money out of their
pocket plus the cap that's going
on here is not necessarily a
true cap as that can be
superseded in certain instances
and so what what is the cap
actually there is no cap so at
what point.
Is this going to be more
detrimental that is good for the
people that are trying to
continue to.
So with that percent opposition.
We expect.
Thank you Mr chairman is here
Representative nice to meet for
the largest workers compensation
insurance carrier state.
Work on just get on the fast and
efficient delivery of benefits
to injured workers often trump
costs and.
For the most part it works it's
a delicate balance the right now
it's working ninety five percent
of our claims are paid without
the need for any kind of formal
process no litigation attorneys
not the few cases that go to
some kind of formal education
process.
There are tools in the staff to
help make sure that both sides
focus their efforts and make
sure that he's not from our
excesses three of those tools in
the statute the attorney fee
caps the the cap on the employer
advance discovery fees and
probation on bad faith
litigation by both sides this
bill as proposed under nine all
three of those tools our data
does not show that there is a
problem with charities it is not
so there's a problem with access
to justice it is not show that
there is a problem in need of
any of those so called solutions
and it's that and for those
reasons we oppose thank you to
yes Sir.
Thank you Mr committee members
on its radiator destroyer for
bill stresses Mexico we're self
insurance fund that are
contractors and light industry
companies we we've been in
business and I need a set
month because Mexico regional we
do insure over center that
dollars okay rolling state UC
are SharePoint.
I want to verse talk about the
of our position Katie's that
calm also won first for going to
this F. R. mind you thank you
one is as a person to talk about
already is both sides have
internet.
The employers will pay for their
side and we also pay for half of
the workers these that is so
distant thousand dollar
increases relative fifty
thousand dollar increase on
businesses and the state of the.
The the discovery G. I wanna
make sure one is and this is not
a cap on discovery fees both
sides and spend as much as they
want to discover this is Dale
an amount for your space back to
the reform in nineteen ninety
one serve our share of the
injured workers discovered it
wasn't us dollars in a recent
to three thousand now try to go
to the doctor.
So when you add up to ten
thousand dollars increase to
directly to the course of
five thousand for the workers
and seven thousand on discovery
to twenty two thousand dollar
bill.
Point now there are you that did
not provide reached and that's
exactly right.
Our reserves more is.
One more fact the the bill
doubles.
Two thousand four stock about
budgets when there's more money
on the table are concerns how
many is fifty thousand dollars
this is well under the cap today
one thousand and twenty four
one.
Operators that are sixteen
thousand one hundred and twenty
June twenty third ask for this
is that this will be a treasure
hunt to look for evidence
there's more to it so going to
the R..
DMCA respond workers on
Administration sponsored FIR the
use a
of producer price index there is
a time that inflationary index
Representative urgent mention
this one came up with five point
six of the last two years I
after the last ten years that is
not what federal tribes maintain
inflation on the long term
that's really bad years last
couple years this is really a
lot higher than what it should
be.
one point out that also have our
General Services I did not.
masses for this.
But there was not a state that
right premiums are costs will go
up so for all.
faces initially self insured.
Our new it's all pass along
somewhere down the chief lawyers
in a lesser cost one form back
to the people it serves.
So far says minimal exposure to
the sector last I would say that
on the.
Representative work from his
website there is a fourth
quarter report the talks I'm
litigation going on that was
reported to.
There's two
things losses on for this
there's two hundred twenty nine.
Basis they have indication
during the fourth quarter four.
You applied at fifty six
thousand five thousand in the
seven thousand dollars also that
the will to forty four million
dollars.
One last question is that I
would be the highest market that
will soon lead to.
Both look at the state of New
Mexico because in the FIR said
it wasn't a packed hundreds
exclaims in the fourth quarter
choose
two point three million dollar
line are made out is all along
this is important bills workers
top two there's a lot thank you
for your time.
Many of you know I've got a few
more.
For the legislation loans we.
Well let's go ahead and those.
Four of those opposition figure
and that.
Okay.
To do this for you or so Chaves
you'll know the work for us.
Good afternoon Mister Mister
chairman committee members thank
you for your time here today I'm
here to speak in strong support
of this bill I'm workers
compensation attorney been
practicing not as long as Mister
Scott but I've only
Representative workers I'm here
to tell you that one echo one Mr
Scott said hi Representative
in order to you were told
numbers of two hundred ninety
five about forty five cases in
litigation right now in court
and it's everything from people
who've lost their legs arms
serious serious injuries to knee
injuries and knee replacements
and one of the things I see
I just go to folks would just
the problem is is once we reach
secretary.
I have a case where a worker had
a meniscal tear toward the end
she did get treatment I hope to
reach a settlement part of the
case but we left for medical so
open internet treatment for two
years after two years she just
tried to go back to a doctor
that's that doctor Hey my knees
hurting me again what can we do
the insurance industry denied
even letting her see a doctor I
have to get involved in that
case I have to file workers
compensation board we have to go
through litigation because the
insurer denied this that we see
this all the time and there's no
need to the bad faith currently
in New Mexico workers
compensation.
Unsure if your insurance company
outside workers compensation
denies your claim if your house
burns down.
Something like that you have a
right to bad faith where there's
real punishment for the insurer
region on your claim in New
Mexico workers compensation
claims these insurers they just
cried crocodile tears about
workers being a little bit more
they will deny a claim and
forces in the litigation not all
the time what happens and just
over things like whether or not
a worker needs treatment just
whether they can see their
doctor so this bill is really
important to help there are
lower numbers of internet users
about twenty attorneys on each
side and we make we lesson we
could make in other fields but
we do it we ought recognize some
of this is like a school teacher
does it because they care about
what they're doing and it's
important though that you be
able to attract new lawyers this
feels and right now that's not
happened thank you for your
time.
Yes thank you chairman of the
committee members I put in my
name I support house bill four
fifty five so that it would be
clear that I do I'm also a point
to so tourney I represent
injured workers and have been
doing that since the like late
nineteen eighties I would like
to respond to some of the things
that the opposition speakers
have spoken to in and put this
in context I I want all the
committee members understands
that.
There are no attorney's fees for
workers attorneys and west we
obtain budget for a worker that
have been incorrectly wrong we
did not so.
Hi I forgot which I think is
builders trustor somebody said
the vast majority of their
claims are resolved without
litigation that's great the role
actor qual Representative said
that his largest claim ever was
not litigated that's great I
don't get paid for helping that
worker if they do everything
they're supposed to do we're
only talking about the claims
where someone has been denied
benefits and workers
compensation judge decides that
that workers entitled to
benefits so this is not the
workers trying to get something
here the attorneys trying to get
something for nothing this is
actually staff for like the
opposition wanting something for
nothing they want to be able to
Soon to pay organized budget
without having to deal with
attorneys to disagree with that
addressing this question of the
access to justice I would just
say this morning I spent an hour
talking with the maternity in
southern New Mexico this
representing a co worker who had
a serious electrical burn and
explosion
and nobody's representing that
work with the workers comp case
and the reason I told her I I
was not interested in getting
involved either because I would
be limited to twenty two
thousand five hundred dollars I
know that's what I'll get paid
because this is a serious
serious point but I can't afford
to representative that work for
for the rest of his life used I
think she said he is forty or
forty one I'm sixty nine years
old we.
Thank you so I I will not be
doing this after a few more
years and that work will be
looking for an attorney other
than me and I won't be in it in
the attorney's fees for the
future with our thank you.
go to the.
You
know this is here we will stand
quest.
The.
Representative.
Mr chair representative I am I
am just concerned about the
rising.
Page seven one five three seven
thousand thirty two thousand
five hundred do you have an
actual numbers show there's been
a decrease in the number of
attorneys providing
representation to these workers.
Members of the committee.
Representative re what we do it
prior to putting this bill
together with me just for turns
we asked for in service to come
together so that we could talk
about this bill what was needed
to make sure that ended workers
who were not
settling claims would
potentially have representation.
We talked to the number of trees
that were there they themselves
have indicated that the numbers
have decreased so the answer is
yes so in terms of what was the
numbers that we give it of they
did say that if you want to go
to.
State of state that bars are in
India thank you for the and
workers comp CME terms come up
okay you don't have anything in
this no I don't.
Members for us it was is based
on what the attorneys themselves
were explained do you have
something else I think there is
Mr chair representative read
thank you for the question
there's no listing of workers
compensation attorneys I can
tell you that.
The lawyers that I knew
practicing when I first started
practicing
either there's they're still
there they have reached and I
think what was said twenty and
twenty on both sides I would
agree with that Mr chair
representative.
As Mr chair representative of an
expert is there do you have any
numbers on there's been an
increase of pro state workers.
Mr chair Representative reason I
don't have numbers for that I
think the work comp
administration should have
numbers for that because they
keep track of all the filings
and
And they try to talk down but it
is if a worker has an attorney
an attorney has to enter an
appearance and so it's in the
record and should be very easy
for the administration to come
up with no.
Those numbers I can say Mr chair
representative read I regularly
turn down to a three workers.
Contact us for various reasons
thank Mr chair and
representative for I guess the
concern I have is
as we go on in the last two
three years with COVID being a
lawyer myself the actual cost to
to handle cases really gone down
because everything is done by
technology you're not traveling
you're doing video depositions
your remote so can you explain
Mr chair and Representative
expert how you can calculate
that into it because to me I
feel things have gone down and
costs based on what has recently
occurred.
You can start.
Mr chair of Representative read
I do know that there have been
gains in
workplace productivity because
of remote work and things like
that and I I do appreciate we're
coming out those mediations of.
Almost a hundred percent by zoom
which which helps a lot but
hearings are starting to go back
to in person hearings is my in
trials is my understanding of I
think just because of the nature
of the work
we have not seen.
Those sit as much of those
savings and I don't think and
those savings have impacted
attorney's fees as much as your
cost Representative we Mr
Chairman.
Mr chair representative of an
expert so a lot of these cases
are also they're taken by just
defense attorneys I guess a
privately.
Mr chair.
Representative I don't
understand politician the change
will primarily benefit workers
attorney's attorneys who
customarily take twenty percent
of
The there's no Mr chair
representative we there is no
specific process for setting.
a worker speak
What has developed in my
experience in other years
experience workers lawyers is
that
If the worker
disputes the fee or if the
insurance company disputes
this is actually correct they
pay half of the feet not half of
the recovery of the workers half
of the feet then there's a
hearing and clever disputes that
the gets their day in court and
the work comp judge sets the
feet of Mr chair representative
re but hope that answers your
question.
Okay and Mr chair Representative
expert I guess I'm also
concerned about deleting this
bad faith language lying all
through eighteen page seven
eight forty two twenty five the
dates are instructor eighteen
and I am concerned about the the
leading of language that
basically is intended to
discourage bad faith.
I will be employers and the work
and so I'm concerned about
removing this language in can
you elaborate a little bit.
Mr chair representative bill
that support.
Mr chair Representative read
This was removed
at my S. and also with other
we're workers attorney for
helping to draft this
legislation
because it badly right I
disagree with the comments from
the opposition that eight
I forget what was said but it is
essentially
undercuts all of the bad faith
controls I think one hundred
percent disagree with that all
the change does is to clean up
this language and make it more
clear and it's under paragraph
two line twelve one eighty eight
on chair representative we want
help fees the benefits are to be
handled.
Mr chair representative of an
expert so
This is not going to give any
recourse against workers
attorneys who are filing
executive.
Mr chair Representative we this
was recently.
Concerns raised to me yesterday
and this morning and my
understanding is that the the
issue is that on page seven and
this was just the full to me
actually Representative for the
hearing that line fourteen.
Clemente.
What has been removed and that's
absolutely true because part of
that.
That block that was removed
if that's the problem with the
language on page eight that was
inserted
I think we can fix that and put
Clemente back in if that's okay
with you.
Okay Mister chair and wrapping
it up here Representative an
expert and so is there is our
ten thousand dollar advance cost
into these attorneys and
discovery.
Mr chair Representative read.
No what happens and I'm just
going to stick with the three
thousand because that's where we
are right now so
Generally what happens is
like I said it it's usually to
pay for doctor staff so I want
to depose Dr
Smith and so I called up.
The system because of my
opposing counsels assistant and
big and with the doctor they set
it up and usually the doctor
sends a bill to opposing
counsel's office or the adjuster
if the gesture and then will
only do the deposition once they
get paid get that check so
usually and we depose on on the
fourteenth they have the check
already do the deposition and
then that amount is deducted
from the three thousand total
the existing three thousand
total I do want to say that.
The insurance company for sure
have the right.
To dispute a request for advance
a cost advantage not automatic
and
It that doesn't often happen
but the I I have had it happen
to where the insurance the.
Insurance company just feels
that the cost request was
improper or unreasonable what
have you and refuse it and then
if that beginning with the work
comp judge.
And Mr chairman members of the
committee on Representative
right it's also important to
look at is what we're looking at
these increasing discovery fees
the cost of experts has also
gone up sometimes it may be a
need for more than one doctor
maybe there may be a general
practitioner then it may be
someone who's an expert we want
to be able to get the
individuals who are needing and
asking for workers compensation
to make sure that they that the
decision that is being made by
the workers compensation does
that that person has all the
Experts that also.
Their fees and so we need to
make sure that the individuals
have the best representation
that is possible for.
Process and Mr chair
representative expert do you
have like an average cost of
what an expert would be in a
case like this because I am
seeing average some position
deposition is approximately
eight hundred dollars
and.
Total deposition costs maybe
average a little over a thousand
Mr Mr chair representative we I
don't have a finger tips what in
the workers compensation
ministration rules there are
limits on what doctors can
charge and I'm just quoting or
trying to remember I believe it
it is along these lines sh four
hundred dollars for the first
hour and then they deserve
reduced hourly rate for each
additional half hour after that
and I think they can charge for
incremental hours and then they
also get a certain amount to
prep for the deposition Mr chair
Representative Reese and I can
find that for you if you want Mr
chair and representative and
express just wanted to kind of
make clear there were limits on
that and it's not like you're
having experts that are costing
you fifty sixty grand like you
would a criminal case so I just
wanted to to make sure that
there were no sentencing
correct.
It's on those deposition Mr
chairman may I respond to that.
The question I just wanted to
add more information to.
One of the problems that is
driving this increase from three
thousand to ten thousand is
over the past ten years there
has been increased use of what
are called independent medical
examinations.
And either side can.
Request one and what results is
either a doctor on familiar with
the case or a panel of doctors
reviews of medical records
examines the worker answers a
letter from the lawyers with
questions how did this you know
what you diagnoses which a work
related to listen what that
results in.
Is.
One at least one more deposition
and you used to have if you have
a multi drive panel two or three
more depositions than you used
to have and and I think you are
right eight hundred dollars is
probably the cost of the average
treating that this deposition
so I this is like we want more
cost money there is a reason for
thank you Mr chair
Representative and thank you Mr
chair other questions.
Representative grow good role.
Thank you Mr chairman I'm I have
a question on our I mean I don't
know much about these but found
I was thinking in the one case I
know someone who cost me who got
I was talking to a machine
where he's from.
So you can how much of the
summer I had a very difficult.
You have been many years ago the
only thing they of course they
could have representation in any
place they have managed to get
to a federal where they are not
paid for the rebels that have
two of the basic things.
there was a way to be John
whatever they have to be
economical family everywhere and
I was wondering I thought of
workers comp attorneys.
How do we specifically I don't
know where they advertise their
business is one part of the
actually say this is what we do
or they were not having any
representation because something
like.
Because the vehicles will be so
much easier and nobody wants to
pick those chances are I don't
know I'm just during the course
and Mr chair Representative
Roland finance it right yeah.
There are various reasons why
lawyers don't take cases
What Mr we said is that is
actually true sometimes the
biggest cases of which may be
the easiest ones you may have to
pass on because that person will
need.
Life long legal care now I can't
speak directly the O. T. the K.
sure talking about
Representative
But that could be a reason.
I think that's probably the
reason because this person.
At.
For sure I mean I can cover the
spread across but I. T. doesn't
respond they use his case and
the national level two
package that trump.
For heating and got all the.
I don't care that he needs but I
was wondering it doesn't respond
in the beginning I talk when I
was trying to help out from here
and everything it was because
they need to have some
specialized.
Attendees to do this but I'm not
one because they were afraid
they want somebody worry more
than they can cover.
Thank you Mr chair
representative I would wonder if
thank you Mr chairman and
members of the.
Hello.
Thank you Mr chair.
Representative or.
Ringing this bill their pieces
of it that I totally really need
to have.
But going in order page three
the cost of discover.
Twenty years probably these two
that information over the last
twenty years you know.
Not a PhD in economics Mr chair
this is a good question what is
three thousand dollars twenty
years ago with today and it came
up with I.
So to me that seems like a
recent change.
On to the next.
Change.
Senator.
It's this.
Ten years.
The attorney's fees haven't been
changed it probably needs to be
changed and might even be worth
while to stake in an indexed to
inflation so we don't have to
look at this every ten years
Mr chair but I share concerns
about the bad language change.
Fourteen to twenty four.
because the statute that
replaces.
This referenced on page eighty.
Does take out clean.
Interestingly enough it adds in
the claims processing
Representative as someone.
Against whom there could be a
claim for bad faith so Mister
chair I guess I'd ask that
question you answered.
Thank earlier that the claimant
maybe should be added that
planet could be added back in.
Is the inclusion of a claim
processing Representative
intentional or did that just
happen in statute.
Mr chair Representative Figueroa
Often times claims processing
Representative also known I
think it's just use are often
at least the beginning process
the basis often times they will
mitigate the sometimes the
litigate the cases but yes they
can be.
I think adjuster is the work
that probably should be in there
I don't know what the proper
word these but they are handling
anyone who's handling the claim
litigating the claims
can be subject to a claim of bad
faith is also a claim of unfair
claims practices which is more
of a negligence standard than a
more intentional bad faith stand
okay thank you Mr chair I really
do think the claimant needs to
be kept back in there somewhere
and quite sure how to do that
and I'm wondering why the paging
if.
The addition of rate lines one.
Why do we have a cat.
If the judge is.
Making a decision about whether
the cap to be exceeded are not
where we just have to judge
seven PM time
It seems strange that that was
added in there can you explain
that a little bit more Mr chair.
Mr chair representative.
That was a mistake and
and I apologize for that and
what it should say is
an additional up to an
additional ten thousand dollars
and that
then and the it I haven't been
before committee in a long time
so I'm from respite this but
that was what I was alluding to
earlier
if it is not uncapped
I believe it should be on caps
but that's that's not the
purpose of this bill and that's
only my personal opinion but
there is it so essentially to to
it will will be a two step.
The cat so the initial calf is
an additional ten thousand on to
the twenty two five thirty to
five.
Then at the judges discretion
really a good costs which is a
very high standard I'd work comp
judge with proper findings and
possibly hearing can authorize
and it up to an additional ten
thousand and that's where you
have a highly litigated case.
you do you have a trial you get
a decision.
it's in favor of the worker
worker is entitled to lifetime
medical benefits they are very
expensive
Both attorneys have reached cap.
And then three years down the
road the insurance disputes the
reason this treatment that's one
example.
Okay Mr chair and representative
and expert the F. R..
In the case that fewer than ten
percent of cases are hitting the
cap right now so most things are
done well below the cat so why
why wouldn't we.
No leave the cap where it is and
as this language to go over it.
Up to ten thousand more in those
cases where judge says yeah this
is necessary Mr chair
Representative Figueroa I
believe those numbers and I at
conversations with people yes we
still the director of the said
that the administration and some
of his deputies and.
that number I believe comes from
work comp or comp administration
numbers that they data they have
regarding fees and I'm not in
dispute the accuracy of the data
except they are not tracking.
The hours.
Workers attorney and defense
attorney actually work in the
case.
So just as an example I had a
hearing two days ago honesty
as part of my argument I
produced my time sheet.
Which had documented in my early
raised over forty two thousand
dollars in attorney's fees.
As justification for the Max
the.
that forty two thousand dollar
number is not going to be.
Logged anywhere to my
understanding at the work comp
administration what will be
logged will be the number the
judge could be a awards as my
attorney fees and and so I some
of the administration's not
going to have any numbers for
any cases that are over twenty
to five because by rule and law
none of them will go over twenty
five and that's a whole in their
data thank you Mr chair and
thank you export the data that's
been provided is.
Less than fewer than less than
ten percent reach the cap so
that it should include
everybody's heading that have.
Like the example you described
of the node forty two thousand
and being paid twenty two
thousand he'd be and then.
Nine percent
that the cat.
I think
Leave it at that it feels like
Mr chair needs work things that
have been mentioned that want to
be changed.
That I think should be changed.
Those questions.
For the last two Representative
that thank you Mr chair thank
you
Representative night and I'd
the.
And I'm just been listening all
this and to me this sounds more
like it's a an attorney for
those then I mentioned earlier
this is more of an attorney bill
that workers bill in the
economic listening to it
all I've heard is how we have to
increase more.
More increases fees so that
transaction the can get more
money rather than
how Mr chair representative the
the person that was injured
possibly for a lifetime this is
the one that's going to the fees
and so I'm going to I mean I
business wise Mr chair
representative
most of these claims I know are
settled the mid vast majority
are settled
would you X. would you agree
with about ninety five percent
of my understanding this was
somebody falls my that's a
construction I mean and so
somebody falls pick up the phone
they call and follow claim the
dispute that there's any is
where we need to run into these
things is did it happen on the
job.
So this is a fellow of the
roofer I don't know it
construction you should your
hand with a nail gun three or
half of if there's no dispute as
so that's why you know they're
they're mostly settled without
without that prices and without
going to District Court the
intent Mr chair representative.
We've the process that we have
is because when someone does get
injured.
They want to have there's a
claim so fast they don't want to
go to District Court they don't
want to go through two years of
litigation so they want they
they created this process to
streamline this to streamline
this the situation.
Mr chair representative I know
that I mean I I we've had bills
always have built but who wrote
this bill.
Mr chair representative.
Mr chair representative it was
attorneys and it was sitting
down talking with insurance
providers and also with those
who are into so this is a joint
operation we brought people
together more than one occasion
to talk about what was needed
here the big concern that I have
is the best thing to happen Mr
chairman and committee
Representative is that the case
could be Senator and that all
the parties agree what is the
the.
Compensation should be and the
and the treatment should be but
in some of these cases where the
the incidents occur much later
in time you are still subject to
the one cap that's on a on a
particular claim that so you can
go over that and so there were
traces that what do we do some
of them like this discussion you
everyone so I will continue to
take the case this is just an
attorney states is also about
the people because can you do
for that against an attorney for
the insurance company and you
don't have one it's not the same
you want to be on equal footing
so that's what we want to bring
to you Mr chairman members of
the committee representative
office and outside investment so
Mister chair representative I
understand.
The mobile thank you Mr chair
representative I understand what
you're trying to tell me and I'm
gonna present here a minute what
you're talking about is I get
injured because I have I have a
friend very good friend of mine
losses let.
And he went through the process
okay.
My age and ideas and.
And he has to have prosthesis
workman's comp for life is going
to cover his medical bills
that's pretty normal something
happens like that.
And so it just what you're
talking about what you referred
to Mr chair representative is
when a person comes back and
says have another injury and
they're trying to tie back to
that to that original
injured did to the work place
again or as a result of the
workplace the thing Mr chair
representative can be most of
these are back injuries so there
there it would be my guess I
would say I'd I'd I've talked to
us I remember this happening to
the company's done this before
somebody says I have a back
injury Mr chair representative
but to say that it happened the
work please their job is to look
back into some discovery okay
and look back to see if this
person had a back injury million
football or maybe the later on
another job or whatever in the
connected to one particular job
and that's where some of the
stuff is the majority of this
disputes take place Mr
Representative.
It can be real because I was
gonna ask you questions chair
representative did you did the
of what the the comp Advisory
Council approve this bill.
Because of vested to workers
comp advisory board to date the
council that they that they that
they have any part of this to
the approve this.
Mr chair of I'm sorry to ensure
yes Sir thank you Mr chair
representative to trust us the
short answer is no unfortunately
for various reasons my
understanding Advisory Council
as scheduled meetings over the
past three to six months and for
whatever reason I think lack of
a quorum probably have not met
that's one reason why it has not
been presented.
Main reason so Mr chair
representative does that mean
that this was submitted to the
WCA and comp community for
input.
This bill is yes Mr chair
representative to rises in and I
will say that when
directed you said first came in
about over a year ago as as the
new director he is going to
General Services soon as my
understanding he did say that he
supported an increase in fees
and would work towards that now
obviously he's his position is
changed and I don't know what
his position is on this but he
did a whole the administration
held a the meeting both in
person and by zoom I believe of
all the stakeholders and yes it
was a lot of described the
discussion Mr chairman and Mr to
rouses
And we tried to come up with the
bill Mr chair representative of
my understanding is that they
didn't come up with they don't
feel that the at the community
input the workman's comp
community everyone did come
together to give up a solid
Recommendation to this bill Mr
chair representative Mr chairman
Mr **** I personally in of last
fall said versions of this bill
out to various people who I I
thought Representative
employer insurers and
I got zero response now I
understand people have the lives
and this may not be have been a
priority for them at the time
but icicle let me know you input
let's have a conversation
Except until yesterday could I
get a phone call so Mister chair
representative I just think you
know I've I think you answer the
question well I'm not gonna be
that anymore Mr chair
representative you know the the
idea is is and also read about
this bad faith
situation the idea of of of Mr
chair representative having
those bad bad that bad faith
language is to keep both sides
from state on on track the
forces them to come to the table
and take care and get these
claims finish quickly.
Because what we can do and and
sometimes you get Mr chair
representative off balance and
you give too much money on want
and let's just say and and I and
I respect what everyone's saying
here in the an increase that
when you're hearing Mr chair
representative of the discovery
most claims are exceeding eleven
hundred twelve hundred dollars
and we wanted to increase it
because most doctors are it this
whole process Mr chair
representative is to bypass
District Court to go straight
and get this resolved quickly
find your your doctor signs off
that it happened in the injury
is is substantial most cases are
are settled and and Mr chair
representative of it would be.
That for either side to drag
their feet.
It hurts the worker.
And it just drags and causes
more cost internet is by doing
that by off balance to that.
It could it could lead to some
attorneys Mr chair
representative saying what about
this ten thousand dollars of of
of of
A discovery you know what I'm
gonna go ahead and.
Posted from people and drag this
on for a bigger Madam maybe or
or whatever.
Mr chair of Representative two
houses
I know almost personally every
lawyer who does were confident
State for so I don't think any
of them would take unnecessary
depositions
and
And I don't think just because
workers comp.
The cases they get litigated and
I don't know about ninety five
percent being resolved but the
Mr chair Senator as the basis
that get paid get litigated
right now every way from Tuesday
and and and the problem is once
a defense lawyer it's the cat.
Insurance companies fees are
zero after that.
that.
Depending on how House have
stringent and and grant if they
want to defend the case they
could string that K. L. for the
ones they want because you know
attorney's fees after the twenty
two I.
where as a workers internet.
Discuss to start.
Thank you Mr chair so Mister
chair representative I mean
here's here's here's what I'm
I'm gonna cut shape years
because I I think there are.
In anything Mr chair
representative of there's always
there's good about a very
everybody I don't care if you're
turning field rector of coke
whatever everybody there's
always gonna be that one.
So that that can abuse it and
that's why this thing is kind of
keeping it in a school board
that doesn't happen or at least
to minimize Mr chair
representative the in order for
you to meet the cap it the cap
is is only meant when when
someone settles order I get her
I get my my medical bills paid
it's my understanding always
that I've known of the to cover
with you were you were.
And Mr chair representative you
get the general rule when I
because I did a little homework
is twenty percent so that means
you have to get a a settlement
of over a hundred thousand
dollars in order to.
Let me that plane I heard one of
my
colleagues here Mister chair
representative say that most of
these claims our our smaller
because not all of them not all
required these hundred and plus
thousand dollars claims so it
does leave most of them
according to what my colleague
said here would leave room if if
it's a twenty thousand dollar
claim.
they're gonna get forty percent
of the last four thousand
dollars and it and there are Mr
chair representative and I'm
gonna ask you this there are
times that is kind of the good
in the that I I do with the good
and the bad in my business there
are some.
work that we do that doesn't
take that much work and you go
out there and you know what I
just we have to it's a short
distances put Dale in a for you
guys also you make a few phone
calls only a few hours a you get
the same settlement because
percentage of of the of the of
the settlement there's other
cases that that takes a lot more
but I I just I'm having a lot of
trouble with the we were re
organizing in the way this is
this is I'm gonna agree with the
rest of my college this has a
needs work for me to pass and
I'm not going to support this
bill not because I.
Because of the numbers that I've
heard the vast majority of
people Mr chair representative
have are are receiving and the
the system is working and so in
the in the Backstreet the
language that we have Mister
chair representative it does
that's the reason they have that
legislative language in there so
that we can if an attorney yes
the the insurance company which
I wouldn't I wouldn't recommend
them doing this.
Shows bad faith to drag their
feet.
That judge can already issue.
On border to increase those
those fees to cover if he sees
that he's acting in bad faith
that's what that language is in
their forms chair representative
and so that's why I have I've
got twenty cues on what you're
doing I think it's the way this
is written there's no cap and I
think it runs a nuisance value
and and and it it it creates a
new since for the insurance
company and is going to it's
gonna cost problems too in in my
opinion Mr chair representative
and then I grab these things on
rather than quickly with all
these things so with that Mr
Chairman as for.
Mr Chairman representative thank
you.
Just a couple of quick ones
Is this bill.
Gonna help.
Growth we own your client.
Or is it going to help or is it
going to help.
The attorney representing.
Mr Mr chair Representative
Martinez no because of Refugio
is under the current twenty two
thousand five hundred dollars a
week.
Mr chair representative.
I really enjoyed listening to
the debate in this committee.
And I agree that.
I'm not sure this bill was based
solely on.
We seem to be questions from the
very beginning whether there was
any additional.
No minimums.
Whether it was.
Language that have been
submitted.
I'm just not sure that.
On this one you the schools are
ready to move on to this year.
and I I don't.
What are.
The table enough to know on
either one up or down vote but.
I just think there are a lot of
things that need to happen.
I know that.
On the administration does not
like to you know.
Question about bill into another
committee.
I just don't know that this one
is ready to go to the next
committee
Mr chair.
On.
Really struggling with this one.
The that's it for now Mr
chairman.
What else do I choose vice
chair.
Chair.
Thank you Mr chair.
And Representative.
Hold questions I think this
could this bill was sent to us
because workers comp is an
employee of workers.
Bill.
And.
Work with workers comp.
I believe is one of those areas.
Right now that.
Is in dire need of the workers
have representation in the
reason I say that researchers
because I live in the district.
where site I have.
Lots of occurrences people
calling.
because they've been injured and
their Spanish speakers of their
immigrants
or.
You sprain you Senator Steinborn
not aware of what their rights
are
And are struggling for where do
we go Mr chair of the US what we
do because for the most part
workman's comp is employer.
All it if you file a claim
you've been injured on the job
you're at the mercy of the
employer and the employers
processes which is their
insurance company
the insurance company mandates
you know whatever the product
whatever the insurer insurer
well insurance companies that
are requires that that you have
has to fund and you're at the
mercy of the employer and their
instruments.
And.
Mr chair for the most part.
Employees don't necessarily
always come out.
in the best place possible after
injury.
Again because you're at the
mercy of the employers processes
so that's your word message
delivered if you know something
major to tell you were injured
who saw the injury.
Was it reported.
The supervisor or manager help
help help each levels of
provision and it'll your injury
it's your word of how it
happened versus the supervisors
and that's how the built in
built through that employment
human resources process and then
channeled over to the insurance
company than the insurance
company has its own set of
processes Mr chair and.
Everyone in this case once in on
this bill has been in one way or
another inferring that the
attorneys are out to get money.
But guess what in a workman's
comp case.
Who is that who is.
Who is set to benefit.
Or how are they going to control
what goes up to forty.
It's the employers.
They control the entire.
Because you have to go to the
employers doctors who they
get when I say employer neither
Representative stuff so Mister
chair you're you're subject to.
Going through that and they have
their set of medical physicians
and medical practices whatever
those are to respond to the
various mechanisms related to
your inner so if it's an
orthopedic injury Mr chair here
you go there set up doctors.
If whatever the cases you're
going to go there set of
doctors.
You have to go through this
you're at their mercy whatever
you get for you cut your your
finger tip working dollars you
lose your tip of your finger.
Right you're going through that
entire process your eight
employees pool doesn't have
command of the language you know
you're not really the materials
are given are not translated for
not they're all in English.
So that's why they call us the
representatives of the does
whatever they can get help from
and they gave me these forms and
it's fine young man Senator the
NMAA that's going off no second
Senator whether you that's what
I want for it only available
they gave me these forms I don't
know what they say can you help
me please I don't know how to
answer that but I know that I
have no no longer have the fit
amid finger what do I do.
So there we are.
You know the mercy of our our
representation and we can refer
them to because we're not full
time.
Eight legislators right.
That you know we service the
pleasure institutions and we
have to find a way to help these
employees.
And then they get told that
their workman's comp.
It is only going to.
A certain percentage for certain
time periods.
You don't know whether that.
Fingertip this portion on is
later going to have an infection
at the legislative action that
you didn't want to wear a
knowing what that infection it
doesn't get content will become
so you have sept you become set
that for whatever reason and
then you've already finished
your workman's comp Mr chair you
have no other recourse.
Then someone tells you well I
think you need an attorney.
And then we go searching for
attorneys.
And Mr chair and representative
and ask for.
The attorney's.
You don't you can't find
attorneys or willing to take
these cases.
It doesn't matter how serious
that infection has gone or where
it you know where that creation
is no one really plans on what
happened after the pay out
everybody is just focused on
this yeah they got twenty five
dollars we we got twenty five
hundred dollars with that figure
to and that's it and you're
expected to close the deal your
claims the.
But six months down the road you
have.
This call.
And there's no more protection
for you and attorneys are very
reluctant to take these kinds of
cases.
And so Mr chair and
representative I don't want to.
Say this is an insurance bill I
fully see it as access an
employees access to the right to
representation.
Every worker every person has
the right to representation in
the FIR.
And I had this is where my
questions somebody brought it
from state and I am interested.
In that because.
That's a whole other realm yes
you can Mr chair.
Everybody has a right to file
your own case pro se.
That literally is more process
I felt individuals.
All the forms of gone to court
District Court clerk's to get
them their assistance.
There's no Spanish speaking
language person in the clerk's
office by they can help these
individuals.
Mr chair so is this commonly Mr
chair and representative and
expert.
You workmen's comp cases.
Can you and I think that was
represented review that ups the.
In just a question that you
referred to thank you do they
commonly
do you know that's a common
practice to go file your own
right to representation.
One of as a result of the work
with.
K. are you aware of that be
anything.
Mr chair miss vice chair
I can't say with any specificity
that it it's a huge problem but
I do know that there are a
significant number of pro state
claimants and in fact to the
work comp administration's
credit there is a ombudsman's
office but and and it's very
helpful and and often it will
call an insurance company on
behalf of the pro state worker
at most file help the worker
filed the necessary paperwork to
start a case at the work on.
And that's where it ends and
then the work worker is on his
or her own
I do know of I'm friends with
all the work comp judges for the
worse things they the for the
year is a pro state worker one
the various reasons thank you Mr
Mr chairman and the
Representative it and next for
you're absolutely correct I've
had to go through that process
several times Senator.
That we're left only affect this
they receive their final check
whatever that was and that was
at the determination of the
employer and the employer's
insurance company no one was
there to represent this employee
the employee was on their own.
Through this process there's no
no employers don't have
necessarily even someone
representing employees they're
representing their own interests
and their own interests Mr chair
and representative of the next
for to protect their pocketbook
their their their fees to their
expenses that's their interests
that's the employer's interests
yes there are benevolent
employers and and for the most
part ways of the level.
But not when it comes to a
workman's comp case.
Their interest is to reduce the
amount of pay out.
The reduce the longevity of the
of of the case they want the
workman's comp case to be
quickly handle that's my been my
experience and as a result the
employee in my view and in my
experience construction whereby
at that point they have to seek
legal assistance and for the
most part you already have a
basically a close case you know
and it's hard there's other
legal things that have to happen
so that's why I see this as
And employee related bill which
is why we got it yes it may have
it may need some fix
and that's why it's going to
Judiciary I think that the
proper place for the kinds of
questions that came up
have to do with legality legal
issues that are best in my view.
handle the judiciary we need to
handle what is in our purview
and that is our leader our
workers rights being protected
or or the not being protected
and what is our legal obligation
to protect their rights this is
why with the labor committee for
the most part we do have to see
all aspects seven but you know
if this is this is the primary I
believe our primate tribes on
page eight.
everyone's talking about spend a
lot of time on legislative.
But.
Mr chair representative ice on
that page any.
Kind of made up for that section
that you removed by adding the
other sections which I feel more
safe.
If I have a judge.
I have the benefit of going
before a judge research here and
the judge finds that there's
good costs.
Then and only then and under the
circumstances will there be and
if we stop and think about it
and I think my first husband
who's now deceased was an
attorney and I don't know why it
tracked I'm attracted trial
whatever my current has been
some retired attorney so thirty
two thousand twenty two thousand
and all the amounts we're
talking about are not even
living wages when you stop to
think that all the operating
costs related with
representation of this case.
So one.
With attorneys are not going to
run off and get rich off of
these cases with this bill.
It probably they're gonna remain
people's attorneys.
Representative they're gonna
remain people's attorneys for a
reason because they're in the in
the field in their in their
profession to representative.
Those that do not have.
Representation any other way.
And they're going to
be doing it.
Because they took this.
And and that was part of why
they entered into the the
profession.
Those that are representing the
and the dog park in the the
reference but you know you won't
find those attorneys and so I
look at it from okay and so for
all of us have the right to a
living wage to the sides of
representation so I just wanted
to make sure is this section of
the state was meant to.
To address the the removal of
that thank.
Is that hello is that.
Please stay.
So.
Mr chair of this vice chair.
Section of lines one
through the left.
Deal with.
The additional ten thousand
dollars above the requested new
cap of thirty two thousand five
hundred twelve through twenty
three field with have is another
exception to the cat.
For a finding of that state and
and you're absolutely correct it
does replace which we deem it
was terrible just an artfully
drafted language on page seven
line fourteen twenty five.
Thank you Mr chair and and sorry
I didn't.
Want to mention those lines as
well.
That that was correct in
language thank you for that
clarification on one more.
Of.
This.
So the other disadvantage Mr
chair and and Representative is
what the expert mentioned was
that the not talking about hours
places the attorney representing
of these cases at a real
disadvantage
so I think that's something that
workers comp really needs to.
Work hard at figuring out how to
address that the big thing for
me Mr chair another big thing
was in the FY are on page two at
the very bottom so there is this
Uninsured employers fund.
Can you get can you explain
briefly what that uninsured
employers is set up under
working for us do.
Mr chair on this vice chair I
can
unfortunately well the work comp
that says
three employees with three or
more employees must have work
comp insurance construction
industry.
And and I don't think it's
correct but it's only one person
and that's needs to probably be
correct in the future
for various reasons some
employers don't get insurance
sometimes I I had a case where
the natural court for one date
and pay their premium for one
sale price insured and I
represented that client so there
is a fund.
that acts like any insurance
money and then it's limited that
in a worker for works fine
uninsured employer.
Can choose to try to get money
benefits and medical benefits
from that fund the same burdens
apply to the worker the worker
has to prove a work injury has
to prove medical treatment is
reasonable and necessary and all
everything else that would have
to be proved when there is
insurance available Mr chair
misplaced General that into your
question.
Mr chair and representative
groups.
So that's.
An option for the employee if
the employer is not insurers Mr
Chairman is misplaced here yes.
What it Mr chair and
representative you said that.
In the law workman's comp is
required if you have three or
more employees except for what
you saw was the construction
industry.
Is that correct Mr chair
misplace your yes that is
correct so.
I'm not in business and
commerce.
In our area but it seems to me.
I heard remember in our
discussions over the in terms of
this the vast majority of our
employers in the state of New
Mexico following to the category
of at least three more and we
were talking about the money the
reason I bring it up is because
Mr chair in discussions
reference paid sick leave them
even all of that that's where
that referenced.
are you aware of need to know
how many employers.
For calling in the state of New
Mexico Mr Chairman is vice chair
I do not but just in general I
think the overwhelming majority
to.
Thank you Mr chair and and I
tend to agree again because of
the discussions were having with
other bills it's come up over
and over again.
So Mr Chairman representative
Let's see
Page three of the FIS are under
significant issues the second
pair.
Applying the by to the existing
discovered costs.
This is a question I think that
came up by colleagues of.
It it it does make reference to.
It being closer to five guys
five thousand five hundred.
Then the ten thousand figure did
you use the I or the CPI thank
you what.
I do those Mr Chairman
representative when yourself.
Members of the committee Madam
by tier I went to the federal
government index rate for
inflation and I think that
inflation rate for period of
five years and then I'm just the
average of that and then I moved
I said nineteen for the two
years that.
We're looking at come up with
the about the.
And so the amount that I did
come up with this actually so I
don't know what we got a test
use but what I use was a
federal.
Thank you our.
Mr chair representative and I
would venture to say that that
probably is the best
reference point to use because
the federal government is in
charge of
the to their economic I can't
think of there for right now but
they are the ones that we are
supposed to be patterning state
governments are.
these kind of making these kinds
of evaluations.
And coming.
These kind of figures because
they're the reference point for
how.
And so if you use inflation is a
measure.
Excuse me that is yes.
Way to do so
Mr chair and representative.
The other significant point that
I wanted to are you talking
thousand that someone else made
reference to it it's been ten
years since we've seen this
change any changes and that
probably explains why we have Mr
chair I've had such a hard time
helping constituents get legal
services and highly for it and
how many to New Mexico with a
I've referred to
you know I've gone through a
pool of attorneys and people
attorneys for the most part just
don't have the time or not
specialist or they say they're
not specialized so I appreciate
you bringing this forward
because again I think IT is this
and why it came to us as being a
contract employee right to
having their representation and
having the right to access to
the presentation this is not an
attorney bill attorneys are
going to get rich over this
they're not gonna get wealthy
over the house.
We still get their their
compensation through that
whatever process is that they're
going through with the claim in
an incline meant however in many
of those cases.
Workers comp does not take into
consideration future.
Future paying future anguish
future medical costs future
anything associated with that
injury they take care of that
injury.
The circumstances around that
injury.
What the findings were by their
insurance medical professionals
paid by the insurance company
and employers and that's all the
door closes from that point on
and then there there subject to
Mr chair representative tool
formula that's used by the
employer and their insurance
company as to whatever
additional payout in addition to
paying medical costs and all
that.
It is by far.
Under.
Representation of what for the
most part these cases result in
in the long term
As far as what they're going to
be face future and that's where
the internet comes an extremely
important because the attorney
in their representation of of
employee rights in this issue.
Take into consideration all of
those other factors that
workman's comp did not take into
consideration and workman's comp
Mr chair representative will
never take it into consideration
because that's not their
function.
Their function is to protect the
interests of the employer not
the employee.
So Mr chair and representative
it whatever work needs to be
done I would be proud to get
this bill this labor committee
and have you continue to all
work through the legal
maintenance that has to be.
I did a work done in Judiciary
because that's where property
place should be that from from
way Steinborn I think that.
Really supportive of it it I
don't think it needs a whole lot
of work I'm not where I did
sales.
Committees and I know a lot
about the law but the fine print
How it measures up to statutory
whatever in legal whatever that
something that I trust.
Of to you all and the lawyers
of.
Involved in this in our classes
of judiciary thank you Mr chair
hope you.
Okay.
Make it fast.
I took it Mr chair.
Mr chair representative.
Just from what I I just heard.
I'm confused this sounds sounds
like it's designed entirely for
the term.
That's that's the way I saw.
Could you explain that please
Sir.
Of Mr chair of Representative
Mentzer.
Obviously it says attorney's
fees
yes attorneys to get paid to
Representative parties in these
cases.
Once again
The vice chair right on the head
Workers comp attorneys on both
sides are not getting rich and
this is about representation and
access to representation and and
one and it's also an act there
is a overriding public policy
because if an injured worker.
Was on Representative
Representative like a years is
not doing a good job and does
not gets this well does not get
money budget.
they will try to get whatever
support they can.
Outside of the work comp system.
More likely is a worker who does
not get the proper medical
treatment.
We'll get medical treatment
either I showing up at eighty
are getting the treatment and
not paying and the rest of us
bear the burden of that.
They have Medicare or Medicaid
they will get medical treatment
Medicare Medicaid will say well
we have a reimbursement rate but
that's never gonna you never
going to get reimbursed for
that.
Or if they're lucky their spouse
or significant other will have
insurance that covers that.
And once again the private
insurer will have a rate of
reimbursement from the recovery
but they're not going to get and
that just drives up the budgets
of Medicare Medicaid hospitals
who don't get paid and medical
insurance who are paying for
country method.
So that's another good.
And specifically a workers
attorney does for the public.
Okay thank you for that in and
so I was listening to Jim in
online the internet and you
mentioned something about having
forty five cases and it wasn't
so.
Forty five cases I just wrote
that down forty five cases times
twenty two I.
This is a million.
Over a million dollars for your
money.
Is that right my wrong.
Mr chair members of the
committee Representative this is
yeah we're we're all.
So what happens with respect to
these cases
The twenty two I can't and in
the sometimes the employer of
sometimes it turns did not ever
get to the captain decided FIR
so the state that it needs of
those forty five K. thank you to
the staff is absolutely correct
what I want you to understand
all you have to do is listen to
the public.
This presentation those who hate
to the box it was those who are
representing the consumers and
in those records in aids the at
the employers and the insurance
companies that make all the
money so what we're trying to do
it was definitely one to say
this is an attorneys of of bills
this is about access to justice
and giving people the right to
have an attorney to represent
them and when attorneys are
saying you know I'm I'm willing
to continue to help people there
are those that's what we try to
take care of those cases where
people don't have don't they
reached that happened and
Attorney continue to help them
because it turns out to turn on
the lights just like you that
gas in the car just like anybody
else and what I did was that
journeys get paid is not money
going into the pockets we got to
pay with their staff all of
these other things that comes
into the building and with
respect to that so this is about
helping the people and making
sure that they're getting the
best representation possibly can
get with the A. R. engine and
that they are getting this is
what people represent themselves
they don't know how to go about
getting the correct doctor to
get the help to to show their
into the is are coming back with
the system this is about helping
them ten years a disincentive
for a long time that.
With that's what I say Mister
chair members of the committee
Representative thank you Mr
chair representative so at a
forty five cases how many of
those cases is there any data
that might get to that cap.
I thank you Mr chair
representative in St one number
is that ten percent number that
the administration has come up I
have not seen the data for that
number
I think that's one number
I don't know how good they are.
I have heard criticism from.
All parts of the staff of the
administration it's a difficulty
with organizations in
modernizing their computer
system so and that is one of the
challenges facing the the work
comp administration I'm not sure
how good that the date actually
is the other thing I would like
to mention Mike does a great
we're Cappelletti
he's not gonna win every one of
those forty five cases.
And so he will put in he may put
in twenty two thousand five
hundred dollars worth of work
they put in more than.
He loses judge says you are hurt
on the job you don't get any
work comp benefits.
Mike Doyle does not get paid so
that's something that the
opponents don't.
Have not don't talk about
defense lawyers always get we
need for lose they may lose a
client if they lose too many
cases.
I always get paid
so I hope that answers your
question Mr chair representative
thank you Mr chair
representative so the employee
we'll see what is here she on
the hook for as far as paying
claims who pays for the internet
and they pay for the entire Mr
chair representative instead of
the default
Arrangement is if the worker
wins.
And as an attorney the employer
insurer must pay half of the
workers attorney's fee the
workers attorney the worker
pasty that have capped at twenty
two five and a work comp judge
must approve the fate sometimes
you need a hearing for it
sometimes everybody agrees and
you just have to send it over to
the judge.
Mr chair representative thank
you Mr chair representative so
if there is a
total disability.
For an employee that means
there's no cap on that correct.
No he can.
Representative.
The staff Mr chair
representative that absolutely
correct twenty two I applies to
every case and I can give you
some examples of cases of of
that kind if you would like
thank you Mr chair
representative so what about the
attorney fees.
Mr chair representative
mentioned so if a person is a
paraplegic of gets injured and
they have the they are what's
called currently totally
disabled they are entitled to a
lifetime money budget the usual
limit is five hundred weeks of
money benefits there are lower
limits on money benefit time
limits that five hundred weeks
versus life.
They are entitled to lifetime.
Budget for appropriation.
Both for both attorneys the most
they can be paid in most cases
in in that type of case is
twenty two thousand five hundred
the worker does paid half of
there is I would think I need to
just add this there is a
provision if there is a trial
each side to make an offer of
judgment it's not accepted the
party making the offer of
judgment if it's the worker.
That's better from the judge in
the office judgments in the
insurance company pays a hundred
percent that's doing it in a lot
of courage Senator Mr chair
representative needs thank you
Mr on the.
Chair of youth I have we have
another question.
What you can Google it is that I
always wake up me just say this
to be my way for.
I go to everybody and then all
of a little vice chair and I am
always lacks.
I will be sure that on that
would be the one that's when
asked the same question here.
That is one of the reasons that
I do I do it it respective
everybody and us but I was
hoping that.
What would follow through with
Representative working this way
to make a motion to table.
The the the floor to make a move
and one that is proper all
second the property sector.
This but I do have a question
for a.
my question is this is going to
do is that I am at the the
morale.
And they get hurt on the job.
In the silicates.
The internet gets a percentage
of the settlement.
Is that correct.
Mr chair
That is correct up to a point
the.
Customary percentage is twenty
percent of whatever the
settlement is and why it's
always cat you can not no worker
says attorney can be paid more
than twenty two five so if the
settlement is ten million
dollars.
The workers internet.
The most here she can be paid
for that settlement is twenty to
I under the existing cat Mr
chair Senator question from
through the.
When I just
One last case for I had wages
that would prove on the internet
when I think they settled.
I think they settled like for a
hundred.
The internet gives something
like fifty to like fifty percent
of.
Mr chair that that's illegal.
Hello this is happening to you I
mean.
I mean this happened this
happened in this case that I
know of and I'm not doubting you
Madam chair of what happened was
that the.
J. wrote the internet is a real.
The version.
J. was there the only thing I
can say Mr chair is that either
your point is misunderstanding
you misunderstood you
appointments and it was not a
work comp claim but a personal
injury claim.
And fifty percent in my opinion
is too high in that instance
explain to me what to do with
the somebody got hurt on the job
at Mr chair yes that's a
personal injury claim
It's primarily a workers comp
claim Mister chair if if a
person is hurt on the job and
under the work compact
the the public policy is
that workers were guaranteed
benefits for work comp injury
and in exchange
employers were protected from
any liability personal injury
which could be a lot more is
usually a lot more
so there was a compromise and so
it's kind.
It's kind of automatic payments
supposed to be for the work comp
for the worker.
state get benefits but they get
less than in a personal injury
case and employers and their
insurance companies are
protected from bigger recoveries
are judgments that would be
characterized as personal Mr
chair.
I thank you a yes I do have a
proper motion to table the
proper seconded that takes
precedence over anything else so
madam chair of the rules.
Representative Jarvis known.
Representative Figueroa yes.
Representative Garcia no.
Representative Roland nope.
Representative Johnson passed.
Representative is yes.
Representative right yes
Representative says yes
Representative Benson yes to
table vice chair Roybal
Caballero no to table chair
offline.
Noting.
This time.
This.
The
region.
Before you.
It
doesn't Representative Johnson.
no to table I'd like to explain.
Think of it hello.
Two six.
Six two six four.
Sorry
I don't about the scale
of the complications and
significant issues pointed out
that I support.
Read on to sherry further
discussion.
To me that the.
The table failed.
I would like to recommend that I
think Representative Garcia is
of I will go ahead make the
motion torture I learned to
love.
They do this with no
recommendation.
That's what I was looking for
second I have a second on the
actual on the new fast with no
representation.
They would.
In another motion of the of the
that.
As with the rules of regulation.
Okay.
All right.
Representative job is yes.
Representative Figueroa.
Representative Garcia yes.
Representative Grove yes.
Representative Johnson.
Yes.
Martinez no fifty.
Representative reform now.
Representative denizens no.
Representative isn't no.
Vice chairman of on going into.
Yes.
Sure of course yes.
Sixty five.
You have no right
with the chair.
It
Thank you Mr chair thank you
committees.
That.
In.
This
is the data.
Your reserves.
You are.
Is.
With.
Share any.
But okay.
Thank you Mr chair.
Today I bring for you House Bill
four nine five.
first I want to thank you for
their bill has actually today
just before four ninety five is
a firefighter health care costs
built this unique piece
legislation would be incredibly
impactful for firefighters in
every corner of our state here
today to present this
legislation is my sponsor
Representative Hernandez and
captions Martine those are.
Kept us also like every other
firefighters providers for this
it means what it means to be
called to serve and protect our
communities way that we may
never understand.
Firefighters are.
Providers and emergency medical
services and have some of the
most hazardous and sensitive
jobs state usually they are the
first team to appear at the
scene of an emergency
firefighting is a dangerous
profession as we are not as we
all know that carries multiple
life threatening risks not only
is there a daily possibility for
injury or death but there's also
individual risk that comes from
occupational exposure to
airborne form toxins from
burning structures such as best
does carbon monoxide right and.
With that I'm going too fast my.
Cosponsored two at.
Throughout the United States
every year about sixty five
thousand injuries reported with
firefighters.
The thing for frames
inspirations muscular pain but
it also our long lasting
lifetime lasting like chemical
burns fire burns
Frustrated heat exhaustion and
smoke or gas inhalation would
stick around for for a while for
for the rest of your life
They are firefighters are also
ninety percent higher than a
normal citizen to develop some
form of cancer not to mention a
whole bunch of other illnesses
that they are more at risk for
from their job.
Thank you Mr chair and are
another factor that is it here
in our state average
firefighters salaries fifty
percent lower than in the rest
of the country.
So as we go to date
we're celebrating our following.
Firefighters.
Wanted to acknowledge those here
and those that are from
committee spending time with
this and here to support this
legislation and as.
Those are.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Share Representative and folks.
Representative I'm here for with
to talk about
This bill it's part of an
ongoing recruitment efforts to
bring more firefighters to New
Mexico we do certain cancers are
two hundred three hundred times
higher.
That we're at risk for than
others this bill tied with other
bills including they were fun
that was heard at the beginning
of we
tax property tax incentives to
get more firefighters here we're
losing firefighters.
And talented people out of state
or not come into the profession
with sacrificing the safety of
our citizens of New Mexico.
This this bill helps to create
parity with other bills as noted
in the FIR
related bills two seventy seven
that's the.
Law enforcement specific bill
that was a fund was created last
year and then this year they're
looking at funding and we're
trying to create parity and we
have talked and heard from
Representative Figueroa about
all of us needing to get on
board so we can start doing the
same things at the same time and
that's and that's understandable
and we're working towards that
and we have a plan of action for
that but for now we need to help
create this fund for that I know
the FIR states cell numbers
about how much it will cost New
Mexico.
Myself as a single father with
two children are copays this
year was that I paid a hundred
fifty dollars my partner behind
me
is a family of four.
If your numbers were up to
fifty.
So this that number represents
if I'm maxed out and every
firefighters maxed out and
requesting those items to be
reimbursement for the to fund
that to reimburse copays and
other things that come into
effect in between there's seven
of us in our families and we've
only got up to about four
hundred dollars total between
two of us so
those numbers are a little off
and you're looking at personal
experiences
and going down again.
These other bills that we are
working towards firefighters are
again to attract more proven and
retention.
So we don't lose firefighters
and we help bring firefighters
in to work in our state.
I'm urging you all to to take a
look at that and look at some of
the
other issues we have including
as a representative stated
living wages and how we're fifty
percent we make fifty percent
less where I've spoken of the
committee my son works at Rudy's
and he makes sixteen fifty an
hour working everybody's and we
have firefighters in Los Lunas
who are making twelve fifty an
hour so those are things like
that how can the weather little
incentives we can do to help
those firefighters it's doesn't
come out to be a lot of money
like property tax revenue that
that those little things could
be a difference between getting
prescription drugs even if we
have a ten dollar copay to get
the drugs in the year that could
that could be the difference in
the maybe.
One of our kids being able to
play a sport.
To pay the registration fees so
little things like that.
Mr chair that we reset staff
with questions.
The other user anybody here in
support of this.
There anybody here in
opposition.
Zero three mutual what the one
speak.
But.
Mr chair of the committee my
name is a Lopez I am the Santa
Fe fire city fire will be
president of the stand in favor
of this bill hundred watts
getting so low saying typically
firefighters we're very
demanding physically and mental
job.
For the most part we don't have
very many medical illnesses on
that side on the other side of
that which would be cancer
that's kind of what we are
pushing that stuff quite a bit
so
I guess what we're trying to say
on that is it wouldn't
necessarily be that high and on
that side reviews tend to be
relatively healthy or not the
type of people that typically
takes less pressure cations that
and stuff like that we tend to
be.
In that physically demanding job
so the bigger stuff bigger and
is a cancer this is the muscle
issues and stuff like that and
that's what we're asking for.
Will twenty fifty nine to
support this thank.
Yes that
would be a state where members
of the committee on the future
The New Mexico federation of
labor we stand strong support
this measure and thank the
sponsors for bringing it up and
certainly stand in solidarity
with our fired by the
firefighters were sisters
side.
This committee as for your
bills over the session talk
about how to.
Bruce and retain workers that
are we are desperate enough we
have been.
That we need help fill this
would be considered a great
measure to help with that
recruitment health he people
here on the job we fully support
that unlike the other the number
of the strongly support.
Thank you.
One.
And restrictions during the.
What you will have to look at
workers come.
And we're all just.
So version.
Issue of.
But if.
William screen here.
What nobody okay.
But yes the one.
Mr chairman of the committee yes
Representative is thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members in those thank you yes.
I was just going to ask a couple
questions did you start off as a
volunteer no Sir hi Chairman
representative I started off
actually the marine corps and
the marine corps and then
someone I wasn't require with
that I should join part part.
Twenty three years later here I
am eight did Mr chair
representative.
I remember when your profession
are prevention we all started
out as volunteers that way we
did it for free.
And I couldn't wait to get a job
and when they finally called and
said you're in.
That was one of the best days of
my life and I know my wife for
this is the best day of my life
was.
What.
For twenty five years off of
some of the uniform on it maybe
practice proud to do us proud to
serve.
What is happening.
Mr chair representative.
I think a lot of Here
Representative I think a lot of
it is educating and featuring
what we have other initiatives
that we can bring together
pulling money for a public
safety recruiter or someone to
let the budget be no I love this
job white I'm still here and
there's other jobs it I get
offered to pay more for things
like that in my son even though
he's making the sixteen fifty he
talks about what I can be a
fireman so the college campus at
yes you can I was born and
raised here that's not going
anywhere but we have to get in
here and I think working with
committees and interim
committees on.
Here Public C. have dropped
people here.
Again total package.
Of little things together to
make it a good place to working
and letting them know the budget
we have what are retirement is
we have peer support mental
health support we have various
things available different
divisions and highlighting New
Mexico showing what we have and
I think that's the biggest thing
I think there's a lot of.
Individuals these days who don't
understand what it is
to.
To where just about everyone who
rides along with us join us.
For if they never thought about
a fire department come by the
truck annexing of the ones refer
me I think it's just educating
people now and we serve our
communities that's the best part
I drive up every morning I go
back every night and I stopped
by my station where the guys are
that are working gals and I
talked about what's going on
here and I go to bed do my
laundry come back.
Because it's not a big city
thing it's not Santa Fe it's not
Otero for Valencia County where
they only have twenty four
firefighters it's everybody I'm
up here not for Albuquerque I'm
here for the firefighters in New
Mexico and public safety New
Mexico.
I think letting.
The youth of today or
individuals exit the military
things just letting them know
what we have to offer appreciate
that.
Mr chair if if nobody else has
questions is of like to move for
due to get back to you.
Anybody else.
The.
I'm sorry.
Sorry
the of the pac
for retention of the idea that
we are thinking of what else
can.
And I think looking health care.
I don't think this is the right
way to do with the.
The department of homeland.
Is.
Got the staff with the expertise
to handle the pass through of
money if this is for copays and
things like that they were
talking about a lot of paperwork
coming in here's my receipt
here's my receive scenes from
every firefighters across the
state and then money going back
out and we have some comments
FIR that indicated.
Senator is not going to pay for
that kind of job.
So.
Yes I would ask Mr chair without
about what other department or
agency perhaps could handle
this.
Because it's really record into
the.
It is Mr chair Representative
think that is the department
security security is where we
have a hard Marshall said this
is the right places to house
this because it goes back to the
HR function to rescind to the
functionality of it being
managed by third party so it
really it's really not that.
What's being stated that that
the cumbersome part of that it's
really already are taking place
in fact Mr chair okay Mister
Representative have you read any
FIR about their auditing
problems.
The findings.
The issues there have.
Right now.
Mr chair Representative again
I'll say it it's under this the
the entire Division the
department of homeland security
but it's with the fire marshal's
would be mansions okay Mr chair
representative we considered
some kind of perhaps lump some
Senator thanks so the fire is
going to keep turning in these
receipts or.
In.
As some way to get at this and
why are we excluding when we
decide we're going to pay their
healthcare.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Representative this is after
what we did with fourth lease
officers so we took that that
previous I think it's H. P.
forty eight or something or
twenty twenty six eighty six
excuse me thanks for the
questions chair and so we model
that language into this bill and
we really worked at it because
we we we came back to this many
many times in fact introduces
rather a little bit late this
this year the session because we
wanted to get it right we wanted
to and we work with our local
governments and municipalities
did that previous work on that
that piece of legislation so it
mirrors that so that's that's
really the functionality of the
language in Mr chair okay thank
you Mr chair.
We
can just just one question
Representative representatives
thank you very much for this
consider what over again that I
have enough.
Despite.
What was
appreciate in our duty
in the so I appreciate doing I
just find that are on page two.
It says
one second paragraph.
The last sentence it talks about
this total excludes four
thousand five hundred thirty one
active on care I hope all into.
Volunteers have.
Mr chair
The and Representative
Representative yes it is this
one specifically is for
A recruitment tool to help bring
more here so we can if you look
down that is also act of one
hundred sixty two that are paid
by call trying to get those
firefighters on the rate status
I see that I didn't we I.
Representative.
So this is this will be managed
it's referred to as functioning
expenses related to health
insurance policy.
So there's a lot to to manage
right.
It says that it be handled the
way that everything else gets
handled for the process thank
you thank you Mr chairman thank
you said that is exactly
correct.
Thank you Mr chair that's all I
have and I'm very supportive of
this.
Do you.
This the is it.
All right you yes.
You left so thank you Mr I I
want to go back to
Mr chair representative I want
the facts to the ministry of
information.
That are on that last.
You know all only
I I included concerns
Representative Figueroa raised.
This agency and I understand the
modeled after other bills so we
have the money.
Going into the agency that have
difficulty maintaining adequate
internal controls.
Of the with it department
auditors issued a qualified
opinion etcetera etcetera so we
have other money going into that
apartment that's having this
kind of difficulty.
Can I I thank you for the
questions chair representative
this this type of money this
kind of funding goes into
insurance plans this for me is
not quite here I don't know it
is the audits in the findings
are.
But to that end without that
knowledge is seen with the
exactly those findings are which
there could be any number of
types of I this doesn't
necessarily mean that it's it's
not directly related to
insurance policy into the
benefits of
Mr chair representative do you
think the of fires and correct.
Mr chair representative I'm
saying that there's not enough
information on the stuff I are
not.
This exact findings without that
knowledge hi.
As somebody who's worked for the
the state and worked as an HR
director I.
Those findings you have to be
very specific to the H. R. to
insurance and two budget and and
what the state does is it is and
what they do is they have third
party rescind that manages
are the chance passed much the
state it would be HSD so I don't
so there's other there are other
agencies to manage these
functionalities and benefits
thank you madam that the same
process Mr chair.
So the other question that I
have Mister chair representative
within the cost.
and I think of the FIR and says
that it would cost for a total
of three years of the twenty two
thousand.
Is that right.
The thousand fold twenty two
million I'm sorry looking at
million thank you Mr chairman
thank you Representative bye to
look at the
Visit the in fiscal impact
report page one you'll see FY FY
twenty four looks at eleven
million eleven million dollars
and that will go back to page
two when it's
If you're going to the ones for
the paragraph of the very and
their last sentence.
For two thousand two hundred
five thousand firefighters we
have multiplied by the five
thousand dollars would get you
that the dollar figures however
what was noted earlier by
testimony would necessarily make
that more the fact we don't we
don't know that to number of the
based upon this information
because it is up on a as needed
basis.
Mr chair representative so the
last question that I have is I
noticed that that this the next
committees health and Human
Services this this bill does not
go to appropriations so then my
assumption is that there are any
money set aside in house bill
to funders where is the money
chair representative thank you
very much for that question as a
member of the patients this is
just setting up the funds right
now Mr chair.
We don't we don't have the
appropriation place Mr chair
representative it would be
setting up the funds so that we
could acquire that pace matter
of Mr chair representative so
that would come at a future date
that correct Mr.
Mr chair and.
Mr chair anymore Representative
if I look at that it's similar
to the house bill eighty six
from twenty twenty two that
helped create the fund for law
enforcement currently there
funding there health premium
premiums and copays section
you live this year's house bill
two two seven.
So they created the fund the
persecuted and and then now the
funding and so we're just trying
to clean it
As a representative rose stated
we're looking to the future
we're trying to build we don't
want to just give us money now
and go for that we want to keep
something going solution that we
can build on and and work to
attract for.
Thank you Mr chair the
Representative phone Mr chair
representative with that says
then I would suggest that we
look at with the FIR says and
get that
Because questions are probably
come up again and it's.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative I I appreciate
that feedback I just.
If we can get more of that
information actually see with
those findings are the pertains
to what this bill does thank you
Mr.
The only question I had was in
Judiciary I hear I heard I
think.
It feels that was covered
firefighters and policemen.
That I did wrong.
Of bills to completion of the
set up that means.
Mr chair that would be
Representative Harper still to
be on the floor.
Hearing maybe it's it's all it's
due to be heard on the house
floor that deals with
that they're trying to raise the
debt.
Yes yeah.
Representative instance bill.
That has now changed hands like
four times apparently.
The one that you're talking
about.
Judiciary Steve this that was a
to the.
Right.
As well as the.
For
one year yes.
PTSD was.
support.
Here's the thanks to your
support.
So basically again just like the
other bills that we heard
earlier this is just the
opposite so that we can find a
place if we ever have the money.
To put this money in correct.
I have a motion.
Mr chair I'd like to make motion
for a new pass on house bill
four.
Conservative
thank you for the last two
seasons G..
Right.
If you are reading this is into
that motion.
See the show all members present
voting in the.
The.
Thank you Mr chair thank.
Sentence.
Thank you.
Thank you.
It.
Mexico has for and.
He was.
Users are traditional.
come up with.
K. goes.
I just started well he wants
done.
We talked about this all.
I think.
To see if.
This year.
Well
see.
Thank you.
He was.
Our.
I just.
I hello I to
To the committee and
Mexico well.
and then access to basically
shorten the probationary period
for classified state employees
from one year to ninety.
additionally this bill provides
that employees who just
completed the initial
probationary period without you
for farger
an additional probationary.
For us to move to another
services and
because they felt that the
probationary period of one year
was hindering recruitment and
retention efforts.
and because it gives employees a
full year of uncertainty
regarding their status
and their future you know with a
state agency when enjoying
employment in the state agency I
will say that the I bringing
this forward as to discuss
because they know there's there
are I'm really interested in
what the committee has to say
about this and I think we can
really there's of of technical
issues we can address the
substantive issues that we can
address so I really just wanted
to get feedback on it Mr
chairman and members and I also
have my answer it here with F.
C. for us from C. W. A. and I
just need to see about that they
will as well thank you Mr
chairman.
Members of the committee of this
opportunity to speak
on behalf of the bill
Do we have for one.
I believe that what is your
position there is is really yes
very
attentive and higher.
As of December.
quarter
of twenty twenty two there
was approximately four
Every ten new hires.
They have the flu.
six of.
We're not saying.
That we haven't seen the numbers
were this first quarter of
twenty twenty three years I
think we see in the workplace.
Where we represent we represent
thirteen state.
I.
Five hundred.
Our vision for our we have.
this is hiring right.
The the the the.
We've also seen some measures
This year that we believe are
also having a detrimental effect
on
hiring and retention
The.
Very high vacancy rate.
in.
All the state agencies
Approximately twenty five
percent in the bargaining unit
we representatives of thirteen
and fees are vacancy rate is
above thirty percent
yeah and if somebody diseases
and for some critical positions
like say a pretty religious it's
considerably higher than that
We are.
Recognize that there is a
technical difficulty with the
issue regarding cross branch
hiring of which we were is not
fully aware of so we are willing
to.
If you are currently somebody
who works for the course.
Kerry there yes.
Which we probably think the.
But it looks like you would
require additional
Tweaking of the staff to get
that
are possible.
Did this and I apologize for
that the help address this and
we just simply
we're a little clear but we
really are clear on the fact
that.
I can speak from personal
experience in my work site for
the third time I've worked here
I know I distinct occasions
where a worker was let go this
eleven months and X. number of
days for no good reason.
There is sometimes a bad reasons
so.
Yes you are official you know we
have an obligation to try to.
Representative R. Lee are
members in situations where
they're being treated unfairly
and this is the problem we have
with our people.
We can't Representative.
Are in you know that I can
the thing more frustrating than
was reading it is with the final
act for termination of.
The boy that you got to know
what love in
months three weeks and I've
found to be you know a good
worker and a good co worker who
shows up and does the job learns
ending told that they are being
let go for reasons which you
know or fully shifts and being
able to do anything about.
We think six months is plenty of
time after talking disposal we
are willing to move to six
months and I did they are you
know willing to discuss some
other issues related to
appropriations we wanted the
issue to be
four eight four by this
committee because we think
there's a staffing crisis I
think we should do everything we
can to alleviate.
people have less and less of a
reason to come to work for the
state for those reasons you can.
They are.
You know again our.
We thank.
This is important.
Thank you at thank you Mr
chairman so our intention would
be to get feedback and and bring
back the substitute for
consideration.
And with that I'd stand for
questions.
House only onions and anybody
here in support of this
legislation.
This is a thank you Mr chairman
of the committee objection is
with us
The disclosure for bringing this
forward we do support the idea
of reducing the one year
probationary period but I think
the what about this building you
all having federal agents were
able to sit down.
After for the last couple of.
Hash out of a lot of issues of
this bill.
I
Students three hundred ninety
days is definitely too short of
moving two years.
Want to see director but she
pointed out some other issues
that I think probably to get
hired out well so you're
interested or committee with
Sanchez the person our office to
see if we possibly can do
something just like that but I
don't want to for the for the
record she may have some other
phones.
Issues with
you support the idea.
It probably I.
Thank.
Be anybody else eight million
screens for the.
Good.
Thank you Mr.
Here sorry think it's me thank
you Mr chair this is making
green I am the executive vice
president of CW a seventy
seventy six and I just wanted to
add some perspective that Mr
Secrest did not.
Resents some additional stories
more members
currently when employees hired
that is not the best fit for the
job it is is Dan mentioned
management often drags out
removing them from the position
until the end of their full year
appropriations this means that
we have spent a lot of time and
money training someone for an
entire year only to repeat the
process again when the refill
that position after getting rid
of that per person at the end of
appropriations.
I personally have gone through
this a lot of times my work
group I've been tasked with
training new employees and even
when it was quite immediately
this the new candidate had
exaggerated the qualifications
of was not a good fit for the
job I was told to continue to
train them for an entire year
only to have the fired at the
end of the probationary period
so I believe we shorten the
probationary period we
will be able to get better
candidates into those jobs more
quickly will be able to get long
term committed employees into
our regained positions more
quickly and won addition.
Additional thing to add is that
currently during that first year
appropriations.
Employees are not allowed to
take advantage of things like
the alternate work schedule paid
parental leave and that this
time that I think here is a.
Very long time especially for
mid career employees to wait to
be able to take advantage of
those parts I think it makes it
really hard for us to hire
employees mid career to solar
vacancies with this year on
probation period.
So thank you for your time.
What else.
In opposition.
Yes.
When I was in the state
personnel director I really
appreciate the conversation that
I had to stay with wells funds
here and was the union
leadership and the I believe
that the way the bill is right
now.
The we there's more
conversations that need to
happen we are not opposed to
shortening the probationary
period was ninety days is too
short.
What else what else.
Of.
The representative every thank
you Mr chair representative this
is just kind of my feedback just
kind of the supplies the state
police right so I'll stay in
place so I as you probably know
I was an administrative about
eight years of the DA's office
and I I kind of I agree with
what the lady in the audience
and ninety days just really
short and I Mr chair
representative never really
notice that it was an issue.
You know the vacancy rate it was
more like at least were our
opposition was it it's a very
difficult job even as an
administrative assistant or as
an investigator and our goal is
to try to work through that here
to try to train them and help
them and not get rid of them and
sometimes it doesn't work out
it's just not a good fit because
it's it's a hard job but it was
it just want ninety days would
just not be enough time I think
for at least an agency like that
it takes so much time to learn
how to decide hearings to
judgment senses and and all
those different things to be an
investigator to take a case from
beginning to end is often over
here to really came and see how
they're gonna do a trial or
anything like that until you
have that longer period so I've
always like to stay here
there are times and I would like
their times at the end where it
just doesn't work out it's not a
good fit in as employees.
Mr chair.
Resented do end up being I'll
leading or are losing their job
isn't really found that to be
reason that there's a vacancy
rate of any sort I think at
least from what I've noticed
really try and work with them to
get them to stay and to get it
to be a good fit
and just sometimes just isn't
but at least in that area I
think sometimes it just takes it
can take up to a year to really
learn a skill and that's the
only feedback I would I would
give you Mr chair
representative.
The cat thank you Mr chair
representative didn't hear that
there is already agreement to go
to six months.
Of we were just having
conversations with conversations
about.
Okay in my comment in terms of
Mr chair representative I think
eight years too long I believe
that committee
and I did see employees work up
to the table for their
provisions to be up and get
fired which I think was there.
and I think that my opinion is
in terms of
In terms of being able to gain
the skills you can do that six
months you know whether or not
think that is a good fit I think
you know part of the reason Mr
chair representative that
there's a big something they can
seize and state governments
because organizations basically
here but good.
and I think that something that
needs to be figured out I'm not
sure how.
and and then there's the other
question of wages so I think
those are the two pieces that
really.
The vacancy rate more than the
appropriations from.
Students thank you Mr chair
representative does this does
this.
Bill included includes all
public employees.
Does not.
Mr chair representative only be
those of the W. Brandt covered
by the person.
Facility.
That money was fairly common is
this.
Where it says a would have to do
the additional.
I think that's probably because
of the star something star one.
Is to close special by the day
that we were some of the
comments that it needs to be
longer not a year for me but for
six months with some reasonable
but I I don't like that you know
trying this will show your what
you can do about.
If you just go over that I'll
start to again I think if you
move in the middle of that one
two three professionals it's
over and then Comeaux and that's
a different story but if you
move in the middle of it I think
that's a motion thank you thank
you.
Well that.
Here.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative for that I'm also
in agreement the one years just
take.
But I also work in human
resources so I just want to know
and I don't know if you all can
pass we can ask the state
personnel director to answer.
What the norm is in my day the
norm.
Cross the nation and I sat on
the employees human resource
point it was ninety days and
then we did the educational
systems not too long ago to this
many years ago passed we are
reduced from one year to ninety
days because of that discussion
that was the norm that is kind
of considered the norm in human
resources so the question to the
person director is has that norm
change if we can ask her for is
there any morning alarms related
to retention of public employees
have not managed at history
chair and representative for our
meeting asked both of your
activity as well as Mr speaker.
Sure Representative we did some
research
we called around to Santa Fe
County City of Albuquerque city
of Santa Fe Bernalillo county
Los crucis and
Dona Ana County and it's it's a
mixed bag of a year and six
months it's probably it about
fifty fifty with Bernalillo
county breaking the tie at nine
months.
It is nothing less than six
months.
So thank you and and
Mr chair and representative the
other point I have that was of
concern and what I think it was
in the FIR is that and I want to
make sure we're not make mixing
up things here but
said that for calendar years
twenty one and twenty two state
agencies needed to.
Four eight during their
probationary period.
Of the forty six percent Senator
after ninety days.
So.
The problem was the termination.
If we're trying to retain and
recruit and retain.
Then somehow we have to look
into the factors for termination
because I think Mr Chairman
representative overall we're
trying.
Story recruitment and retention
we have to have working
Steinborn so something's going
on to have that many sixty five
percent terminated the amount
terminations when we have to.
So I would ask that in this
process that you're going to be
that further discussing that you
kind of inquire as to how we can
improve in these discussions of
the unions help legislative
personal office and others
improve on in in those areas I
think that's a big red flag Act
thank you Mr chair and thank you
Representative.
I love this.
That six month is about right.
But I just give you an example
modems myself with a.
You know it was a miles of spoke
to so and and and and and to
just rub people the wrong way.
And in one government job that I
had I think the probationary
period of six months.
The manager also had the ability
to place in my file and extend
my appropriations to.
Was done for me for thirty days.
So so just live with it and
that's what I am thinking that
somehow this this is really is
working.
Hey and that was the six month
period that the manager and see
that there's probably some
holes.
And not just get rid of them if
they can extend that you for
certain amount of time the
probationary period for maybe
thirty sixty days I think it
will be a better fit for
everybody and that employee.
A signal and the chance to know
that that.
There's a possibility that they
could stay on your side at the
end this week for six months.
I think that I think about no it
over for me and the right after
the.
Besides that put that to the
point that I think that we're
going to do is be allied with I
don't think thank you thank you
for the we're out of the
agreement that it needs a lot of
work.
And I'm advocating the.
Senator then with it's okay we
Rowe thank you Mr chairman at
that would be appreciated that
way we can take all of this
comes back to account and work
on a substitute.
Thank you thank.
So.
For the record.
What
if I.
This.
In my.
You're gonna work.
No.
For us.
Zacks
the sentence.
Senator Mr chair when you're
ready thank you Mr chair Sierra
nine six increases the maximum
pension for state prison
correctional officers
probation and parole officers
committed to for the fund is
about a hundred thirty percent.
Funded over the top and this
requires them to serve a minimum
of thirty years for C. one
percent that benefit
about three percent officers
will do that.
The doctor.
Twenty five to the forty nine R.
twenty five percent off service
fire anywhere from twenty five
years twenty.
Well with me I have a state.
In
the in the Toyota they're known
as the crippled in the call.
Four of these drugs all over the
place of this.
So I appreciate.
For that I think will stand for.
Mr chairman of the committee
know you guys have been here a
long time to build very
straightforward honest request.
Thank you anybody the Argentine
as part of the.
Speaker.
Point four.
And.
In opposition.
The members of the committee.
Thank you Mr chair Senator how
many officers are nearing the
thirty five.
The the.
Mr chair
We have here in this area that
students had a lot to re just
did
send a bill to the Senate you
know where it goes anyway so do
I have a motion.
A commotion there too.
Do pass just be ninety six.
Representative.
Representative revenues.
C..
Thank you Mr.
You for money.
A number of office.
That's about the normal.
This is.
