Yeah.
Mr chairman
here.
Thank you very much mister
chairmen.
About.
As they like to say third time
as
it's a pretty simple bill mister
chairman all it's essentially
does this require two man
minimum crill and free train.
Those trains will be carrying
ultra hazardour waste or.
A three man crew and also
protective equipment to be worn
by those men to make sure that
they're not getting a overly
dose with radiation and without
am going to hand it over to.
Good afternoon mister chairman
and members of the board i've
been here before and it's I
think i'm hopefully and getting
better at this
I from smart she mel error rail
transportation transportation
division I do represent bus
drivers in farmington
the railrunner to get agents
conductors engineers union
pacific amptract and uh b and I
am a look motive engineer this
is my every day job this is what
I do so when we speak about we
need that guy next to me or when
i'm the conductor it's very
important that we are there.
What's going on in new mexico
we've had about fifteen service
interruptions per night
not in the last year but the
last few days per night so we
should be aware of and the
companies know this is going on
that we need that conductor
there to get now from that local
motivates make repairs if
possible or maybe save a life
thank you.
Yeah.
However i've had the opportunity
to work around eight.
Yeah.
Because safety is very important
what other.
Grandfather my
greece who works the whole minds
and he died because of black
long that was a safety issue for
the workers you know we're also
talking about the issue for the
workers as well as for the
people surrounding the area of
the train stations let's not
forget palestine.
To protect our workers.
This.
This.
Yeah.
We all.
Across the state.
The.
Yeah.
Chairman there's a community
jeff take with the southwestern
rhetoric shoreline favor
operating at damning mexico I
had remarks to prepare that were
incredibly similar to my
friends.
I agree with them and i.
The.
Yes my name is jack of weber i'm
an engineer look a lot of
engineer with one of the two
major class railroads here new
mexico
I have been engineer for
eighteen years and I raise in
the support of this bill I think
it's incredibly important for
this bill because it and
unfortunately
the railroads do not wish to
actually commit to a two man
crew they have repeatedly stated
that they want a single man crew
for their profits and that is
necessary wrong with profits but
in this case I think it makes
the railroad industry extremely
dangerous and I urgently
implore this committee to pass
this rule it imagine an engineer
having to work to twelve hours
by themselves in a train with
nobody talk to at two am in the
morning and somebody happens on
the train now you're waiting
thirty minutes or more for
somebody to show up to help you
i've had incidents even in the
last week where it my conductor
was able to prevent major
problems even maybe even
badly issues simply because they
were on the training able to
help me mitigate the situation
immediately not have to wait for
a responder which is what the
companies watch
to replace the conductors it is
vitally important that if
someone like even an engineer
was to collapse on the train but
there is somebody that there to
get emergency services to them
already help the public if
something happens yeah I cannot
say enough a daily that is
issues like this come up every
day and the rewards will not
address it without
prodding from the state I urge
it
employee to pass this block
thank you.
Thank you mister thank you.
Yeah.
You've heard mention that there
is a federal war making
currently in the wor.
Really is marching which is the
case that will.
Throughout the country until
that happens it really depends
on what the rule is.
Colorado it's not going to.
Another state without a.
Decision.
Yeah.
Yes.
About twelve right now.
By a little as we go we're
getting more m.
You think this will match.
Thank you mister.
You know
this morning we had a a bill
mister chair that talk about the
real r.
Where it goes more talking about
the same one area.
And so I just still happened to
have.
Real ways and and.
In my question is kind of biggie
back in on what
representative roller said we're
in from state to st.
I'm possible
you know that then I am to
alvocate and from our parcel
which is texas to.
Just control.
The.
Right there.
