Vice chair representative Linda
Serrato your.
Representative.
Miguel Garcia excuse.
It looks like we have a quorum
so I'm gonna go ahead and very
can you go ahead and bring over
Representative Ferraro.
For our first bill.
Representative from can you go
ahead and raise your hand
education great.
Good morning madam chair.
Representative Ferrary do you
have any witnesses the would
like us to bring over right now
well yes please my hash Sita.
Miss Iglesias to can you raise
your hand in the in the
attending so that Americans you.
Did I move her over.
Representative Ferrary.
Yeah.
And this is who I'm sorry.
My hash see that.
Yes I. T. eight.
But she calling by phone issues
and he's in the attendees I
believe he might have just
raised his hand.
I'm scrolling wondering if he's
not on.
On the phone.
I see in here is and the S. is
his little it's red is his
little yes okay thank you.
Are there any others
Representative Ferrary.
Thank you madam chair that would
be great.
Okay well Representative Ferrary
please bring HB ninety seven to
present for the committee for
local government tobacco
products sale ordinances.
Thank you madam chair.
House bill ninety seven is local
government tobacco products sale
ordinance and it will remove the
exclusive state control of
tobacco read regulations and
allow the adoption of local of
policies to address tobacco use
by minors including baking
within their own communities and
of local governments understand
the needs and values of their
community yes and this is about
local democracy and communities
being empowered to take
appropriate measures to address
their unique challenges
local control tobacco
regulations will allow
municipalities and counties to
tackle the epidemic of E.
cigarettes more effectively
within their own communities.
In two thousand fifteen local
control was eliminated at a time
when E. cigarettes were becoming
popular with you and the tobacco
industry successfully killed any
local restrictions.
I'm.
Now we face a public for health
crisis directly affecting more
than a third of New Mexico high
school students and one in
fourteen middle school students
are vaping has increased
dramatically as cigarette use
has gone down so it's you know
of a real problem in a lot of
our communities and we feel that
they are best able to address
you know the finer
regulations within their own
community I New Mexico
department of health a study
conducted in twenty nineteen
found that thirty four percent
of New Mexico high school
students said they bait E.
cigarettes at least once in the
last thirty days and the same
study conducted in twenty
seventeen down the right to be
at twenty four percent that
statewide some places are much
higher and a lot of our rural
areas I think you have as a
handout that was
given to the committee and
my witness probably will go over
that a little bit more but E.
cigarettes have jumped as I was
saying seventy eight percent
among high school students and
forty eight percent among middle
students from twenty seventeen
to twenty eighteen and local
governments will be an important
that this will give them an
important opportunity to adopt
ordinance.
Ordinances that restrict certain
E. cigarette flavors marketed to
underage children within their
community.
So with local control their
opportunities to establish
guidelines that restrict the
sale of tobacco products your
schools community centres
baseball fields skateboard parks
and other areas where underage
children frequent within their
community.
And businesses are used to
meeting different required there
used to meeting different
requirements
And under different local
ordinances and this community
approach is the norm and doesn't
create an undue burden for
businesses.
And with that I'd like to
introduce my
Witness.
S. C. yeah.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee.
Thank thank you Representative
Ferrary.
For sponsoring this important
legislation.
We have the American heart
association and all our
coalition partners you know
strongly support this
legislation and believe this is
one of the many public health
policies you could adopt you
know to stop and reverse you
know the epidemic of youth
tobacco and E. cigarette use in
New Mexico.
You know but before I get to get
into this bill what this bill
could are accomplished I want to
briefly explain what this bill
does not do are you know it
doesn't change the minimum age
of twenty one years to buy
tobacco product drugs which is
the federal law both on state
and tribal lands and also it has
zero impact on state licensing
process which you know was
undertaken by the regulation and
licensing department and then
you could see that you know and
in your FIR and the.
You know New Mexico is ranked
third highest in high school
students use of E. cigarettes
out of forty four states only
behind West Virginia and North
Carolina and so we this is a
serious you know public health
issue and house bill ninety
seven provides the local option
you know to limit youth access
to tobacco and a mechanism to
specifically respond two hundred
press regional or geographical
you know tobacco use disparities
and up you know you know this is
not.
This will not solve the problem
of you you know E. cigarette and
tobacco use in our state you
know this is one of the many you
know proposals you know we are
pushing including raising taxes
on tobacco so this is a
comprehensive approach you know
we we we have the tobacco tax
bill being House cosponsored by
Representative Ferrary
Representative Montoya.
Isn't of Chandler and
And Representative Lujan in the
house and and there's a similar
bill in the Senate so we we we
need a comprehensive approach to
solve this problem you know just
like when we tackled drunken
driving prices and I'm sure you
all remember you know that the
campaign you drink you drive you
lose you know you at the
legislature you know your
increased DWI penalties you know
you're implemented ignition
interlock programs you know
funded special DWI you know
enforcement.
You know special prosecutors to
deal with you know DWI cases and
so you know this is one of the
many tools in the toolbox you
know we were asking you to
implement so we can we can get a
handle on on on the scratches
and one last point I want to
make as a you know on neighbors
we always like to be you know
compare ourselves to our
neighbors you know Texas Arizona
Colorado they don't have to back
up.
And local communities and then
spell Kings are allowed to adopt
you know ordinances that make
sense to that and and you know
our friends on the side you know
will always you know what will
say this is going to create.
I'm you know the regulatory
nightmare for them.
I just wanted you know just
point out you know.
Texas has two hundred and fifty
four counties we are thirty
three counties in Texas has
doesn't they don't have to echo
preemption and you know
different counties have
different tobacco taxes so it's
it's not affecting businesses
it's not you know.
Are closing down their stores
we we we feel that this is you
know gives the option to local
communities so that they can
address some of these issues.
And madam chair thank thank you
for the opportunity and members
of the committee be glad to
answer any questions and.
Thank you thank you.
Mr speaker is that doctors need
to Mr Singh thank you so much
Mister speaker and thank you so
much Mr Representative do you
have I thought he had an
amendment in the shared interest
here.
Just going to introduce the
amendment it is amendment two
one nine nine zero six point
one.
And what this I'm sorry to all
the members have see the
amendment is that okay.
Right.
And this amendments is
will mirror what happened in the
Senate to clarify
exactly what can be
improved or or changed by the
local governments and so in
addition to the tobacco taxing
authority to state shall retain
all tobacco licensing the
penalty assessments and
compliance functions as
specified in the tobacco
products act that was passed in
the last session and a and but
local government this is where
it specifies
they may adopt ordinances
establishing
within their communities the
restrictions for certain point
of sale advertising that's aimed
at you they're very strict and
that often happens you know
where they might have you know
like it was Joe camel or
something like that if they have
something that is very
attractive to you
and then also restricting
certain flavored tobacco
products
Also are aimed at attracting you
to their product local
government so
Exclude they can exclude any
establishments
we're
There is a local permit that is
needed so and this is going to
affect on the twenty twenty one.
So we just think this is a clear
fights
And we also will then be the
same as the Senate bill.
Thank you so much and so with
that is there of motion on the
amendment.
Was there debate on the
amendment I should say.
Well let's go head I'll tell you
what we will consider it will do
a discussion of the amendment
with the the bill itself and
then we we make a motion on the
minutes afterwards so now we'll
go ahead and turn it over to the
public comment merry if you
don't mind bringing up the whole
on H. B. ninety seven
so attendees on your screen
you'll see a poll pop up asking
if you were in favor or opposed
to this bill that Representative
Ferrary has introduced today the
ninety seven local government
tobacco products the ordinances
on if you please go ahead and
many of you are we'll give you
another ten seconds to go ahead
and register your support or
opposition for this.
Five more seconds.
Great we're going to close the
pull.
And so we had very close when we
have forty eight percent twelve
folks that voted in favor it and
fifty two percent thirteen folks
and opposition to it so let's go
ahead and start with the
opposition if you are here to
have public comment in
opposition to this bill please
go ahead and raise your hand and
you should see at the bottom so
hand signal go ahead and raise
your hand now will go in here
from the the folks were in
opposition.
To be fair to everyone that's
three commenting today make sure
we can get to everybody I just
make sure to keep your comments
to about two minutes to three
minutes that we we can actually
hear from everybody and you know
try not try to not in the
repeat any comments to bargain
maybe and make sure that all of
your comments are focused on the
the legislation that's before us
not any of the individuals or
anything else like that so with
that looks good and forward I
can we have Mr mat hotel
moved over merry so that we can
hear from him.
And he's moving over crystals on
L. you'll be up next Mr crystals
on but for now we'll have Mister
matagal you're on and you can
and you yourself.
Yes the.
Good morning thank you for the
opportunity to speak here are.
Mr president of core mark
international markets on
wholesale distributor of
consumer products the
convenience stores all across
the state we have over seven
hundred customers that we
distribute drugs to including
tobacco products.
By my opposition to this bill
really has to do consistency of
I think that the removal of of
the
The preemption statute it is
good to back with a different
categories of state treats all
our house promoting it's going
to be treating us.
This.
While I think there's no debate
about about the extent of which
the issue is an issue out from
the discounted Mr alley I.
No different than what we have
issues with alcohol in the state
but there's not a movement to
create this sort of
inconsistency between this is
how it is as they how they
enforce this time our excuse me
apply new restrictions to use
drugs I think it has the
potential solutions will
confusing and online regulations
across the state we have an
adverse impact on these
businesses
Excuse me Mr sensing Todd Lee
mentioned the
there is no adverse impact on
business in Texas is being an
example of that Texas is.
Situation.
Numbers impact we're talking
about situations where at one
store who is happens to be the
county or municipality which
doesn't have restriction has
significant business manager one
is literally you know could be
all the way across the county
border which has
it doesn't really address the
issue that we're talking about
here that the intent is here is
to try to prevent underage use
today there's a there's a ton of
things that are being done that
my company is actually being
involved with to to to insure
that we are not selling to or
leading or work distribute
products that are marketed
towards children
I just think there needs to be
more surgical.
and I would say strategic
approach to this if it's going
to be effective and it's not
happening.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr tile next we'll
have Mister crystals on merry
Commission over and Mister Tom
Hennessy you'll be up after him.
Again just remind everyone to
keep your comments around two or
three minutes
we'll just keep going forward.
I'm not seeing Mr crystals on.
Can you hear me yes I can thank
you thank well other chair
members of this committee I'm
Chris falls on a and I'm the
registered lobbyists for Aweys's
CBD and bait we probably have
see all stars are on the the
state and I'll just want to
bring to the attention to this
committee that this bill is not
being comprehensive that
information is incorrect is
actually with all respect is
being inconsistent like the
previous public comment that was
given on on on the streamlined
off keeping regulations are
equally through counties and
municipalities but you can bring
several different arguments on
from the health aspect economic
aspect and regulatory framework
aspect other chair
just bring from the regulatory
side this counties may not be
aware of what Ana County
ordinances are causing confusion
on the rights of the citizens
and I know that this committee
cares about the rights of the
constituents just to give an
example if you have in your
district to that say I counties
three counties.
You and I might be driving one
County purchase a product go to
the next County and my being
legal and accounting and causing
a lot of confusion and I
streamlined process this is just
one item from the regulatory
side mother chair members the
committee when it comes to the
health and economic crisis that
was brought by the expert thank
from nation it is inconsistent
as well because consistent on
the counties in streamline
regulations help create quality
and safe products while
preventing mitigating youth
access to other products now if
you take a look in your computer
there in Google quickly on
Massachusetts black market they
try to do the same exactly think
madam chair and create a team
beating dollar black market just
on by state now think about that
right we are trying to pass a
piece of legislation that at
this moment we don't have a need
for it because back in twenty
twenty we did pass a
comprehensive and regulatory
structure on a new mask we work
very close with the stakeholders
with the governor and we create
that under the department of
licensing regulations so that
existed previously that's given
some time let the framework.
Do its work by itself okay the
state legislature this body
passed that will not honestly so
I think we should give some time
for this and that's what I
ordered a members of Canadian we
have already a framework set up
and with all respect we we ask
you to please do not support
this piece of legislation at
this moment thank you very much
madam chair.
Thank you Mr rose ano next we
have Mister Tom Hennessey strand
Tom and his the Hennessey you
can on yourself and next
afterwards if you can move over
merry Missy content.
Mr Hannity.
Thank you madam chair my name is
Tom Hennessey and I'm the
president of the New Mexico
petroleum marketers association.
The new tobacco products act is
designed to keep cigarettes and
other nicotine products out of
the hands of minors and we all
want this most retailers already
have procedures in place to
prevent sales to minors this
includes age verification by
scanning the idea of the
customer and implementation of
the we card program.
The tobacco products at is even
more stringent than the liquor
control act with regard to age
verification requirements and
penalties for selling to a minor
I'm not compliant business is
subject to the loss of their
tobacco licensed faster than
what it would take to lose a
liquor license.
To allow municipalities to enact
even more restrictive regulation
is unwarranted.
The tobacco products act has
only been in effect for six
weeks it would be prudent to see
the impact of the new state
statute and regulations before
allowing each municipality to
create their own set of rules
thank you for your time.
Thank you Mr Hennessy now I'm
missing miss miss Clinton you
can meet your cell and can we
move over Mr Pat lock.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is miss content I am a business
owner in the state of New Mexico
also the president New Mexico
small freelance
I'm in opposition of this bill
because I I've heard.
In lawmakers say that this will
not affect businesses it will
affect businesses in every
single way you will checkerboard
the state where you have one
county that has a flavor ban or
one county that decides that
they want to then they being so
what do consumers do consumers
will do what they will to get
the products they want to it
doesn't matter and they will
drive they will drive for hours
and I attest to that because I
have customers that just like my
business so they drive hours to
come to my business from Texas
and you know different parts of
New Mexico I just this is not
good bill it's like I said you a
check for the state let's think
back to when you have dry
counties for alcohol.
What happened people would go
and they would load a truck up
with beer or whatever from a
different county bring it back
and they would sell it in the
county that was dry this is
what's going to be created we're
trying to keep our tax dollars
in New Mexico currently my town
is seven miles from the Texas
border when I mention this bill
to customers do you know what to
tell me they sent out a school
seven miles across the border
and I'll spend my money in Texas
where I can get whatever I want
to without having to deal with
New Mexico and and what's going
on here.
So I just really think that this
needs to be thought through very
very well before anything is
done on it because it's like I
said this is not a good thing
not for businesses not for
consumers because you're just
going to push on to to go
somewhere else it be like if
Albuquerque decided well flavor
van what are people going to do
they're going to drive to Rio
Rancho that I tried to burn a
Leo they're gonna drive wherever
else they need to to get what
they want and you'll put those
businesses in Albuquerque out of
business as much as people say
it won't happen it will happen.
Thank you for your time this
morning.
Thank you Mr content Mr block
your next and can we also move
ever Mr Oscar and drawing.
Thank you madam thank you madam
chair and good morning madam
chair members of the committee
on Pat block and registered
lobbyist for the New Mexico
retailed Association and we
oppose this bill are you know we
feel like there is some value to
uniformity and regulations we
have concerns that a patchwork
of regulations and make things
more complex than we have seen
in many areas not just tobacco
that complexity in compliance
have an inverse relationship
more complicated make something
the harder it is to comply we do
feel like the partner in terms
of implementing new laws like
the one that we passed in.
Going into effect I guess I
would point out that you often
hear the democracy is an
experiment when you do an
experiment you develop your
hypothesis you tested look at
the results and you see how it
went and you adjust accordingly
within six weeks of the law
taking effect we really haven't
had a chance to test whether
it's working or not but we have
been doing things at the state
and federal level and in stores
to combat youth use of tobacco
products and I would encourage
the committee to look at the
latest statistics from the CDC
it was good to hear what was
happening in twenty seventeen to
twenty nineteen but if you look
at the twenty twenty our survey
of tobacco use it shows that
there was a dramatic decrease so
we feel like the things that we
are already doing and have done
recently are working and we
would like to give it a chance
and follow the experiment
through to the point of knowing
what the results are so thank
you for your time madam chair.
Thank you Mr block Mr Andreotti
you're our next if we can also
look for Mr Najjar
Mr Johnny you can and you
yourself.
Mr Jody it shows the other the
visibility and and you yourself
can you.
Okay we can come back I believe
Mr Najjar was moved over Mr
Nisar can you yourself yes thank
you madam chair members of the
committee I'll be brief
We during his our behalf of
Swisher international we oppose
this bill for reasons previously
stated I'd also just like to
reemphasize what Mr see to
pointed out a nationwide the age
to purchase tobacco products to
twenty one.
Dresses the youth usage issue
and also as as it's been stated
preemption is necessary to
create uniformity of the law
this bill could potentially
result in different regulations
in each of our counties that
would create a regulatory
nightmare for businesses in
terms of compliance and also the
states in terms and enforcement
so for these reasons and those
previously stated we
respectfully oppose this bill.
Thank you Mr Nisar Mr Johnny can
you try to and you yourself
again in the meantime American
you will over over Mr Scanlon Mr
Scott Scanlon.
Still not hearing you Mr
Andreotti Oscar and dry a and D.
R. A. D. E. just so okay so
pronouncing that wrong but in
the meantime we can hear from Mr
Scanlon.
And then you can and you
yourself.
Beautiful thank you madam chair
and members of the committee my
name Scott Scanlon registered
lobbyist for bowling travel
center and all Trea Bowlin
travel center was be began their
company in nineteen twelve it's
New Mexico home grown operation
with seven stores in New Mexico
our offices are headquarters is
in Albuquerque but we have a
forty five thousand square foot
distribution center and other
offices in Los crucis and so
they're especially.
Concerned about this legislation
and we respectfully oppose it
I do want to I don't want to
repeat madam chair so that.
Others can speak but I do want
to bring up a point about this
preemption issue because frankly
it's just wrong
preemption was passed in
nineteen ninety three and a
simple search of the Legislative
Council Service library will
will show that preemption was
added in nineteen ninety three
in twenty fifteen through Senate
bill four thirty three there
were changes to the act and
things were moved around but
preemption of state and then in
twenty twenty of the entire act
was repealed and replaced and
again preemption state so this
notion that preemption is
something that just came came
about in the last few years
respectfully is just incorrect
so I don't want to repeat what
others have said
preemption is necessary for a
consistent regulatory scheme and
we respectfully oppose the bill
thank you madam chair.
Thank you so much Mr Scanlon so
Mr Andreotti I see that you are
muted can we try again thank you
hear me now yes one moment
though merry we move over Mr a
James different Murphy USA
into the here and Mr and audio.
Thank you madam chair I
apologize so when I use
different
Zoom features etcetera this
state affects my ability to.
What I'm doing here
first what I appreciate you
allowing me to speak today I am
the owner and president of
Pickwick stores located in
southern New Mexico macro we
have about twenty stores
and compass in three different
counties and cities all the way
from Deming New Mexico hatch New
Mexico Anthony New Mexico law
The New Mexico Los crucis and
Sarinana County I'm speaking in
opposition to this Bill of
personal reasons I'm in the
business for forty years start
this record when I was eighteen
at some level stores and I'm
seeing the the this changes in
the industry over last forty
years we are you know all time
regulations were licensed my
average turnaround employees is
almost twenty years our folks
know the rules and regulations
my concern with this bill is
that it gives
local municipalities and again
counties on and like Los crucis
I have a store that so two
blocks away from.
County or the city and if we
start placing restrictions on
certain products
are you on the consumer is
accustomed to consistency and
again we're talking about a an
adult you know who's twenty one
years of age or older and to
make reference to things like
Joe camel and
that the industry is trying to
encourage miners to use tobacco
products as an actor Joe camel
hasn't been around for many
years we don't have signage were
very straightforward you can do
there
and then my biggest concern with
this again of them.
There's a lot of pressure
already on my employees no
Torrance forced all the
different regulatory regulations
we have now including the last
year especially with the
pandemic and we're not face
masks and you know I want you
all understand the pressure
that's put on my staff to have
to explain why the state can't
by all and all use some somebody
else on use of Dale or marbles
Armental flavor syrup why can I
buy menthol flavored or vapor
product you know two blocks away
and I kept by your it also
creates a lot of issues with
them toward for supplier of Mr
Matt how're start with our core
mark but it's going to create a
huge problem for them and for
most stores for my order guards
and for folks so do that again
having over three hundred fifty
employees
they work and for locations and
so again I ask you you know to
consider the pressure on the
responsibilities are placed on
our staff that we already have
and then now to have to deal
with the customer who is our
right and and upset about the
fact that they can buy their
product and I got to drive
somewhere else yes somebody else
mentioned also we are only a
fifteen minute drive from the
Texas border and I'll pass so I
have a story and in the New
Mexico which account for rock
act after the Texas if we do
such crazy restrictions.
will destruct on and in Texas
and again I part of the one to.
and then the the question over
the years when dealing with some
different municipality is set
up.
base our decisions on personal
opinions
if a person doesn't believe us
spoken I can respect a person
simply bowing and
you know in a McDonald's because
it makes me to Pratt I can
respect that but to
Have a group of the the city
councils or county commissioners
make decisions on their personal
opinions without any legal
backing or document Tatian
really concerns may and again it
will hurt and because a lot of
chaos especially on the border
challenge of so again I do
appreciate your listening
the last thing we need New
Mexico now with the pandemic and
all of restrictions and issues
of put the place on on
businesses is to put in of the
ability for local government
bodies to create rules and
regulations are for banking
system in a small market or
large markets thank you for your
time thank you Mr Mr and killing
the lower Mr John Thompson
Mister James decker on you can
and yourself.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I appreciate you
giving us time to speak today
one is James ever I'm an
attorney for Murphy USA.
And I won't belabor the point
that a lot of other submits all
I'll keep this quick we
currently in nineteen locations
in New Mexico we operate across
twenty four states when I was a
mention the issue regulatory
patchwork minute that's a
serious issue for us we
obviously try our best to make
sure we're operate within the
confines Law and all of our
communities which we operate.
But if.
We have some local regulations
that we don't know about yeah
we'll we'll have those pop up
from time to time and they're
often not well publicized so it
makes it difficult for us to
comply likewise we have an
employees who will work between
multiple stores and so we do
have potential difficulty with
making sure they're aware of.
Localities regulations when they
move to a different store to
cover shift help out what have
you I think the bigger issue
though is when you look at the
intent of the bills offered
that's to.
Kirby youth access to tobacco
products we often see with with
these these kinds bills is that.
What happened to localities
given the power to regulate is
that you has.
A rise in black market so you
know whether they're raising
local taxes were there when the
local flavor ban is you see a
black market either grow or rise
up on its own and so then you
actually make it easier for
minors to get access to tobacco
products so when you look at the
into the bill.
As as it's not gonna do what I
think the intent it is meant for
to to so we would respectfully
ask that you pose the bill.
I apologize speaking and I
thought like it was on thank you
Mr at upper we have one more in
opposition that is Mr Thompson
Mr Thompson.
Thank you madam chairman members
of the committee good morning
thank you for the opportunity to
speak my name is John Thompson I
represent a local nonprofit
trade association that
represents independent stores
that operate in this space madam
chair and in twenty twenty all
my clients supported the
regulatory act which included
regulation taxation and also an
age increase madam chairman this
bill is as mentioned
in consistent with state law as
it pertains to alcohol and as
well as legislation moving
through the body as it pertains
to cannabis madam chairman I I'd
like to add that I think it's
very likely that the debates
that space within the cannabis
market if it's not the number
one market of recreational
cannabis consumption it's a it's
a close second and I think it's
worthy of note that we have
there's nothing in cannabis
legislation that refers to any
of this so I I believe it's very
inconsistent madam chair we
would ask that you allow the
legislation that just went into
effect to work and I would also
like to echo the comments on on
the preemption timeline that
we're make madam chair
appreciate the time to make the
comments and appreciate your
consideration of the matter.
Your and your madam chair.
Thank you I just a bunch of
really nice things about you
spent madam chair sorry merry
thank you Representative part of
let me know but thank you very
for moving or want a long so
well on now if you're in support
of the bill please raise your
hand using the little thing at
the bottom the little hand
symbol at the bottom
I'll give let folks get to take
a moment to fill that up.
Great.
Okay it looks like we have
eleven folks that are going to
speak in favor again please
remember try to keep it to two
or three minutes
merry can you go ahead and move
over
Miss Libby and I am.
Susan Lawson schools I guess.
Make sure that you are muted
attention.
Mr Mr.
Representative I think you can
community might thank you I'm
sorry we go back one second this
is an awesome did you just get
moved over I'm sorry to see you
for.
Yes I'm in support of the bill
it had my company name on there
I couldn't change it until I was
made act so I just changed it
because I'm here is individual
perfect okay wonderful so we'll
go ahead and start with comments
from the student Suzanne Lawson
and then we'll go to miss Libby
and I Mrs Lawson.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Suzanne Lawson and I'm from
Albuquerque and I'm here as an
individual citizen of New Mexico
I am in support of this
legislation my brother Kevin
started smoking as a teenager we
lost him a few years ago after
he died after a brutal battle
with the soccer deal cancer.
I have a six year old daughter
Elizabeth.
I began talking with her about
not smoking and not making
several years ago and we
continue to talk about it
because of the tricks used by
big tobacco this legislation
supports local governments to
understand the needs and values
of their communities best local
control of tobacco regulations
will allow cities and counties
to tackle teen smoking and the
epidemic of E. cigarettes more
effectively within their
communities please pass this
legislation and help save more
of our fell in New Mexicans
thank you.
Thank you miss Lawson now can we
move over Dr page possible and
will have miss Libby and I speak
next agency and I am you can and
you yourself.
Thank you madam members of the
committee my name is Libby and I
have I am speaking on behalf of
Thompson consulting represents
the more in the City of
Albuquerque city council
unanimously approved a
resolution to repeal the tobacco
preemption it stands in strong
support of this bill we know
that sixty three percent of
registered voters in New Mexico
support communities being able
to regulate tobacco sales in
their jurisdiction we urge you
to give local governments the
ability to take measures to
address the unique challenges
thank you so much.
Thank you Mr Nye and merry we're
Lawrence her and
and can we and Dr cage promo you
can and you yourself.
Right.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is Dr
page come on and general
pediatrician practicing in
Farmington New Mexico we
currently service the American
academy of pediatrics chapter
champion for you the cigarette
prevention and cessation Mexico.
The members Representative The
New Mexico Society today I would
like to state are supported
house bill ninety seven as a
local pediatrician I have seen
first hand the devastating
impact E. cigarette use I
patients if I have easy it is
for teens are using E.
cigarettes challenges faced by
adolescents trying to quit are
docking at their still
developing brains a need for all
the harmful and act.
Ninety seven will be a crucial
step in allowing local
municipalities counties in New
Mexico allowing them the
opportunity to address the
cigarette academic more
effectively district or tobacco
regulations on a local level as
was mentioned by our expert
witness Representative Ferrary
that you begin make is permitted
Mexico you and although federal
and state legislation has
instituted tobacco twenty one
based on a long way to go in
terms of protecting you at in
your.
One ninety seven is a step in
the right direction allowing
local governments to adopt
ordinances for example districts
they'll restrict meals are at
thank you know that there's
ample evidence that pre
restricted particular heavily
marketed to young people CDC
morbidity mortality weekly
report on September twenty
twenty although highlighting a
decline in the cigarette use
among you but actually truncated
study due to the pandemic and
actually highlighted the fact
that nationally two point five
million you that's one in five
high school students in
particular are currently using
E. cigarette still and over
eighty percent of them reporting
using flavored E. cigarettes
whether locally or nationally we
know that tobacco used by youth
in any form including E.
cigarettes.
In New Mexico in advocates for
children and teens we owe it to
this generation appurtenant the
second epidemic Institute
legislation that will protect
not only this generation how to
help I'm Peter New Mexicans for
many years to come secretary all
to support house bill ninety
seven thank you madam chair
members of the committee your
time and opportunities Martin.
Thank you Dr Palmer I'm can we
move over colleges of miss
Joanna Struthers and next we'll
hear from Mister Lawrence
around.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee Larry heard and
register lobbyist for the city
of Los crucis and also the New
Mexico municipal league The New
Mexico municipal again the city
support the efforts of this
legislation and and I I would it
was interesting to hear my good
friends who are on the other
side of the issue discussed some
of the the objections they had
to preemption and as home rule
municipality the city with
municipalities.
The default position is local
control and local decision
making for a home rule in less
the legislature specifically
preempts that
that authority and the reason
for that is is philosophically
the the legislature when they
adopted home rule thanks that
many decisions are made much
better at the local level part
of that is access part of that
is the ability to have
discussions with your local
officials and city council it's
also that you have a better
opportunity more frequently to
interact with the regulatory
body and probably the most
important thing is local
governments are tend to be more
in tune with the needs of their
community because they are all
in the community they all come
from the community and I was one
of the opposition indicated that
they they worry because city
councilors make decisions based
upon their own opinion.
But so do legislators so to
members of Congress so does the
president and as with the
governor and so at the local
level you just have an
opportunity to to appear before
them and make your case often
much more frequently than the
legislature's only meets once
every year and in the sixty day
session every two years so you
can have a bill like this but
our city council Los crucis
meets every week and so we think
the reasons that that they're
talking about exactly the
reasons why you should support
this bill because we think local
control and city councils are
really in a good position
to take action on issues that
could that are going to affect
their community and although it
may create a patchwork
Yes as one of the opponents
talked about but they're also
they are well publicized the
meetings are well publicized you
can find what the ordinances are
the regulations are on the
city's website throughout the
state we just think we we
appreciate the sponsor bring in
legislation and we think you
should default in favor of local
control rather than preemption
so madam chair thank you we hope
you support this legislation.
Thank you Mr and can we go ahead
and move miss at Patricia torn
over and next we'll hear from
miss Joanna Strother Mr hunter
as a stronger stronger yes thank
you good morning madam chair and
members of the committee for the
record my name is Joanna
Strother and I serve as the
senior advocacy director for the
American lung association and we
stand in support of house bill
ninety seven I just want to talk
a little bit about what Mr
Scantlin sent he's correct we
have had preemption for quite
some time in New Mexico and it's
a long known tobacco industry
tactics that they tie the hands
of the public health
organizations at the state level
so that it makes it very hard
for us to pass good public
health laws at the local level
local governments have a unique
opportunity to adopt ordinances
that would restrict tobacco and
certain E. cigarette flavors
marketed to children I think you
heard that we have a crisis here
in New Mexico that thirty seven
point five percent of teens use
tobacco products I'm also want
to make clear that this isn't a
mandate this is removing
preemption so that we can allow
cities and towns if they choose
to pass ordinances stronger than
the state level I know we're
talking about going across
borders but I just want to
emphasize what Mahesh had said
earlier don't forget that our
partners in Arizona Colorado and
Texas do not have preemption so
those local cities and towns can
also choose to pass ordinances
stricter than what's at the
state level I'm also the black
market issue another tobacco
industry tactics long used where
those numbers are highly skewed
what we want to do now is just
to make it available for cities
and towns should they choose to
restrict tobacco flavors or
other ordinance proximity
advertising that they can do so.
Without preemption local cities
and towns can make it good for
health well being and equity for
all of their constituents
families friends and neighbors
so we stand in support of house
bill ninety seven thank you
madam chair.
Thank you Mr merry can go ahead
and move over Mr chair Glenn
next up we have miss Patricia
toward.
The storm thank you madam chair
and members of the committee I
am Patricia toward I'm here is a
man representing myself as an
individual and as someone who
worked on the claim in their
door air campaign in Albuquerque
New Mexico beginning in two
thousand two it was so important
for us to the local level to
begin to use our our our local
areas as laboratories to
experiment with what would might
work at the state level and I
see that as being true for the
current bill
it what could be more important
than taking care of the health
of our children
I lost a niece to smoking and we
don't know yet know the full
impact of vaping on our children
but many many parents are very
very worried about it we need an
opportunity at the let local
level find a laboratory for this
and I just our our children are
just too important for us to
ignore this right now to be able
to use those local ordinances to
see what works best what works
what doesn't it's a very
valuable book place to begin to
look at what could happen at the
state level the D. Johnson clean
indoor air act was the result
and based on a lot of things
that were done at local level so
I am in support of house bill
ninety seven thank you.
Thank you Mr can we go ahead and
move over is Mendham accountable
next up we'll have Mr Declan
speak Mr Lin.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee and thank you
to the sponsor for bringing this
bill forward my name is Derek
lane and I am representing New
Mexico voices for children
tobacco use in the building are
a serious problem for young
people which is a problem for
New Mexico we're learning
anything these last ten months
it is the importance of good
health habits and good public
health policy.
This bill is both good public
health policy and encourages
good health habits we believe it
is important for New Mexico to
do all we can to curb tobacco
use and of local governments
want to place tighter
restrictions on use in the state
we should applaud their efforts
to protect the young people and
keep them healthy.
We fully expect that the tobacco
industry will fight to get their
products in New in front of as
many New Mexicans as they can
the target young people with
flavors and packaging it's a
creative industries and of local
governments want to take
creative measures to keep up
with them then let's give them
the freedom to do that we would
urge you to to allow communities
to act on their own behalf in
order to protect their own kids
and families thank you.
Thank you Mr Lin I'm right we
had Mr gonna go in here but
maybe she fell off juicing she's
back in the comments.
I'm
gonna go if you can hear me I
just raise your hand again will
come back to you later can we
move miss Linda Siegel over
merry.
You Mr conical Mr nominal you
can go.
just a run of members of the
committee I'm gonna go a
registered lobbyist for the
American heart association.
I understand that there's a
great benefit to have who
governments be able.
Agency in the level of support
issues like this they know their
communities best and how to work
to secure a healthy sustainable
environment especially for the
young people like state
legislation there is a process
to here and debate all sides
Development affordances this
bill does not mandate edition of
local government it simply
allows for choice you're being
concerns expressed by opponents
of this proposal that
consistency at the point of sale
for tobacco any cigarette
products we know federal law
already requires a purchaser to
get eight twenty one and to
provide identification to
confirm it that's universal
secondly please remember that
these products are in Lori so
even if there are different
rules in different locations no
matter what the product.
No matter what the product we're
talking about is inventory and
inventory is traditionally store
specific.
This was brought up in may be
worth noting that there are
local provisions with this
legislation under consideration
what we're asking is please
trust your local governments and
support house bill ninety seven
thank you for your consideration
on each.
Thank you Mr Connable we go to
Mrs Clinton move over ms Claudia
rodents over into the speaker
yet miss Linda Siegel
Is an yourself.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee Linda Siegel
representing the American cancer
society cancer action network
and we've been working on these
issues and I personally have
been working on these issues for
over twenty years and there is a
checkered past four or
preemption there have been
periods when there wasn't
preemption and one of those
periods was right before the two
thousand nineteen legislation
passed and and preemption was
added to one of the omnibus
bills I want to build on what
Patricia important porn had said
about clean indoor air in those
periods of preemption and using
local rule we were able to go
through out the state of New
Mexico and get local clean
indoor air ordinances that
required no smoking and
restaurants and and other public
places and by doing that a few
at a time every year we built up
the momentum so that we were
able eventually to pass the D.
Johnson clean indoor air act
which protected employees in in
places of business ours
restaurants six cetera.
So these kinds of positive
things can happen on the local
level and really help address
the critical health issues that
may be specific to our community
so we stand in strong support of
this bill thank you.
Thank you miss and then merry
can you go to move over Mr
Charles good marker next up we
have ms Claudia Roden's.
Hi good morning members of the
committee excellent thank you
for the opportunity to testify
today again my name is
Colorado's and I am the director
of the southern region for the
campaign for tobacco free kids
we are the leading advocacy
organization working to reduce
tobacco use and its deadly
consequences in the United
States and around the world I'm
here to let our support of house
bill ninety seven because local
governments should be allowed to
solve problems and that's a term
in the loss and set standards
that reflect the unique views
values and needs of their
communities corporate special
interests across the country are
using their power to push state
legislators to keep local
government from passing
workplace health safety anti
discrimination protections even
overturning election results to
pushing national corporate
agenda with the legislators
stopped communities from passing
their own lost the silence the
voice of the people they rob
local democracy said the power
in the hurt the community's
health safety net economic well
being instead say legislators
should be working hand in hand
with local communities to fight
against special interest groups
like the tobacco industry who
has a long history of targeting
the most vulnerable populations
by communities of color the
LGBTQ community's meant to help
communities and lower
socioeconomic communities.
And our youth which has been
mentioned today.
We need the assistance from all
levels of government to address
the different needs of each
community if the state wants to
get involved if you make loss
the floor not a ceiling and lay
a foundation they can build on
to reflect the facts of life in
each individual community on
behalf of the campaign for
tobacco free kids we ask you to
support half of ninety seven and
choose to give the right of
local democracy over special
interest abusing their power
profits thank you.
You and now we'll have our last
public comment Mr Charles good
marker misconduct.
Well I'm sorry you're still
muted right now thank you madam
chair.
Members of the committee thank
you for the opportunity to speak
and thank you to the sponsor for
sponsoring the bill I just like
to highlight
What I think is a really big.
Picture of part of the equation
here which is and we think about
what the tobacco folks are
arguing against this bill
they're basically saying that
their narrow business interests
are essentially more important
than the public good as
determined by local bodies
you know they of course they
would argue that in favor of
their business interests that's
that's their job you all should
be infielder that with as much
salt as you want what they have
to say but
What they're saying does narrow
down to their interests over the
public as well as the public
good that we're talking about
here what is the public goods
that that is at stake forty
thousand kids in New Mexico now.
Will eventually die from tobacco
related causes.
Eight hundred forty four million
dollars of our tax payer money
in New Mexico alone eight
hundred forty four million
dollars a year is spent on
health related.
Public money tax expenditures so
essentially this business their
business interests are having us
the rest of the taxpayers
subsidize.
And of.
Norma's public cost not to
mention the public health cost
need to consider please pass
this bill of.
Thank you very much.
Thank you very much and so now a
little over two debate among
the.
Committee members are questions
for our sponsor of the bill
right now I see Representative
at the heart of.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative I'm just as a
point of order before I continue
with my question did we adopt
the amendment or we still
discussing the amendment can you
we're still we're still
discussing amendment I guess we
have adopted okay thank you I'm
so I'm at madam chair and
representative so I guess I have
a question
I
settlement fund back in the day
and haven't been there on a
while in a while I'm doing money
going into that provide.
Representative Ferrary I'm sorry
I and.
In between two of my committee
to had to take a vote
I'm sorry would you repeat the
question please I thank you
madam chair representative I
used to sit on the tobacco
settlement funds subcommittee
I'm it's been a long time do we
still money going into that fund
an annual basis.
Yes we do you
happen to remember how much we
have going and I know it's
supposed to change a few years
back.
No madam chair and
representative I I don't have
that on hand do you happen to
recall how much money is that in
that fund and Representative
Representative and I am out.
I will defer to migrate
distancia Madam chair
representative Alcee
Mister sea to has that
information.
Madam chair representative so
hard I think up you know but I I
don't have those numbers but we
we can get that for you I think
that the number has been you
know going down year after year
because you know I think the
tobacco settlement fund I think
it expires in a few years so
that that number is you know you
know it's lower than what it
used to be but what we're we're
gonna get you those numbers
right is it two hundred thousand
two million what we just I I
general idea we think it might.
No Madam chair representative of
fraud I mean I I don't have that
number so I don't want to give
you something that's not
accurate but I will certainly
find that this morning and then
I will send you an email.
Okay thank you I'm Madam chair
representative and
those funds are used for
educational purposes and things
like that correct madam chair
representative.
I'm sorry what was the question
and.
And those funds have primarily
been used for what
Representative.
Madam chair representative this
has nothing to do with our
bills.
Madam chair representative well
it kind of justice in trying to
because a lot of the debate that
we that came out of the as was
talking about local control and
and prevention this is what this
fund does it actually does
education yes Mr chair.
they'll yes.
Thank you.
We
are thank you.
I'm sorry madam chair and
representative of the if you're
talking about the permanent fund
it does not expire they keep
making payments into her to
perpetuity and that frontier
does keep going down they are
using part of that for other
things sizes for tobacco.
Yeah
and and the reason I bring this
up is that you know you said
it doesn't make sure that it
actually does chair
representative because some of
the upon and we're talking about
education things like that and
into local communities that that
money is going to go into local
communities a lot of it goes
into native American Community
committees of the life I'm
another question so I'm and your
bill will in effect our our
tribal or native lands and all.
I'm going to refer to Madam
chair representative I'm going
to refer that to the hatch.
But madam chair Florida I think
I missed the question can you
please madam chair
Representative I can go ahead no
it does not include that tribal.
Reservations.
Thank you.
My concern I I listen to a lot
of that the on both sides yeah
we did we talk about presumption
I'm so we have M. I. more one of
bill cuts coming up and the day
we will and they we will
complete the action because it
is a nightmare do Colorado has
actually come on record when as
we talk about
the lies more on the state.
When they have sent over and
over again is the fact that they
have given local control.
To local municipalities and
counties and it is maybe
regulation extremely extremely
difficult that is why our bill
that that that you know the
bills coming through this year
don't include that we don't do
it for alcohol because of
regulating is a nightmare
there's certain things we don't
do now I support local control
and the biggest advocate for
small government but there's a
reason we don't do these things
when it comes to alcohol and
marijuana and tobacco is because
it is difficult because it
creates a and and make more you
know that this bill that passed
that is more.
And it was removed it was
removed because everybody came
to the table everybody had the
conversation and that was
removed
I am here this is as a
revenge bell in some sense you
didn't get last time so we can
try it again
but that's why we don't do that
is because when it comes to
these things when it comes comes
to the substances there are
certain things that should be
regulated by the state for the
health and safety of everybody
in the state and that's why
that's why why regulated that
way
this is it's just not a good
bill if if we're gonna do a
program we have to do it for all
and this is why we don't do it
so thank you madam chair and
thank you Representative.
Madam chair I'd like to respond
to that
there are
Communities that are asking for
this as you heard in those that
support like the city of Los
crucis we have the City of
Albuquerque us Santa Fe Las
Vegas Espanola Bernalillo county
commission Albuquerque public
schools Rio Arriba county
commission a greater Albuquerque
medical association The New
Mexico chronic disease
prevention there's groups that
such as the ball which is a
youth group these are people who
can give advice to their own
communities or you know whether
or not the store is going to be
allowed to have a permit to
build you know next to a school
the communities themselves have
the understanding of what's
happening in their community if
they don't want to have you know
there you
Targeted by the tobacco industry
do you heard very strongly
Because against this because
this is something that can
really drill down to the
community itself and given that
the communities their own
Regulation and their own desire
to make sure that their youth
are not targeted in ways such as
restricting
we're a new business might come
in or how many are in an area
such as in under
Cases were under age gather or
in a community that is of low
income where they often are
targeted and they want to create
the tobacco industry a new
generation of people who are
vaping and and smoking and using
their products so that they will
be lifelong customers and we
need to allow the communities
themselves to note their own
community the state can't know
what's going on in the direct
community M. as well as the
local governments can so we need
to make sure that those local
governments and municipalities
and
councils can make sure that they
can address the targeting of the
tobacco industry in their
community and make make the
difference.
Thank you and now I'll turn it
over to Representative amber's
Constanta.
Madam chair Representative
Ferrary I know we we my concern
is if these communities do come
in and and we approve this today
that sometimes the communities.
Can a community raise the age
limit for.
To tobacco sale.
No madam chair and
representative this is our.
What the amendment specifically
says that the taxiing the age
limit that licensing that
penalties assessments all is at
the state level but what local
government may adopt ordinances
stab us guidelines relating to
location and density of the
retailers and within their
community and restricting
certain points of sale for
advertising and also the
flavors.
Okay good thank you madam chair
Representative Ferrary I get
talked to people in Rio Arriba
and send Gail and we had a
discussion on this
and.
I think it is if a local entity
can ban the sale of tobacco
correct like in San Miguel the
city of Las Vegas can band that
sale in San Miguel County.
I'm then the tax we want to get
the tax base like Representative
Fajardo stand for the education
correct that would hamper our
tax.
In San Miguel county and the
city of Las Vegas.
I'm sorry
Are you Madam chair
representative are you saying
they could ban the sale all
together yes could could with
this could the banned the sale
together with this bill.
I don't believe so but I'd like
to refer to my witness.
Madam chair Representative
Castellano on the tax issue.
Tobacco taxes are collected by
the state.
And none of those taxes there's
no G. R. T..
On on tobacco sales it's it's a
it's a tobacco straight tobacco
tax that goes straight to the
state.
In terms of you know your
question
you know what will this
Make a city or county to ban
tobacco products and there
there's jurisdictions you know
the the answer is that the this
law is very similar to what you
have.
With the alcohol sales you know
the good alcohol sales in New
Mexico there's no pretension.
If San Miguel County wants to go
dry they can adopt.
So it's it's very similar to the
but you know realistically will
that happen you know I think of
the last County due to come from
dry you know to selling the what
was great County was couple of
years ago.
In Travis county was in the
county that was cry you can buy
alcohol Russell so it's it's
very similar to that so what
what you haven't tobacco the you
know can can the city common
banned certain products yes
certainly thank you.
Thank you madam chair
thank you a version for more so
that's my point is if they
banned and you need and I think
you just said that the cigarette
taxes that goes directly to the
state if identity would.
Banned sales of cigarettes the
state would not get that tax
correct.
Correct but I'm not sure that
yeah you can ban the sale
totally.
Okay that's just that's a
concern I have because you know
if somebody wanted to I mean if
they didn't with alcohol in quay
county like
Mr cedar said I mean.
There could be that.
I guess that that that might
happen eventually maybe one of
these days who knows I don't
know I'm just saying if that
were to occur in the state of
New Mexico will lose out on that
tax.
The chair and representative
that has nothing to do with this
bill.
Well I think okay madam chair.
Representative Ferrary is if the
local entity where to stop the
sale of tech tobacco sales in
the city or county it does this
bill because then the state
would lose out on that cigarette
tax.
Madam chair representative of
this bill is not trying to make
it so that local communities can
ban the sale of tobacco totally
this is just saying they were
giving them the opportunity to
make certain ordinances
according to
you know if they want to
regulate our where they have.
Are allowed to be they don't
want to have too many in one
area that is you know.
This bill is just as it health
equity and it allows controlled
address tobacco disparities
especially with you it's not to
ban at the tobacco sales.
Okay madam chair we're sorry
okay thank you I don't I think
what my maybe my points not
getting across correctly but
what okay madam chair
representative
The amount that the state would
lose in taxes completely
minuscule compared to the health
cost to taxpayers.
Thank reserve right thank you
madam chair and more questions.
Thank you we we still have
amendment others there's no more
discussion in here actually I
guess I do have one quick
question Representative I I know
that you mentioned you chose
these parts of how much youth
usage of vaping products has
increased you cigarette products
increased over the past two
years and I was curious if
either you you would just kind
of a nation more information
about where they're at firing
these products and those that.
Madam chair I will defer to my
witness.
Madam chair.
Thank I think the issue is you
know kids who are you know what
we want to get their hands on on
cigarettes you know they they
will find a way to go.
I think what one of the things
we're also trying to address
with that issue is you know
along with this measure we're
also trying to raise cigarette
taxes.
You know the question is has
always been like you know you
know how are the kids getting
the the these products but but
the question we should ask is
why are the kids getting these
drugs because that will answer
because they're cheap.
And you know you can buy them
like like you know disposable E.
cigarettes are as low as a
dollar.
And we're discounted prices that
go lower than that so this is as
I mentioned before this is not
going to Seoul you know the
entire problem but if we take a
comprehensive approach of like
you know giving local
governments this option and
raising cigarette taxes in
funding no more prevention
programs you know we we we can
you know you know we get control
of this issue.
But you know kids who want to
get their hands on you know they
they will find a way to get it
you know I have heard stories
way where they go to a homeless
person or someone on the street
you know tell them to buy for
them.
And then also stories about kids
who are twenty four twenty one
and older.
You know buy stuff and sell it
to you know underage kids so I
mean that bad as you know an
issue where you can't you know
completely you know
stop that problem but if you
increase the price you know kids
are sensitive to price you know
so it's it's up to Congress to
approach.
Madam chair and representative
and madam chair I just wanted to
also add that and there's been a
national study that revealed
seventy four percent of kids get
their product from the retail
location so that's partly why
the tobacco industry so
vehemently opposes
this measure because they don't
want local control that can
narrow down where to kids are
getting tobacco and and how they
are being
targeted by the industry.
Thank you wonderful well you had
discussion is is there still a
motion on the out there is there
a I'm sorry they're still
amendment out there is there a
motion on the amendment.
I make a motion to adopt the
amendment.
So now we have a motion to adopt
amendments the number right now.
We're looking to adopt the
amendment we two one nine nine
zero six point one to HB ninety
seven is there a second.
Thank you.
Thank you can we have a roll
call.
Representative black.
Hello I'm cert I'm sorry what
are we voting on the amendment.
A document drafting the
amendment okay yes.
Thank you more more.
Representative Castellano yes.
Representative Cook yes.
Representative Fajardo.
I'm sorry I didn't hear the
phone.
Well okay but.
Senator Montoya.
Yes
Of course.
Vice chair the Cerato yes.
With a vote of five in the
affirmative one in the negative
the amendment is adopted now is
there a motion for the.
Amended H. B. ninety seven.
Their second.
Second.
So we have a motion to table H.
B. ninety seven as amended
very committed to roll call on
and as the Legisla-
Representative black yes to
table.
Representative Castellano ledges
to table with an exclamation
madam chair.
Representative Cook yes.
Small Representative Fajardo
yes.
Representative where.
What is the.
Yes.
Chair Serrato yes quality with a
photo of us six the affirmative
zero and the negative we move to
table the amendment a table the
ninety seven as amended on thank
you very much Representative
Ferrary I'm sorry and I'm sorry
Representative yes and we wanted
to explain about yes thank you
madam chair and I want my vote
to reflect that I am very
concerned about health issues
with our teens but I guess my
vote was to table because my
questions are not answered madam
chair and just one extreme thank
you
well Representative Ferrary
you're you're.
Bill has been tabled and I'm
sure the after the conversations
of some of the voters I know
there still.
Thank you so much thank you
madam chair and committee
members and I appreciate all
Preciado all of the
comments made by the.
Candies thank you.
Right now we'll go ahead and
move over to our house memorial
for New Mexico Taiwan relations
brought forward by
Representative Lewis can we move
Representative Lewis over from
the attendees C..
Yeah I see her.
Thank you madam Heidi Gardner.
And.
Just a couple of notes we're
going forward I did get in
contact with the chairman and
Representative Lujan had
Representative had reached out
to ahead of time to confirm that
you would not be able to ten
today also just reminded we do
have a four sessions and little
bit about a half hour here so
it's going to kind of get folks
that reminder.
On.
We've been able to move over.
Representative Lewis.
So.
She has her hand raised in the
attendees merry.
Okay.
Yep.
Welcome Representative Lewis you
are in the panel now.
Do you have any witnesses you
like us to bring over from the
attendees.
Morning madam chair and
committee members I am flying
solo today.
Well thank you will you present
your bill house memorial for.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members House memorial
for is really looking to
strengthen the relationship
between New Mexico and
Taiwan so Taiwan has been pretty
active in New Mexico as recent
as December seventh the New
Mexico economic development
department issued a press
release notifying folks that
there has been a third Asian
manufacturing company operating
in New Mexico and it's in the
borders down of Santa Tessa so
we're really looking to promote
the economic development also
looking into strengthening the
relationship one of the great
things about this is also
building on cultures and sharing
our.
Experiences are shared values
and just looking to work
together and with that madam
chair I stand for questions
the representative will go turn
it over to public comment you're
will be hold it appears we've
sixteen folks the attendees area
they'll be pull that pops up in
moment we'll ask you Sir are in
support of or opposed House
memorial for.
Many you're still getting it to
pop.
Here it is so it says are you in
support or opposition age and
for New Mexico Taiwan relations
so please go to click here in
support and opposition will give
everyone about ten more seconds
to go ahead and fill out.
Wonderful so that part of the
folks in attendance responded
that they were in support for
folks I said there's where there
was no opposition not so with
that we'll turn to public
comment if you are opposed to
this bill please raise your hand
using that hand icon at the
bottom of your screen.
I'm not seeing anyone populate
in opposition if you are in
support of this bill please
raise your hand to speak.
Seeing any in support it to
speak we did have for support
and that the poll now I'll turn
it over to our panel to our
committee first we have
Representative Fajardo Senator
Arnold thank you madam chair
thank you Representative I'm in
the past.
I do pass on the floor I don't
see any other.
And what we have I don't see any
further discussion with that on
it is seconded by Representative
Ambrose Constanta.
merry can you get injectable.
Representative black.
Yes.
Representative Castellano yes.
Representative Cook.
Yes.
Representative Fajardo yes.
Representative Montoya.
Yes.
Share your Serrato.
Yes with a vote of six in the
affirmative none of the negative
we have a two passed thank you
so much Representative Louis
street all thank you madam chair
and committee members I
appreciate it a wonderful day
and.
Last on the docket we have our
own representatives yes and no
twenty for House memorial seven
Hispanics outdoor recreation and
public lands Representative has
been on Representative you all
have any witnesses you yes madam
chair a witness is going to be
Camilla Simon.
Miss I mean can you just you and
that you raise your hands she's
at the top now merry of the
attendees list Mr Florida to let
the manager.
Believe Mr Gillette that's
already in the past.
I just I'm sorry no worries.
Wonderful thank.
All.
Miss senator so wonderful and Mr
Representative Santa can you
present and house memorial
seven.
Yes thank you madam chair.
This is a little about Edgell.
Our public lands in the people
and wildlife who rely on them
face under protest unprecedented
challenges it shows mission is
to empower and support Hispanics
and Latinos to engage on public
lands and conservation policy
with more than fifty million
Hispanics living in the United
States over six thousand Latinos
elected and appointed officials
we are important stakeholders of
for conservation.
It shows unique role is to
educate empower and create
opportunities for those voice to
be heard.
For these voice to be heard
whether it is fishing in the sun
one river hiking in the song a
crystal mountains hunting in the
sun we spelling or camping in
the casino National Forest
Latinos have been enjoying the
great outdoors for generations
it connects us to our ancestors
and I just.
How we see our future the
mission impounded spending
leaders to engage our
communities in the conservation
of our public lands and their
vision is strong culturally rich
communities connected to nature
and each other madam chair and
owls.
Let my witnesses also from in
this is.
Representative you can director
witnesses who which would you
like to go first I'm I can have
a first Mr Ford edge let down
madam chair districts that the
you like to.
Speak on this more.
For.
Mr to let the you're still muted
at this moment.
Madam maybe our miss Camilla.
Seven yes.
In a yes we can hear you.
Thank you very much I'll be very
brief the madam chair members of
the committee.
Thank you for the opportunity of
allowing us the.
Before you this morning.
Thank you also Representative
discussed the on going one way
up for sponsoring our memorial
the similar moral is being
sponsored by senators post meal.
And the and good sellers.
In the Senate.
With me is the our H. two
executive director of the left
side and.
And the I realize that your time
is short and I would like to
yield my time.
This is Simon for information to
the committee.
And I believe that the as our
subject matter expert the she
can provide you with relevant
information and any questions
that you may have a less thank
you very much.
The search letter miss Simon.
Yes thank you everybody for
having us today thank you madam
chair and committee members and
thank you again to
Representative Castellano and
Representative Montoya for
sponsoring this memorial
I executive director of
Hispanics enjoyed camping
hunting and the outdoors are a
joke for shorts and I want to
just tell you a little bit about
our group at today before we had
considered the memorial so
essential it's a group that
elevates Hispanic leaders voices
increases the visibility of
Hispanics and public lands
policy making and advocacy and
we had our beginnings in New
Mexico back in twenty thirteen
and our vision was to build a
platform to bring culture get
and Sierra which is a love for
the land and sense of belonging
with lands and conservation of
our shared natural resources to
local state and national public
land conservation policy and
advocacy efforts since then
we've grown to be active in five
states impact is also felt at
the federal level.
Hispanics are among the racial
ethnic groups of people who are
disproportionately impacted by
pollution and also cool Act
right at rates greater than non
Hispanic whites to provide
environmental issues like
pollution climate change to be
extremely important yet
Hispanics are also I'm hunger
racial ethnic groups who are
underrepresented in the decision
making processes that affect our
air our water our lands our
health in our communities so it
was created to help close the
gap between under representation
when it comes to decision making
and over representation when it
comes to impact from
environmental harms in many New
Mexicans panics have generations
all connections to the land
water and wildlife and for
generations have stewarded these
resources and passed down
important land based traditions.
We know and believe these
experiences traditions and the
knowledge that come from these
will bring tremendous value to
any decision making process
these but especially when it
comes to conservation of our
natural resources I'm and
Furthermore we believe that
everyone should have equal
access to the benefits of nature
and in order to do that
Hispanics need to be more
robustly involved in decision
making processes around
conservation and environmental
issues so through actual
Hispanic voices are increasingly
part of the conversation about
concerning our lands and waters
we work hard over the course of
five years to help pass a
federal bill that permanently
authorizes and fully funds the
land water conservation fund
which federally provides nine
million dollars annually to
protect parks rivers wildlife
refuges and provides matching
grants for state and local parks
and recreation projects and New
Mexico has received
more than three hundred million
dollars over the course of the
fifty year life of that program
prior to its
we authorization and with it now
being permanently and fully
funded we know that New Mexico
and other states and our nation
will benefit for years to come
today we hope that you'll
support house memorial seven
which is knowledges Act it shows
efforts empowering Hispanic
leaders to engage their
communities and the conservation
of public lands and waters and
it also supports us in the
creation of a new public lands
conservation council which we
see as a formalized network of
Hispanic public lands leaders
with the goal of further
increasing participation and
representation of Hispanics in
conservation policy decision
making.
Thank you.
Thank you I'm and Representative
Alcon yes it is your hands as
you also want to speak on it as
well very briefly thank you.
Madam chair representative
obviously this schedule memorial
is somewhat symbolic as is the
R.
very very important to.
The notion of stewardship you
know it beyond recreation the
hunting to fishing my goal as a
legislature or is to look at
building on the good work of the
senator Heinrich in the great
American outdoors Act and other
policies at that level to drive
our young people all of our
young people across the state.
Into careers that are really
about stewardship about
conservation cleaning the for
just the watersheds these are
viable jobs of the future and
what a beautiful way to empower
youth to a healthful life into
Kerry for these beautiful and
beloved try these units is a
little most important the I
Representative a beautiful
district that's really at least
with the mountains the the spine
of northern in New Mexico more
Espanola through jazz Beckles
these are regions where those
resources are real so I would my
intention is speaking today is
to take this memorial to a place
of.
Policy change and driving young
people into those careerpathways
I yield back madam chair thank
you so much thank you
Representative Montoya now will
go to go to the public again
we'll have a poll that will pop
up on your screen we have about
ten we have twelve answered with
twelve attendees to right now
the poll ask you if you are in
support or oppose house memorial
seven and will get just give us
a moment to get that loaded.
Great should be on your screen
it's are you in support or
opposition of H. M. seven
Hispanics outdoor recreation
public lands and we give you
about ten more seconds to
answer.
Also of the twelve people who
are of the eleven people are
attendance we had seven who all
responded in the affirmative
that they would have percent
support this bill on it so no
turn it over to public comment
if you are in opposition to this
bill please press the raise your
hand button on the bottom of
your screen that little.
At symbol.
Given that a moment.
I'm not seeing anyone raise your
hand to speak in opposition if
you'd like to speak in support
of this bill please press that
button at the very bottom.
Wonderful.
We have a couple folks want to
speak in favor of the bill we do
have to go to the house floor at
eleven so or I will allow folks
to speak about two minutes
actually have one house so
very can you go to move over we
have no and
unless they came over the other
side that what happened no.
yes okay sorry issued with your
server that Mr can't Salazar can
you go ahead and and yet month
meet yourself there is just so
fast I didn't see your happening
will be reserved.
Madam chair members.
Sorry hold on one second Mr
cells are get everyone else to
ensure that your muted thank you
Mr chair that you might be a
needed right now.
I'm sorry Mr cells are can you
continue.
Okay I I'm currently the
director elector National
Wildlife.
Founding member for its.
Strong support on memorial some
of the.
Yes I to
also want to say that it was
done great work in New Mexico we
worked on a wildlife corridor
bills getting passed worked on
clean air issues including
methane regulation that what's
disproportionately affecting the
spandex worked on clean water
issues wherever they affect our
communities so I urge your
support for this bill I think
they've done great work and I
think that are we need to
elevate our voices for spandex
in this work thank you very much
thank you Mr.
And community Romero can you and
yourself.
Good morning madam chair
committee members Camilla Romero
with the New Mexico State Land
Office Land Office stand in
strong support of house memorial
seven because we recognize the
commonality of agile platform
and our mission to preserve the
land for future generations will
be revenue for our beneficiaries
thank you.
Thank you Mr Merrill and so now
I'll bring it over to the
committee thing has a questions
please raise your hand or
comments.
Wonderful Representative
Fajardo.
Thank you madam chair past.
We have to pass on the table for
House memorial seven is their
second.
I second okay wonderful can I'm
very we take the role.
Representative.
Representative black.
What what.
Representative Castellano.
Yes.
Representative Cook.
After.
Representative Cook.
Representative Fajardo.
Yes.
Representative Montoya yes all.
Representative Serrato yes.
We
that role I kind of missed a
couple when a call again
Representative black.
Representative.
For.
For for the checks to the for
the past thank you that
Thank you yes we ended in a vote
of four in the affirmative none
of the negative
that house bill house memorial
seven sex outdoor recreation and
up the lines.
Point of order what what what
tax forms of four or five days
listening to Mary's it for five.
Black to.
What the court room.
What's one more.
You may be full.
What.
Requirements when you know that
you have.
Four zero.
I just want to make sure
All right so we have the we we
have four members that voted no
at thank you Representative part
I I had the same question we
have eight members that are part
of this committee
President present
we need five so called black
because she's on thank you just.
Thank you.
Just one moment.
This call.
Just posted.
So
we do the the can we call and
Representative black again okay.
Representative black.
Yes.
Thank you with thank you
Representative hard on the
everyone for helping out with
that with a vote of five in the
affirmative not in the negative.
The H. at a house memorial seven
is to pass thank you gentlemen.
Share.
If I may I just want to thank
the committee for their support
thank you madam chair.
Thank you everyone will thank
you all for your patience today
and for helping with all of our
work you know we'll be back next
Tuesday and the the chairman
will send out an agenda with
more information but otherwise
we'll see you on about fifteen
minutes.
Hi guys.
I think we can go ahead and and
this meeting.
