The person House Bill fit yes
yes yes okay.
Okay Representative Baca.
Representative.
Representative black.
Your.
Okay thank.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Rubio here
Representative.
Representative Representative.
Welcome I don't.
Madam chair representative.
Here.
More more.
Yes Representative yes yes okay
so we were missing I haven't
heard from them okay.
I want to get money the right
button which is the normal thing
in today's world.
Motion the right button.
Okay let's go ahead
Representative Anderson.
Well first of all let me a yes.
Representative.
Welcome are a new member
representative directors.
Welcome to do a house labor
Military and Veterans Affairs
Committee
I'll give you a leg in a couple
of minutes to introduce
yourself.
Representative delacruz.
Good afternoon everyone.
Present.
Hey can you help with that and
New just introduce yourself to
the members of the body.
Thank you chairman.
Art De La Cruz I was appointed
yesterday today is drinking the
water from a fire hose I'm
enjoying being with all of you
and I'm proud to be part of this
committee as well chairman and
members.
Thank you thank you I guess
we'll let your experience the
Representative you had a couple
of months and.
and previously didn't.
I tell everybody I have five
minutes I didn't okay also
that's a lot more than I did
when I first started I heard I
would thank you.
Okay up let's go to
Representative Anderson you are
here I and I know of heard your
voice so whenever you're ready
Representative the floor is
yours.
Thank you Mr chairman
Mr chairman I realize we've all
just come off a long four
sessions.
but none the less I want to take
a few minutes and visit about
House Bill.
Fifty for those that are on the
committee and just looking I I
find page eight to be the most
interesting
page of describing of house bill
fifty Mr Chairman start by
simply saying of some confusion
perhaps between our house bill
fifty and house bill one all I.
Representative Rehm is a sponsor
of house bill fifty and I too am
a sponsor of house bill one of
five.
in short I'm not going to steal
Representative reams under on
one oh five but I am going to
clarify that that house bill
fifty as you will hear this
afternoon is not is not a parent
endorsed bill it's not and I
pocket endorsed bill and it's
not a governor's bill I did
receive a message from of the
poor poor up it allowing the
introduction of house bill fifty
house bill fifty is all hair on
return to work.
House bill one of five years for
law enforcement so you can see
where I go when I say house bill
fifty actually accomplishes what
one oh five does and more and
today I want to talk to you I
could about the and more.
Mr Chairman it became very clear
to me throughout the interim
that the vacancy rate the lack
of workforce was not just a
sentiment of Santa Fe phenomena.
Our curry county New Mexico had
eighty vacancies and and really
virtually no applicants no
qualified applicants this was
true there thirty three counties
and it was true all across New
Mexico the municipal county or
state.
So Mr chairman I I I brought
myself well we must figure out a
way to open up New Mexico's
workforce make it larger after
all work on the edge of a budget
that passed the house today
House Bill to and that was eight
billion four hundred seventy
million dollars and it just has
tremendous of opportunity he had
for those who want to join New
Mexico's workforce which is
deficient we suffer from high
unemployment rate and yet help
wanted signs are everywhere we
read national magazines
reporting some but I'm gonna
make COVID great resignation.
And all of this adds up to.
Not enough.
Nurses in our hospitals not
enough doctors not enough
policemen on our street law
enforcement fireman Mr chairman
the list goes on and on.
So it became clear to me one of
the ways we could look to grow
New Mexico's workforce is to
open up.
Employment to pera retirees.
All parent retirees under under
the current arrangement in my
mind those simpler those
retirees are face a penalty on
their reemployment.
R. if they want to go return to
work so this bill changes that
panel after all these public
employees.
Bill their obligation under the
their pension contract with the
state out of the city.
And it is only fair that if they
choose to return to work at this
time where we are woefully
deficient in many areas of our
workforce that they not suffer
the penalty of of not receiving
their earned retirement so in so
many words.
These employees can come back to
work.
Receive their earned pension.
And during that work period they
can.
Hey and to the all right that
we're the retirement the same
way every other employee does
and their employer pays in the
same way.
But they were C. no.
No benefit from that and and I'm
not gonna argue this afternoon
the merits of that I am simply
going to say that is that right
all and that is you are not
penalized in your retirement and
yes your employer and the
employee will contribute during
this period of time of returning
to work.
I think that is critical because
it is that very component that
ensures that the pair of pension
bonds will be helpful and
actually they will be more than
hell hole hole they will.
They will gain.
That there is no way you can
frame house bill fifty as
hurting the the solvency of our
of our important public pension
funds so Mr chairman it in it
says
that.
If you return to work the
circumstances the salary the
compensation the job title the
whatever it is is between you
and your employer is it we're
not we're not saying you can't
you must return to the work you
have anything like that we're
saying to a retired law
enforcement officer if you just
want to work half time you will
not be penalized you will you
can return to work and as you
can see on page eight there are
some stipulations that I will go
through quickly and one is.
Section J. online for on page
eight we talk about you have to
retired honor before December
thirty one two thousand twenty
one you have to you can't
continue to draw your pension
including a cost of living
adjustment if awarded.
You're not to become a member.
During the period of subsequent
employment meeting your status
in peril does not change even
though you have returned to work
retired member does not accrue
service credit any portion of
the parent of subsequent
employment and up above and J.
we talk about three years thirty
six months either consecutive or
non consecutive and I choose
what why is that and Mr chairman
that is simply because we hope
that this workforce deficiency
is not something that is going
to last forever so thirty six
months gives us ample time to
put an experienced return to
work Aaron played in curry
county New Mexico running their
wastewater treatment plant.
it allows us to put a retired
judge in Dona ana can't I mean a
retired nurse in Dona ana county
back on the floor doing the work
that she is trained educated and
experienced in doing this list
goes on and.
All in all with the our.
Workforce.
I think that anything else is
is.
It's really unfair to to to a
retiree who says you know if
they don't.
My retirement.
I'm gonna go down and and see if
they need me down there and all
work I'd like to work.
So this is a simple idea return
to work it affects every member
of parent who has retired before
December thirty first two
thousand twenty one.
And
I just do I think it's a it's a
solution in and of itself.
For New Mexico's workforce
issues of course not but I do
think it will do it will help
and companion bill carried by
one of my Sanchez joined here on
is dealing with the E. R. B. and
the important teachers that are
needed in the classroom so this
is a an effort to return to work
not just for pero para and the
R. B. they have to be separate
bills for one of those lawyer
reasons but nonetheless Mr
chairman I am really excited to
present this this afternoon
all I want to go back and say
about all these non endorsements
Mr chair real quick.
Hi I really don't I've never
understood the pair of non
endorsement the I. park was
simply I I I spent the summer on
the I. park which would
Representative Rehm and his bill
was ready for the last meeting
and mine was here's was endorsed
that will be of the next bill is
endorsed by I part mine is not
up Michelle Lujan our good
governor I believe of years is
supported but has made clear
that it is not to be considered
a governor's bills but yes you
will get a message to bring this
issue before the legislature
that Mr Chairman is what we're
doing today and I think
I think I'm probably done with
my kind of rambling introduction
on this but it's been a long day
Mr chairman so I think I should
go to let those who come to
support oppose have there have
their shot at house bill fifty.
You guys yet do you have
anything to add thank you Mr
chairman of for the opportunity
to be here thanks for your in
the bill yes they do Mr
chairman.
The benefits of this bill will
be number one of the work force
is really done in the state of
New Mexico number cool if you're
a police officer inundate
District Court right any
capacity a new hire new police
officer you have to retrain him
the police officer or I want to
go back work our off already
trained and that pulls through
Mr chairman for any position in
the state of New Mexico.
The people want to go back if
you want if they choose to go
back to that particular job that
they had before they are already
trained so that would be no all
normal and what it cost to the
employer would do anybody else
and if I may Mister of German on
page two of the physical impact
board it is payroll check there
are like the to be the positive
impact the pension fund as a
result of it has been on house
bill fifty there are two reasons
for this during the reemployment
returned to work employees will
pay normal non refundable
contribution to the fund will
not receive any additional
benefit to them I'm not going to
go to the next one Mr Chairman
you're just point that I want to
put out there.
Representative Anderson pretty
well covered everything that the
these on the bill and this is to
me it's a win win for the
employer and it's a win win for
the employees that want to work
and no one to be taken away from
them Mr chairman of with that we
stand for questions.
Thank you Sir with that that
Madam secretary do we have the
ability to do the full.
Representative it does all from
the bottom but I don't know are
all.
Let me ask Miss now okay what
was that.
Mr Chairman while we're waiting
I apologize to representative
Garcia because he too is an
important part of bringing this
bill forward in this legislative
session so I appreciate very
much his comments and we're
looking forward to hearing of
the remarks in question.
Look.
That's okay we can live without
a well I.
I.
Just something that for
curiosity purposes what I would
like to do that at this time.
Excuse me is one of the attendee
list there are.
I want those people.
Who are in favor of the bill
that want to speak to raise
their head and those that are in
favor of the bill I want to
speak to raise their hand and
then I will call on.
I will.
Approximately.
Approximately two minutes.
To do this field and
That should be enough I think so
with that in mind I have one
hand raised the.
Representative did hear me right
those in favor of the bill.
Raise your hand and the.
Without all start with Mister
mark Moran.
Mark just a new just twelve.
Thank you Mr Chairman can you
hear me.
Thank you for your user.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee mark Duran
Representative the City of Santa
Fe and we would like to speak
and I do this also on behalf of
more whatever.
In support of house bill fifty
Mr chairman a.
First of all let me just say
that
we need a solution to of the
labor shortage that we are
experiencing and municipalities
and counties.
and and your everyone knows
what's going on in regard to
comment and the labor shortages.
So the next it's what solution
that is best and we understand
there's a number of solutions
out there and we appreciate of
those efforts but the reason we
support house bill fifty is
because of a couple of things
first the thirty six month
component in it of where there's
a limit to the amount of months
that are returned he can work as
a return to work employee is
very important because one of
the things we experience with
past policies of it was the
disruption to normal attrition
patterns and career paths.
with having this limitation that
seems to address this issue in a
very unique way which we
appreciate also in many cases we
need specialists and specialized
employees so the idea that any
other ideas would have only
entry level and I want to be
respectful to Representative
Rehm and I know he has another
bill sometimes and and often
times we need specialists in
these areas and so we think it's
a very well crafted bill it's a
huge need that we have Mr
chairman and members the
committee and so we stand and
support of house bill fifty and
would like to thank the sponsors
for bringing the bill forward
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you let me remember I
always forget that was that we
knew that I knew but not would
do us somebody promote the
Representative last us to that
list.
That is not there on the
attendees waving his hand that
we.
Can we do that.
Representative I can.
You did.
But I think that it would raise
the federal.
Limited these.
Two hundred.
Mr chair sometimes for some
reason it takes a little while
you have to try multiple times
so I've been trying.
So I'm trying get him promoted
but.
Using this whole year yes.
Your chair and he also has to
accept the invite so I don't
know if he's there.
Okay so.
Will not go ahead the state will
go to the back to the.
In the list and that this I will
ask those in opposition to the
legislation to raise your hand.
Again I will give you a couple
of minutes each.
And
With that in mind let's go ahead
and start with the.
I'll jump shot.
John are you there.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee hi John Lipschutz
with the New Mexico federation
of labor are we very I and I'll
briefly just to speak on both
house bill fifty and one of five
they are very closely related we
are very appreciative of the
situation that we're in in which
all the sponsors are bringing up
these two measures however I did
want to our first state that
unfortunately we respectfully
oppose both of these bills and I
think are two reasons are to
unintended consequences that
could develop from these bills
one of which is bringing a
retired members back into the
work force.
Could have a potential negative
effect on current workers who
are looking to advance in their
jobs I know that to the next
bill that you're going to hear
house bill one of five tries to
address that problem but it
doesn't do it quite affectively
enough in itself there could
certainly be a morale issue
involved with a lot of the
workers that are currently
working in these positions and
then second by bringing I
retired members back into the
workforce even for three years
you are basically kicking the
can down the road which could
lead to an even bigger workforce
shortage in three years you are
not filling these positions with
new workers instead with workers
who are coming back who will
then ultimately retire again
adding more strain to our
already depleted workforce so
these are just two of the
potential unintended
consequences but again we
understand that this is a
problem but we just very
respectfully oppose both of
these measures thank you.
She will be.
Okay can you hear me Sir Mr
Chairman.
I can hear you Sir good
afternoon chairman and committee
members thank you so much for
the opportunity of the
Albuquerque police officers
association is opposed to this
legislation we're a little bit
frustrated that we've had
attrition problems and vacancy
problems in the state of New
Mexico for several years long
before COVID and yet time and
time again every single year
we're back to the same tired
concept of double dipping double
dipping is personally as a
police officer has exacerbated
staffing woes and staffing
problems in our police
department for a great deal of
time what happens is management
becomes lazy because of for all
of the P. points that that R.
Sanchez talked about we don't
have to train them we don't have
to pay them the state of New
Mexico is not going to be able
to or have to market or stay
competitive in the job market to
actually fix the problem we're
just going to depend on retirees
and we're gonna have my pension
that I'm working for right now
give them a seventy percent pay
increase to do the same job that
they just retired from so it is
so frustrating that there are so
many great things about this
state we have one of the best
pension systems in the country
we're not marketing ourselves
we're not competing in the
region of the southwestern
region of the United States
because every single year
literally for the last ten years
we've been fighting this
particular concept hoping that
we could get down the road of
being a little bit of using some
ingenuity to try to market New
Mexico and fix this problem this
is kicking the can down the road
this brings back problems of
yesterday to exacerbate today's
problems tomorrow it is
absolutely reckless to be
bringing back double dipping and
I know a lot of folks caller
return to work bless our
retirees they did a good job
while they were here but the
concept of our pension if I can
have the time or if I still have
time let's talk about how it
negatively affects the Brazilian
tire pension we're changing the
retirement behavior for the.
Entire system some people work
longer than others to get better
benefits out of their retirement
unless you have double dipping
and I can do the same job for
the rest of my life for a
seventy percent wage increase
well of a seventy percent wage
increase fixes the problem
where's the money let's pay
seventy percent more in policing
this is a twenty year retirement
in the you can you imagine if
the United States military I saw
the representative with the
United States Marine Corps
placard behind him was dependent
on retirees to fix their
staffing woes in the military
absolutely not that's not
beneficial for the country
that's not beneficial for
anybody double dipping is not
beneficial for New Mexico thank
you so much for the opportunity
please vote no on this this does
not help police departments in
this state whatsoever Hey even
though you at ninety miles an
hour used to more than two
minutes I just tried.
Mr Carter Bundy.
Mr Chairman.
Again here not in clear Sir the
on button just came up Mr
chairman members of the
committee thank you so much for
your time this is Carter Bundy
with asked me we want to thank
the sponsors Representative
Anderson representative Garcia
and the other Sanchez on both
these bills we do appreciate
that they understand that we
have an understaffing problem
nobody appreciates that more
than are members who would be
affected by every part of this
bill because as the sponsor
mention this applies to all
parenteral sections all parents
borders all period job
classifications.
One of the main reasons we
oppose this is because it really
does act as wage suppression
tool using a PED for example
because we all know that that
does drive a lot of this
conversation if they have two
hundred vacancies and they can
fill it because parent is
effectively supplementing
payroll they never will change
their pay structure they have no
incentive to move anyone up and
look if I were mayor or county
commissioner I would be asking
you to support this to if I can
get her to pay my payroll
instead of trying to allocate my
budget as the citizens best need
I would take that in a heartbeat
nor do I blame anyone who tries
to double dip or return to work
and keep both a pension and
paycheck but the reality is this
keeps wages down it absolutely
doesn't just simple supply and
demand problem where if you can
fill your spots with paramount
E. instead of actually paying
them what they're worth you will
do it so that's our first major
problem with it a second problem
with it and I'll save the entry
level discussion for later this
bill doesn't have an entry level
flaws and what we have found out
and this isn't hypothetical this
really happened when we had
double dipping from two thousand
four two thousand ten what
happens is as soon as they're in
the door whether they're hired
entry level or the get hired two
out of higher a position they
apply for those spots and they
took in a previous case they
took a PED to the EEOC equal
employment opportunity
commission and said it's age
discrimination not to give us
these jobs not the desk jobs
number management jobs aren't
important but that's not where
the real short staffing is
happening it's on the front
lines so this bill makes it wide
open to just inflate all of our
upper management which actually
makes it harder to have the
money to hire your frontline
workers there are a number of
other problems with this but I
know I'm up against by two
minutes we urge you to oppose
the.
S. and I'll gladly talk about
the entry level closets in one
of five in a little bit thank
you so much.
Mr Josh shuttle Anders
Mr Anderson are you ready to go
ask you.
Can you.
Can you hear me.
Welcome back to you okay.
I will go to the Mr Richter
he'll.
Thank you Mr chair can hear me.
Yes Sir.
Thank you Mr chairman a greater
hill with the P. R. A. do want
to say that the board does not
support this for all the reasons
that have already been stated I
do want to thank the sponsor
when he brought this idea up
during the interim committee he
did ask for a feedback from
peril which again incorporate to
the into this bill so I do
appreciate that from him but Mr
chairman the paracord does
oppose this and I will just stay
on the line if there are any
questions thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Mr justice Hayden
the dust containing.
All right Mister chair can you
hear me I can hear you Sir thank
you Mr chair make thank you
committee members I am adjusting
should be present the
Albuquerque area firefighters
representing over nine hundred
members in the Albuquerque area
we believe that this is a wrong
wrong measure for the citizens
of New Mexico for the workers of
New Mexico we think it's wrong
that this country in the state
of New Mexico are changing
requirements for employment
whether it's age requirement to
drive eighteen wheelers are
allowing Karia retirees to to
work return to work.
we're sorry we were turned up
more retirees to return to
public service careers all
because.
They refused to pay workers a
fair wage the way we open New
Mexico employment is to pay
workers of New Mexico a fair
wage the state is trying to use
para as a way of keeping wages
Stifel New Mexico has enough
citizens to build these careers
that we need filled so
desperately the way we open New
Mexico employment is to pay
workers of New Mexico a fair
wage I FF two forty board does
not support Senate bill fifty
four Senate bill one of five the
idea of thinking that you can
have firefighters retired for
any amount of time and then
asking them to come back to work
is not obtainable it takes daily
training for our workers for
their whole twenty year career
were out there every single
shift whether it's training are
doing the job every day to be
gone for any amount of time you
will be behind the eight ball
every single time so we're
asking you to not support
Senator fifty or Senate bill one
of five thank you for your time.
Thank you they were out of.
Can you hear me Mr.
Thank you Mr.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and members of the committee my
name is Vince Alvarado I am the
president of the New Mexico
federation of labor house bill
fifty public employees returning
to work this is a double dipping
at as a wage suppression tool
double dipping compromises
payroll solvency and it hurts
frontline staff being this is
extremely unpopular with the
public and endangers the long
term public support for pensions
for the reasons stated before me
please oppose house bill fifty
and house bill one oh I would
support a renewable and thank
you for your time.
Thank you Sir
Josh you will try again just
does.
Sorry about that Mr chairman
members of the committee Josh
Anderson also with asked me I
will just echo the comments made
before and of course encourage
the the committee to oppose this
bill and instead let's let's
focus on our current workers in
our future workers to recruit
and retain and and pay our
workers a decent wage and not go
down the road of bringing
retired public employees back to
work thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Sir okay I didn't miss
anybody.
They would do this later on I
find out I missed somebody's
going to give us a couple of
seconds here okay your time's up
I guess.
I didn't miss anybody let's go
to the committee now at this
time of first follow back to the
sponsor on Representative
Anderson would you like to add
or subtract from anything at
this time.
Madam if I could and and I would
invite representative Garcia to
comment as well Mr Chairman.
The people who sent me to Santa
Fe.
Want fireman.
Putting out fires in New Mexico
they want policemen on the
streets helping to reduce crime
they want nurses in their
hospitals and not hospitals that
have wings shut down because of
insufficient staffing.
This workforce shortage is route
New Mexico this is not a
permanent.
Solution nor.
Some in run on wage suppression
this is about getting workers
into jobs where New Mexicans are
expecting these good the
services to be delivered so
Mister chairman I really object
to some of the ideas that have
come for because I just think
they don't understand what it
means when you have a hundred
and twenty million dollar
wastewater plant run by a
seventeen year old at two AM in
the morning whose entree and
that person is is very close to
telling people in a New Mexico
community they can't push report
toilets from eight AM from eight
o'clock at night till eight in
the morning I think that we've
got to bring workforce today and
this is one of the ways it is a
three year solution it's not a
permanent solution and yes to do
the same top decisions have to
be made thank you Mr Chairman
representative Garcia.
Thank you Mr chairman if I may
all Representative Anderson
pretty well hit double the bill
on the head this is not a
permanent solution which trying
to fix what we have with
basin is right now no matter
where you go out there the help
wanted sign these positions are
getting filled I think the state
right now is about ninety
percent vacancy rate.
If I'm not mistaken if I am
mistaken please correct me and
back to what we're talking about
we're not trying to take
anything from anybody we're
trying to fix the problem right
now this is not a permanent fix
but COVID came around and caused
this problem need to address it
and in three years hopefully
we'll be in good standing and
everything will be alright thank
you Mr chairman.
Thank you okay with that I think
I'm ready to go to the committee
is that right Mr Representative
Anderson.
Yes Mr chairman we're ready for
questions okay I'll start with
the Representative black.
Thank you Mr chairman
And thank you Representative for
bringing this bill I'm actually
a co sponsor on the next bill so
I'll leave some of my my topics
for that but I do want to point
out the general public I am a
County.
I'm employee I am currently
impairments.
What we have seen in in the
local government area
over the last year as as
Representative Anderson
representative Garcia point out
we're having a huge.
That's a set of applications I'm
and so the way parent currently
sits if you have a law
enforcement officer that retires
after twenty years of service
let's say you go through the
training and starts.
When he's nineteen years older
than twenty years he's thirty
nine years old well the we
current law as written if that
officer wanted to go we a
resource school resource officer
currently he could not do that
without.
But in his retirement aside and
going back in the workforce I'm
he could go and work for the
parts department and drive a lot
more if that's what he wanted to
do so I'm I think that this is a
valuable
Tool that for the the local
governments my city currently
right now stand has eighty
vacancies my County has I I'm
not even sure how much our
detention center we can't get
detention officers so I I think
this is a valuable way to
hopefully get maybe some people
to do the jobs are.
Our communities there eighteen
we're not growing our own so yes
this may be a bandaid on a
temporary solution but I I think
it will address what we've got
going on right now down at the
local level and our local
communities that that need that
I'm not that you know the big
cities with the unions and they
they may have a younger
population we but but I do think
it is it is a it is a valuable
thing so that I just want to
share that with the committee Mr
chairman so thank you.
Thank you Representative Rubio.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
committee members thank you
Representative Anderson and
Representative Garcia I really
appreciate you all working on
this especially because I know
for both bills there's been
significant effort in the
interim and so I I certainly
appreciate the process that you
all have had to go through to
get this year I did have a visit
with Representative Anderson on
the for a couple days ago so we
have spoke about this issue and
and I know that it's an issue
that's really important to him I
think for me at this.
And
I'm I'm I did.
Just.
The confused a little bit about
why we're here because.
I just want to remind everyone
that what we're experiencing
right now in terms of this issue
of understaffing is a long term
consequence that we have all
been a part of not paying
competitive wages we have not
been good at providing
competitive benefit.
We have not worked as hard to in
people that are not working
right now or or we're facing
this issue of being understaffed
it's because of the bitter
consequences of us not making
those investments in the past I
understand I really do that
we're trying to address this
issue but.
For it and it's it's been said
already it's it's short term and
it's been said already as well
that I mean I wasn't here during
that that time period but when
the legislature repealed this
whole process it was done so
with the sixty five three both
back in twenty ten so it's not
even like a bipartisan issue
this is this is a significant
issue where people do not
believe that this kind of effort
actually addresses long term of
this long term issue and so
I appreciate everybody for
bringing this legislation
forward and and I don't want to
be redundant about saying this
again and for the next bill but
I I don't I can't support either
piece of legislation at this
time again I want to remind
everyone.
What what you all are bringing
up right now are direct
consequences of us not investing
in workers and ours and our
state employees well before this
we need to think about
competitive wages we need to
think about competitive benefits
we need to think about how do we
improve the environment in which
these folks are working in once
we address those three things
those three things in a number
of other issues then we won't
have this problem but until we
tackle that these are the kind
of short term solution started
keeping brought up and I'm and I
don't think that that's
sufficient for the long term
goals that we're trying to
accomplish here in the
legislature and so with that
I'll leave it there thank you
Representative I appreciate you
all bring this forward but I
cannot support this today.
Thank you Representative Garcia.
Thank you.
In my chairman.
And
Representative Anderson and
Garcia
You know.
Chairman
I empathize fully.
With that are.
With the Sanchez.
In terms of what they're trying
to to do.
And
I've been at this
Return to work.
Efforts done from the very get
go.
mainly because Mr chair.
I have the keen.
Of our double dipping.
My district.
Tell you the story you know what
really prompted me to really
look at this question from from
the very get go.
There was this our employee a
high ranking.
In this up again to do my
district.
he was pulling down a salary of
a hundred fifty to a hundred
seventy thousand.
He decided to step down.
And retire.
Mr chair.
And back then you know you could
do that like within the ninety
day period thirty day period you
know whatever the statue was
back then it wasn't as one year
wait it was it was like a quick
fix.
And so
he you you he went on the return
to work.
A program.
came back at a Saint at the same
position at can I get the same
position because they held that
position open for him.
So he's going down that a
hundred fifty hundred seventy.
then the benefit kicks in.
And on top of that.
It can collected unused sick
leave and come time so so
package came up pretty close to
four hundred thousand.
And and you can see why we're so
concerned.
And
And so Mister chair so what I
tried to do is to.
Have a common sense approach to
this return to work considering
the issues Representative
Anderson and Harry are
addressing.
So I just propose I started
proposing.
Kind of an alternative to vote
and that return to work
practice.
What was the more concentrated
on more directed a more focused
their efforts for chair.
And that was our goal that's our
return to work.
But that's where the need is
most.
Because back then we were going
full speed ahead Mr chair with
the return to work where were
these double dip there's
nothing.
Santa Fe metro area the will get
the metro area the last because
of natural area.
That's for ninety percent of the
double dippers are at.
You are so I won't be so
legislation that said this
spring but does not work back.
The where.
We given Senate.
Two workers to work in rural New
Mexico.
Because that's where the jobs
were more crucial in terms of
feeling.
You know the solid waste.
No working at that so that waste
plant and Representative on.
Or harms or demi.
You know
Garcia short supply but then in
the Santa Fe metro area but
could be a metro area.
You know they're they're coming
out of the cracks in terms.
You know the so that waste the
technicians you know and
so I had suggests that.
Doing return to work for
counties under forty five
thousand in population.
And then just about he's under
twenty.
Five thousand.
And that would focus return to
work in rural New Mexico.
And not in these concentrated
urban areas.
You know and and actually that
that just didn't have by and.
And and now we're not even I
think at that point where we can
come close to even.
Recommending that.
Many because of the issue with
solvency in the para Fund you
know and we did that.
That temporary fix in the.
The twenty twenty legislation
with Senate bill seventy two we
made some really good.
amendments.
The gonna keep.
At the para Fund afloat.
Into our.
gonna hit the solvency figure at
about a hundred seventy five
million.
we did in fusion of fifty
million dollars.
we were shooting for seventy
five million but we were only
able to capture some fifty
million of it.
And so I really empathize with.
You know what the Sanchez.
Want to have an open and that
type of initiative just is going
to.
I feel
rendus impact on the solvency of
the fund.
And again gonna create those
dilemmas within the workforce
that we saw when we turn to work
was going full speed ahead
between those years of two
hundred three two I mean between
two thousand three two thousand
eleven somewhere in there and
You know but but but my my heart
is is with.
The Sanchez in terms of what
they're trying to do because
they are addressing that that
concentration of the need.
Is more prevalent in these rural
communities you know and
but unfortunately the way that
are that the peril Fund is
fluctuating.
And going through.
Exemplos.
To bring return to work back at
this juncture.
I think it's suicidal and not
really kind of a step up in
terms of trying to keep that
fund flow and eating in the
road away solvency factor.
So
Mr chairman thank you very much.
Thank you Sir all Representative
the the approved.
Thank you chairman.
I I'll be candid I've had the I
haven't had on an awful long
time to look at these bills and
I'm on this committee at this
time.
I propose double dipping in
concept I think I think it's a
terrible idea to have people
double dip particularly and
management levels or any
management level.
On the other hand I sympathize
having been a former county
commissioner with the difficulty
of filling some positions are
particularly around jails Hey I
am in our case it Bernalillo
county's NBC.
I also understand that sometimes
it can be difficult to fill law
enforcement positions as well.
I think the the larger failure
has been that we have not paid
certain professions the money
that's necessary to keep
Brittain promote
and and draw people into certain
feels so I'm in a in a difficult
position here because having
been a former county
commissioner having seen the
difficulties that M. D. C. and
and how hard it is you know it's
tough because I I I think it's
really more of a pay issue than
it is people coming back on the
other hand.
Having a bit of flexibility to
bring some of some folks back
that would be interested.
For those slivers of of areas
that are necessary for public
safety for public health.
R. and so I I think I have this
is more of a question is a bit
of a statement and a question
saying plan German and maybe the
members can help enlighten me.
Is there a way to create.
Solid guard rails that one allow
in difficult situations the
ability to bring some people
back that are willing to come
back in those key professions
were municipalities and groups
county governments are having
difficulty filling positions.
And and so I I I see both sides
of this for our.
Not supporting double dipping in
concept in general so if
somebody could help me with that
I would really appreciate it I
noticed two bills under
consideration and I read the
bills I've written was quickly
as I could while we've been
sitting here so somebody could
help me with that I would
greatly appreciate it.
Mr Chairman if I could
Representative first of all
welcome we welcome you to the
New Mexico house representatives
you couldn't come on a more
challenging first day with that
record.
Thank you Mr balanced budget the
history of the state.
Mr Chairman representative of
what I hear the word guard rails
I think okay great concept of I
understand your point I to agree
with you on double dipping it
his way a decade ago I would
have said no way.
Circumstances have changed and
part of this pandemic part of
this is
the great resignation part of it
is New Mexico didn't grow the
last ten years.
all of these factors.
Contribute to workforce
efficiency.
so guardrails I think well
that's what the next bill does
it only addresses law
enforcement where there is
incredible the we see that our
cat image without enough
of students we we we see our our
sheriff's department so police
departments are deficient so I
think that the idea that there
may be a retiree out there
willing to return to work
perhaps because he recognizes.
The crime problem in Albuquerque
or Roswell.
Hatch because he sees that his
former employer is is struggling
not in that you're not in the
career path he did but over here
and he's willing to go to
assume a parent employer and say
I'm willing to return to work
full time have time he knows
when he doesn't he's going to
pay in to the pension again that
is critical those pension
solvency and not receive added
benefits.
He is going to enjoy his hard
earned pension benefits and
they're going to continue he
will not be penalized for
returning to work so all of
these add up to I and I don't
pretend that this is a single
soul solution I simply say that
I overcome my.
This white for double dipping as
others have praised it to.
To we've got to get nurses in
our hospitals we've got to get a
policeman on our streets are we
can't.
On and on I I think of of point
made earlier and I think you
can't draft people to live in
Clovis or Eunice New Mexico.
I think representative Garcia
got.
lived through a draft period of
by the United States Marine
Corps we we can't do that we
enjoyed our budget plans and
just regular centers and so the
idea that we're gonna build our
military with retirees I think
good grief we'll have a draft
before we do that so I wonder
about I think guardrails are
troublesome however there are a
family of
There are different.
Tions within Iraq and perhaps
they could.
We utilize some guard rail sense
which is the case in the next
bill of law enforcement but the
truth is I'm I'm I'm probably
gonna say now I don't think
guard rails is installation I
think this is a three year fixed
your workforce deficiency that
is in desperate need of
attention and this is only the
only way I can think of and I
listen to opposition and know
what you got a better idea so
that's my point Mr.
Representative thank you.
Representative Garcia has
anything to add please do so now
Mr chairman if I may of Mr
like to welcome to the house of
representatives I know who you
are I've talked to before
thank Representative matters
should consider Mr Chairman.
But in favor of double dipping
you know I have a prison
facility in requests matter fact
that three of them.
Yet oh now.
The.
Thank you right there is so
great we're putting our regards
it they're in jeopardy of
getting harm you know all these
positions need to be filled and.
This bill is not fixed by no
means it's a three year fix
three years from now maybe we
can address all the issues that
have been brought up as to by
far as paid or budget but for
right now we're in bad shape all
throughout the whole state you
know we need to have doctors
that are in our in our hospital
we're not dogs Mr to but nurses
on the hospital the police
officer on our streets regards
that are entered jail facilities
and if we don't do something
we're gonna have a bigger
problem when somebody gets hurt
or something for not having his
vision staff than Mr understood
now you hit it right on what
you're saying somebody mention
about the military get in your
plus with all.
We retires that'll never happen
you know that's that's federal
stuff in no we're not I'm not
gonna just able to go back in
and you're back in the military
doesn't happen that way
the public I'm feel better since
the Representative advantage
that Mr chair.
What happens with the brought
back on.
With that in the Representative
Cruz I hope that answers so many
questions.
Tend to have the floor.
We have the floor.
Thank you chairman.
It is helpful I I appreciate the
the dialogue and the information
did I understand that
Representative Burciaga I
understand that there is a
sunset clause by here three
years or to your correctly.
Yes Sir there is a three year a.
If you go back to where kids can
only The New three years.
Mr Chairman representative
Garcia.
So.
I which bill are we talking
about or is it in both bills
because I I didn't quite catch
up in the bills.
Done on house bill fifty
Representative I understand you
want to touch another bill
chief.
Thank you Representative Garcia
yes Sir that is one of the
differences between the two
bills and so the description of
the thirty six months either
consecutive or non consecutive
years in house bill fifty all
right I believe.
Mr Chairman.
You may be on mute all right
Sir.
Thank you
Where is the the the sunset
period from this from the
signing orders or something
built into the bill.
Assuming the governor signed
thank you I'm gonna take the
swing at that of Representative
I believe it is from the date of
employment that
That that period would run for
that I I think I'm trying to
understand I don't think I'm
going to answer your question
accurately R. because
I interpreted a couple different
ways but it is of the thirty six
months are full time part time
and importantly remember the
return to work reemployment is
between a willing employee and a
willing employer and that gets
to wage hours budget
responsibilities of.
Workstation I mean I think that
that's what I think is often
lost because I hear about past.
Applications with double dipping
horrible horrible situations
that and that is certainly what
we're trying to avoid indicates
to the retirement date being
twelve thirty one two thousand
and twenty one.
so R. it is for the retired
workers within para who are
willing and want to return to
work they don't have to do the
same job and all those sorts of
things what the employer needs
and the employee agrees to our
so are.
I think there's a great need and
I don't hear any solutions and
the people sent me really
Connick specter a nurse to be on
the floor well when their son is
in the hospital overnight that
that they just don't put a sign
up saying call us in the morning
thank you.
Mr Chairman.
For clarification the sunset
period is for the employment not
for the program.
I'm here that I'm going I was to
break Representative you might
ask me that because I'm not
going to have a really good
answer for that I believe it is
for the period of employment of
and so the sunset itself saying
that this
It would I guess it would would
not sunset on the of
reemployment of a a retired
person willing to return to
work.
Is what is the way I'm gonna
leave it today.
One more question Mr chairman.
The there in H. B. fifty.
There is mention of thirty six
months.
At the back of the bill can
somebody clarify that formed yes
I'd be happy to that thirty six
months is either consecutive or
non consecutive and specifically
addresses the period of time in
which a retired para.
Member of could go back to work
to a parent employer are period
in other words if this works it
has a re visited at a future
date by the New Mexico
legislature.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman I have no
more questions thank you
Representative.
Thank you Sir.
I have I have the next one I'm
the wrong side.
Representative but.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you
In terms of this bill
I got it I got to go a couple
things that I've got a really
that I'm having struggle I'm
struggling with this
Because you know earlier today
want to thank my colleagues for
the the work that they did on
the the large bill that was
passed.
As far as to properly fund us
and I I want to emphasize that
you know.
We can do better than just fund
these positions we also have our
support and I think that's the
important thing about it is that
we need to support.
All all those intended groups or
whether police officers are our
officers our first responders
and so I you know I think that a
lot of this problem was said by
one of my colleagues earlier
that part of the problem is.
The post what you're.
The other thing that I struggle
with is how.
We have through for those who
have actually chose to stay with
us I mean that's important piece
about that as well that you know
for those folks that have chosen
to stay with us despite this.
You know that we have to
excavate acknowledges.
Our.
So I I really I really do I know
that we have a shortage here but
you know one of the things that
also fortunate during the
discussion there is about the
matter public safety and health
for the police officers in these
folks that are in firefighters
of this advised by.
Missing in our state not even
for a short period of time to
assume that they can go into the
you know the same of position or
fill the same position or even
do the same task is I did.
Is a little bit.
With that I think is of the
gentleman the pharmacist it may
not actually be
possible.
So I've got I've got to really
tell you that I'm really
struggling this I know that we
have a report of these shortage
of individuals and people to
fill positions but I think that
we if we want to if you want to
keep people good people here and
we say that we have to properly
fund them and support them which
I think of the bill that was
passed today hopefully does not
but as a community we've got to
just put them just with more
than dollars we've got to
support them with our policies
and the way that we we reach out
to these folks so those are my
those are not a strict question
but it's something that I think
that we need to bring out there
that you know I struggle with
this I know that we're short.
My fear is that.
By by doing something like this
it may actually make our
problems worse and it would
definitely could undermine what
we're trying to do is make you
make our state in our
communities safer thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you Sir Representative
that myself.
Thank you Mr chair
representative thank you so much
for this legislation so I'm
gonna ask a few questions.
Get it and I was I'm sorry Mr
chair wasn't that it wouldn't
accept it it was buffering and
it wasn't allowing me is a
sitting there buffering so I'm
sorry that I didn't probably
hear everything that was was
stated and and my apologies if I
just something that was already
asked Mr chair representative.
The first question I have is.
There's a little re the the the
retirement date of twelve thirty
one twenty one.
It's if this becomes law should
become law it had if this passes
it would it would start on
January or excuse me July first
of twenty twenty two my
understanding that correct
that's correct.
So.
I'm just concerned about that
again because we had that happen
with the D. O. T. of the state
police the last year we fix that
we have that gap of them not
being.
You know allowed to get some
benefits we had run a separate
little bill for that you know
Mississippi six months the six
month period.
And I don't know if your goal Mr
chair representative to keep
working for another six months
for them to retire accuses
basses or that was just a over
oversight can you answer that
for me Mr chair representative.
Well Representative thank you
for the question and that.
Part of me thought well I'm glad
you didn't hear some of it
because.
It was overwhelming opposition.
Are from parents from of many
are individuals who spoke
clearly and to the point but
Representative they.
Nor the fact that if we're going
to find New Mexicans with the
workforce so that when they they
go to the municipal water
Department there's.
After they walked past the sign
that says.
Help wanted of there's nobody
there and so you call and
there's nobody there.
We have got to move forward
or we're going to slow down the
economic progress in the state
however you ask a question about
the retirement date and that
retirement date years sat
in the bill on page of the page
eight or nine no the inner part
number J. on page
eight and it basically says.
a member who is retired.
On or before December thirty
first two thousand twenty one
and and the concept there that
was worked up a month.
Advocates of the legislation
bills that are there this might
this might I push the word might
eliminate the concept that that
some soon to retire employee
might figure out a way to gain
that there is a thirty six month
reemployment are in some
unintended or advantageous way
and.
I I guess you just can't write
perfect bill but this bill says
you have to retire on or before
December thirty first two
thousand twenty one.
Thank you thank you Mr chair
representative so the next
question I have is.
From what I'm reading here on
page eight.
a retired member shall not
accrue credit for any portion of
period subsequent employment
explain that to me does that
mean that all the truce
explained X. I think I
understand what it is but I want
to explain to secure your
Representative and and while you
were buffering you might miss
that point the point is simple.
We should not penalize.
Members who are retired who are
willing and able to return to
work and they provide a para
employer willing to re employed
for the return to work so it it
really speaks to the fact that
During the period in this will
call thirty six month period.
The employer pays into the
pension the same way every other
employee does the employer
patient to the pension the same
way employers do are required
and they receive no additional
benefit.
Now that is what I call a trade
all.
Some people think that's unfair
and I think you know I'm not
going to argue with that I'm
just going to say that's the
best idea we have on how to.
Make return to work so it does
not diminish solvency of the
pension fund so if you're paying
in and not getting any benefit.
Then you are increasing the
pension fund wait a minute the
pension fund is paying you your
pension yes that was your
harder.
Pension benefit that you deserve
and you should not be penalized
if you choose to come back to
work I think we're in a very
our.
Dangerous work shortage
throughout the state and this is
one way to help I hope that
might have answered your
question Mr chair representative
it you know I'm just trying to
spell out these things that I'm
seeing here that I'm reading
that I'm on page eight for it
basically tells you three four.
Five and six.
Four says a member of a sales
basically what you just said so
make contributions that would be
required for both the member and
employer are the applications of
the covers program during the
entire period so in other words
yes to put in he has to
contribute to the to the
retirement but then it goes on
number nine on a two page nine
this isn't number five the
contributions paid on our behalf
the of the retired member during
that term shall not be refunded
mothers a cat anyway I'm putting
in and I can't get back out and
number six says
it's it can only be for thirty
six months so it you know that
tells me first of all that.
Person has already earned their
retirement.
Whether they get retired or not.
They're gonna still ridge it be
receiving that retirement number
one.
Number two if they go back to
work according to what I'm
reading they'll be contributing
to the same retirement they're
receiving adding to the till but
so my next question is what they
be able to and I know the answer
but I I believe I don't know the
answer but I'd like for you to
to tell me so what I read here
what a person that came back to
work be able to acquire a second
pension.
No.
First of all the time is
insufficient and too
the bill stay in state clearly
although you paying in and your
employer is paying here there is
no added benefit at the end of
the employment.
The trade off is Representative
you'll get to enjoy your
attention on interrupted.
You're going to Mr chair
representative so I retire I I
work twenty years will just say
I retire I'm getting my pension
I said I want to go back to work
not gonna still contribute my
employer sauce contribute
whether they hired me or another
person yeah I don't get a second
I don't get a penny out of it
but I am contributing and so
that to to that point I'm gonna
say you know what they're gonna
have to hurt the if that
position is open we have to hire
someone to fill that position
regardless of the retired or not
a person to fill in the position
about when it comes to position
my next question is.
What I don't like you I think a
lot of the people here and
everybody that every
representative Mr chair
representative have a valid
point I mean it every single one
of them and one of them and I'm
gonna I'm gonna finish by
explaining what my situation is
and what in my area what I'm
dealing with but so the position
or so I am This bill and this is
important to I retired as a
captain will participate in the
and and and and and for the
police department to say I'm
gonna say state police I exit
from what I read here you have
to be out one year twelve months
and then you reenter.
The first question is why twelve
months Mr chair representative.
I'm sorry Sir could you please
repeat the question yes Mr chair
representative so when a person
retires it says here they can't
come back to work for twelve
months after separating
themselves from or retirement.
Thank you for that question of.
In Santa Fe your B. and para
they would say that is a
requirement of the federal
government of the Internal
Revenue Service personally I
never believed it but I can't
prove it wrong and it it is to
ensure that the employee
returning to work is not.
Receive an iris.
You're not penalized by the IRS
I haven't done a very good job
on that but that is the idea
that twelve months is not
totally arbitrary
testimony I heard and I part
from Mr be was it must be twelve
months to be sufficient hi that
the IRS considers you now
retired.
Okay I don't know that Mr chair
representative so
I think that's important because
I know that some of these people
of I retired and I that she's
This Is died I did what I did Mr
chair representative right talk
to police officers Hey how's it
going would you consider coming
back this so would love to come
back when we retire the biggest
issue that they had they can't
afford the health insurance
because they're on their own so
they take a second job so that
they can't be offset their their
cost the lives of of not life
which can be health insurance.
So
That being said that a lot of
those retirees sometimes we'll
move on the six to six to nine
month period because they it
all.
They go Mr chair representative
fishing for six months ago I got
to go back to work in the and
the tail starts the money starts
going down and have to go back
in and and start making money to
to pay for their expenses of
being retired a lot of these
people are young Mr chair
representative and and so they
they have that
they they have a they're able to
great start a second career
so my next question is Mr chair
representative.
Is the entry level this is
something that I that that I did
hear discussion amongst I did go
to a meeting I just talked to
the guys on the street yesterday
you know what's got what happens
chair representative if.
Personally chairs of the captain
steps out pretty much what our
our Representative Garcia I'm
sorry Miguel Garcia is we have
to one your L. L. M. A. L. H.
well it wouldn't be as yet
explained that the they stepped
out to the retirement came back
and went right back into the
same position they had Mr chair
representative one of those
things that that I do want to
see is for I'm looking at a
retiree that has whatever number
that is twenty years of
retirement to come back and and
then for a young I'm and I'm
gonna stick with just this
particular
Position of a police officer
comes back in and mentors a
younger police officer that
maybe came out of that the
academy and doesn't go back into
the same position be list left
he can mentor that younger
young.
officer that make may be a
little bit high strung because
it just graduated graduate or
whatever I mean I'm not sure the
more tree business you get a guy
the badgers from orchard school
and you know other they they
they're on top of the world and.
The the until you get your feet
wet then you start realizing
that
the books in reality are are I
have a a gap in the and so what
what I would like to see if
there's if there's language here
that would
Make people that are in the same
as long as they're going to stay
in the state police if they
leave the state police that's
fine they can go back into the
the upper level positions that
way the younger or the the the
lower position shipped up and
allow them the opportunity to
take a better position better
pay and more experience so we
continue that that latter
and I don't would like to see Mr
chair representative of these
people not climb the ladder in
just a short period of time and
I I see that in that in that
three year role but I just
didn't see that they can go Mr
chair representative back into
the same position that they had
previously can you answer that
for me Mr chair representative.
I certainly will and I think
it's an excellent point
One house bill one and house
bill fifty approach it
differently.
House bill fifty.
Yes I suppose Tyler and silent
in the sense that we're
whenever.
A retired Hera pensioner returns
to work.
That is between the employer and
the employee and I'm really
hesitant to start saying well in
this three year period of time
they can have their old job they
sure as heck can have a better
job and Furthermore I I think
you've just got to have some
faith in the sheriff's
department in these
municipalities in the state
agencies that they're not going
to automatically say go get it
go over their two year old desk
and and start doing your old job
I I think that I just can't tell
you that won't happen but I
think you can't write a law to
prevent that that's what I
think.
Representative I think that's
just something that I and and
this is just my idea I'm just
kind of thinking if a person on
the same Mr chair representative
in the state agency will see
state police again of the stick
with that retires as a captain I
would love love Josephine Mr
chair representative of some
language stating you stay within
the same department you must
start entry meaning a patrolling
officer.
So they can mentor it caught
maybe maybe we would have some
of the
Situations of of that we see out
in the streets were you know I
got a young man in it happened
in my community we're young man
went up to a to a.
Pulling over someone in downtown
Silver City you literally
through the grace of god that
that police officer who added as
a kids swim in my pool and I
know I know his dad his mom and
I'm not as a little boy to the
grace of god he didn't get shot
he approached that vehicle and
eight years younger and maybe
have you had a a senior officer
with them it maybe could have
changed that change their their
approach to that to that person
the guy didn't get hit or
anything but it was pretty scary
could sit on the game of a the
income of the okay
I the other thing is I would
like to that person retires if
they want to take another
position outside of that agents.
And go and and and I'm gonna
tell you why I'm I'm I'm kind of
building where I'm where I'm
going with my my area goes over
to another majestic vality Mr
chair representative and goes to
it goes I mean it's probably
because the need for a a
sergeant or whatever in another
department he's not it it that
that agency that he was there
before state police will have a
shift up maybe doesn't work for
the state police again maybe
once district was to make sure
officer maybe wants to be a
chief of police or some other
other position in another agency
and that's really it I mean and
and this thing that I just
generated a language like that
Representative the the the.
Lasting up so I'm just going to
sum it up because I mean I've
I've gone on but I these were
important things to me.
What was what was sent is
competitive wages I heard that
earlier Mr chair representative
which is which is true to a
certain extent some of these
positions are tough to fill
period
I can't get anybody to go clean
my are for twenty Bucks an hour
twenty five Bucks an hour I mean
Madam one and in certain areas I
can't find anybody and so
sometimes wages isn't it you
know
McDonald's in our areas hiring
kids at point at fifteen dollars
an hour Mr chair representative
people start coming back to work
the reality of what we're living
here I walk into places a state
agency is in and for us as well
statistics I went in there the
other day.
That I work with over thirty
years walk in there and two
thirds of the of the cubicles
are empty Mr chair
representative in my area my
little mining district were
myself lieutenant governor
Senator.
Ground most and and and all of
us came from I.
There's we don't have any
officers in literally in her
early at all that was basically
a building there with the
officers there doesn't have a
chief of police Santa Clara has
literally a shortage of police
only have a chief and one of one
or two officers not enough to
cover consecutively even when
they try to work together
there's always shortages there's
always gap's
it's scary not to have in that
whole sector might of my
district nobody No officers so
they lean on Mr chair
representative they they lean on
the chair of was already
stretched and who needs who also
is lacking.
And has openings in this the
positions you know
Mr chair representative I I do
like that that I know I stuck to
a post which department but in
in in I will be honest
to see someone that retires it
goes back to work has to
contribute to the fund that
would that started to change
them getting their their
retirement I think that's that's
pretty good to reserves to for
them to contribute without
getting a second retirement
I think we're gonna find it was
kind of funny as we in the FIR
and and to the fire said
something funny that that what I
thought was.
Significant issue DPS believe
that this bill will likely lead
to a substantial number of
retired police officers
returning to work.
Which is hope is what we're
we're trying to accomplish with
this bill.
With that Mr chair I'm going to
I'm going to stop because we
have another bill that I that
has similar issues and I want to
talk about some of the things
that I read on that
and and I but I do support this
because of the shortages that we
have all across the state thank
you Mr chair representative.
Thank you.
Representative I is there
anybody else one missing that
would like to make a comment
director question if not I will
go to my life more by
Representative I share Roybal
Caballero.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
to the committee and and more
especially thank you to
Representative Anderson and
Terry Garcia.
We're we're your work I know
that Representative Anderson and
I have been on investigations
and oversight committee are
together for a few years so I
know he has a good understanding
of
Of our retirement funds a ticket
early in this case Mr chair are
para
I.
And I do appreciate the
questions you've asked
throughout our internal
processes the last few years and
particularly this last
in from.
You know.
No matter how you look at Mr
chair.
Are and no matter what you how
you refer to it.
it could very well be.
The return to work.
But the way that it is perceived
and generally seen is a double
double dipping it doesn't matter
how you put it how you phrase
that how you
hello.
Our workforce perceives the
actions we take such as this.
Is as double dipping it has
favoring one sector over another
secretary
and and and it creates even the
forty one gets off the ground it
creates a
That huge issue and in
particular Mr chair.
You know there's been study
after study after study after
study anything you just need to
ask and and mingle with
employees in the public sector
across the board and you will
understand and feel
the the difficult part and in
some cases the higher and
another case of the anger when
you discuss policy such as the
because no matter how you look
at it the unfair and it doesn't
matter what the reasons are or
what the intentions are that you
can then to making such a
proposal they're just on their
and there aren't there in many
different ways and I want to
remind Mr chair this committee
that in the prior
administration we went for years
and years and years building up
vacancy rate.
To this day I don't understand
what the reasons were two of the
administration of the governor
then to keep our vacancy rates
in the public sector so high.
And I agree Mr chair with
Representative Rubio and for
statements and the other part of
this is that had we been paying
attention to
waste Gail to pay including
wages the paying benefits to
making jobs and wages comparable
to the state surrounding us
if we had looked at ways in
which to recruit train and then
retain our workforce are
without.
Trying to win the competition
for keeping the most vacancies
like our fire governor
administration then I think that
we would not be trying to put
out a fire or perceived fire
when we introduce legislative
pieces that are this is a
reaction to a problem that's
longstanding if the problem
that.
Deeply embedded into the way our
our all our public sector and
private sectors have been
dealing with our workforce
the way that they have not been
appreciating our work force in
the way in which they've
exploited our workforce Mr chair
in the way in which we refuse to
acknowledge the voice of
workforce in our decision making
processes Mr chair and
representatives I think that
I you know I I hate to
glamorize our efforts on our
part by in any way
misrepresenting what impact we
actually are doing and I think
that what you know I I will I've
worn many hats in my
professional career but as a a
human resource a person as an
employee relations professional
as a labor organizer it's given
me a really good home listed
experience to be able to
understand why when we make
these kinds of decisions that
has are really bad adverse
effect on overall.
relations and it creates more
problems for example Mr chair
some of the the comments that
were made were made up of
concerning if it's only for
three years R. O. R.
Excuse me reference to are
keeping a pair of fund of
solvent or
if it's meant to make up for
four of losses due to the COVID
well you know COVID is yeah and
and the pandemic Mr chair just
all it did was highlight all the
inequities that have been going
on and the be a waste of which
we
are taken for granted our
workforce.
And by yes.
Place these kinds of instruments
all we're gonna do is to create
the continued cycle of pay
inequity pay disparities
we're gonna really he then to a
huge morale problem and if you
thought that we had employees
that.
That left for number reasons
during that time pandemic
of instituting this type of a of
a policy would create probably
an even greater will act because
no employee no employee under
any circumstances I appreciate
not being
Value inequitable and in a
It parity and that's that that's
just the reality Mr chairman and
and representatives I think that
It
was discussed over and over
again and quite a lot of detail
a lot of questioning
What back and forth I think all
of us have a good understanding
of what the bill attempts to do
but what
But it gives a all in might be
Mister chair and Representative
and Representative gives a
really Paul fan of where the
real problem as.
And I think I I think
Representative Anderson.
Several different times you
mentioned are nurses well you
know I don't know if you're
keeping up but you know our our
public our nurses are are
fighting I have been unionized
and when you guys for a reason
our employees are other public
sector employees that the
university for unionizing for
refund
more and more are of employees
public employees are seeking the
assistance of public employee
unions to represent them for the
very reasons Mr Mr chair that
I've just given and and and then
we want to compound that problem
by
returning to work and double
dipping more employees into the
work force I I don't think that
this is going to fall any but
create any type of solution I
think that we have enough
absolute obligation as public
administrative and I welcome the
the administration one or
administration came in on the
new administration are pledged
to fill the vacancies as quickly
as possible to pay attention to
recruitment to put in the
professional training necessary
to be able to retain our workers
and that's only been a couple of
years I think we need to
be in a position to
Actually demand that our
administrators KPM hi dear.
And do all that is necessary to
of close the gap on and fill the
vacancies and set up the
recruitment practices and the
training programs to offer our
employees living wages are
comparable wages market wages
with the private sector so that
we don't have mass exoduses into
our unintentionally four because
of the decisions that we make
and and and really focus on
giving healthy and inviting.
Work.
When setting where our public
sector employees look forward to
coming to work on a daily basis
and doing the work of the public
and public service which is the
very reason why the entered into
the public sector you know Mr
chair there was a time when I
was growing up when I was
thinking about what profession
to pursue you my father who was
in the military
trying to get me into the public
sector and more importantly into
the
Government workforce I can't
recall right now what what that
the technology is and he would
and all of that generation value
of the public sector and
government because.
In those days which was the the
late sixties early seventies
The public sector is viewed as
having the best professional
tracks Mr chair the best of
retirement packages and Mr chair
the best wages and that that
anybody and and much better than
the private sector so Mr
chairman and Representative
Anderson and Bessie has a you
know I feel what you're saying I
do
and and I know the reasons
behind what we're doing but I
think that.
House Bill B. house bill one of
five
do not accomplish what we want
to do I think we don't want to
three year fix that kind of
compounding create even more
problems with our Paris system I
don't think that we want to
create anything that is viewed
by our public sector in any way
that will cause any more like
our exited by a public employee
I think we need to embrace what
we have in hand which is a huge
when healthy and our workforce
that has stood with us
representatives and Mr chair
thanks during and they continue
to stand with us during the
pandemic price.
And even.
They have been
You know mass retirements you
have down there why you have to
understand we have to understand
and explore the reasons why and
it's not just because of the
recent that have been a
articulated so
I find it very very hard
to.
Support.
Type of legislation.
One segment of our public
employee work force against
another even if it's for one day
and that's what I the house bill
fifty and one all I do no one of
I doing and that and I would
never create a temporary fix
that continues to create Hey
inequities and pay disparities
and morale problems or FedEx
back
I would.
More readily insure our feel
comfortable with supporting
thank you
ways in which to improve our
public sector work with those
that represent time boys that
all spoke very eloquently and in
a very dedicated man are to work
with those same groups to create
the ways in which we can are
solidified our workforce
Provisions and again recruitment
and training and retaining
repayment.
So that we can make sure.
That we are attracting a
younger.
And ready to work rather than
return to work all ready to work
workforce that will be with us.
For the next.
Ten twenty thirty years and well
I appreciate the sacrifices that
were made my current retirees
and twenty thirteen and twenty
twenty one we ask them to make
the sacrifices in order to
correct
solvency issues with our our
retirement plan.
So Mr chairman and and
Representative I.
All the questions that needed to
be asked in my estimation have
been asked and I don't have any
questions I just.
We have to stand in opposition
to.
This and the other piece of
legislation our house bill one
of five of because they do not
do anything in my estimation to
correct the problem that has
been generations in the making
and that now Representative
require us to pay attention so
that we can create new
generations of fixes rather than
just a quick fix that's going to
create more problems than not so
Mister chair and and and
representative thank you Mr
chair that that's all I have to
comment thank you.
I guess.
I'm the last one on the.
That's left that hasn't said
anything that wanted to say
anything right my wrongs okay it
would just start with this I
want to start first of all of my
thought somebody would ask
Representative Anderson
Representative actually out.
A retired member has retired on
or before December the thirty
first let me twenty one.
Okay.
A return to work okay
on or before.
Does this mean that somebody who
retired in two thousand and
eleven can come back to work.
That's correct.
If they're willing to and the
employer is willing to hire.
So there is no provision in
there that the they have to be
retraite or anything they just
come back to work.
Representative that is correct
and if you took a perhaps a
younger retiree and part time
wanting to hold the prisoners
back and forth from the jail to
the court I I just I think there
are many jobs that are vacant
that can be built by workforce
if there's a willing worker to
fill the job in a portion of
quarter willing to hire them
thank you.
Thank you thank you
Representative Anderson the
other thing I'm curious about I
don't know if you want if you
done any research on this but I.
Are we because just lately I
heard that there were a lot of
state employees that were making
minimum wage.
Given the IBM in state employees
are getting paid minimum wage.
Thank employees are I happen to
not know the answer to that but
I happen to us and and analyst
with the legislative finance
committee that very question
this morning and they felt that
one with the minimum wage
increase that their work
For parent importation employees
so I'm I'm simply saying the new
at least number exceeds the
statutory minimum wage here in
New Mexico starting July first
two thousand twenty two.
If this thing that bothers me we
are state employees getting paid
minimum wage.
I just that bothers and we want
to retain.
Right we want to make sure that
the state working with us but
will only pay this you know on
my is here as a legislator.
I'll go through the Dodd did we
did cuts when we would we we
were out of money we didn't have
much money.
We just didn't do anything and
what did we do.
You got.
Thanks teacher salaries of
teachers salaries and that.
We took benefits from state
employees
state employees but more on
their insurances and everything
else that we could cover the
deficits that we needed we did
this all on the back of our
employees.
Today we are sitting here
wondering why we have a shortage
of employees.
I mean really and honestly
Representative Phelps I look at
this and that and I I and I see
I I I'd like the idea of those
big pay raise proposed for the
teachers.
But I mean really and honestly a
teacher goes through all the
education and everything.
Those up to master's degree and
will not be making approximately
sixty thousand dollars a year.
With basically five years
education.
Is that I I mean how do we
consider that there.
I mean I can do better with a
with a high school diploma and
if you college credits I I did a
lot better in my lifetime.
That's one of the problems that
I do have a New Mexico why do we
have the shortages that we have.
But.
So.
I think that I was looking at
and I was just given some of the
numbers to look at yes just
lately.
I'm gonna take a police officer
who today's world Hey.
The police officer I estimate
and I'm estimating this for the
purpose of a of the ease of
calculations is.
Earning sixty thousand dollars a
year.
Let's just use that sixty
thousand dollars a year as a
year salary number
Representative police officer.
And that this.
At twenty years.
Requires at seventy percent.
Other salary right.
So that would make that the
retirement approximately forty
two thousand dollars a year in
think they're right or wrong
Representative.
I'm.
I certainly can't confirm the
numbers but I believe you're
certainly right in the right
direction in your calculations
yes.
We're going to hire additional
employees officer.
And the we're going to give them
his salary back I'm not saying
he is here to have our salary
back a sixty thousand dollars a
year.
And that is going to have forty
two thousand dollars a year.
So now we have a version working
for the state of New Mexico.
basically taking over a hundred
two thousand dollars a year that
be will that work that would be
roughly right delay correct.
That's correct.
So.
In order to address the younger
people to become police
officers.
It's giving them an extra forty
two thousand dollars a year.
How come we don't think of a way
to start your salary to words
worth them coming back to work
instead of trying to keep them.
After diverted to retirement.
I'm.
Representative Mr chairman R.
I'm a little confused by the
question in our I'm going to ask
you Representative Garcia that
want to take a swing at it if
you would please try to re
stated because I didn't quite
understand the question okay
okay so now we have a police
officer coming back to our now
we're paying them a hundred and
two thousand dollars sixty
thousand dollars or his salary
because you came back to work
I'm forty two thousand dollars
in retirement.
So now we have a police officer
or do not hundred two thousand
dollars a year.
So why.
Can we just raise that salary
for that starting police officer
but it's worthwhile at all for
that person that is interested
in being a police officer.
A little higher than what
they're paying now instead of
trying to keep somebody that
would love to retire.
And it is in the hands of and to
bring him back.
Why don't we make it to where
we're attracting the younger
people instead of trying to
attract the older people.
Well I I think Mr chairman of
first of all your your question
is is about law enforcement
police officers are not not
entering.
The force of we see that
reflected in the academies are
we see that in the larger forces
in New Mexico hiring law
enforcement from smaller forces
are and it's certainly a very
imperfect situation I I just
cannot I believe the next bill
has a sponsor that will do a
much better job of answering
your question but my question
would be I believe that that how
much a police officer is paid is
is an issue of how much the
employers paying and how much
the employer is willing to pay
for his services as a policeman.
Thank maybe I should just up to
police officer I'm gonna just
that a government employee okay.
So that that it would cover
everybody because basically I
was just using the police
officers an example well I'm
sorry I'm sorry I'm sorry that
I.
Then at that on the wrong track
well basically I just using the
police officer sample.
So it could be a correctional
officer.
It could be up I don't know
somebody that works for a motor
vehicle.
Mr chair it could be anybody
that but I I'm just using the
example of the sixteen thousand
dollars I said this for the ease
of the numbers.
So well
to where we can attract them to
come to work for us.
A lot easier.
And trying to make the
announcement that the other end
instead of at the beginning
that's all I'm saying.
Mr Chairman.
Representative Garcia Mr
Chairman on what you just
finished saying makes a lot of
sense
of under sixty thousand dollars
salary to do starting on
whatever starts the salary
that's one thing but the forty
thousand the jury including to
make a hundred thousand that's
their money already they've
already earned that money
that's.
number two well it is good to a
pair people more network all
conversation to a whole meeting
today and.
This was before my time when I
came into office we do have to
pay all employees more money
than what you're getting.
One one you go to work at the
big bottles of the burger for
fifteen dollars and then you're
a state employee making thirteen
dollars an hour now and some of
them are there's quite a few
That is a big issue
Representative called I. it'll
mention that also in all we're
open up a can of worms what
we're trying to do is fix what
is wrong we need to work.
We would I'd and geo we get the
people more money the fifteen
dollars an hour in the state and
bring them to get Mr chairman
that's fine and well but do you
still go to McDonald's or Burger
fifteen dollar an hour and and
you don't have to be responsible
for anything and what a lot of
responsibility under state
employees yup of boys out there
all.
driving back goals tractors or
whatever and fifteen dollars an
hour the big part of the problem
that we're facing Mr chairman
with all the problems we have in
the state of New Mexico.
Our employees have never gotten
paid what they deserve and you
know I came in in the Martinez
administration and and that was
not a good deal and you know she
got everything back in we need
to fix it it will take a little
bit of time and what we're doing
Randall this bill you just put a
band aid on it do we get back on
our feet and our employees have
an opportunity to give more
money is that make it is Mr
chairman.
Yeah that makes a lot of.
However the bandaid approach
that is.
All off on.
And is going to be the scab that
we're going to have to fix no
matter what.
Mr chairman this thanks for
answering the.
And I know will it disturb
patch and we need to try to fix
it before the three year to
Representative that's basically
what we need to do because if
you don't do some we're going to
be in the same boat we are right
now through your from the Mr
chairman thank you.
Thank you thank you
Representative Andrea with that
in mind.
Representative Lente approach
really there's not work I
believe I get I really am not
happy with the idea of not happy
with the idea that that.
Not opening the doors for the
younger generation to come in
and I can understand why people
will come to work.
I mean I was at the grocery
store here the other day and one
of the managers of the store
was me me over Representative.
Why are you giving those people
so much unemployment.
They don't want to come to work
for us.
And then mention the I the thing
that they were that that people
on unemployment or making a
hundred dollars a week or
something like that it was a
present did not the the maximum.
That there are some people out
unemployment he was he was what
he was talking about not
everybody that was receiving
unemployment was just giving the
maximum.
Okay no but not everybody that
got unemployment was getting the
Max that was allowed by day but
the government so I how much do
you pay your employees would pay
minimum wage how many hours do
the work.
Twenty four.
Somebody working for twenty four
hours at minimum wage and
they're making two hundred
ninety dollars a week in
unemployment.
Why would they want to come to
work.
You know that's what what would
through my mind I wouldn't.
Making more money the I'm not
getting a lot of blame and check
I guess there's just no way.
But I would want to go to work
but I'll leave it at that I'll
end up might might might.
My questions and I see that the
Representative Rubio leisure
hand up Representative Rubio
I'll go to you.
Thank you Mr chair if you'll
entertain a motion I'm happy to
do that right now I want to do
it.
Go ahead I move to table.
Have a motion to table do I have
a second.
Okay.
I have a second
Welcome I at all.
We have a proper motion to table
the proper second and and that
takes precedence over everything
else at this time madam
secretary of would you call the
roll bleach.
Representative Baca yes.
Representative bash.
Yes the table.
Representative black.
Now.
Representative manga.
Yes.
Representative Miguel Garcia
yes.
Representative Rubio yes to
table.
Representative also just.
table extremely low please I'm
sorry what was your fault I said
no and I'd like to spend my vote
please.
Representative
Robocup Iran.
Yes the table.
Representative dela Cruz.
Which bill are we.
The table.
Yes No and I wanted my vote.
Representative that chairman
I'll call.
Yes the table.
There will.
So.
The vote is seven yes and three
while.
Or Representative says you got a
couple of minutes to explain
your vote.
Russia's Mr chair.
Mr chair you know I I I just
would like to I think we did
something last
Last year on the sixty day where
we try to merge the two bills
together and let them kind of
have a subcommittee I would like
to see in the Mr chair and I I
didn't make a motion for a so I
wasn't sure of both parties with
the agreement Mr chair the
reason I voted that way is.
In my area I have a dire need
police officers and other people
that other state employees I
agree with with the rate you're
I wish we had some sign on
bonuses I wish we were able to
afford all that and do that for
our our state employees
I just wish that this bill the
only the biggest issue that I
have right the entry level
situation because I don't want
the same position but I I I in
in in support for the mall for
the main reason of we need more
officers and it's a truck coming
back thank you Mr chair.
Representative and members of
the.
The committee I purposely
scheduled is built together
hoping that the the two Sanchez
with the pandemic thank but
that.
I can't tell them what to do
okay I I but I purposely did
that hoping that.
I would throw a wrench in there
and then there would be some
thinking aloud but it didn't
happen.
Hello okay Representative the
lead groups up for you got a
couple of minutes.
Thank you gentleman.
Our.
The bill both bills are are in
my estimation terribly flawed.
I had hoped to have
H. B. fifty come out of
committee for amendment on the
floor.
If you look at that may not
happen now obviously but I I
want to I want to make clear
that like many.
We have a great amount of crime.
The public our constituents
require that we do something.
And it isn't any one thing
everything from the judiciary
side to this side.
It's going to take different
pieces of the puzzle and for me
I would have liked to have seen
a bill that was crafted that was
very specific to locations
whether in my in my estimation I
should've been a W. a police
officer
Jail officer and maybe some
medical but if we have to be
very narrow in scope and none of
these did this and so I know
that they are very flawed
And so I want everybody to
understand that my motivation
for voting to not fable this was
based on wanting to see those
narrow slivers of of locations
have.
The the ability to draw some
even for people like I don't
think anybody's breaking down
the door to work at NBC and as I
said earlier I think Paypen is a
is an issue but that being said
we're here in a situation where
you're make craft other
legislation that's going to
require more crime
incarceration particularly at
the local level which does
before any cases adjudicated
then clearly you have to have
the manpower to keep folks in a
secure constitutional facility.
And so that is my motivation is
simply on that I hope I've made
myself clear into a members of
of this body as well as two
members of our of our labor
representatives I would love to
spend a little more talking
about that because because the
community the public our
constituents require us to
action and I'm not sure exactly
what the answer is I only think
this would have been if crafted
correctly a small part of that
equation thank you Mr chairman.
User.
Okay at this time we are ready
to proceed with the other bill.
House bill one oh five as
Representative remember ground.
Mr Mr chairman.
I will be presenting the house
bill one of five four
Representative remember co
sponsor is in another committee.
Okay
Thank you.
The little light on the subject
in the dark you are in the dark
Mr chairman.
What was that now you can see
the.
Go ahead the review in the black
thank you Mr chairman and
committee members so I will be
presenting house bill one of
five as we just heard
There's a few differences in in
house bill one of five in house
bill one in house with fifty
that we just start I will draw
your attention to the main the
committee of the difference here
on page eight.
You will notice that this period
is ninety consecutive dates and
the reason this bill reversed
the ninety consecutive days I'm
sitting out that's because law
enforcement loses their
certification.
If their train is not kept up
within two years I believe
department of transportation is
one year I'm so that's one of
the main reasons we went with
that.
The other main difference is on
the very last page you'll see
that in line six retired member
can only come back in an entry
level position.
And so those are the main
differences and as we spoke and
as Representative doctors and.
Just stated you know in the in
the county.
In the county world and Mister
world unfortunately our jails
are being overrun and we don't
have the staff.
We have all these positions open
we don't have qualified people
to do the job I'm so that's
that's really the main thing
that I wanted to to bring up I
do have with me and rural I
believe house three fifteen is.
From the New Mexico state police
I would like if you if you could
weigh in on some of this for the
technical aspects I would really
appreciate that Mr chairman.
Your muted.
Your muted.
The only person intelligent
enough to understand me it's me
that's why I keep myself on
mute.
So where are you hiding G. value
there.
Mr chair stand on the can you
hear me Sir yes Sir okay so Mr
chairman of the committee just
always ask Miss speak someone on
on on this bill not and support
or oppose up with just kind of
understand and listen to the
conversation during the last
bills kinda let everybody on
this committee and those are who
are listening at home hi and how
the state police would handle a
return to work on and I think
this would also be important for
what your talking about on the
left over.
The state police policies if we
were to hire some turn to work
folks back or force
this is just eight weeks I
realized a lot of other agencies
municipalities counties other of
divisions for.
State government bureaus would
you know should have the
flexibility to do it their way
well we would start folks out at
the lowest level of the no
control and
everybody for the state we start
from as a patrolman so then from
there we would follow our
policies in that
you know if you have previous
experience of what we were
sometimes called lateral in this
case would be returned working
fully on they would be L.
eligible to tests
and move laterally within our
organization to be a detective
or almost inject for us what.
This one Rader on until after
the for build some of the
obligations within our policy
are and also to.
Representative motion to the
rank of sergeant which is our
first level supervision in the
state we.
That takes five years and so
just kind of give a piece of
that would you understand how
how we would be able to
implement something like this
and I do believe this is needed
at this time I don't know how in
depth you want me to get on why
I believe that but.
All be here for any questions
that you may have.
What are muted again.
Do you thank you Representative
black I'm glad you're keeping an
eye on me R. T. lead like to
promote the to the panelists
that way you can be around
because I'm pretty sure they'll
be a lot of questions coming up.
And like I said I understand
that you're not here to support
or oppose the bill but that you
might be able to answer some
questions that
Okay it's just to talk I did Sir
can you hear me.
Will be promoted the panelists
to understand like I said I
understand that you're not here
for against but the just in case
there are any technical work.
So here that's you yes Sir.
Okay we got it okay with that
again Representative black.
The floor is yours west.
The.
All on and.
I thank you Mr chairman I had a.
Suppose at this point
Yeah stand for questions.
Okay at this time the money will
you hope I'm still on.
Thank
you Mr chairman of one other
thing I wanted to point out that
this bill house bill one of five
is actually endorsed my I pod.
Okay thank you thank you okay at
this time I will go to the
attendees.
And
For those of you in the.
Order this bill unlike you to
raise your hand those in
support.
Raise your hand and I'll give
you a couple of minutes each
will should be.
Thank you one hundred eighties
didn't support the Mr Miguel
Gomes if you would
Mr Chairman.
Go ahead Sir.
Good morning Mr good evening Mr
chairman and members of the
committee my name is Miguel
Gomez representing the retired
public employees of New Mexico
tonight the R. P. E. N. M.
represents the forty two
thousand public retirees
we were standing in support this
bill today because we believe
this bill is narrowly tailored
as was suggested by
Representative dela Cruz
earlier.
we we think this bill addresses
the the crime issue that is felt
across the state but
particularly particularly in
urban areas
in addition we we liked the the
fact that this bill only allows
retired individuals to come back
at entry level positions where
we believe they are most needed
and and again this we believe
this this issue addresses
Representative Terrazas issue
so we think this this bill has
the the.
Mechanisms within it set to be
good legislation to allow some
of our retirees to come back in
to fill a desperately needed
area to fight crime in our
cities and throughout our state
thank you very much Mr chairman
we appreciate your your work as
always.
Thank you Sir I have the Mr Sean
Powell.
Are you they were opposition.
We are in favor raise your hand
if you're not I'm not going to
the opposition in.
So Mister Polish your hands
raised.
Sean Paul.
Yes Sir.
Okay thank you Mr chairman and
committee members for the
opportunity to speak in support
of this I think everyone knows
in the state of New Mexico there
are shortages in the police
force and also on the
correctional side as well I
would just say.
Encourage support for this
action and hopefully this so
alleviate some of the issues
that our communities are having
thank you Sir.
Anybody else in support I don't
see any other hands right.
I am very those are you in
opposition to do a raise your
hand really.
Okay well startled Mr will be.
John well the.
Thank you Mr chair thank you for
the opportunity thank you for
the ability to to have an open
form and and speak about these
issues I'd like to talk about to
situations that I don't think
anybody on the penalties
remembers or knows about but I
think that it's really really
alarming two years ago we
created a inability for police
departments in mid
municipalities all over the
state of New Mexico to come to
the table with the joining bonus
with the state of New Mexico of
seventy five hundred dollars
giving your most experienced
police officers a fifteen
thousand dollar bonus to keep
them employed for one year that
bonus can give them another
fifteen thousand dollar bonus
every single year if they're
willing to stay not one police
department with the staffing
woes all over the state has
taken advantage of that benefit
that is located in the law
enforcement protection act I
think it's important to
understand that these retirees
retired for a reason law
enforcement is a young man's
game the truth is nobody wants
to come back after a twenty year
career of being a detective or
being a dog handler or being a
sergeant lieutenant our
commander and go back to field
services we know this to be true
because in Albuquerque when we
had over two hundred return to
work employees back in two
thousand and nine the suit
through the E. O. C. for age
discrimination because they did
not want to do that job.
I think that it is it is
disingenuous to to to look at
return to work double dipping as
the only Avenue to fix this
problem another story when more
Tim Keller came to the City of
Albuquerque police department he
gave them a fourteen percent pay
increase that pay increase got a
hundred and ten people to leave
their retirement benefit and
come back to work for a new top
three and a better retirement in
the long run so if you build it
they will come right now before
this legislature state police
with nothing but respect for the
chief of the state police I
think he's doing a great job is
you're getting the largest raise
I believe has ever been
appropriated possibly on behalf
of New Mexico state police
officers nineteen point five
percent that is enormous and
it's great and thank god because
those men and women deserve it
but if we had returned to work
if we had returned to work right
now in the state of New Mexico
there wouldn't be that rates for
our state police officers baby
telling I'm sorry guys I guess
you got to work twenty years in
order to get a sixty percent pay
increase you'll make more money
when you retire by entering the
double dipping program this is
failed legislation this will not
work especially in the City of
Albuquerque because my guys
aren't leaving holy for money
they're leaving because they're
miserable in the job they don't
feel supported and they can't
adequately protect provide the
protection this community
deserves thank you so much for
the opportunity please oppose
this legislation it lacks
foresight that lacks leadership
it lacks succession.
The card Bundy.
Mr Chairman can you hear me.
Here you great thank you so much
Mr chairman and members of the
committee and thank you for
letting us speak on both of
these bills again yeah
representative of black in our
representative Regan I'm
passionate thank you for for
trying to find effects on some
of the short staffing issues on
the first thing I would note and
and I'm willing to be
embarrassed here I apologize and
read to build multiple times and
I don't see where it is house
bill one of five that is limit
it to law enforcement but I'll
let people who are better have
better rise and I do address
that so a couple of thoughts on
the forces to something that
chairman I'll come said this
actually isn't really a
temporary solution at all in
fact I think
you're going off Mr Willoughby's
testimony what we're doing is
we're putting a bandaid on
something that actually
prohibits us from treating the
wound because if we're ten or
fifteen or twenty thousand
dollars behind Oklahoma City or
Las Vegas metro Phoenix or
Denver right now and we fill all
our vacancies with people who
are essentially getting double
the take home pay who are former
retirees.
Then we're going to be twenty
twenty five thirty thousand
dollars behind market rates
three years from now when this
when this all and so with all
due respect to some of the
people spoke about this just a
temporary solution it's a really
temporary at all actually
lengthens the problem and
exacerbate said in the meantime
the entry level language also is
problematic I very much
appreciate the sponsors of this
bill adding the entry level
language but first of all it's
it's very vague there's no
definition of it I think you
were to do this first well like
I said the supplies to it looks
to me like it applies to every
jurisdiction in the state and
maybe even to all job titles
entry level can't just be out
there is a word it ought to be
defined it can't be the lowest
rate because that would probably
be janitorial staff I was KCPD
would have fantastically shining
floors but no new officers I
think entry level needs to be
defined as the mean entry level
detective doesn't mean entry
level supervisor so so it's
pretty problematic especially
given that the people of doubled
it before have gone back into
based on age discrimination and
actually ended up in Daskin
management jobs so I'm I don't
think entry level certainly as
extracted here really comes
close to achieving what what is
a noble idea and in the final
pieces I even if you could make
an entry level again that just
exacerbates the problem that
that we're not paying market
rates for entry level and I
think we're going to have a huge
plus three years from now where
to be far worse in this today so
thank you all for your time and
we respectfully ask you to
oppose this bill thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman Gregory
again with para they want to
restate anything but the power
board does
opposes legislation and like
Mister Bundy added the.
The entry level definition would
be difficult for us to to
enforce that such not to the
data that we receive from our
employers so that that would be
impossible for us to to monitor
and forced of the you know just
just a committee to oppose this
legislation and all also on the
call if there's any questions Mr
chair.
Mr all Justin J..
Thank you Mr chair this Justin
Cheney with the I've February of
firefighters local two forty
four we stand strong opposition
of this legislation much like
the last legislation we look at
this as a way to stifling bill
one of the questions I would.
Ask about this legislation is
yes it's an entry level position
and yes it takes five years to
be a sergeant but what would
prevent a elected official from
taking that entry level officer
and appointing them to a
appointed position such as a
deputy chief or a commander
thank you for your time I
propose legislation on behalf of
all of my nine hundred members
in Albuquerque.
Thank you Sir John looks at.
John are you there yes thank you
Mr chairman members of Canadian
journalists here it's with The
New Mexico federation of labor
AFL-CIO representing
to all over thirty thousand
members around the state we once
again respectfully oppose this
legislation for many of the
reasons stated by others and we
hope you'll do so as well thank
you very much.
We are going to
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee Josh Anderson with
us Council eighteen again just
want to echo the comments
already made and and my comments
previously we have an amazing
opportunity right now to invest
in our current workforce and our
future workforce and we hope we
we we we focus on that and not
entertain of double dipping
proposals thank you Mr chairman.
Your meeting Mr chairman.
Thank you again we're still
we're out of you had to do you
have your hand up or my wrong.
They're not okay did I miss
anybody.
Okay in that case I will go back
to the committee at this time
Representative.
The floor is yours at this time.
Would you like for me to go to
the committee for questions.
Yes.
Thank you do I have anybody in
the committee with questions.
Anybody know what and I I do.
Representative the the last
ounce.
Thank you Mr chair I I just in
my I hear all what was going on
and and and it's a tough spot
you know we're we're trying to
fix something that you know has
has.
Again Mr chair representative
something that's been building
up over years of of neglecting
to build something to fix
something I tell my son he's
taking over my mic my business
is working on a business account
so you got to keep up with the
maintenance of these of these
huge buildings what you're gonna
find yourself the you can't
afford to be remodeled the
entire thing rather than
spending you know fifteen twenty
thousand dollars a year you'll
end up spending
of four five hundred thousand
and it really hurts so.
You know this this is what's
happening we're we're we're
hurting from previous
Neglect it to say the least and
you know and I wanted to share a
story and and why I.
What what happened to me when I
was in college I at the young
late we're class some of the
young lady came up and she says
we lived in the same complex as
as a young man I really never
lived in a in a in a big city
and I global to Dallas and you
know we don't recognize things
it was to say something rate
real pretty and so we thought it
was a wonderful place to live a
lot of the students live there
but when the sun went down it
would get kind of crazy out
there you might see this
helicopter flying over your your
your residence and come not come
out on the news and so one day
this the student came up to me
and asked me she said she said
can I have your your number our
last night someone was breaking
into my trying to push the door
in I called the police and they
don't respond for an hour and a
half or two hours and as she
just wanted my numbers that I
could do something and I and I
feel
that that has resonated with me
and I hear my community
which some of the other
representatives
expressed in rural New Mexico we
don't have the same
opportunity you have is a small
departments the department said
that that that struggle to get
officers and when when I have a
whole three communities that
are.
Under tremendously under
serviced.
We're in trouble and I don't
want to find ourselves in that
situation that that might that
young lady Fund or sell I also
worry about the other things
that were brought up were.
It I I think this is more narrow
to least I think Madam chair
representative will can I ask
that was it narrowed down a
little bit differently there are
Madam chair representative was
Mr Chairman representative.
Good respect those excuse me
the.
Yes Mr Chairman representative
and the wording in the the
affiliated Pueblo employer is is
what I'm told is is encompassing
the law enforcement aspect.
Mr chair representative I I
thought that that noted timing
you know I I I hope that
something passes in again I
would love to for some of this
language to been merged Mr chair
representative but I I don't
want to go on about I think we
passed up pretty good the both
similar and and it's just my big
thing is I need we need officers
on the street they're not coming
to work it's the if it was
brought up earlier they're not
supported in many other factions
it's not just he.
You're not supported it in other
ways and there
and things have not been in
their favor in the last.
In the last eight excuse me the
last session
where we're seeing the results
of some of that and we're seeing
the results just throughout the
state for a lack of employment
so that with that that's all I
have to say I I think I've
already said my piece thank you
Mr chair representative.
Representative Rubio.
Madam chair Mr chair I move to
table please.
Proper motion for a table.
The second Carol vice chair
second.
Okay I have but promotion the
proper second is there any
further discussion.
See none.
madam secretary would you call
the roll please.
Thank Representative Baca.
So.
Representative bash.
Yes.
Representative black.
No.
Representative okay.
Yes.
Representative Miguel Garcia
yes.
Representative Rubio.
Yes table Representative
Terrazas.
No to table.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Representative what was your
doctor yes to table.
Did you get Representative the
crucial developments that all
however representative I had to
Adam at the bottom of my
checklist if you just came in
and I didn't know so I'll go
back to him and then do I guess
do you representative that I
Cruz yes.
Okay chairman of course yes.
We have the vote is.
Seven to three the table.
Seven two three your bill of
being able Representative.
And I think we're done for the
day the we are finished at six
eighteen PM.
We're working over I hope you
realize that so when you get
your check make sure you turn in
the for the overtime pay okay.
Do we have your approval.
Thank you
for.
Thank you.
You have a good night then we
will see you next week today is
Thursday right now.
Mr chair just wanted to
formally.
invite and thank Mr delacruz
represent their gross we're
today congratulated for were
becoming part of the legislature
today thank you US dot level.
Hello everybody goodbye.
