OK, everyone, let's, uh, we're
getting ready for this next
bill.
Let's get started, um.
Sponsor, uh, go ahead and.
Explain
Your bill, and I understand you
have a committee sub. Yes, Madam
Chair.
OK, we'll need to, can you read
that out loud?
The number, madam, I believe
it's uh 231-062.1.
Um
But let, let me see. Hey,
that's, that's what I have here.
Our binder. Yeah, that's, that's
the one.
231062.1.
I want to make sure that we are
all looking at the same.
Committee
Can someone move. Madam.
Madam
set for discussion. So moved.
Go ahead and explain the sub.
thank you very much, Madam Chair
and committee. Our committee sub
and I, uh, pleased to have
Jennifer Bradfield here who will
go through uh sort of line by
line, some significant changes.
Our committee substitute builds
on the really good and robust
discussion we had here last
week, Madam Chair, um, first,
this bill is to promote the use
of industrial water for
industrial uses. We specifically
exclude Madam Chair, uh, Pot.
water, which was a question uh
that had come up in our first
hearing. Madam Chair, right now,
there's no entity that's helping
specifically in this area, uh,
with businesses that are looking
for industrial water sources in
the state, and that's why we're
taking this on. Um,
The really positive feedback and
great questions that we had have
led to a number of changes,
starting at the top, Madam Chair
and committee. This place is the
responsibility with New Mexico
Environment Department.
Uh, instead of the New Mexico
economic Development Department.
This came after again, questions
here, also working with NMED
economic development and the
Office of the State Engineer.
Um, Madam Chair, we think that
this now is very helpful in, uh,
Working within the regional
water planning that's authorized
under the water securityity
Planning Act.
Uh, the water certification is
no longer needed. Um, and was
causing a lot of confusion. So,
Madam Chair, this operates under
statewide standards at NMED.
Uh
Office of the State Engineer had
concerns about sort of pushing
too many folks to use reclaimed
water, so they wanted a
voluntary and a discretionary
approach, um,
Which we're happy to do. And uh
Madam Chair, I would just again
circle back to this is now an
enemyD
not economic development. This
now excludes potable water, um,
specifically, and we've uh
entirely gotten rid of Madam
Chair and committee, the
certification that members had
really good questions on and
concerns about.
I'll turn it over to Miss Brad
Fe to go briefly through some of
the most significant changes for
the committee substitute.
And then we'll stand for your,
uh, stand at the committee's
pleasure. Thank you for that.
Can you go ahead, Jennifer.
Thank you. My name is Jennifer
Bradfield and I'm an attorney
located in Albuquerque, New
Mexico. I'm also at the exit
water access treatment and reuse
alliance. It's a group of
businesses, local municipalities
that are interested in promoting
various types of water we use.
Um, we want to reuse every
molecule of H2O that we can
primarily in industrial uses for
industrial purposes, so that we
save fresh water for freshwater
uses. Um, going through the
second committee substitute that
you're looking at before you.
On page one we struck the
definition of certified
reclaimed water since we're
eliminating the concept of the
certification process in the
bill.
On page 2, line 8, we are
changing the department that's
responsible for creating an
authorizing the reclaimed water
authorities from the economic
development department to NMED,
the Environment Department.
On page 2, we're adjusting the
definition of reclaimed water to
specifically exclude potable
reuse. Here our focus is to just
focus on non-potable uses. On
page 5, lines 5 through 6, we
are swapping the economic
development department secretary
with the Environment Department
Secretary as there, the person
that they choose to delegate it
to.
On page 5, we made minor
adjustments clarifying who
support, who, who appoints
members of the reclaimed Water
Authority Boards, and this was
in response to edits that were
requested by
um, and then 15 through 16, we
added an obligation to provide
biannual reporting to regional
planning and water Security
Planning Act, and the reason why
we did that, that was
specifically requested by the
governor's office, um, once the
regional, once the regional
water.
abortion.
On page 7, we strike the ability
of a reclaimed water authority
to develop a water quality
management plan that's um that
and the reason why that was just
creating confusion. We want to
have consistency with the
aggencies, um, and we met
extensively this last week with
enemy D. We got good input from
the Office of the state engineer
and we thought that that change
was needed. Um, page 8.
Oh, I'm sorry, page 7.
OK, it was, um, lines 6.
It was items 6 and 7,
And it looks like lines.
Um, on page.
8 and 9.
Um, it looks like it's a strike
the ability to perform
inspections, um by the reclaimed
Water Authority. There was a
desire not to have this be an
inspection, we struck that that
was at the requests that we had
received, keeping the.
On page 11, we struck the
exemption from state personnel
laws and rules.
On page 13, we changed, um, in
the context of retail.
And we struck the obligation for
a reclaimed water at the
original water resources within
30 days. This edit was made at
the request of the Office of the
State Engineer. They would like
a more um instead of a more
compulsive.
On page 14, we struck the
reclaimed water at, and this was
also an engineer. They also um
thought it was too, you know, I
think the input was um and and
so that is OK. Our focus price
setting authority for that.
Um, um, page 15, we struck
language encouraging uh
producers and wholesalers.
Basically kind of compel an
agreement for the use of
reclaimed waters, um, and on
pages 15 through 17, we struck
uh sections. This sections
through the process of entering
into an agreement and it would
have required um and users to
start TE office as a state
engineer. And then on pages 18
through 19, we struck the
concept of certified.
Thank you for that. Uh, any
other comments before we move to
public comments.
OK, we're gonna do Madam Chair,
can I, I don't have a page 18.
It, it's been struck.
It's no longer in the, it's in
the original, which is in green
right and back and forth. Um,
OK, we're gonna go to public
comment. If you are in support
of this bill.
Uh, please raise your hands.
You'll have one minute.
Um, and please restrict your
comments to the 2nd committee
sub. Thank you.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair and
committee. My name is John
Roderick. I'm the deputy cabinet
secretary at New Mexico
Environment Department.
And I am here to stand in
support of the committee senate.
Thank you. Can you stay in the
room to answer any questions
that might come from committee.
Yes, thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Vanessa Lari. I am a.
Lobbyist, a registered lobbyist
for Borderplex, as well as
several other development and
uh, I did testify earlier and
I've spoken with all of you. So
thank you for all of your time.
I would like to say that it'd be
great if this bill were to
actually titled the Bill to
Protect potable water.
This is a way that we are using
alternative resources for
industry and economic
development. This is actually an
incredibly exciting bill for all
of my multiple clients in
various counties within the
state. We really encourage your
support. Thank you very much.
Thank you. Good morning, Madam
Chair. I'm Joe de la Rosa, the
chairman of the New Mexico
Border Authority. We believe
that this is a responsible way
to support economic development
and preserve water resources
statewide, but especially at the
New Mexico-Mexico border.
Madam Chair members of the
committee, Debbie Hughes with
the Association of Conservation
Districts. We are being told
that we're gonna have like 25%
less water in the next few
years. What are we gonna do?
This will help with the supply
to keep us whole and keep us
growing because what are we
gonna cut the 25% off? Is it
gonna be ag? Is it gonna be
development? Um, if we can do
things like this, we can keep
growing and surviving in New
Mexico. Thank you.
When else in the room?
If you are in support of this
bill on Zoom,
please speakers
Jonathan, please admit yourself
when you can.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
Committee. I'm John Apecius,
assistant county manager for the
County of Junana on behalf of
the board of the county
commissioners, I'm here in
support of HB 311 as presented
with today's substitutions.
Identifying additional water
resources as a key component for
the growth of our border
industrial park located in Santa
Teresa along the US-Mexican
border needs such as these that
have been identified not only uh
supports our federally funded
projects such as that by the
USDOT's Build America Bureau
grant under our competitively
awarded regional infrastruc
accelerator program, but also
are in line with some of the
state initiatives identified by
the New Mexico Economic
Development Department. So thank
you for your consideration and
support today.
Good morning. My name is Kate
Ziegler. I'm an independent
consulting geohydrologist, and
we work with uh multiple rural
communities in northeastern and
eastern New Mexico and in
working on groundwater resource
management on the high plains
and recognizing that we are in
dire straits. Um, I think that
we must consider all options to
be on the table to preserve our
fresh groundwater and surface
water resources and therefore, I
would strongly, uh, I, I would
strongly speak in support of
this bill. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, we will
go to opposition,
if you are opposed to this pill,
please raise your hand, those in
the room, and you'll get a
minute to speak. We will hold
the mic. Please state your name
for the record.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
committee members, my name is
Kathy Elliott. I'm the
registered lobbyist for New
Mexico Rural Water while we
highly appreciate the bill and
the intent, and also the
substitution. Um, we do have
some concerns um that have still
been not addressed, that we feel
could be addressed from the um
FIR and for that reason, we are
asking that perhaps this bill be
heard and discussed more in the
interim committees and um to
fully work out all the details.
Thank you very much for your
time.
Good morning Chair
Representatives. My name is
Colin Cox with the Center for
Biological Diversity I commented
on initially on 311 in
opposition and we, we remain
opposed um with the committee
sub. It doesn't resolve issues
with produced water reuse with
oil field waste, um.
Which it's not ready for prime
time, and so for that reason, we
remain opposed to the committee
sub. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representatives. My name's
Sarah Cannope and I'm a policy
specialist with Amigos Bravos,
which is a statewide water
quality protection and
restoration organization.
We are opposed to the committee
sub, we continue to oppose the
ways in which um
The committee the committee sub
doesn't address our concerns
about the relationship between
this bill and the water quality
Control Commission. While the
rulemaking involving water reuse
is now underway at the WQCC.
That rulemaking is not
comprehensive.
If anything, excuse me.
The rulemaking, which is
contemplating a prohibition on
the discharge of reclaimed oil
and gas production wastewater
raises more questions than it
answers regarding the um
prudence of treating
commodified, and using treated
oil and production gas uh
wastewater.
The other thing that this bill
doesn't address is how extremely
expensive it is to treat, uh,
produced water.
Thank you
Hi, my name's Kathy Economy. Um,
I used to work on the whip
Project. We drove by these um
ponds of discharged water.
Month after month, year after
year, and I thought, what are
they doing with this water? We
can reclaim it.
Then I looked into how expensive
it will be to reclaim this
water, the technology is not
developed yet. The science is
not developed yet, and it puts
the onus on the state to
fund the reclaiming of the water
and not the oil and gas
industry. So I think the onus is
in the oil and gas industry that
produces this water that just
dumps it on the road, um, and we
need more um science to figure
out how to reprocess this water.
It's not yet developed yet.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Mike Neese
from Procidas, New Mexico. Um, I
am a water drinker. I, I don't
have much to say on this bill,
but on page 2 definition uh line
21 definition J reclaimed water
does not say anything about uh
produced water and I, I hope
that you will question that
definition, poor definitions
make poor laws, and this is a
definition. Thank you.
Anyone else in the room in
opposition?
OK, we'll move to Zoom. Raise
your hand.
OK, Madam Chair, um, everybody
on Zoom, uh, again, I will allow
you to unmute yourself and
that's when your time will
start.
Uh, you'll have one minute to
speak and please say your name
for the record.
Uh, first off, we have Vida.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Vidal
Gonzalez, and I work for the New
Mexicoe Association as the
policy director in planning.
We are highly concerned with
this bill, and we're opposed of
it, so we urge you to vote no,
uh, with water quality and our
main concern of this is how
treated water from wastewater
treatment facilities would also
be wrapped up in this and in
times of drought and major
concerns for Aseos when we're
really in dire need of water.
Um, we want that.
Water to be put back into the
system for beneficial use for
downstream users. Thank you.
OK. Next up we have indivisible
Albuquerque.
Hello, can you hear me?
Yes, we can hear you.
Thank you so much. My name is
Sandra Stalberg, and I'm with
Indivisible Albuquerque. Thank
you, Madam Chair and committee
members for taking our comments.
We stand in strong opposition to
this bill. Um, this is still
produced water, uh, that's where
it originates, and there's no um
standards for to which it will
be treated. And when you start
moving this water around, there
is high risk of contaminating
other water. And so we strongly
urge you to vote no on this.
Thank you.
Thank you. Next up we have
Madam Chair, members of the
commission, Eric Schlenker
Goodrich with the Western
Environmental Law Center. We are
frankly alarmed by HB 311. This
bill would devolve governance
and oversight of toxic oil and
gas production wastewater to
local reclaimed water
authorities. We expect that
these authorities would subvert
the public interest because they
would be captured and controlled
from the start by private
economic interests. Further, New
Mexico lacks a comprehensive
statewide regulatory framework
to treat, commodify and use
toxic oil and gas wastewater in
the public interest. The fact
that enemyD would review
requests
create these authorities
provides us with no comfort. HB
311 confines NMED's role to
ensuring an application meets
paperwork requirements. NMED has
neither the authority to assess
whether the creation of an
authority is in the public
interest, in order to ensure
that the authority once created,
is serving the public interest.
We thus say it stands strongly
opposed to HB 311. Thank you.
Thank you. Next up we have
Andrea.
Hello, my name is Alejandria
Lyons. I am the coalition
coordinator for New Mexico No
Fall Solutions. We also stand in
opposition to HBC 11. We have
some of the same concerns we had
for strategic water supply, um,
you know, we were a big part of
the hearing that took place in
the interim, and we feel that
these continued efforts are
undermining our democracy and
specifically what water rights
holders are asking of, you know,
our legislature and our
departments. We
We are very worried about the
science around produced water,
but also the consultation for uh
with tribes and also with the
Araka users, I think I would
like to see um questions from
the committee if possible about
the funding for this bill, how
it correlates to the governor's
strategic water supply, and so,
um, we look forward to the
discussion and we hope that
folks um make this bill better.
Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, next up we have
Cheryl.
Hello, thank you for this
opportunity. Um, I am opposing
HB 311. I, um, I very much
appreciate what Eric said a
moment ago. I appreciate what
all of the people in opposition
have said, I do not trust that
we will not get contaminated
water back into our clean water.
And I really fail to understand
why it is that taxpayers are
always burdened with cleaning up
corporate.
Pollution that is completely
inappropriate. Thank you so
much, especially since we, since
we subsidize oil and gas and all
manner of other mining and
whatnot. So no, I opposed 311.
Thank you, thank you.
Thank you. Next up we have
Julia.
Um, good morning, uh, Madam
Chair and committee members is
Julia Bernal. I am the executive
director of Pebble Action
Alliance, and I'm also a tribal
member from Santia Pueblo, um,
Again, our organization is in
opposition of HB 311, um,
including the um amendments from
the committee sub, um, there
still isn't, um,
A clear definition or
correlation of how this is also
going to impact the reuse of
produced water. This has been an
issue that um our organization
and our colleagues that have,
you know, spoken before me, have
expressed time and time again,
um, just wanting to ensure that
there is also adequate um
collaboration and consultation
with um with um uh tribal
nations of New Mexico and also
other senior water rights users.
So we urge the committee to ask
those um poignant questions on
how this could impact the uses
from those uh
Thank you, Julia. I apologize,
uh, you in overtime. Next up we
have.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Annadi Lopez, and I'm
speaking on behalf of YAA. We
still stand in opposition to
House Bill 311, our concerns
remain the same, especially
regarding the vague language of
reclaimed water, and also our
concerns regarding water
oversight. We know that creating
separate bodies for the
oversight of reclaimed water
will not only lead to confusion,
but also allow for its current
authority of the water quality
control commission.
to be undermined and continuing
the same risk of contaminating
our communities. Um, we should
not be threatening the bill or
the responsibility for um the
industry's toxic radioactive
waste, and so we strongly urge
you to vote no on House Bill 31.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. OK, next up
we have Barbara.
Um, thank you. Good morning
again, chair and members of the
committee, and Barbara speaking
for the League of Women Voters
of New Mexico. We asked the
committee to vote no on HB 311.
The league supports stringent
regulations to protect ground
and surface water quality from
pollution that can impact human
health as well as the natural
flora and fauna. Such
regulations must be strictly
enforced. HB 311 creates many
water authorities.
The power to to define
Uh,
reclaimed water, these
definitions could be
contradictory.
This bill is the best premature.
Please vote no. Thank you.
Thank you. Next up, we have
Luis.
Can you hear me?
Yes, we can hear you.
Hello and good morning. Madam
Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Louis Pena
and I'm a commissioner on
Seazila Plaza in the Sesnovas in
North Central Rio Riba.
I'm also vice president of
Regional Association of Aseass
for the Rio Calete.
And tributaries, and I oppose uh
HB 311 because it proposes the
creation of an entirely new
quasi-governmental reclaimed
water authority that lies his
existing institutional
foundation. Uh, it's also
unclear how these entities would
develop the capacity funding and
expertise necessary to carry out
the responsibilities in the
public interest, especially
given the ongoing controversies
and certainties surrounding the
treatment modification and use
of brackish waters and
wastewater from oil and gas
production.
many of oursea communities
depend on clean treated water
from, um, I'm sorry, um, many of
our seco communities depend on
clean water, um,
During water droughts, water
should be not be commodified.
Um, thank you for accepting the
public comment.
Water's life, the water is
alive.
I ask you to protect life
went over time. Next up we have
Clara.
Good morning. My name is
Reverend Clara Sims. Thank you
for the opportunity to provide
public comment. I'm here today
as a faith leader representing
New Mexico and her faith, power,
and light, we work with faith
communities all over New Mexico.
We want to uplift similar
concerns about the vague
definitions of reclaimed water,
the lack of a regulatory
framework for dealing with toxic
wastewater and inadequate
consultation with frontline and
tribal communities.
I also want to uplift that for
people of faith and conscious,
water is not only a resource,
water is sacred. Valuing water
and valuing life are one and the
same, and we are concerned that
HB 311 situates the primary
value of water as a commodity
that profits private industry
rather than a freely given gift
for the common good of all. We
strongly urge you to vote no on
HB 311, which jeopardizes the
health and integrity of our
freshwater and the irreplaceable
beauty of our lifeways in New
Mexico that water sustains.
Thank you for your time.
Thank you, except we have yeah.
Morning, Madam Chair
representatives of the
committee. My name is Beata
Sosi. I'm from Santa Clara
Pueblo, and I'm the
organizational director at Birth
of My Heart Birthplace, where a
freestanding midwifery and um
birth center in Espinola.
Um, I'm opposed of this bill
because
It puts our birthing community
and pregnant families at risk
for toxic exposure.
All of our families in New
Mexico deserve the right to
raise and birth their children
in a clean, healthy and safe
environment.
Uh
Environment is that of our
waters, which shares our birth
waters that we're all born from,
so what we do to our water, we
do to ourselves, and any re any
um unregulated use of toxic
waste.
Um, attempting to camouflage
this as safe is unacceptable.
So thank you for opposing this
bill.
Thank you. And next up we have
Joaquin.
Can you hear me all?
Yes, we may hear you.
Oh, great. Uh, yeah, one of the,
my number is fuck, uh, my name
is Joaquinoras Gua de Jesus. I
may, uh,
But San Antonio de Valdez and
Valdez Taos County. I'm also a
member of our um Aonarriva
Community land grant.
And I'm also a bilingual
community um.
School social worker and, and I,
I'm just gonna be honest with
you all, like,
And, and bear with me, you know,
in the work I do, working with
kids and trying to help them
learn their emotional realities.
We see all kinds of stuff, you
know. Sometimes I see kids on
the playground, and one will
have candy and the rest of them
will be looking and wanting some
and, you know, that, that desire
for candy, that fiending for
sugar is so strong that
sometimes secai, you know, it
falls on the ground. And before
adults can say anything, those
kids are pick it up, put it back
in their mouth. You know, and I
sit there and I think, geez, how
strong is that candy? How strong
is that desire to to
that sugar that they can make
themselves sick and.
I apologize as you went over
your time. Thank you everybody
and Madam Chair, that concludes.
Representative Small, would you
like to address any of the
comments, especially.
Thank you, Madam Chair. And I'm
thinking of a, a
I will not address that comment.
But Madam Chair, committee, uh,
thank you, um, first, I just
want to say uh that industry
bears these costs. There is no
public funding that's associated
with this bill. There's, uh, so
industry bears the cost and
Madam Chair, uh, we think that
industry is very interested in
bearing the cost for non-potable
water to expand economic
development in the state.
There's not a way to do that
now.
And so that's why we're bringing
this. Second, Madam Chair, on
page 10, section 8, subsection
B.
To the um
Questions and concerns raised
around water rights, uh,
impacting of any potable water
rights or any water rights in
general. These are all subject
to reclaimed water authorities
are subject to all applicable
laws and rules governing water
rights.
Um
Water quality to the issues
Madam Chair raised around water
quality, reclaimed water
authorities won't set any water
quality standards. Those are all
set by the state in Mexico
Environment department.
Through the
commission. And so, uh, if there
is um
Surface water that's being
treated now going into that's
not affected by this, uh,
Our proposed bill, Madam Chair.
This is to take uh other
non-traditional water supplies,
treat them solely for
non-potable.
Um, Madam Chair, as we go
through questions, uh, Ms. Brad
few will be able to give maybe
some additional, uh, sort of
examples right that if that's
interest of interest I think
that would be very helpful.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, you know, a really
good example that came up at the
governor's um state of the
science symposium that was put
on this summer in a certain type
of, well, focus really we're
interested in any HO model use
here was the cement needed for
wind turbines. Um, you actually
need 30 to mix cement and wind
turbines require 11,000 tons of
cement too, and so for the
sunzia project, it's got, you
know, the goal is there 900 wind
turbines.
Well, that's approximately 36
million gallons of water.
That are needed.
Um, you can use non-traditional
water resources to mix that
cement and it would save a whole
lot of water.
Um, another example for
reclaimed water authorities is
when there is mining
contamination in an area, you
could form a reclaimed water
authority, you can have industry
come in and pay for the cleanup
costs. You can have public
oversight. So it's those two
elements combined private
investment. Let's make industry
pay. We would like engaged with
over 20 companies in forming
this bill, but we also want the
public oversight because without
public oversight and being
subject to things like IPRA and
the Open Meetings Act.
I don't know if we're gonna
build public trust in the right
way when we're looking at
non-traditional water resources.
So it's really OK, we're gonna
move on to questions.
Representative Rubio.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representatives. Um, so
just I have a number of
questions, but to speak to um
that the, the, that we're not
providing that we're not giving
any sort of subsidies to
Um, industry, I just will say
that a few weeks ago when we
heard House Bill 137, um, I
don't know where that's gonna
go, um, related to strategic
water supply, but if it were if
that bill were to have moved
forward.
Industry could potentially apply
for, um, public funding. So I
just wanted to make that clear,
depending on how, um, that
legislation moved forward, um,
but my first question is
regarding the reclaimed water,
particularly the powers, the,
the uh the reclaimed water
authorities power uh power and
oversight. Um, as I was reading
the committee sub, I guess I'm
just wanting to understand the
justification for granting um
the reclaimed water authorities.
the 25 separate powers. You have
the 17 in section 5A, and then
the, um, and then an additional
8 in section 5B. Can you, can
you elaborate on that?
What the justification was for
that?
Um, Madam Chair Representative
and members of the committee, so
the, the thought here is
creating economic development
arms that are county level and
the types of projects that we've
heard about with the biggest
amount of interest are joint
investment in creating joint
investment to encourage
desalination of brackish waters,
education programs for local
community education, um,
And um clean up, mining clean up
for contaminated waters and then
trying to match um businesses
with
With non-traditional water
resources that are available for
industrial sample of, and
there's a whole host of those
that were um submitted to the
feasibility study over the
summer.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. Do these
entities have this institutional
foundation to be able to do all
of the things that you've just
described.
Madam Chair, Representative, and
members of the committee, yes,
they will. I, you know, these
entities will have to be formed
with an expert um in certain
background areas and so you're
gonna have a water treatment
person on there. You're gonna
have a member from the New
Mexico Environment Department,
you're gonna have a water
transporter on there as well, so
somebody who knows about how you
transport water safely, you're
gonna have a, a water user um
there, and then somebody from
your local who's got
working for a, a water company,
right? Like you like Bernal Leo
water tail users, and then
you're gonna have an
environmental professional. So
that's a nice mix of experience
on the board, um, which will
bring a depth of knowledge when
you're looking at economic.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Representatives. So they,
they will, but they don't right
now.
Um, Madam Chair, Representative
and members of the committee,
there's no authority in place
right now to form these. So
they're not currently formed.
OK, great. Thank you.
Um, moving on, um, so there's
There's well, I mean, we, we
know the controversy surrounding
the commodification of brackish
water, um, and, um, oil and gas
production wastewater and so I
know that a lot of opposition
raised concerns around the
public and so.
In reading the sub, I still
don't feel reassured that these
newly created authorities will
act in the public interest, um,
I feel that they still will work
in the um interest of private
industry and so how do you?
How do you actually calm what
I'm feeling in terms of, of that
right now because I think that
in reading the sub that's
something that I'm still um
navigating.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative.
We think that the um
The one of the core public
interests is um using fresh
water for freshwater uses,
namely, drinking, uh,
agriculture, our environment.
Madam Chair, Representative, we
see economic development and
growth, particularly in low and
zero carbon industries as very,
is very much in the public
interest.
That economic growth.
Yeah
Demands water.
That whether it's the example of
the wind turbines and the
concrete that they need other
manufacturing of solar panels or
a wide
economic development takes
water. And so Madam Chair,
Representative.
The public interest served by
more economic opportunity, and
without
Mm-hmm
Taking more fresh water for that
economic development. That's
where the reclaimed water
authorities come in and Madam
Chair Representative of the
Reclaimed Water Authorities are
constrained. They don't, uh,
The water quality is governed by
the state through the New Mexico
Environment Department and the
WQCC, um, there's, they're not
gonna be involved in potable
water, so they're serving a very
high uh public interest, which
is uh job creation and economic
development, and a very high
public interest, which is
reducing pressure on freshwater
resource.
Miss Brad, if you would like to
add, uh, Madam Chair,
representative and members of
the committee, you know, right
now for non private contracts
between companies.
And so you really don't have for
inspection of public records
Act. It's gonna put more
sunlight.
On these transactions and where
these uses are suitable, and
it'll put a whole lot more
sunlight on areas where we could
conserve water because you're
gonna have entities actually
ident on traditional waters may
be more appropriate and that
would be a novel concept in New
Mexico that would really help us
save water and use industrial
water for industrial purposes.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
thank you, Representative. I'll,
I'll, I'll move on, um.
I
I have some concerns around the
regulatory capture and the
public accountability, um, in
reading the committee sub, it
says it grants authority to the
New Mexico Environment
Department, NMED to approve
reclaimed water authority, um,
as far as I can tell and if you
can confirm enemyD being a
member on the board.
Are they a non-voting member?
Are they?
On voting, Madam Chair.
OK, so it's purely advisory.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
it's uh technical advisory and
sort of oversight, but not
voting.
OK. Um, and so with enemy
serving as.
I guess I still think quote
unquote, a primary role, um,
Their, their role.
Primarily throughout the state
is to protect water quality.
Not to promote economic
development, which is what you
all changed in or.
In the sub madam I think what
we, there was there were
questions from the committee
around the technical expertise
to judge water quality. Um, and
instead of, so we, I think
hearing those concerns,
The that authority, that
technical expertise, that
responsibility,
uh, lies now with Mexico
Environment Department and the
water quality Control
Commission. um.
So we, but they don't have a
role. They're they're, they're
that oversight.
Regulatory, that is their clear
role in, in this bill. But, and
there was request, which we
think was wise to have them be
uh in charge of the
The reclaimed water authorities
to main just for it to be
absolutely clear and not to put
water, any sort of water.
quantity or quality, even this,
the
Uh, an expectation of
responsibility with the economic
development department.
That that should stay within a
ED.
Madam Chair, Representative,
would there, I know that there
was concerns previously around
conflicts of interest around
that is that
Is that still a concern?
Um, Madam Chair, Representative,
and members of the committee, we
did discuss that and so they
will have a
Thank you. Um, Madam Chair
Representative, um, with.
With the NMED doing, um,
participating in in this role
now, um, they will be.
I guess supporting in terms of,
of the application process. Um,
I'm not seeing a clear criteria
on how they could deny an
application. Can you say more
about how that process is going
to work.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, um, it is a fairly
simple application process
outlined, so you've got to have
the necessary, the necessary
requirements outlined in the
bill. Um, you've got to have a
board that will be able to
function and that's, I, I think
gonna be the big threshold
requirement of having the
experts within the county and
once you have that, um, I don't
see why we wouldn't want those
experts, I mean, their primary
duty is to start to identify all
the water treatment companies in
the county and the city, and
anybody who could use the
treated.
And I think we'd want to start
that as New Mexicans as soon as
possible, because that gives us
our goals of, of where we can
focus on conservation and where
we can focus on industrial uses
or and, you know, industrial
waters for industrial uses. I,
uh, representative, the uh an
application to form a board is
not an application to reuse
water or to do any of the
reclaimed water use. It forming
the board and then doing
any of the water reclamation and
reuse that water reclamation and
reuse would still depend upon
meeting uh all of the enemy and
water quality control
commission, uh, requirements and
standards.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative.
Um
So once the reclaimed water uh
from what I'm reading on the um
on the sub, once these reclaimed
water authorities are
established.
Can you point me to where
I
And, and maybe you can't. And,
and I think this is why I have
this, I still have a lot of
concerns with this bill is
because of the oversight piece
from Enemy D.
My fear is that.
Private water interests could
potentially co-opt this process
and so what?
I guess what guarantee can you
provide to the public that.
That that public trust won't be
broken.
Based on what I'm reading on
this committee sub Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative. My bedrock, it
comes back to the independent
regulatory oversight that's in
New Mexicovironment Department
maintains, and so any use of
reclaimed water is
Um
is solely dependent upon
independent experts at the state
level. Second, Madam Chair,
committee, I think the makeup of
the board.
Uh, the exclusion of potable
water.
The protection of existing water
rights, all of those are really
strong guardrails that move us
very quick sort of very
carefully but very directly
towards um reclaimed water for
new economic development that
will bring jobs and opportunity
to communities without depleting
those communities freshwater
resources and Madam Chair
Representative, I think that is
very much the choice we have
now. If
want new jobs, then there's
going to be new pressures on
precious freshwater resources in
communities, and we see that all
across the state.
We need those and want new jobs,
and we want to reduce the
pressure on freshwater
resources. And that's so.
The
enemy do you maintains
regulatory oversight
independently.
Um, the
Potable water is excluded
existing water rights through
the Office of the State Engineer
are protected and um
Those are the very strong
guardrails in my.
Mine, Madam Chair,
Representative.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. So speaking
regarding the board, um, on the
committee sub, I think it's um
section, well, it is section 4B,
uh, folks have raised concerns
about it being unbalanced. And
so, um,
I guess the question is how did
you all decide to come to this
language specifically because
it's, it, it reads to me that
Um, the board of the reclaimed
water authorities.
It looks like it could be sacked
by folks who represent economic
development industry and other
industry representatives and
There's like one environmental
science representative that's
been included, um, who could
potentially have ties to the
industry as well, and so.
How does this actually prevent
regulatory capture when the
board could potentially be made
up of industry folks.
Um, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I think an example of
where we think one of these
boards would be useful, might be
helpful to illustrate, you know,
um.
I'm currently working with
Border Region.
And they need a lot of water.
To New Mexico, um, um, and they
say, hey, go, go to OSC and find
water rights. In that, um, and
the water rights options are
buying water from farmers, so
then you go back to the client
and you say, OK, here are your
options. Do you want to go buy
this farmer? And the answer is
no.
These companies really don't
want to come in.
And so then you go over to the
the environment department, they
say, hey, we got a great pitch
deck from these companies that
have water treatment, um.
Processes, but they're not
experts in those processes. And
so you get the pitch deck and
you reach out to those people
and the conversation falls flat
and they can't find the
non-traditional walnut.
And economic development doesn't
have the water expertise. Um,
they've got, you know, they know
about companies, they know about
incentives and incentives aren't
really what they're looking for,
and they, they can't match the
water treaters with the water
users.
And so we need expertise when
you're thinking about economic
development or
Who knows about water treatment?
Who knows how to transport it
from site A to site B. And then
who knows about those uses, and
then who knows if the local
water reefs or impacts are gonna
be, those are very essential
components to getting those new
with non-traditional waters. And
so that's, and, and that is the
heart and soul of this and get
water to those businesses. Madam
Chair, thank you, Ms. Brad,
Madam Chair Representative, if
you want to suggest as we go
through the process, additional
members representing specific
constituencies or stakeholders.
We're very open to that. The, in
my mind, Madam Chair
Representative, the strong
sideboards that have been built
because of this committee and
other great questions and other
really good feedback.
We have some really strong
sideboards in there.
Um
But if you want to suggest other
sort of members, uh,
representing different
stakeholder groups or
constituencies super open to
that. Um, because the need for
this is so strong, and if
there's, if there's ways to add
uh a few members.
With the, you know, again,
representing specific
stakeholder groups or
constituencies.
Uh, these are just identifying
sources and uses for reclaimed
water and having more folks
there if that's of interest,
very open. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you,
Representative. Um, I appreciate
that. Thank you. Um, I'll move
on to the fragmented water
management that I've.
Also have concerns within the
bill. Um, we, a couple of bills
ago we were hearing about um the
Pecos River, which I didn't make
the comment earlier, but I grew
up right next to it. It's, it
was 2 or 3 miles from East Lake
Arthur where, um, I was never
supposed to go out and hang out
at the river, but that was just
the thing that you did and um.
And so, given that, you know,
rivers, streams.
Wetlands all function.
And connected watersheds. And so
The subcommittee, I mean, and I,
I, I or the committee sub talks
about um these local reclaimed
water authorities, which looked
to create a patchwork of
conflicting policies, and so how
do you explain?
That piece and then ensuring
that um we don't undermine
statewide water protections.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. Um, the uh
the water security Planning Act.
And uh integrating that approach
more into this, which was a key
request from the executive that
we appreciated, I think probably
one of the reasons they're now
stand in support, uh, speaks to
that interconnected nature,
Madam Chair, uh, representative.
Secondly, reuse and discharge.
So using uh um the uh reclaimed
water and then discharging
reclaimed water, that's go.
by New Mexico Environment
Department.
The reclaimed water authorities
are just connecting the users of
reclaimed water with sources of
reclaimed water.
Uh, the quality and the
cleanliness of that governed by
the state. Any discharge back
into the environment, uh, if
there is any controlled
completely by the state. And
Madam Chair, representative,
because this respects uh the
existing office of the State
Engineer Water rights. Um, we
can't take water out of that
system and impair those rights.
So it's really like, we can't
touch water that's already in
that system.
We can't put water back into
that system, unless it's
approved by the state regulatory
body in the regulatory
framework, which is a key change
in the sub that was came through
this committee and also through
the executive.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. So, um,
If we were to say that, for
example, Donana County opposes
the use of oil and gas
wastewater, but Otero County
does.
While, um, like what mechanisms
exist within this bill and
within the authorities that you
all are, are asking for to
provide and resolve conflicts
between those two counties.
Um, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, you actually hit on
a, a key point representative
that I think is nice in this
bill, um, it does allow counties
and cities to adopt in their own
political points, um,
non-traditional water resources
have not been widely adopted in
New Mexico, but they have been
adopted in other states like
California, and we saw
California aggressively switch
to non-traditional water
resources starting back in the
1970s, and they continue to do
so today.
Um, I think that it is important
as New Mexicans consider whether
or whether or not they want
certain industrial waters to be
used for industrial purposes, to
have, have your county be able
to say, here's our county
reclaimed Water Authority. We
don't like this type of
industrious, um, and that does
give individual cities and
counties more control.
Over that, but this is all
nonpotable use. Um, everything
is subject to the WQCC and you
can't discharge anything without
a permit.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. And so,
given that we have yet to
provide a comprehensive water
quality standard.
Um,
I think folks are still
concerned regarding the
definition around um reclaimed
water and um.
And I think
I personally, but I know that
it's, it's a majority of, of, of
people who are in opposition to
this bill also feel that this
process is being rushed as well.
Um, before actually like looking
at established science-based
water protections and so, um,
For me, the issue is still a lot
of different things, but it's
still very much the issue
related to public interest and
safety, and so, um,
I will go ahead and close my
marks, but um I just I still
think that this legislation is
still deeply flawed.
Um,
It, it gives me even greater
concerns because I feel like
we're sidestepping so many um
potential for the state to
provide more water protections
and um.
And I don't know, I, I feel like
it's, I know that you all are
saying that we're not giving
industry anything, but for me, I
feel that it's still very much
um
We, we definitely are. And so,
um, I'll, I'll just close my
comments. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Representative Rubio.
Uh, next up is Representative
Mirabal Moya.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you so much, um.
I just have a couple of
questions. Um, much of them
you've kind of touched a little
bit, so I'm still gonna ask them
so I have clarification. A lot
of the testimony kind of
Um, brought up stuff and I just
want to make sure that what was
being said to clarify some of
those pieces.
first on um on page 5.
Um, the, so it, um, all of the
different people that would be
um within the board. Um, what
happens, my, my question is, uh,
Madam Chair, what happens in
like those small communities
that maybe can't find this, they
can at this point if they have
trouble finding each one of
these types of types of
professionals, they just won't
be able to um to um form this
board, is that kind of how it
is?
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, yes, that is how it
is. I, I, it is contemplate um
but that is why we did both
count that are interested in
this could form a county
initiative.
OK, thank you very much. And
then, um,
And then, uh, if we go on to
page 6, I believe from the
original we added in um from uh
like a line 11 to 15 about uh
giving that report, I actually
really like that edition because
I think um I think knowing what
water is out there. I mean,
because I'm, I'm gonna be honest
with you, I, I like this. I, I
agree with, um, I believe it was
Debbie Hughes who says, you
know, like we are running out of
water and we need to do
something and there's water out
there that we haven't and
Um, and so, um,
So, um, so I, I like this
because at least the authority
or or that area knows what can
be used at any given moment, um,
and so like in your scenario
that you described before where
you have a business coming in
and they're like, OK, where's
the water, at least in it with
something like this, you would
know where it's at. Um, so I
really like that. Now, um,
I want a couple of the questions
that that that came up as I was
listening. Um, so is this bill
at all saying that um that the
the reclaimed water authority or
the state is responsible for
cleaning up any of this water.
Me in chair saying no.
And and that's what I thought.
So, and then does um the water
authority, like where does it
the the this water authority
fall in the hierarchy of all the
other um uh water authorities or
or or anything like that, do
they conflict at all or, or is
it all, um, they're kind of just
getting into a niche that is no
longer be that is not regulated
at this point,
Madam very much the latter, uh,
getting into that niche that's
really is Ms. Brad few pointed
out, it's not public
It's not sort of out there in
the sunlight, um.
It's very much in their own
niche, not getting involved or
using waters that are uh
utilized in other associations
for other purposes.
So, um, thank you, uh, Madam
Chair, and, um, and, and
representatives. So the water
that we're hoping to, to govern
here. That's not being used.
At this, at this point, right? I
mean, um, to, to this extent,
or, or, or, or a monitored, I
should say too.
Madam Chair.
Very much so, Madam Chair
Representative, in many cases,
these are gonna be the brackish
water reserves that are uh
there, but not utilized, and
it's a choice of sort of
brackish water or fresh water
for the example that was given
of uh new manufacturing.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. And
so when using this this water,
um, are we going to, do we know
or is there um?
Is there data on making sure
that we're not gonna deplete any
other sources, uh, that, uh,
that, that are precious to us.
Like, so it's not gonna, it's
not gonna take from those
anyway, it's just
Madam Chair, great question. And
by uh making sure that these
respect and can't impair
existing water rights.
Uh, and are not for potable, not
for potable sources. It's really
focusing on um reducing that
pressure on those existing uses
of water and the sources that
supply the, even as we work to
grow economically.
Madam Chair Representatives, a,
a great example is um in our
municipal reuse system, so there
are certain municipal reuse
systems.
In place in New Mexico, um, a
certain amount of that was, um,
but in time.
They actually sent her because
they don't have any place for it
to go.
And so this will be treated
municipal water matching it up
with industrial users as we
bring in new jobs to New Mexico.
Thank you. Um, and I think
that's about.
Yes, I think that's about it.
Thank you very much. Thank you,
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
And
Thank you, chair.
For your
Legislation. I think I, I can
drill this down to about 2 or 3
hours' worth of questions. So,
Representative, please don't do
that
um.
We'll start with a comment.
You know, unless I'm at an ACI
conference.
Um, there's not a whole lot of
people within a couple 100 miles
of me that know more about
concrete.
And um when we talk about using
non-potable water and concrete.
That scares me with respect to
how that is cleaned, Madam
Chair, and I'd love to have an
offline conversation about that.
Because I've seen what.
Improper use of the non-potable
water does.
The structures and we can see
that across the country and
across the world.
Moving on to.
The direct peace within this
bill, Madam Chair, uh,
And chairman, uh, specifically.
Help me through why our cities
and our counties.
And municipalities can't already
do this.
Because the way I understand our
our rules and our laws within
our
towns and counties, there's no
reason why we can't do this
already.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee representative, um, so
right now, um, the, the public
can have all the public
oversight, right? But it can't
have the private investment.
Private investment can have all
the private investment without
any public oversight.
But how do you get an entity
that can take the donate and get
the public funding match it with
or get the private funding and
match it with other Bureau of
Reclamation and grant funds that
are out there and magnify that
and then have that public, so
that's that currently has to
happen under New Mexico law
under time. I think it's good we
haven't heard about it a whole
lot, um, there are entities
organized under it. We use the
example of the New Mexico
Partnership, but the fact that
that entity in the news for.
And this bill, and that act has
been around since 20. Thank you,
Madam Chair and thank you,
Jennifer, for that, so.
One of the
In one of the analysis, and I
think it was from the state
engineer.
Lifted concerns about how RWAs.
Are really defined in this
legislation in their opinion, as
nonprofit corporations, and they
have some concerns with that.
So, Madam Chair, uh, chair
Jennifer, whoever wants to
answer that, talk through that
to give us some ease.
If you don't mind. Madam Chair,
Committee representatives, um.
You know, I think that a public
private corporation is the
existing model in New Mexico
that has worked the best over
time. I did check the New Mexico
statutes and the federal
government has kind of
partnerships and things like
that, those, but here you have a
proven model or a couple decades
and a half now, um, and it's
doing well, and that entity is
from other countries and other
states into New Mexico and help
them navigate the startup
process and that model does very
well.
and economic development. Thank
you, chair, and thank you for
that answer, you know, it's a
concern, uh, for the years that
I've sat on transportation, each
year they bring.
Public-private partnership bill
in front of us and each year I
vote against it because it's so
doesn't work.
When, when you look at what all
we need to do.
And once we ride a
public-private partnership, lot,
a whole bunch of other things
up. If we're not concerned
about.
Laws like that we have.
And so I keep telling, well, our
past Secretary of
Transportation, our current
Secretary of Transportation.
Or, or, or current leads in
transportation. This is, this
can be a problem.
So I, I, I hear what you say.
So, Madam Chair,
Presenters
In section 4, again, let's go
back to the membership.
Help me understand what how
county like Sierra County or
Moore County, we're gonna find
people that meet the definitions
inside of here, Madam Chair
Representative and members of
the committee. So I think
You are gonna need to plug in in
a county or a project in New
Mexico-based water treatment
companies like and then those,
and then you do have somebody
that works at your local water
sales and it's not difficult to
find everywhere.
Madam Chair, and, and Jennifer,
I appreciate that. I, I do find.
Parts of this
Yeah, we can look at a reclaimed
water producer or something like
that from the municipal side. We
can look at
Some of the experiences, I think
you're gonna have a hard time.
Where
confining this, this is with
respect to that without going
out to consultants.
You know, when we look at what's
happening within our rural
counties with respect to just
getting people that are
qualified.
In the different levels that it
takes to take care of water or
waste water.
that creates its own set of
problems with their, um,
Madam Chair, I'm going through
and making sure I'm not asking
questions other people have
already asked. Yeah.
Madam Chair and presenters.
With respect to
The public
Sector with respect to
Growing government.
I think the chair can tell you
that I'm very opposed to growing
government, and there are parts
and pieces inside this
legislation that requires us to
grow government.
Cut me off that
Um, Madam Chair, members of the
committee representative.
Water reused him to tea that
develops public trust.
And so if we want to develop
water reuse and bring in, you're
either purchasing water from
farmers.
Um, so if we want to bring in
new jobs, um, most many for
business development is hooked
with water directly. The states
where, and I do think that's an
essential in water reuseing
correctly.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for that answer. I
have one last question.
With respect to this, when, if
this was to be enacted and, and
we um
That process was put together,
they have a company.
Madam Chair and chair, um.
would have to deal with
The disposal of anything.
If any minerals
Or any compounds would.
Uh, have to be dealt with there
and and chairman, talk to me
about your vision on
It's beyond lithium.
So there's the um that could
bring a whole lot of that um
that is something that, that's
gonna happen tomorrow in New
Mexico, but right now we have a
robust.
Thank you,
Madam Chair, and, and Chairman.
Uh
Working in the oil field.
I've and and had them tested to
look at the minerals that are in
there.
When we get to a point where,
where that's in, in.
Success
I'm in agreement that there's a
lot of things that we can do
with those different minerals.
And, and so it's, it's cleaning
that to that point. And right
now it's not economical, but I
think I see it coming as an
economic solution.
I do appreciate chair, Madam
Chair and chair, the, the
changes that were made in here.
I don't think we're all the way
there yet.
But we're
Heck of a lot closer than we
were and uh I'm not gonna stand
in the way of seeing this
continue. Thank you.
Thank you
Madam Chair, thank you,
sponsors. Um, I also, Madam
Chair Representative the the
piece that I was asking about
there if I was um understanding
the, the deep and extensive
conversation we've had about
these authorities last time I
was asking about what else this
bill established, and it's in my
understanding, reading offered
here in front of us today that
those pieces that in my, my
perspective, we're setting water
policies, none of that is in
place in in this sponsor Madam
Chair, representative, yes,
that's correct. Thank you.
And Madam Chair and sponsor, I
want, I want to clarify here,
um.
With our cameras on water policy
from your, so I do want to
appreciate that, um, and if you
bring another bill forward,
maybe we're out of time this
year, but sources, that's,
that's where we're at. Um, so I
think I just, most of my
questions have been asked.
Um, I just had one clarifying
question.
And
Page 14, section 12.
I don't, maybe I could have
walked out and missed this,
Madam Chair sponsor as you
named, setting rates probably
where we stand right now with
these, Madam.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, you know, the pricing
for public, so that's the whole
intent there, um, uh, if a water
authority. Um, so, Madam Chair,
like, uh, I'm not sure yet how I
feel about this New Mexico and
certainly representing the
district down south, we're
really proud of our of our
border plex and the
possibilities and and potential
that we see there, but most
important about water, whether
it's Santalina or down south,
like, do we have water? Um, so
I, I still wonder like how much
of this you can do.
What kind of authorities, but I
appreciate most, Madam Chair,
um, an expert meaningful. So I
also.
In a committee that has
expertise different than ours.
We've brought up.
Thank you. Um, any other
questions from the committee?
I have some comments, um.
I don't see how we can.
Uh, get ourselves out of this
crisis without looking the water
crisis about the water. Um, my
concern is
How we get to that water, how we
treat that water, how that water
is applied and where it's
applied, and that's the
discussion, I think we're that
we're having right now. So I
really appreciate.
from the original to the first
committee sub, the 2nd committee
sub. I think it is reflecting.
Um, the comments that we heard
from the public, the comments
that we heard from the
committee, um.
But it's still like I'm, I, the
question I have is really like.
Why do we need a nonprofit
organization.
That is sort of in this funny
state, right? quasi.
Governed by enemy, but it's a
nonprofit that is exempt from
certain liabilities and um.
It has an immunity from
liability. I want to talk a
little bit about that. And, you
know, what experiences you have
with other states and how they
do this because we absolutely
need to get comfortable with
reclaimed water. We really do,
um.
But, and we also really need to
regulate and make sure that
there is a lot of authority and
oversight and testing and
inspection that's coming from my
belief from a government entity.
So talk to me about why
nonprofit and why exempting from
liability. I mean.
Granting immunity from
liability.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, so this was taking a
known structure in New Mexico,
um, back, um.
What we really want to achieve
is private investment, right?
So, and I, I think we heard that
in strategic water supply with
137 with a lot of commentary.
Things being paid for by
taxpayers, right? Industry, we
went out to 20 businesses and
they said we, we want to pay.
Um, and so the question then
becomes under the law, how do
you get pay for the projects and
on the back of industry.
That's the goal.
Um, and you look at other states
and they do have um
But when you look to New Mexico
law, we have a less
controversial model that's
worked for a couple decades.
And it hasn't been in the news
of litigation, and it's focused
on economic development, which
is exactly, and so we did
largely copy um the statute that
was in place there, um, chair.
Um, we've added it back in, but
here there's gonna be a ton of
oversight with the WQC, um,
that, that will always remain in
place. So that does not, there's
no liability shield for those
types of issues. Thank you,
Representative S. Thank you
expert. Can you point out all
the places where NMED has
oversight. So I think that's
what we're, we continue to hear
from, uh, from the public
because that's what I, my
concern remains is.
Very explicitly where do we see
NMEDs continued oversight.
Madam Chair.
while we
Miss Brad few gets there, there.
EnemyD controls uh the uh
quality.
Um, weather.
A water and um and what
treatment level?
can be used. So it's sort of the
source.
The quality, the application,
and then the discharge, where
that water comes from, what
standard it's treated to and
where it goes after its use in,
say, uh, you know, manufacturing
or factory.
All of those places are subject
to New Mexico Environment
Department.
And none of those are standards
that can be created
independently of New Mexico
environment, specifically, Madam
Chair, uh, members of the
committee, Section 8.
Um, subsection.
And this is on 10. Thank you.
Um, so a reclaimed water at
handling of water, water
What part there, on um section,
subsection 3.
It does say the department,
which, which has been defined as
Department of Oh there thank
you.
I'm just um and so water quality
is um I know oftentimes we don't
think about it as in a water
quality and has delegated
certain responsibilities
department, um, the environment
department is subject to rules
regarding the discharge of
water, and there's a
prohibition. You cannot
discharge water on the ground.
Or to waters, um, without
getting a permit.
From the Environment department
for non-traditional water in
place when you're thinking about
produced water, there is a
complete prohibition of spilling
any produced water on the
ground. OK.
So, you're saying that Section 8
has all oversight that NMED
needs.
Yes, Madam Chair and members of
the committee.
But enemy D is not.
part of the decision making
because as a reclaimed water
authority will do.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, that is correct, and,
and the reason for that.
is because what these
department, it does really
change, um, right now, the
environment department has
economic development
professional and they've that,
but the goal of that agency is
not economic development. The
goal of economic development is
not water. And so you need this
bridge and that's why company
that is why in the street and
the goal under that statute was
to find a matchmaker.com, if you
remember that analogy. Um, we
don't have a legal entity in New
Mexico to help.
play Matchmaker.com, um, but the
authority doesn't have any
powers under this statute to do.
Anything you know beyond kind of
those economic development
functions. So if they take
water, they still have to
independently go to the
environment department in the
WQCC and get permits.
So they are, they are subject to
enemy jurisdiction, um, if for
some reason their members were
handling water, nothing exempts
anybody from still going through
all the existing permitting. OK,
uh thank you for that. Um.
Why wouldn't we? Well, I think I
differ from idea about expanding
government. We probably have
some, I think, I think we have
different views. Uh, it is
pertinent, um, which is why
can't we?
Places an enemy deed and have
any enemy just.
Why do we need to a separate
nonprofit Madam, um,
I think
Yeah
What has been brought to us is
that in the current system where
um NMED controls that sort of
they maintain the regulatory
functions.
There's not any entity that is
helping new large economic
development
by non-freshwater resources.
So the right now.
There's no way to grow
economically without putting
more pressure on our freshwater
resources.
They're, as the example that Ms.
Brad few talked about when uh
economic development
opportunity, they're told to go
look for water rights, which
means farmers are cities.
Um, so, as a, the, the reclaimed
water authorities.
Leave all of the uh regulatory
function to enemyD but are able
to go out there and be that
matchmaker, be the connector, be
the forum where we can grow
economically while not.
Thank you for that, and I, I
don't wanna, you know, keep
going down this.
path, but I just, I don't
understand why we couldn't make
them uh able to be matchmakers.
Why can't we give them their
staff so that we can do just
that, right? So that we can
increase the New Mexico
Environment Department budget
170% since, uh, I think 2019
inappropriately, I think, and in
ways that serve many different
perspectives.
Um
Madam Chair, the
I think we're, you know, these
economic development
opportunities are real time.
Uh, I know particularly in the
down south, but I know in other
parts of the state as well.
That large economic development
opportunities are looking for
within a few months, whether or
not their future can be here in
New Mexico, or they have.
OK, and, and I think it's
amazing that we've been able to
fund the department, uh, it's in
the finance making that happen,
much needed.
A budget increases, um, I don't
know, um.
What I can do to
Add language to more comfortable
that anybody has truly
oversight. I don't know if it's
being a voting member.
Of the board that might help me,
um, but I, I do have, I do have
heartburn around that. And as
questions, there are other
members of this committee who's
who still have questions, so I'm
gonna go, I'm gonna stop my line
of questioning now and I'm going
to go to Representative Hera and
then Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, chair.
Um
I think I just have a caution to
uh representatives Rubio about
the makeup of the.
And that's because I've had no
and um.
And right now it looks like
it's, you know, it's slanted
toward the industry. I think if
we could bring more people on
the board.
If you say, OK, we'll have an
invite if you specify that.
Then everybody comes to the
board thinking, and you have to
be careful of that too. So I
think we ought to add more
members, but I, I think you have
to do that carefully, maybe.
It, but it's, it, you don't want
everybody to have a tie board in
there and I've seen boards just
totally.
This met with the label.
And then they can't
Reach compromise or move forward
at all.
So I that's just a cautionary
tale. I really don't, um, having
brackish water, using brackish
water for really struggling and
um and we also know we have 3100
shallowba as opposed to the 25
deep brackish water wheels. So
there's, there's a lot of
opportunity and uh uh I see it,
uh, I think this should move
forward and I think uh.
The next committee with that
board composition, but I
Representative Cates.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you very much for your
presentation. I was able to
really study this committee said
last time, so I'm sorry I missed
the discussion on date, um, I, I
will say one of the, one of the
shortcomings in the news that I
was concerned about was the
makeup of the nonprofit board. I
really like our chairs
suggestion of having a voting
member from NMET. That sounds
like something that I could
definitely, that's another
accountability factor that
makes me feel so much more
secure in this, um, so we have,
uh, the quality water, uh,
control commission, they're
doing the standard of the
quality water enemy D is for the
discharge of the water because
these nonprofit groups, they're
Basically commodity brokers. I
mean, that's their setting
prices they're they're the,
they're the, the hinge pin
between a public resource and a
for profit business, correct?
Madam Chair, representates and
I'll go to Ms. Pratt few, some
of those they are the matchmaker
and the connector, Madam Chair,
Representative um in the
committee substitute, they are
no longer the price setter.
That that function has been
removed after questions and, and
I, you know, questions uh around
doing that. So they're no longer
the price setter. They are the
matchmaker.
The water quality control
commission, which is a function
of New Mexico Environment
department,
uh, is like you said, in charge
of uh all the standards. So the,
what the water is treated to,
um,
And then where the water goes
after it's used, if it goes
anywhere after that, that is
fully to the um.
They, um, Madam Chair,
I think we're very open the
suggestion to make the enemy D
uh member, a voting member.
fair suggestion. I, I'll commit
to this committee, Madam Chair,
and thank you as we go forward
with this and also stay in
conversation about um
Sort of making a board that is
best balanced while also
reflective of the different
parts of the state.
But we can make that change for
sure. OK, thank you very much,
uh, chair, and thank you, Chair.
Um, so just clarify, who is uh
the price setter is that the
PRC.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative,
members of the committee, so,
um, the, the price setter right
now because it's a matchmaker
function is gonna be the company
that are deciding to treat the
water and use the treated water.
So, we've decided that Office of
the State Engineer thought it
was.
Um, if it is a, these, these are
industrial waters, so I don't,
they will stay regulated just as
they are, um, and they go
through the PRC process.
Thank you very much for
listening to our concerns, that
would be my only thing is that
if, if I understand that it is
not a utility because we're not
using it in the public, but it
is a public resource and having
public input on site setting
prices rather than the industry
itself would be the other thing
that I would need, um, but thank
you very much the sub is much
improved. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Uh, thank you. I'm going to go
to the chair for a 2nd time.
I have a couple more questions,
but I will, I will be brief. Um,
if we are setting up a
nonprofit, which is what this is
asking authority from NB to do
this. Um, where is the money
going to come from to pay the
staffers of that nonprofit and
If they're um.
You know, there will be water
that's bought and sold for
industrial purposes, as I
understand it, um, will there be
any, uh, profit made from the
sale and purchase of that water,
you know, with, when you're
matchmaking, Matchmaker.com
takes a percentage, so I want to
know what that looks like.
I, I don't know that for like as
an experience.
I
I heard
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, that is an excellent
question. So right now the
concept is to pay for this on
the back of industry. So have
industry pay for this and so
that, you know, you can have
different participation
contributions. We took out fees
and assessments from the bill
for feedback from the office of
state engineer, um, but you want
those private investments and
then there are a lot of federal
matching funds that these
nonprofits come from multiple
sources, and that's what makes.
new business entities looking at
New Mexico is they want to go in
with joint investment. So often
for a quote on a desal project
dollars.
And so if you think about that
upper ends of 378 where you want
to find numerous different and
investment. They like invest.
OK, that's it.
Um, no more questions from
anybody.
What's the will of the
committee.
We have a DuP pass.
This is a do not pass for HB
311. Go ahead and rephrase that
motion, that is a do not pass.
On House bill.
311 and a do pass on House A
311.
You're welcome. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Representative Herrera,
Representative Lara Kadena.
Yes.
Representative Matthews.
Yes.
Representative Moya.
Yes.
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Rubio? No.
Ranking members Amora.
Yes.
Madam Vice Cherokeats.
Yes.
Madam Chair Orest.
Thank you. Uh, 9 in favor, 1
opposed.
Representative Small, you have a
due pass on um Thank you very
much, Madam Chair. Thank you.
I'm going to explain my vote,
please.
I have deep concerns about this.
We've talked about it. I've
talked with your, with the folks
you're working on with this. I
think we need more.
enemy oversight.
