Yes.
Representative do you.
Spurts over it Representative
Montoya.
You madam chair.
I believe.
When the blade is your expert
Linda blade also Natasha chart
okay and best stills and
In the barber Erhard.
Representative Montoya will not
be here okay.
I'm not seeing Lara or Torshin.
And Barbara Natasha if you
weren't in the waiting room can
you please raise your hand.
You know what what it is one of
them under women's liberation
front.
You.
It should be.
So.
Thank.
Start.
Do you have did did we get
everybody.
I I believe so is coach blade
there.
Landed late at your service okay
and Beth stills
Is there okay Erhard.
I don't know I don't see a bar
graph.
Barbara okay the attendees okay.
Whenever you're ready
Representative Cook.
I'm.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you members of the committee
appreciate the opportunity to
present this bill House Bill
three oh four
is that protect women sports act
this bill was brought to me B.
by.
A woman I know in Clovis who
Asked me if I was aware of the
situation of males competing in
female sports and I told her
only be superficially from what
I've seen in media accounts of
it and she is a mother of a
daughter and a son and said that
she in a lot of other mothers of
daughters in Clovis and and
around that area had we're very
concerned about this phenomenon
and we hope that somebody could
would carry such a bill
And so she asked me just because
I know her and so I did a little
bit of research into it and she
asked me to get into or to put
me in touch with Natasa chart of
the women's liberation front who
has educated me a lot more on
the subject and together this
all happened after the session
started so we came up with a
bill
It which turned into a house
bill three oh four and then
eventually Committee substitute
for House the one for the bottom
line of the purpose of this bill
is to protect girls sports in in
our schools in New Mexico by
eight and and in so doing
protect the girls that play
those sports by not allowing
the new
to play in girls sports so
that's the bill
Madam chair and because I'm not
real I've only learned a lot
about this subject in the last
few days more than anything we
do so by talking with the with
this chart with women's
liberation front and just doing
my own homework but I would like
to hand it over Madam chair if
it's okay with you and let me
talk a chart takeover from the
policy perspective and why we
want to do this.
Representative did you talk
about a committee so.
Yes ma'am I I I have prepared a
twenty seven I thought that the
committee had it if the
committee doesn't have it we can
go forward with the original one
it really doesn't do that much
okay let me just let me check
with the I can't keep track of
my own bills every can't keep
track of other ones so analysts
did we get a sub.
Okay we have we got it in time.
Okay okay so I will I will the
staff for discussion and
Representative Cook I I'm not
sure how you want to handle this
do you want to.
We haven't do you want to tell
us what the order does that
different from the original.
The only thing that the that the
sub does is.
On page one line twenty two to
twenty three it includes the the
language as in other Cadena saga
agency the million mammalian
species and I'll have a missed
the treasure chart talk a little
bit more about why that's in
there.
Okay.
Thanks so much so I'll start I'm
thank you madam chair Thompson
and Representative Cook for
inviting me to act as an expert
in favor of HB three up for the
women's sports protection act
and the executive director for
women's liberation front a
radical feminist organization
that hundred ninety members
across the country and in New
Mexico.
Since the passage of title nine
the ability to participate in
competitive athletics just had a
huge positive impact on women
and girls in the United States
in addition to the physical
health benefits of an active
lifestyle participation in
sports my girls has been trying
to increase academic success the
self esteem and confidence we to
lower rates of teen pregnancy
and help women achieve long term
in their careers.
Roughly nine in ten female
corporate executives are former
athletes about half of them
competed at the college level.
The fashion of allowing male
students to compete in female
athletics based on gender
identity claims puts this
progress at risk by costing hard
working women and girls the
opportunity to compete in fair
and safe sporting competitions
national polling of thirty five
hundred likely voters that
women's liberation front
conducted before the twenty
twenty election indicated that
sixty six percent of the public
across the country shares this
view.
The differences in physical
strength between the sexes
starts before you pretty and
it's so great that every year
teen boys break the women's
world record times and track.
The best nine year old boys can
out run the best seventeen year
old girl athletes.
In twenty seventeen a team of
boys under fifteen be the US
women's national team and the
soccer scrimmage reverse is
almost unimaginable.
Everyone knew what a girl was
when she was a child who wasn't
allowed to run late or compete
for titles and scholarships like
the boys at her school.
Mike wise human beings cannot
change sex nor can we change
over sixty five hundred sex
differences in gene expressions
at the cellular level.
And although people have begun
to talk as though it's very hard
to determine sex and human
beings.
We specified that we are out of
stock of this mammals determined
by large and small gamete of
millions of your old.
Years old sexual reproduction
the strategy and it stinks
because of organisms and it's no
harder to tell the sex of the
human being that is any other
mammal.
The sex differences are fact but
we don't arm wrestle or hold
sprints to determine who sits in
elected office or who gets to
manage the accounting
department.
We no longer decide questions of
criminal culpability in trial by
combat holding a person's moral
worth hostage to physical
prowess.
Sex differences are facts that
imply no judgment on women's
intellectual ethical fitness for
public life.
Still when they do matter they
matter an awful lot.
Earlier this week I was asked to
speak to Candace Candace
legislators considering a
similar bill I am the other
proponents including some
accomplished female athlete
spoke about the benefits to
girls and women.
Opportunities that were denied
to our grandmothers the
opponents of the Kansas women's
sports protection bill largely
talked about the effects of
depression dysphoria and
bullying on young boys.
Which is of course tragic the
several of them issued a week
suicide threats over the lives
of children is the committee
would not offer a girl sports as
a sacrifice to mental health the
voice this is a common tactic
the committee should certainly
expect to hear such suicide
threats this evening.
It's not even clear that
destroying the hopes and dreams
of girls will help the mental
health employees.
And the government of New Mexico
what about the the federal U. S.
government is no more medically
qualified to offer it to them as
an experimental prescription are
their teen girl appears.
We all know who girl is when a
teen girl is dangerously
depressed perhaps because she is
been grievously abused or
bullied or has body dysphoria
she is the six percent that we
do not stop the world agree for.
The deadliest type of body just
for court disorder is anorexia
nervosa it's the likeliest
proved fatal.
V. triggered by depression or
bullying it almost exclusively
affects girls.
It would be inappropriate to
threaten to invoice for the
guilt these girls lives to us to
give up their own rights and
futures.
I and many other domestic abuse
survivors have the memories of a
male partner using suicide
threats against me to back up is
an appropriate demands
eventually Act founded in need
to say now and I hope that more
of our elected officials can
find their own courage to resist
these improper pleadings.
If the government insisted there
was now the only next exports
went up with two categories of
boys sports very sports for a
week now athletes and are we
sports for the less talented
male athletes allowed to compete
against the girls.
It's unfair to make girls and
women compete physically with
boys and then the economic
undeniable physical advantage I
asked the committee to think
about the futures of New Mexico
girls and women will continue to
benefit from female only sports
please vote yes on H. B. three
or four thank you.
Madam chair.
Yes.
I wonder if we did I don't want
to takes so much time to
complete so much of the
committee's time but I wonder if
is still there in New Mexico
split could give a brief opening
statement and I would appreciate
it thank you keep it brief we've
already been now what are we
going on our eight can we still
got a ways to go so thank you
Madam thank you coach.
Yes hi everybody madam chair
thank you for having me I am
coach when the blade and a PhD
in kinesiology I've been
employed as for affirmative
professional for twenty five
years I'm president of athletics
over to now even though I'm up
here in Canada I feel compelled
to contribute to this
conversation because I was a
beneficiary of title nine our
goal Meryl Maryland Terrapins I
had my turn and I you know I
really feel obligated to speak
on behalf of female athletes
so therefore I guess I'm
appearing here before you as a
witness in favor of New Mexico
house bill three all for the
women's sports protection act
now I have a three quick points
okay so the first point is about
biological sex I'm not gonna
waste your time telling you
about the differences between
male biology female biology we
know that I have a husband
upstairs use autism call right
now is that the entire culture
so I've got my Michael's
Department
add you know just like you would
never tell a farmer for example
that a bowl.
Could become a milking cow
because of some key thought.
You're never going to convince
me as a coach that a young human
being can actually change our
biology somehow through a belief
system so I'm used to get that
out of the way that's twenty one
point two
I think the more important part
of this is talking about human
rights and and gender identity
so most people I think I
understand there's a distinction
between biological sex and
gender identity.
For example a young male person
could literally identify or see
itself as a girl.
And I believe that person should
have the liberty to present as a
girl without being bullied we
all accept that but there's a
key question.
Is it appropriate to compel all
of the girls to let this male
person.
So come into their arena of life
where it's been set out
specifically for biological
females so look I would put
another way we're all human
beings were all complex will all
different identities I'm a woman
I'm a coach I'm a mother I'm a
sister I'm a cousin all of these
are identities you guys just
most recently probably have
identities as being for example
are representative of the people
so that's another identity right
so when it comes to sports that
we need to ask is which identity
how.
In order to decide what category
you competed so like how crazy
would it be if we would just say
well listen let's base our
sports selection on religious
identity so all the Muslims over
here.
All the Christians over there
or maybe like political identity
all the Republicans in this race
all the Democrats like it just
doesn't make sense no in sport
you compete on the basis of your
biology with your human body the
beauty of sport is that you can
actually take all of your
identities ideologies our belief
systems put them aside and
compete on the basis of your
biology here you're just a human
body competing as a male or a
female so I can speak to point
three that's it we're gonna talk
about fairness and the impact of
transition so the only way in my
brain that you could possibly
think it's fair to have a male
body in the sport with girls is
yes.
The medical transition erases
the mail advantage so there been
three no there's been and
they've been twelve studies in
all of history just twelve
studies that have measured the
the strength or the advantages
of mail pre transition the
strength of the body performance
measurements pre and post and
all twelve studies show that no
matter the intervention no
matter the duration of treatment
even if you only like you could
treat them for here you can
treat them for for three years
that it does not diminish the
mail advantage to any
appreciable extent.
All the studies show that no
matter what you do medically or
otherwise surgery to a male body
the advantages process so what I
would say is this madam chair.
Is to allow a male body to
compete with a female athlete or
in film all female sports no
matter the ideology no matter
the medical treatment it is most
definitely going to result in
discrimination against the
female athletes on the basis of
sex and that is definitely just
discriminatory it is contrary to
title nine and it is simply
inappropriate that's it.
Representative Cook madam chair
if the agency doesn't or to give
a very brief some very brief
opening remarks about the
previous.
Thank you for K. committee for
your time today my name is best
cells are a former medical
laboratory technician now a wife
mother an amateur power lifter I
am the founder of the grassroots
coalition save women's sports we
are nonpartisan we are world
wide and we resent all sports
and all angles of the political
spectrum I'll try my best to sum
this up I'm proud to say that I
can deadlift over three hundred
pounds after nine years of
training but my son he's age ten
and after just a few hours a
week of training he now lives
two hundred pounds it will not
be long until he will out with
me no matter how hard I work.
If we continue to allow males to
compete and female sports
they'll be male sports they'll
be coed sports but eventually
there will no longer be female
sports.
Many women I know are getting
harassed they're getting called
transphobic and bigoted and
racist simply for trying to
preserve female sports I have
even received death threats I
share my story to represent this
silenced majority and because it
should not rest on the shoulders
of young women to fight this.
Thank you for your time this
bill is simply to protect
females please preserve sports
for girls and women vote yes on
house bill three oh four.
Thank you I'm Representative
Cook are you ready go to the
audience yes ma'am okay so we
will do a poll first.
I'm.
Allison has put the pull up if
you are on the panel you can't
vote so.
So if people would please vote.
I can't see what's happening so
when it looks pretty stable can
you what in in the poll please.
Yes there's also votes coming in
so.
Okay thank you usually I can see
it but every once in awhile I
can't see what's happening so.
Okay so in favor is twenty two
people or thirty three percent
and in opposition it's forty
four people or sixty seven
percent so now we will go to the
audience and we will go to those
in favor first so if you
If you are in favor please raise
your hand and if you that's if
you click on participants that
will that will show you where to
raise your hand we do we will
have a timer we will have a one
minute timer with the hard stop
at one minute so please.
Engine to the timer and now
Representative start wrapping
yourself up when the time is
running out and now we are going
to be very civil and we're going
to be very kind to each other
about model what this committee
as be gentle on yourself and be
gentle on others so I will make
sure that that happens so we
will start where.
We will start with Marci going
Marci.
Can you hear me yes we can go
ahead.
Okay for small businesses or
worse are five hours after this
thing is supposed to have
started we had a lot of people
that were ready to go for this
and many of our for people who
are in favor of this bill have
been blocked out just like they
did with HB two seventy four
this needs to stop and that is
very rude when it comes to
When it comes to getting
opinions of people other than
the Democrats in this session
then I would ask you to please
think freedom of speech I will
continue to speak thank you
ma'am.
Here's the other part.
Girls are built to different
physically
and and and I mean in the
physics sense even
you can not that the girls are
should should be able to compete
and get their scholarships you
know we talk about women's
rights and and creating and I'd
like to have a couple extra
seconds for your second that you
took off of my time.
You girls.
Our benefit from being able to
participate in sports as well as
get scholarships this is really
unbelievable.
And for those of you who do not
know.
Legislative time and
Representative Cook knows this
better than I do because he's
been around longer provided
trying is the suggestion we
cannot stick with a time
schedule that time on the agenda
was three thirty or ten minutes
after we leave the floor and so
I I would I would I am I
apologize for things not being
on time but when you have
seventy.
And.
Thank sometimes take longer than
we anticipate that they will and
if we could we could doubt.
I will just leave it at that so
I apologize but that's the way
that this the fifth runs here so
Christina Tatum.
Yes hi I am shy go ahead go
ahead yes thank you I'm in
support of HB three or four I'm
concerned New Mexico parent and
that's why I'm speaking up
without HB three or four women
sport fails on all three import
export factor safety fairness
and inclusion of female athletes
with female athletes potentially
being edged out a team's
scholarships and podiums no
other categories such as age or
disability or challenge the way
female sport has been challenged
it's telling that the emails
that ideas trans A. K. A.
transmission often not even a
factor in these discussions it
helps to demonstrate how females
regardless of how they identify
are marginalized in these
conversations the fact that
there are pro female athletes
the ideas chance but have agreed
not to take testosterone
currently opting to remain a
female pro sports like soccer in
W. NBA is important currently
female players are expected to
be inclusive of these gender
nonconforming players and they
are it hasn't been a problem
however it highlights the
unfairness when on the flip side
no such similar inclusivity is
asked of males is expected to
females but considered
unfathomable task of males this
isn't right it's giving female
female athletes the wrong
message and that is why support.
Okay we will go to Andrea.
Read.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you for letting
me speak must be you know me as
a district attorney and I'm
often speaking on crime bills
this time though I'm speaking as
a mother of two daughters who
have spent
approximately eighteen years and
the swimming sport what I can
say is that I've watched a sport
for many many years and the
times for men in the times for
girls boys and girls are
completely different because are
biologically different I can
tell you that last year at the
high school swim meet in a
hundred freestyle high school St
eighteen boys qualified to enter
state at a fifty point nine nine
time the actual winning time in
the girls one hundred free
freestyle was fifty two point
nine OO and you can see just by
those numbers and that was the
winner of the two hundred
freestyle the others just
qualified as the boys and that's
even greater at a club swim
level than high school swim
level well that's just a stat
but I think it's important in
New Mexico I am in support of
bill three oh four and I thank
you for letting me speak.
And then the.
H. E. I'm yes thank you my name
okay.
My name is Jeff Archie enough
for Clovis New Mexico and I
speak today in support of HB
three or four my wife and I have
two daughters to compete in
athletics the older is an eighth
grader and she representative
for middle school in volleyball
and basketball and plans on
trying out for high school
without the passage of this bill
my daughter could be facing off
against a biological male on the
basketball court allowing this
to compete against her will put
heard physical and competitive
disadvantage because science has
proven time and time again the
physiological differences are
thing between males and females
and terms of muscle function
body mass and growth rate these
physiological differences also
increase the possibility of my
daughter or her teammates being
injured by having to compete
against a male when I was in
high school our JV boys soccer
team scrimmage against the
varsity girls during the
scrimmage the leading scorer in
the state from the girls team
went into our goalie and tore
her ACL well I know the
possibility for injury could
have happened against a female
goalie it still happened against
a male this injury ruined her
season took her from a possible
state title.
Thank you I'm at I think do we
have Andrea reed already.
We did madam chair okay okay so
we will go to and select can't
Cadwallader.
And you'll you'll need to
unmute.
I'm sorry thank you madam.
Yes okay thank you madam
chairman and representative.
Billy Jean king Abby Wambach
these are all female athletes
that I admire and young women
have to look up to women in
sports learn positive attributes
such as team work leadership and
competence and communication
skills which will lead to future
leaders women have worked hard
to establish themselves as
athletes and leaders your title
nine you have reached a point
where women have equal
opportunity to participate in
sports please don't jeopardize
this study show that women's
sports and the positive impact
on young women this is too
important to let go by women do
not receive college scholarships
at the same rate as male
athletes do do not diminish
their chances are thank you for
the opportunity to speak.
Thank you now we've got Gary
person.
Thank you madam chair can you
hear me.
Yes we can hear you.
Thank you my name is Gerry
Pearson I support the bit I
support this bill men and women
are physically different and
should have to compete with each
other better question is why
don't you pass a bill that eight
open classes simple men women
and I open classes based on
hormone levels boxing and MMA
does not let a fighter I do in
between classes a two sixty five
pound fighter will not fight at
one forty five pound fighter in
NMAA transgender man for the
woman of the same weight the
transfer what then one in sixty
seconds the woman was left so
battered she had retired from an
inmate if open classes are put
into place more competitors.
More champions and a better show
will rights please pass this
bill and then come back with
common sense bill with more
diverse thank you.
Thank you Chris and please give
us your last name Christy.
You'll need to on mute.
Christy.
Please.
Okay let's skip over Christie
and go to case the hating.
Hello can you hear me yes.
Thank you for letting me speak
today.
My daughter ran cross country in
high school so I'm mindful of
the importance of this bill
female athletes will experience
discouragement and loss of
competitive fervor if they are
forced to compete against boys
the bill touches on the fact the
boys are stronger and faster
than girls and medical science
holds these qualities do not
diminish when a boy takes
testosterone suppressants I
believe my genetic make up is
physically different than a girl
this can't be denied simply
because of which chooses to
identify as another gender my
daughter won eighteen medals my
son who was not the fastest way
on his team never won a medal
yet on his worst day he still
beat my daughter's time by over
five minutes in a five K. race
imagine the unfair outcome had
my son been allowed to compete
against her despite being slow
for a boy he would have taken
away her wins for years only
boys were eligible to play
sports women finally achieved a
safe place to build confidence
and athletic talent and compete
with equal opportunity don't
take a step backward please vote
yes to this bill and safeguard
the future of sports for women
thank you.
J. Kelley.
Hello my name is Jay Kelly I
live in Clovis New Mexico and I
have a daughter that plays
Volleyball and now runs track
and you know this really comes
down to a question of of
physiology you know we're born
male or female and just because
a boy decides to wake up one day
and say that he is the email
does not change his physical
structure does not change
anything you know just like if I
was to say tomorrow I want to be
a cat it didn't change I'm still
a physical mail and those that
those strengths for their if you
ever looked in look at a track
meet watch track meet in the
hurdles there's two different
sides there's a smaller size for
the girls in a bigger size for
the the voice my my daughter's
tried to to run race with that
the big hurdles and it's it's a
lot of extra work in the SLO's
are now where is the boy when he
jumps over at a girl's size
hurdle it's it's effortless
there's no comparison of the
difference.
Eight Sherrie Mullins.
Yes can you hear me OK yes thank
you thanks for allowing me the
opportunity to speak.
Ma'am
can you hear me now yes we can
hear you okay just let me know
when to go.
Thank you I am speaking on
behalf of myself and other
parents in Alamogordo New Mexico
I have a fourteen year old
daughter that is competitive
athlete both in track and
volleyball I would highlight the
fact you that she is five foot
two inches tall and I myself and
the same height no matter what
we say about anything else
biologically speaking we're born
either male or female.
Because of this we are
physiologically put together
differently I understand that
there are those that that
identify as female but were born
male and I appreciate the
struggle that they probably have
however title nine was created
years ago to give opportunity to
women and to protect their
rights in sports to be
competitive and leisure taking
this away by promoting this that
boys provided biologically
speaking are competing with
girls takes away those
opportunities that title nine
created and would effectively
and my daughter's chances F. I
would to a competing at all.
Thank you now we have share it
parity.
Share it.
You are muted but we can't hear
you.
What.
Okay.
Technical difficulties there
will go to Amy.
You will.
Yes.
Hi I have eight daughters and
one son
all the ones who are able to
have participated in school
sport.
And I am here because.
As much as we would like to.
Include everyone everywhere all
the time for everything
sports the high school level and
you are level for that matter
absolutely should be separated
and I believe that your
philosophy that you have in your
constitution currently supports
that if you go to two point one
point two the end of your
statement says the association's
leader should be representative
of the state schools and the
most important single
consideration in the regulation
of any school activity must be
the welfare and healthy
development of students I can
tell you that after working hard
preparing all year especially
for state and other events but
if my girls knew that no matter
what they did they would still
show up in the building by their
male
Compact companion it would just
shoot them down there would be
no point there would be no point
for them to try my daughter
continuously notice that in her
practices.
Thank you we have Jennifer
Williams.
Yes can you hear me yes.
Is Jennifer Williams and I
support house bill three oh four
when children are four years old
they start sports usually on
coed teams to build self esteem
learn teamwork enhance social
skills and exercise this works
because it is before hormones
kick in in cost noticeable
differences in size strength and
speed before they start using
locker rooms to change and get
ready and receiving scholarships
for college this is All Things
that you have to separate later
on so the boys can get voice
scholarships and girls can get
school scholarships on an even
playing field.
And just as.
Just as I would like to if I
identify as a butterfly I cannot
fly and if the boy as this is a
boy cannot play girls sports if
you identifies as a girl thank
you.
Thank you next we have Jason
Atkinson.
Hello.
Yes go ahead Jason on the head
track and field coach at highly
successful.
Program in southern New Mexico
and I'm in the thick of it
dealing with high school boys
and girls on a daily basis I
just see the differences every
single day that we train we just
finished I weight room session
as an example and the
differences are are excuse me
people have got over for example
we are currently working with
our school record holder in the
hundred meters for a girl our
girls team I had twenty one
faster boys last year R. four
hundred meter record holder ran
Levin eight.
As well you have implements this
gets shot put and javelin see
that are lighter smaller in
diameter and my throws coach
when we talk about this today
let me know that a average to
sub average male thrower but
take those implements intro
twenty.
He further in the shot put and
discus so you have physical
attributes that are factor and
also equipment.
We have J. Kelly.
Well.
Hi this is Amy Kelly I'm the
parent with two daughters a
moment in support of this bill
participating sports is a in our
in our family means we are all
involved we help our help our
athlete handle disappointments
in competition and celebrate
with them and their success we
encourage our daughters to be
dedicated to practicing by the
challenging competition.
Athletes in track of a common
goal to reach a qualifying mark
whether that is timed jumping or
throwing I can assure you that
female athletes for the most
part do not compete in track for
the fun of it biological male
athletes in the same competition
would have a physiological
advantage over female athletes
as even by the creation of the
sport militants having higher
hurdles and have your topic and
discuss the inevitable and
eventual changing of the
qualifying marks being no events
would make it almost physical
logically impossible for females
to achieve and likely give them
no reason to continue try.
As a mother of daughters or
active in sports I can use your
you that their participation
with their peers as help them to
learn life lessons that are
otherwise absence in their
childhood years.
Thank thank you we have Joseph
Westover.
Madam chair.
Can you hear me yes we can.
Right I also my father got four
daughters most of which enjoyed
playing sports I know that there
are there is.
There's very little likelihood
that any of them will ever
will ever be professional sports
players
But they they get so much joy
from competing with their peers
and enjoy the camaraderie being
able to to do that physically
I'm.
The basis of science on the
basis of science as well as a
gender.
At the other people have have
have made their points on that I
think it's very clear the
differences
I don't think anyone's trying to
stay.
That's.
That everyone has the same value
in the same were.
And unfortunately.
My time is lapse.
We will try jerit period one
more time.
Sure can you hear me now yes we
can okay good thank you madam
chair committee members of
on the superintendent John Rupel
school district I am in support
of the future for as it was
conceived after the recent
presidential executive order
that essentially commands middle
and high schools to comply with
allowing biological males to
participate in female sports in
my experts you this legislation
protects title minds original
intent which was based on the
general biological distinction
between men and women athletes
based on sex not a duty well the
executive order orders the right
of transgender students to
participate in sports
unrestricted there is
interpretation which gives H. B.
the real for legitimate efficacy
the word identity in the
executive orders not proven to
have roots in silence but rather
signifies an individual's
direction and or movement of
choice which in this case
impedes the ability for
biological females to have the
same opportunities as more we
must be vigilant not to
misinterpret the founding
principles of title nine which
is based on sex and not gender
identification I have much more
to say I wish I had more time
please vote yes for H. B..
Okay we have J. Kelly.
You will need to unmute.
Madam chair I think will carry
already spoke I could be wrong
with that name okay.
Yeah there was I I there was a
need Kelly so I thought this one
maybe J. Kelly but let's go on
to Rosalind ****.
Hello can you hear me yes okay
I'm I am in support of this bill
I have three boys and one girl
what my eldest son plays college
basketball my daughter plays
high school volleyball runs
track when my two younger boys
play basketball.
All are pretty athletic hello
boys are physically bigger and
stronger although my daughter
works out morning and night.
It is plain and simple and that
any.
It is plain and simple the
anatomy of males are designed to
be bigger and stronger and
therefore can compete on
entirely different level than
females and for that reason
alone is enough to show exactly
why two different sexes should
play into different rates thank
you for allowing me to speak.
Thank you and now we will go it
please raise your hand if you
want to speak in support of this
bill.
We'll start with Renee bell
Tran.
In our position.
I'm sorry no this is in support
are we I'm it no I'm.
I'm sorry this is in opposition.
Okay we will go with gel pots.
Can you hear me yes go ahead
jail.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Joe Potts
and I live in Rio Rancho and I
thank you for allowing me to
speak today I am the mother of
four children three of whom are
cisgender and my youngest who is
eight years old happens to be
transgender.
The experience of being a mom to
a trans child is quite the
adventure she's identified
ballot burst but let us know at
a very early age that she was
all girl and yes she is just
that a little girl she loves
pink sparkles glitter is
incredibly sassy loves fiercely
and also less to run she might
want to run competitively run
club cross country or track or
do something completely
different I don't know it's up
to her but the point is just
that it's up to her she should
be able to choose what sport she
wants to participate or not in
my children all of them love
sports they love to compete and
they deserve the opportunity to
do so and know what it means to
be part of something bigger than
themselves I know that my trans
kid is exceptionally lucky she
was born in a family where you
as a mom to my little boy was
really my little girl and that
was okay she doesn't let
anything stop or and I ask that
you don't either thank you.
Thank you Jill Andrew Echols.
Hi everyone hear me okay we can
hear you Andrew madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Andrew Eckels I'm a student
at New Mexico state an organizer
with the quality New Mexico and
I also identify as transgender
and queer I absolutely oppose
this bill not only are the
claims that women are inherently
weaker and less athletic than
men outlandish but the attempt
to further exclude transgender
youth from their peers is
incredibly alarming to me
transgender where you are at
high risk to harassment and
violence from their peers and
this legislation isolates and
already vulnerable community in
New Mexico we come together over
Friday night lights HB three or
four excludes you that are
deserving of community team
building and a chance to
participate alongside their
friends thank you for allowing
me to speak this evening.
Thank you John the money in
Sanford.
Chair Thompson and members of
the committee my name is John
Munyan Sanford I'm the executive
director of the New Mexico
religious coalition for
reproductive choice.
The New Mexico religious
coalition seeks to ensure that
LGBTQ students can bring their
whole selves to physical
activity education and sport the
student athletes participate in
sports for the same reasons as
everyone else to be part of a
team to connect with their peers
to learn good sports and ship
and to get and stay healthy.
We reject the.
Patriarchal notion.
That women and girls are
inherently weaker and must be
protected from predatory men by
other men and.
We also reject the notion that
our sons would.
Would cheat.
Measure just to win by
masquerading as girls on girls
teams thank you very much.
Thank you Jeff Clark.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name's just
Clark and I'm the prevention
manager for solace crisis
treatment center in Santa Fe and
also transgender man according
to the New Mexico youth risk and
resiliency survey twenty percent
twenty one percent of
transgender youth in New Mexico
report having been sexually
assaulted compared to seven
percent of their cisgender
peers.
Participating in extracurricular
is like school sports can be a
significant protective factor in
preventing you from being
targeted for sexual violence by
increasing their confidence
contributing to their sense of
belonging and strengthening
their peer relationships as the
area sexual assault service
center we know that providing as
many opportunities as possible
for increase protective factors
is paramount in preventing all
you from being targeted for
violence we urge you to not take
away transitions opportunities
to participate alongside the
peers their gender and oppose H.
B. three four thank you.
Okay thank you heather Smith.
Hello can you hear me yes we can
hear you all right thank you
madam chair members of the
committee first of All I Want to
say transgender girls are girls
and transgender women are women
they are not and should not be
referred to as boys are then
biological or otherwise even in
transgender athletes retain some
competitive advantages it does
not necessarily mean that the
advantages are unfair because
all top athletes pretty
possessed some edge over their
peers we shouldn't punish trans
athletes create a playing I a
proper plan so for everybody to
participate taking away sports
or any kind of competitive thing
for children is wrong and we
need to come to an agreement on
a different situation instead of
just taking it away from them
all together so please please
vote against this this is this
would be terrible for the trans
community thank you very much
and you all have it thank you
for letting me speak.
Spare a Baker.
Hi can you hear me yes go ahead
and get madam chair and members
of the committee my name is
Sarah Baker I am fifteen years
old and I've been a part of the
girls in commit community for a
little over ten years now I'm
against the bill H. B. three
four because singling out
transgender girls and chipping
away their ability to
participate in athletics based
on misinformation is
unconstitutional I've been given
many amazing opportunities
throughout my soccer career my
hope is that all girls can have
the same experiences as me
therefore I feel that billing
transgender girls and keeping
them from participating takes
away their opportunities to be
part of a team build friendships
with other girls and possibly be
selected for college
scholarships transposon to jet
sports there merrily girls who
want to participate therefore I
urge you to vote no one H. B.
three or four thank you for your
time.
Thank you Marshall Martinez.
Madam chair and members of the
committee Emerson Martinez
executive director of equality
New Mexico I am a proud New
Mexican born and raised in
Alamogordo I'm also incredibly
proud Chicano clear then the
reason most where entrance New
Mexicans are so proud to be New
Mexicans is because our values
have always been clear we love
each other we accept each other
we support each other and we
don't teach our children to hate
each other this bill is the
exact opposite of our rural New
Mexican our encouraging cultural
or religious values our values
our acceptance and love this
bill is about seeing people as
other it is about seeing appears
as a threat girls let X. across
our state is not a zero sum game
the reality is there was room
for everyone children are not
born hating each other this bill
not just teaches but pushes them
to do exactly that the quality
New Mexico stands in fierce
opposition to this legislation
which is not New Mexican does
not protect anyone and is not
who we are thank you.
Thank you Marshall when do you
Pascoal.
Madam chair.
Your muted that was not the
manager okay go ahead okay
thanks madam chair and members
of the committee I'm Wendy Basco
the staff attorney for the
southwest women's Law Center the
Southwes women's Law Center
stands and fervent opposition to
HB three oh four not only is
this bill morally repugnant it
runs afoul of any number
statutory schemes in court
precedents in fact this bill
violates New Mexico's own human
rights act which prohibits
discrimination on the basis of
gender identity or sexual
orientation again the southwest
women's Law Center asks each
member of this committee to vote
in opposition HB three oh four
and I appreciate the chance to
speak thank you.
Thank you more read here.
Bring on I'm so sorry if the if
you're if I was not even close
on your name Marie.
Thank you madam chair.
Good evening madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Marie Pierre for gun
representing New Mexico voices
for children and we stand
strongly oppose this bill any
student should be allowed to
participate in team sports
regardless of how they identify
and they should be allowed to
join the team that best
represents their gender
identity.
Bills like this one you the
transgender community as a
monolith rather than
understanding that each
transgender person has a
different set of skills
strengths and gifts just because
a person identifies as trans
does not give them an automatic
advantage over other athletes
what this bill seeks to do is
ignore those differences and
when that happens the result is
not fairness the result is
discrimination.
Barring students from
participating in sports because
of their identity is wrong this
bill sends and sets an extremely
dangerous precedent for
discrimination against LGBTQ
plus students and we urge you to
oppose this harmful divisive
legislation thank you.
Thank you Emelie poll necked.
After more panelists okay thank
you.
Thank you very yes we can you go
ahead okay chair and members of
the committee thank you my name
is Emily hose connects and I
live in Albuquerque I'm the
mother of a transcendent child
when they sent my child off to
kindergarten she looks so tiny
and her classmates newer she was
a girl right away and this is
the second grade and she still
smaller than almost everyone and
she loves soccer her US women's
soccer shirt is her favorite and
she loves to wear soccer
ponytail school staff work to
affirm her gender the children
state peacemaking where they
learn to be team players and to
lift each other up this bill
would mean that when the bell
rings at three ten school starts
treating her as a boy and all
the lessons the kids were
learning about inclusion go out
the window hurting all the
students my child doesn't have
to displace any girl from
playing soccer if the interest
in soccer as high let's expand
our sports team capacity meeting
challenges with solutions that
are in line with what the
children are taught in school
and sports about what it means
to be a team there's no need to
discriminate please vote against
this harmful measure.
Thank you we have Renee bell
Tran.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Renee
Beltran I live in Dona ana
county I speak today as a
community leader a teacher a
certified nami mental health
educator and a key I of Los
crucis board member but the role
I stand most fiercely in is that
of mother I have three children
ages fourteen to twenty and our
family has the lived experience
of both systems hetero children
and non binary LGBTQ children.
I can compare the lived
experiences of my different
children in their New Mexico
public schooling and youth
sports experiences and say
without a doubt the H. B. three
oh four will offer even greater
challenges and potential harm to
an already struggling community.
Statistics tell us trans youth
have significantly higher rates
of depression suicide and
victimization my family has
lived the statistics placing
further barriers before these
you will only create more harm
and negative impacts I ask you
to vote no on H. B. three oh
four and vote no on
discriminating against children
like mine.
Thank you Adrian lawyer.
Madam chair members of the
committee I'm Adrienne lawyer
the executive director of the
transgender resource center of
New Mexico.
Transgender athletes have been
competing openly for decades
with many state high school
athletic association's the NC
double a and the international
Olympic committee allowing
transgender athletes to
participate in accordance with
their gender identity as early
as two thousand four since that
time women's and men's sports
have continued on harms The New
Mexico use risk and resiliency
survey is clear about the
disparities that young
transgender New Mexicans face
including alarming data on
substance use and suicidality
it's crucial that these kids
also have access to the
protective benefits of sports
participation.
More importantly as even
governor Spencer **** recently
said after declining to sign a
similar bill when you spend time
with these kids it changes your
heart in important ways I hope
you'll hear from the trans
people and families here this
evening and let your hearts be
changed thank you so much.
Thank you there are both this.
Can you yes we can hear you Sir
go ahead.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is terrible state and I was born
and raised here in Santa Fe I'm
a nurse a school board member
and a mother of four children
one of whom is a ten year old
transgender girl at its core the
foundation of this bill.
Is rooted and flawed and archaic
notions about genitals and
physical abilities.
Senator gender is more than
biological sex it is not binary
it is genetics the full picture
beyond XXL next why
neurobiology and endocrinology
they all factor into gender.
Legislation such as this one
feeds on fears and insecurities
and a scarcity mindset that is
already too prevalent in our
society as leaders we should
seek to minimize othering and
all areas of our communities I'm
grateful beyond words for the
spaces where my daughter has
been able to participate in
sports as her true self.
We should be fighting to foster
and create more welcoming kind
and inclusive opportunities for
all our children thank you so
much for the opportunity to
speak tonight.
Thank you Lawrence Chandler.
Allison did Lawrence disappear
or did you promote.
Now.
I'm sorry.
Now okay go ahead.
Committee chairman Lori Shepler
from a pediatrician in Santa Fe
and I'm here speaking on behalf
of the New Mexico pediatric
society the state chapter of the
American academy of pediatrics
we strongly oppose H. B. three
oh four.
Mexico pediatric society works
towards all children and
adolescents regardless of gender
identity or expression receiving
care to promote optimal physical
mental and social well being.
Discrimination based on gender
identity or expression real or
perceived as damaging to the
social emotional health of
children families and society.
School environments play a
significant role in the social
emotional development of
children.
Every child has a right.
To feel safe and respected and
school but.
So identify as trans gender this
can be challenging.
Every aspect of school life
we present safety concerns.
The National Collegiate Athletic
Association and me.
International Olympic committee.
Let's go to lily G..
Hi can you hear me yes go ahead
willing.
Hi madam chair members of the
committee my name is lily ana
and I live and Johnny and
accounting thank you for giving
me this opportunity I oppose
this bill because for starters
schools boards is meant to be
for everyone and isn't it so
always encouraged to be
inclusive we go to school and we
and we're supposed to enjoy it
everyday but arguably trance you
don't feel necessarily
comfortable especially if
they're open with their
sexuality to the opposing
genocide this causes two more to
be corrupt because being trans
is still controversial these
days especially in public
schools if your argument is
about strength I was the only
difference I see in male and
female sports from personal
experience is the physicality of
the sport and the training
between sports thank you so
much.
Thank you LA rush forth.
Good evening madam chair can you
hear me yes go ahead Ellie thank
you madam chair members of the
committee I hope you'll please
excuse me shaking voice today
but the discussion on this bill
breaks my heart knowing that
members of the audience in
children and young people are
having their humanity question
have experienced misgendering in
comparison to farm animals this
evening and had their rights
debated in this way.
My name is Sally rush forth and
I'm a born and raised New
Mexican I'm rising today is an
attorney with the ACLU of New
Mexico but perhaps more
importantly as a mom to a little
girl and a former student
athlete who learned a lot about
the values of teamwork
leadership inclusivity
resilience discipline and equity
from coaches and teammates I was
also honored to be a coach and
an effort to pass these values
on to girls entrusted to me.
This proposal is not about men
and boys playing sports for went
with women and girls nor is
about protecting women and girls
athletic competitions for men.
This would by design resulting
in a scalable discrimination on
the basis of sex and transgender
identity it would cause
irreparable harm to women and
girl athletes in New Mexico and
could not pass the lowest level
of constitutional review is
unconstitutional wrong as a
matter of law science and basic
dignity.
Okay thank you Chris all the.
Hello can you hear me yes go
ahead Chris madam chair and
members of the committee thank
you for allowing me to speak my
name is crystal Harris I'm
speaking in opposition of health
bill three oh four I think first
off the bat I just want to point
out that the women's liberation
front we heard from earlier this
evening has a history of
opposing civil rights
legislation and even published
style guide that recommends
intentionally misgendering trans
individuals in journalism we've
also heard a lot of conflation
of the ideas of female and women
or girls are both from the
committees and the experts and I
think it shows that this bill
ultimately comes from a place of
misinformation this kind of
legislation which we've seen pop
up across the country is just
the latest trend in
discriminating against trans
people so I think it's point to
ask how many trans athletes do
we actually have allowing them
to continue to compete would
realistically affect very few
but passing this legislation
tells all transgender people
that the state of New Mexico is
willing to discriminate against
them if the goal house bill
three or four is to allowable
girls to compete this bill
defeated own stated purpose by
discriminating against
transgender girls thank you.
Thank you Carmen bell.
Madam chair and committee
members and the student in doing
Ana County and I think
preventing women from competing
in sports.
and knowing harms this women and
every obstacle female athletes
athletes have face to get a
state space are the same
obstacles trans women face but
they were twice as hard to
overcome and I think that they
deserve the same space state
thanks.
And including trans people rob
them of scholarships and other
opportunities to it is that they
deserve.
And accept acceptance must
extend beyond the classroom and
I don't believe you can call
yourself a feminist.
If you don't support all women
and that includes trans women.
Thank you.
Thank you Rehm sure.
Hello can you hear me yes go
ahead hi
Madam chair members of the
committee I want to thank you
for allowing me to speak today
my name is rain and I've been
Working in the LGBTQ community
of in suicide prevention for a
couple of years because
when I was younger I was in a
relationship with a trans person
who actually attempted suicide.
It it is been clearly documented
that keeping trans people out of
spaces and
Putting them into places where
they would not be safe and I
strongly believe that.
In trans people into our.
Sports teams of the opposite
gender would be unsafe for them
will.
Raise the suicide rate and I ask
of you to vote against this bill
because I think it will cause
irreparable harm to trans use
and I just I just ask of you
thank you so much.
Thank you during M. block.
Go ahead Dorian.
Durian you are muted but we
cannot hear you.
Okay let's skip over Dorian and
go to jail and jeopardy.
Jefferts send and will come back
to Dorian and hope that whatever
that technical issue or can be.
Six so go ahead Jan.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Jim Jefferson and I'm the
prevention coordinator with the
Santa Fe public schools part of
my role is to affirm and provide
support for transgender and
gender nonconforming and I'm
also a parent to children I
strongly oppose H. B. trail for.
First the name of this bill
protect women in sport is
completely inaccurate the bill
does not protect anyone that
twist manipulate the intention
of money it also ignored and
even denied the research
involved understanding of gender
transgender old are not fully
transgender all our current.
I think we can all agree this
was what it provide many
benefits beyond just the
electors all of our youth
including our transgender you
deserve to have an opportunity
to participate in athletics and
extracurricular activities the
line item that opportunities
extremely harmful to their
emotional physical and academic
well being as demonstrated by
the New Mexico youth risk and
resiliency survey this bill an
attempt to exclude some of our
most vulnerable you from access
to these life changing skills.
What people were actually from
New Mexico now is we have a long
history of respecting and
embracing each other's across
different.
Please honor New Mexico value of
inclusion and anti
discrimination thank you for
voting no discrimination and
harmful bill.
Okay let's go to Dorian block
again.
On a real chair members of the
committee can you hear me yes
thank you really in my name is
Dorian block I am a native New
Mexican as well as an out and
proud trans masculine individual
I've worked in the professional
sports industry with the New
Mexico and let my lived
experience both of the digital
marketing professional five
years and of the trans gender
male the money file marketing
decisions within the first year
of New Mexico United success.
The active lifestyle that I now
enjoy resulting in self
confidence and a positive body
image was a direct result of my
transition and being around a
sports environment.
I therefore entreat New Mexico
to reject any legislation that
targets transgender individuals
or requires any participatory
exclusions based on fact the
provide at birth I can
personally attest the passing
any such legislation would be
detrimental to the physical and
mental health of any youth
affected thank you for your
time.
Thank you Jenna's deal.
Go ahead Jenna.
Okay looks like where we might
be having some technical
difficulties with Jenna let's go
to Cat Sanchez I will come back
to Jenna.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Cat Sanchez
and I'm a policy associate with
old futures today we saw our
Congress passed the equality act
a bill that would ban
discrimination against people
based in part on gender identity
New Mexico congresswoman DePaulo
and presided over the house that
federal legislation and about it
she said quote as a mother and a
non binary child I shouldn't
have to worry if they are being
treated fairly and yet this
evening as a queer women of
color from million a County I'm
bringing my voice in opposition
to a bill in Congress woman
Hollins home state that would do
just that treat transgender and
non binary you unfairly and not
just on fairly this bill for
there's the statement
transgender and non binary you
already face under the false
promise of protecting women and
girls we urge you to oppose H.
B. three zero four thank you for
your time.
Thank you cat we'll go back to
Jenna.
Any given to me now yes go
ahead.
Members of the committee my name
is Janice the el al of monsters
Mexico I'm here to say that this
bill will not help anyone it
will only hurt and further
stigmatize transgender non
binary youth and student
athletes including some of my
very close friends I'm not
personally involved in any
activities that be affected by
this.
The state employee really much
very close friends are and they
have stated they do not feel
there and I playing and
competing against transgender
individuals I am concerned that
this bill will make me and my
peers implicate and paddle on
our teammates for being
themselves and that is
deplorable.
Thank you for your.
Thank you.
Karen do god.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Karen do guess I issue her
pronouns I live in Santa Fe
County I'm the program manager
for the New Mexico genders and
sexualities alliance network I'm
also a public health
professional and a parent I'm in
strong opposition to this bill
this bill goes against our New
Mexican values of inclusion
affirmation and embracing one
another not in spite of but
because of our differences and
as an advocate for trans and
queer youth across our state I
believe this bill is harmful it
contributes to school push out
and poor health outcomes for
trans and non binary youth is
ineffectual and misses the mark
of providing more options for
girls and women in sports
instead.
This bill as it is an attack on
trans and non binary you and it
reduces our community to
baseless gender essentialism
therefore I stand in strong
opposition to this column thank
you.
Thank you Karen and I apologize
for messing up your name
Mariana and I have.
Hello good evening madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Marianna and I stand before
you today as a queer woman of
color and the deputy director
for progress now New Mexico we
stand firmly behind our trans
youth and their families in
opposing this legislation I'd
like to provide some background
on the origins of this bill as
more built with the same
language and the same title are
being run across this country
this piece of legislation is
openly known to be written by
the alliance for defending
freedom no hate group as
classified by the Southern
Poverty Law Center.
Its local affiliates are known
as a family policy alliance
which you may be familiar with
as our own Republican Senate
just hire their ex executive
director.
This bill has nothing to do with
protecting anyone and everything
to do with masking and hate
based agenda by co opting social
justice movements.
HB three or four is not
reflective of New Mexicans
values this bill does not belong
in our state or with our
families thank you.
Thank you John church.
Hi madam chair my name is John
urgent with the American
federation of teachers New
Mexico and as educational
professionals across our state
we must speak out against house
bill three oh four we urge
members of this committee to
table this measure after you
hear the rest of public
commentary this evening this
bill would take New Mexico
backwards and in fact according
to the center for American
progress many states across the
United States conventionally red
states and blue states alike are
moving in the opposite direction
of house bill three oh four we
urge this committee to reject
this measure and vote instead
for respect and honoring the
human dignity of our students
with our public schools thank
you for hearing our testimony
and we urge tabling motion on
this measure.
Thank you John Robert Woodruff.
Can you hear me alright yes go
ahead thank you so much for your
time honorable chair members of
the committee my name is robin
Dr rob would dress I live in
Albuquerque pastor second
Presbyterian church and played
both high school and collegiate
sports I respectfully express
opposition to house bill three
oh four the bill's adoption
would do nothing more than
exclude young people at a
formative place in their lives
we know such exclusion
especially to already vulnerable
populations is soul damaging our
diverse state gets our nation's
principle of actual freedom for
all from by eliminating this
bill the church I serve took on
the opportunity to transitional
house trans asylum seekers
Presbyterians are non
hierarchical so was our
congregations decision to
participate the church grew from
the experience meeting trans
women.
Learning from them including the
challenging realities of being
trans and moving beyond our
sometimes ill informed an
unscientific assumption housing
in meeting these women helped us
better.
Become more loving congregation
and growing up as an athlete I
know the pain of getting cut
from a team but as a white
heterosexual male I do not know
the pain of not being allowed to
participate in the first place
inevitably and even deeper cuts
thank you.
Alexandria Taylor.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is
Alexandria Taylor I use she her
pronouns and I'm the deputy
director for the New Mexico
coalition of sexual assault her
programs I just want to say
personally I was born and raised
in Alamogordo I'm a graduate of
Cibola high school and I'm one
of the one percent of athletes
that has earned a full division
one college scholarship and
actually trained and competed at
the highest levels and I can
guarantee this bill is not about
sports it offers zero protection
it's discriminatory and it will
cause irreparable harm on this
day when the US house passed the
quality act we should be here
celebrating and yet we're here
asking you to oppose this
discriminatory bill transgender
students are are ready at
increased risk of physical and
sexual harassment and assault
compared to their peers we know
that building empathy not
division as a way to combat
these injustices affirming young
people gender identity
guaranteeing equal access in
treating transfused with respect
and dignity is an essential part
of protecting students mental
and physical health New Mexico
coalition of sexual assault
programs stands in strong
opposition to this bill thank
you.
Thank you Alexandria and polls
Neil.
Yes good evening madam chair
members of the committee thank
you for the time this evening I
am in Paul's Neil I live in
Albuquerque and I'm executive
director of Sheikh New Mexico as
well as a parent teacher and
coach I'm speaking tonight in
opposition of this bill the
society of health and physical
educators New Mexico instead
speaks for the inclusion of all
students in health physical
education physical activity and
sport opportunities.
The statement specifically
includes members of the LGBTQ
plus community deserve the same
access to the benefits that
sports find their cisgender
classmates I would like to add
that part of the required school
training includes the quote the
need to accept protect and
respect students must be the
first priority in every school
regardless of actual or
perceived sexual orientation or
gender identity and expression
we are at a time in our country
that we need opportunities for
students to participate in life
saving activities without
exclusion due to gender identity
like to remind you all tonight
that all means all and please
vote no on house bill three oh
four thank you.
Thank you.
We are back to Larry's Chandler
I'm not sure Dr Chandler if if
you will Act put your hand up
accidentally or or I'm so could
we find I'll allow him to to
speak and and Dr Sam but can you
tell me what's going on.
Put my hand up twice okay okay I
I just wanted to be certain that
there wasn't someone else with
you know who
okay thank you okay we'll next
go to New Mexico working
families party one and please
introduce yourself.
Hi madam chair my names Judy
Matthews sorry for the wrong
name I you see him pronouns that
I am with New Mexico working
families party I was moved
tonight after hearing some of
the public comment and the and
the victory all really of
comparing human beings of our
community to animals and
butterflies and things like that
I want to make sure that
receipt any children listening
tonight that you do have a place
on this planet you do have
people in New Mexico who love
and respect you you do have a
right to practice your heart out
in the sports that you love and
I'm just really disappointed
in in some of what I've heard
tonight I don't think there's
any place for hate in this
committee in this legislature in
the state and we have to stand
against it tonight madam chair
and members of the committee of
you need to vote against this
bill and you need to vote
against it quickly so that we
can move past this this should
be a day of celebration with the
equality act passing in Congress
but it's not we're here
defending members of our
community.
Thank you I'm Denise.
Good evening madam chair members
the committee my name is any
second on a policy director
pulled futures I also among
former division one rugby player
on my rugby team in college we
had people of various gender
identities that came out while
they were playing and after they
were playing and it never
interrupted the play of our
sport so I'm here to ask you to
oppose this bill because of my
for nibbling because of my many
transfer level ones and
relatives across the state thank
you.
Thank you Karen Witt lock.
Madam chair members of the
committee Karen what lock with
national association of social
workers New Mexico chapter and I
will leave let everyone else
speak for me because we have had
we've had some amazing yes money
today but we strongly oppose
this bill or anything that
slightly resembles a spill this
is not about equality this is
about.
This is about hurting
transcriptomic.
And finally we have miss capped
and I will say Mr can't I know
exactly what your initials me
I'm a PT so go ahead miss
capped.
Thank you so much can you hear
me yes go ahead thank you good
evening madam chair and
committee members my name is kat
a well and I use she hers
pronouns I am a speech language
pathologist in the public
schools I am also the mom to a
transgender child my son and I
are out in the community we
train others on gender identity
we are strongly opposed to HB
three oh four this bill is based
on misinformation that is
sweeping the country right now
and it is important for people
to know that all student
athletes very inability
regardless of gender or assigned
sex at birth.
Thank you the ability of trans
girls to participate in girls
sports is discriminatory and
detrimental to their well being
transposons and we must promote
inclusion in order to protect
them to all the transfer rules
out there right now you are
loved and supported to all the
parents listening we must
continue to stand strong for our
gender expansive children please
vote no for the spell thank you.
Thank you okay and that is it
for public comments so let me
just switch my view.
So we have Representative Lord
go ahead.
Thank you madam chair it's on
for the record I'm gonna start
this conversation out by saying
that both of my mother's.
It's my mom right there were
lesbians they're both gone now
my mother basically paved the
way for women's rights by
becoming a doctor back in
nineteen forty one my two best
friends are gay one is openly
gay candidate for Congress here
in New Mexico and last night I
wanted to get a bunch
information from one of my dear
friends who is trans gender and
she came use permission Ms Gina
to speak for her about the issue
of fairness she gave me a lot of
details about the different
levels of trans gender that I
was actually on aware of.
And so last night we were
speaking she told me about that
that transgenders not as cut and
dry as I thought and I don't
know about it so I apologize to
people that are because I am no
expert that is for sure and
trans gender but she did give me
a lot of information and it
seems that there's a difference
between a child that goes on
hormone suppression before
puberty are verses a male and
that transitions after that
there is testosterone explosion
transitions take time and work
and use your given very
seriously by physicians so I did
do my due diligence and trying
to do some research on this so
my.
Order process they go through
this is not about hate at all
because I have friends.
And I get really upset that
somebody would say that it's.
It's about hatred because I
loved my mom and I love my
friends so with that being said
I get frustrated because my
friends that are gay and lesbian
transgender.
Enter transexual are
conservative and they feel like
their voice is never ever heard
there never taken seriously
there costly mocked and shamed
and they feel their voices don't
matter so there is not one voice
and this is was told by my
friend Gina that there's not one
voice for the LBGTQ community.
And it may surprise you that I
do actually agreed that there's
more than one gender and that's
not the issue for me I also
believe that sexuality can be
fluid and I love all of my
friends of all genders and all
sexuality.
But I want to make sure that
everybody understands that the
gender identity is not what I'm
debating the issue for me is
on fairness to women and sports.
I'm six feet one a lot of you
have not met me I'm little over
sixty one I'm six foot one and a
half I'm a complete anomaly for
women I'm big boned I'm larger
than most women I don't fit in
and I know from my own personal
experience that I'm not as
strong as then I when I was in
in shape I did.
Bodybuilding and powerlifting
and I don't care how much I
trained I was never as strong as
a man that was the same size as
me this is why and body building
they break it down by.
They have Maez and they have
women's and then they have
natural on them they have people
that on steroids completely does
a complete two different
completely different.
Thanks but no matter how much I
worked out.
I was never a strong as they
were.
Women bodybuilders and
powerlifters are never going to
be a strong even at six foot one
born a biological female I'm
never going to be as strong or
as fast as men are I know I've
competed against this gym rat
for years and they are stronger
what I want to do is I want to
keep everything fair and equal.
This is why they have divisions
and sports and especially boxing
the prime example I don't think
it would be fair for heavy
weight to fight a bantamweight.
And I don't think it was fair
With one of the.
We had somebody skull cracked in
And it breaks my heart because
she was fighting a transgendered
person who splitters call up and
and it's heartbreaking and her
career is ruined and she's still
having a lot of issues.
Because it wasn't fair that this
person came and pulverized her.
What's most troubling is a I was
thinking when I was talking to
my friend Gina.
That she was explaining to me
that if somebody transitions
later there is a difference
between somebody transitions
before the hormones kick in.
And I.
Contemplated the fairness of
let's say a seventeen year old
six foot two two hundred fifty
pound football player.
Who goes through puberty.
Has all this testosterone who
finally gets secured the courage
to transition and Bravo for
them.
But I am concerned about the six
foot four.
Just transitioning has not gone
through the process because as
we read through as I read
through the information I take
versus it takes years for those
hormones to kick into the kind
of level out I worry about a six
foot four seventeen year old.
Recent transition going into a
sport and harming a woman.
This bill for me is about to
protect the rights of girls.
For a five foot hundred ten
pound girl to compete with a
five foot hundred ten pound girl
and I'm not saying I'm going to
reiterate this a hundred times
I'm not saying that a trans
gendered female is not female
they are I get that what I worry
about is a two hundred pound
seventeen year old recent
transgendered female and I don't
think that's fair.
I know what it's like for me to
have a physical advantage for
being as tall as I was at eleven
Ms five foot ten and abnormally
strong I was stronger than
ninety percent of my equals
until the males caught up to me
and then that went right out the
window.
So I want to ask a question
Madam have you heard of fallen
fox.
Madam.
I was thank you madam chair I
did have a question sorry I was
I was I was asking I wanted to
know mostly if our sponsor had
heard of Fallon fox.
Madam chair I believe I have the
NMAA fighter yeah I bring that
up because Fallon fox was a
transgender and that is MMA
fighter that hit opponent so
hard it crashed fiscal.
To make a grants her career's
over.
I she was quoted as saying I I a
lot of women I've never felt the
street that I felt in a fight as
I did that night.
I never been so over powered
ever my life and I'm them
normally strong woman I can
definitely relate to that.
Representative was different I
can usually move around in the
clinch against other females but
I could not get away.
I feel bad for her because my ex
was a professional by boxer
kickboxer and I did get in the
ring one time with him let me
tell you being hit by then just
completely different from being
hit by a woman.
And again I'm going back to
recent trans gendered because as
I read through here.
After a couple years there is a
difference in the hormone level.
There was a athlete Terry Miller
in Connecticut high school
transgender athlete that was
transitioning to female.
And he won the fifty five meter
dash and state open indoor track
championships setting a new
record.
Andrea here would another
transgender came in second and I
don't think this is fair nor
does to empower women well we
have a glass ceiling that we can
now reach.
The opponent sprinter Salinas
Seoul said that fairness is
issue.
She will not get a scholarship
she could not get a scholarship
because she came in second
place.
It's not fair to have.
Women when we have to compete at
a higher level of sports that we
will never be able to reach and
that is my problem we don't
throw bantam weight female boxes
and with heavy weights there's
some difference in for a reason
and I'm not saying ever to be
exclusive of anyone because I
love my transgender friends what
I'm saying is I worry about the
fairness.
For females competing about
females and them not being
having the opportunity and
missing out on scholarships.
And that's all I have to say I
know it's a very emotional topic
so thank you agree of my time.
Vice chair Romero.
Thanks.
Representative Romero what we
can't hear you.
I'm sure no that's I know you've
been having some internet issues
so if you need to turn your
camera off just to get stable
please do so.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative
to everyone in the audience who
spoke tonight I just
this is a this is a very
emotional issue for me as many
of the advocates discussed as
well I've.
Been involved in sports as well
since I was very young one of
the first all female teams at
Pignon elementary school here in
Santa Fe and and then
basketball.
And I think a lot of the stigmas
that come with first just women
sports much less adding
additional statement with the
participation of trans women in
sports and.
forgive me Madam chair play try
to collect my present my
thoughts about some of this
because often
what we've heard.
I think in from so many in the
past and I now try to be brief.
Is there's a lot of junk science
that ends up being touted as
science regarding how.
Bodies work how
you know athletics may work how
we perform
and how
society is meant to be run for
fairness and for the sort of
ideals that some have on what
they believe the quality to be
and what some others believe for
quality to be sometimes this has
taken the form of eugenics this
is taken the form of separate
but equal some other forms of
how that would play out and for
me madam chair
seeing how that's unpacked been
unpacked in our society today is
about creating an opportunity
for everybody
to have an access access to
activities madam chair
Representative I think I find
that we're we tried to.
Create divisions around folks
trying to better their lives
whether it be through sports
access school
through through jobs through
certificates through whatever it
may be the more that we put up
barriers to entry of the more we
create divisions in our society
that we're trying to still break
down I'm definitely opposed to
this legislation madam chair and
I'm grateful to be able to cast
a no vote for my community for
the LGBTQ community to protect
the interest of our vibrant
accessible and
inclusive sports community that
I've been a part of and played
undergrad rugby where we were
still stigmatized as a team for
even the sport that we played
madam chair and representative
so I think what we're still
trying to thwart the the junk
science that exists surrounding
some of this and what we're
trying to do to create a more
inclusive society madam chair
Representative while there have
been
Single incidents that may have
existed I just I disagree with
the premise and the.
And the approach Madam chair
representative so while I think
there are creative ways that we
continue to see this happening
in targeting our LGBTQ community
I just cannot support an
initiative that does something
like this so thank you for the
time madam chair to collect my
thoughts a bit but I cannot and
will not ever support something
like this Madam.
Thank you Representative Romero
we'll go to Representative but I
just.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative.
This is an incredibly hard for
me to listen to I'm getting.
Flashbacks from my childhood.
They're not easy to remember.
I thought that I blocked out.
Thank you middle school when I
was playing basketball.
And I was told that nobody
wanted to play with me because
they thought I was a boy.
running for me that the reason I
was so good was because I was
like boy.
That was around the time that I
had my first idol fox as well.
It's not easy to be.
From my community.
We don't need legislation like
this to make it even harder.
Thank you.
I do have some questions madam
chair.
During the.
Public comment it was our.
Brought up the emir of
legislation out there
Brought forward by the alliance
R. for defending freedom.
The reason that I bring that up
is because each the three four
seven seven from South Carolina.
Has.
Mirrored.
Wording to to your bill
Representative.
And so my question is where did
the language for this bill I'm
from.
Madam chair representative I
worked with the.
The women's liberation fronts to
draft the the language of this
bill I don't have any idea who
the alliance for defending
freedom as.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative.
You know it was brought up that.
If girls have to play and and
and it's it's transparent and
trans women it's not males.
I'm incredibly offended hearing
that throughout this entire.
Bill presentation.
It was brought up that if girls
have to players in the sport
with transferral.
That would somehow bring
suicidal thoughts and my
question is do do you know that
forty percent.
Forty percent that's almost half
of all trans you.
Will attempt suicide at least
one.
Did you know that representative
madam chair.
I'm sure I did not know that.
We're talking about women's
rights trans women's rights or
women's right.
Madam chair I have a question I
just I can't I can't the I'm I'm
gonna you'll thank you.
Thank you Representative
Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative for bringing
for this bill and the debate.
A question first question.
Madam chair representative page
two of the V. so.
Line ten references United
States versus Virginia.
Madam chair representative can
you can you tell me the the
reader's digest version for it
for our engineers.
That lawsuit was about.
Madam chair and Representative
first of all I would tell you
that if this bill were to pass
committees it would go to pass
this committee would go to
Judiciary and in the meantime I
would probably re draft that
because we don't typically put
in citations to court cases
findings is actually including
legislative findings in a bill
is something we don't do
typically New Mexico either but
the drafting of this bill as I
reviewed it prior to the
committee
It became clear to me that this
other drafting errors is as well
that I'll deal with it if it
were to pass.
I have not read United States
versus Virginia but the there
was a quote that was included in
the draft of the bureau bill
that that that the court stated
specifically that inherent
differences between men and
women.
Remain cause for celebration but
not for denigration of members
of either sex or for artificial
constraints on the individual's
opportunity believe that that
was included
Just as a way to support the
idea that there are differences
between men and women and that
it because that is in the
Legislative finding section.
Of the bill that it's it's the
the point is that that the
legislature had what if this
were to pass it would be
legislative record that the
legislature New Mexico has
determined that there are
differences between males and
females.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative I think that
this is important.
We recognize those things
Madam chair representative when
I when I read the bill when I
read the analyses.
Responses from.
Different organizations
With the bill because there are
times when.
Through through no fault of our
own Madam chair representative
that that we put.
Thanks to Kerr and.
Laws that are mission federal
level state level that have
unintended consequence from the
like this you know some of the
decisions are made for tribal
line and so many other.
Well as of the act.
Was to bring things inclusively
together and bring us together
as a community.
But then as I was are read this
what I what I.
Right took away from this is the
intent madam chair and
representative of.
Was that there's a danger
associated with that as well at
times.
And and because we group
certain.
Certain people together.
I'm.
We put them in harm's way.
And and so I think I I Madam
chair representative I a senior
legislation of studied some of
your legislation over the years.
And madam chair representative
of I feel like you're.
It's awful about what you decide
to support and what you decide
not to support so that so I took
that approach well red nose.
In addition.
Look at that perspective I have
a multitude of very very close
friends.
Representative.
And one of.
L. B. J. here.
scenarios and and their close
friends and time with us we go
to their house thank you for our
house and and I don't look at
people from that perspective but
I do look at things from a from
a safety perspective and for and
need to protect and and with so
many bills Madam chair
representative.
That are just.
Find for you right now but talk
about the need to protect.
For this.
Opposition.
Use the but again I don't look
at look at people for who they
are.
How they define themselves.
But their level of character is
what the moral code is with the
more conduct staff
And and so I don't.
I don't know I was shocked to
hear some of the testimony
tonight a a
I for one thing to you put
together a thoughtful piece of
legislation yes there are things
that we need to work on it as as
I've been reminded a multitude
of times but different committee
Madam chair representative.
Judiciary will take care of
those are two pieces you know
right now it's a discussion on
as is is is the bill worthwhile
to get get there so we can when
we can have those discussions.
Madam chair Representative.
I support the thought process
behind this because at the end
of the day the whole purpose of
this is to keep people safe.
And this isn't about how how
eighty one defines themselves
this is about what's what's best
for for from a safety standpoint
and and what that I support that
and so madam chair
representative when the time
comes up will last for two
passed still.
Thank you at your back.
Thank you I just have a couple
of a couple of statements and I
too was that believe it or not
was a high school athlete I'm
and I grew up on Navajo so so I
was a giant time I put eight and
I was the giants and so we and
sports all the time I mean we
played against another team that
had a white girl who was six
foot three and outweighed me by
a hundred pounds you know that
that that's how sports go I also
have had a to trans gender
cousins I'm.
What
about a year ago.
And he.
He decided he was South Dakota
was going down a lot of bad
roads in terms of trans gender
and he decided he would be he
would be go to the legislature
and try to educate them and so
we talked a lot he would he
would call me up and asked me
and I and I don't know how the
South Dakota legislature works
but but I I tried to mentor him
with that and he decided that
his strategy was going to be
kill them with kindness and no
matter how people treated him he
was nothing but kind to them and
a little more than a year ago he
committed suicide.
And now I'm.
And so
This this is an emotional topic
for many of us I will I will
stop their and and I will
entertain a motion.
Madam chair it's my honor to
move to table.
We have a second thought madam
chair so we have a motion and a
second Representative Romero and
Representative but address to
table Alison what will you take
the vote please.
Representative arrest.
We just.
Representative Lord no.
Representative.
Absolutely no.
Thanks chair Mero.
Yes to table.
Madam Thompson.
Yes.
So by a vote of three to to
health bill Rio for has been
terrible thank you very much
thank you madam chair committee
members thank you thank you
Representative Cook okay we will
move on to house bill three oh
seven which we have both of our
both of the Sanchez
Representative Lord and
Pettigrew do you have experts
that we need to promote yes
there should be an expert in
their
me pull up this phone number.
It should say Glen Hamilton but
he's calling in and have an of a
tough time so let me see it
should be a five seven five
phone number there's only ones
I'll go ahead and.
you can promote people with
phone numbers the panelists but
I can just do a lot of talk.
Okay I'm.
The five seven five number can
you please and you can make sure
that we have the right person.
Mr chair Felton can hear me yes
and okay okay thank you are you
can meet again I just wanted to
be sure that we have promoted
the right person so
Representative Lord are
Pettigrew whoever go ahead okay
this is going to be a sh super
short
this has to do with the
independent tort negligence and
it has to do with the the fact
that long force meant has lost
their discretion and is forced
to do things they normally don't
have to do before and what I
like to do is just go ahead to
our expert witness sheriff Glen
Hamilton because he can explain
it better than I can.
Madam chair go ahead Sir.
Thank you madam chair.
Sure sure County sheriff's.
So my duties as chair of your
county also the chair of the
public safety and courts Policy
Committee with New Mexico
counties
With bill sponsors to just to
see some.
Some changes that were
previously made in the twenty
twenty regular session and also
the twenty twenty first special
session that had taken place for
this post for section of the New
Mexico tort claims act
As you probably you're sure this
all the time what I'm intended
consequences and I think what
the the bill sponsored the time
during the twenty twenty
legislative session when the
mood.
The amendments to this
particular section of the New
Mexico tort claims act.
Their intent was to ensure that
law enforcement was in fact
going to.
In our Florence.
Well passed by our legislature
is incredible to have the
funding by the governor.
And therefore
the section.
For failure to comply with
duties established pursuant to
the statute wall.
What does not intentionally done
unfortunately is.
A lot of work of.
New program to come out
specifically as it pertains to
dealing with the mentally ill
those individuals who are having
problems with substance use
disorder and suffers from mental
illness does it was opened that
what you need for the program
called lead which is a small
portion for us diversion program
unfortunately in using such OS
diversion programs on
individuals who have committed
offenses well there's more going
to the crisis
Law enforcement not actually
arresting the individual we
potentially are are subjecting
yourself under the change that
was added to the New Mexico tort
section here.
We are still the bill Sanchez.
Please.
New this intent she about to
removing those sections that
could be problematic
specifically in in these type of
new programs the mention of the
way and to many of the law
enforcement communities of
thanks to a less devotions on.
The administration of evidence
of language that came in during
the first special session of
twenty twenty again the bill's
Sanchez intent here was to
ensure that this came into play
with the all new body worn
camera systems.
R. for law enforcement you want
to implement.
This so called requirement came
in that it is in fact you have
an agency that was that was non
compliant that there could be a
potential claim of the negligent
or intentional spoliation of
evidence.
Act case law on this indicates
that before you can even make
such a claim opposed to such a
call in there has to actually be
a.
Thank the cases filed is pending
for that is is contemplates.
So really though to do that with
the bill sponsor had in the hope
that it was going to do but we
feel that the service to one
necessary changes one all that
kind of ties to Hancher
specially for the programs
pertaining to dealing with the
mentally impaired and
Making our jails yes I do mental
institutions in fact making sure
that we're able to devote a lot
of our rescue center suffering
from such mental illnesses this
doesn't subject law enforcement
to unnecessary tort claims so
with that madam chair
alternative comment to the
Billsponsored.
Thank you thank you for that
thank you madam chair the reason
I brought this forward is
because we have this lead
program that is the diversion
program to keep the mentally ill
from going getting into the jail
system and unfortunately when
they passed this and made all
these amendments and on the
community it now forces law
enforcement to actually arrest
the mentally ill instead of
allowing them to put them into
the lead program I find that
very problematic so with that I
open it up to questions thank
you.
Okay so we will go to the
audience we will do a poll.
Use deadly force even when there
are alternative means of
subduing the victim by allowing
this I just and pass you only
increase the chances the
incorrect is a by them as we did
the all interactions with law
enforcement throughout New
Mexico and includes against
transparency ink and
accountability and we're need to
oppose the tree three oh seven
thank you.
Thank you that looks like all in
opposition so if you are in
support and want to speak please
raise your hand with.
I'm not seeing anyone so we will
go to the committee for
questions.
Any questions from the
committee.
I will entertain a motion.
Madam chair motion for it to
pass a second madam chair like
to move to table I would say
okay so we have a motion to
table I Representative Romero
and a second by Representative
Barreras Allison can you please
call the roll.
Representative arrest.
Yes to table.
Representative Lord no.
Representative.
No to table.
Thanks chair Mero.
Yes to table.
Madam Thompson yes to table.
Three to to help fill three oh
seven has thanks tabled.
Thank you.
And now we will move on to
Senate bill ninety two as
amended and that Senator Lopez.
Madam chair I don't see you
Senator Lopez in the attendees.
I will text her do you see us
Senator Moores and or Neil.
No more and no you know.
No nail okay let's let's take
about a five minute break and
I'll see if I can get in touch
with any of those sponsors and
so everybody just to take a
break and let me see who I can
get in touch with hold on.
Madam chair.
Yes.
What the drummer called his two
daughters.
Tom Tom.
It's close.
No one added to.
To start Representative Barreras
my at my cousin who's like my
sister just had twin girls in
October who I haven't met yet
and they we call in the and us
because they're Eliana and ID on
a.
And I'm gonna have to tailor
that to open up.
Whether remaining for that
following.
And I used to work with the set
of twins that was Adriana and
Adriana oh my gosh the time
twisting Bella the.
It was a K. okay so I have a
good joke for you.
So why do you why do all of
Finland's ships have bar codes.
So.
Scandinavian.
That I heard that I actually
heard that joke last summer
Madam.
Internet in international
shipping class I told it on the
floor last year.
I'm.
I didn't remember.
So I could not get a hold of any
of the senators I will just
throw a little dig at them they
don't work as late as we do and
so so I guess we will just roll
those two bills
I'm.
Their phones just rang and rang
so so I guess we will call it a
night and look at us we're done
before we're done but so we did
we did good today
we will not be meeting Saturday
We will be having a floor
session on Sunday so we will
will we will be cranky next week
but we will not meet Saturday so
everyone have a good night I was
the evening that's pretty much
night time thank you all for all
your hard work and thanks to the
audience who hung with us okay
bye bye thank you all.
