yes.
OK, thank you. Did I miss anyone
for supporting comments in the
audience.
Seeing none, do we have any
comments on Zoom?
OK.
Who are they?
Yeah
Do you, can you hear me? Uh, who
is
Claudia
Can you hear me?
OK.
Larry
Thank you. Next we will hear
from Larry Sontag.
Thank you. Next, we have Joshua
Riley.
Can you hear us?
Yes, please uh state your
comment in one minute.
Thank you. Now, we'll go back to
the audience. I just have to
follow procedure. I don't
imagine we have any uh opposing
comments.
And back to Zoom, any, yeah, OK,
committee members,
Representative Block.
We just like to move the
amendment.
For passage or the substitute.
OK. Representative.
We already did that.
We, OK, so then I guess I'll
just discuss. Thank you, Madam
Chair. OK.
Back on the soap, Madam Chair,
and I apologize if I, if I
referenced something in the
actual bill that wasn't.
On the right page, so my
apologies. I have both of them
in front of me, so.
Starting off, Madam Chair
Representative, I think we kind
of heard a comment about this,
but I'm on page 6 of the new.
Bill to substitute.
Talking about surviving spouse
on line 17, I believe that is
also on.
Line 4 at the top of that page.
So Madam Chair Representative, I
know a couple of years ago we
changed the statute to define
spouse. I'm wondering, does that
include domestic partnerships,
or is that just somebody who has
been
Married.
I just want clarity on that,
Madam Chair, Representative for
the question.
Members of the committee, Madam
Chair and Representative Black,
the, in this case is defined in
the property tax code, those
individuals need to have been
married.
OK. Thank you so much, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Representative
Madam Secretary.
That clears it up a little for
me. Next here, Madam Chair,
Representative.
Secretary, uh.
I believe on the original bill,
I, I, I don't know if it's still
in there on the same page.
It says in the amount that shall
be based on percentage of the
veteran's disability, yes, it
is.
And it says as determined by
federal law. So Madam Chair
Representative and secretary,
I'm wondering, uh,
Is that a specific code in the
law that's very specific or
I don't know everything about
the tax code and and all the
veterans codes and everything,
so I don't know if you have
comment. Thank you, Madam Chair
and Representative Block, I
think if we can defer that
question to the Secretary of
Veteran Services. That is a
process that he's very familiar
with.
And take my care.
And good morning, Madam Chair
Representative Locke.
The
Allusion to the federal law is
the veterans go through a claim
process and that it is
adjudicated by the Veterans
Affairs, and that documentation
would be used as a source
documents for applying the
percentages and validating
through our office, um, through
the proper protocols to ensure
that that veteran actually is in
receipt of the percentage based
on VA ratings and, and the, the
adjudication by, by the Veterans
Affairs Administration.
And I'm trying to thank you
Secretary. You might want to
stick around in that, in that
chair because I do have a couple
very veteran services department
questions representative.
Um
So that document, you need to be
in possession of that document
before that happens. And I'm
wondering, Madam Chair
Representative, how it currently
works or how it will work.
Would it be prorated for the
year, let's just say they begin
in July.
And that does that, is that the
whole year of that property tax,
or is it only half? If
It takes 6 months to get that
format, that document.
How's that work, Madam Chair,
representative.
Um, Madam Chair Representative
Block. So the first question is
that document is, is easily
attained. It is mailed to the to
the veteran when their claim is
adjudicated. It is also
available on the VA.gov, and we
have our veteran service
officers that can assist any
veteran in attaining that
documentation through for that
purpose to provide that and that
source document would then be be
utilized for us to provide the
certification from our office
that they would take to the
assessor's office.
You have that done now the
timelines that you, uh,
are addressing on if it would be
prorated or not, it would all
depend on the date of that, when
they present that information to
us in veteran services and it
was taken to the assessor's
office, and I would not begin to
speak on behalf of the
assessors, how they would apply
that in their offices, um,
whether it's prorated or uh from
from that point forward, and I
believe that would be addressed
in the in the rules committees.
Thank you, I will just add one
more part which I want to
commend veteran services for the
the forms are actually available
online. Great. Thank you so
much, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative and uh Mr.
Secretary.
Um
All right, a couple other
questions. I won't get too into
the weeds here on this one, but
Madam Chair Representative, by
the way, I was a co-sponsor of
the HJR so I'm very supportive.
So these questions are
absolutely to make sure that
those dollars get to those
veterans and ensure that they
get that. And I, I also want to
commend, of course, the legacy
of former Representative Al
Cohen, who spent 7 years getting
this passed in this chamber in
his last session, he, he finally
got it done. So I just wanted to
make sure to, to give him props
for that because it's, it's hard
having to come back every year.
reintroduce something.
So, madam chair,
representatives, um,
representative and Mr.
Secretary. So the CPI, I thought
it was tied to the CPI in the
bill.
Uh, I believe it's
Line
I forget, Madam Chair, page 2.
Or I'm sorry, page 3.
At the top of there, it says,
Consumer price index. I'm just
guessing that's general um
language because I know other
things in statute are tied to
that, is that the most effective
approach to that, Madam Chair,
Representative, or Madam
Secretary. Thank you, Madam
Chair and Representative Black.
Yeah, there are many places in
the tax code where we reference
the CPI and we'll put sometimes
as a technical suggestion to be
more specific about it, but
generally we use the CPI for all
urban, that is what is
sort of the, the general CPI and
then there's some more specific
ones for different things, but
that's what would be put in
place.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative Madam
Secretary, on that same page, it
might be a little off topic from
what I just asked. I believe
it's there. I apologize. I'm on
the sub and the regular bill
says on D.
I think this is page 3 still.
Um, it says the department
shell, Madam Chair
Representative, what department
are we referring to in that
section. I didn't see the
department.
Before
in the bill, Madam Chair, Madam
Chair and Representative block
in the entire property tax code
where this falls, the department
is the taxation and revenue
Department, the division is the
property tax division.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Madam Secretary and
Representative that does help a
lot. And then next question, I'm
just trying to be rapid fire
here. Uh, the, the exemptions
or, yeah, the exemptions, are
they stackable?
So for example, if there were 2
veterans in in a house, two
veterans.
They're not married.
They are partners and they live
in a house. They're both
veterans. Let's just say they're
both 100% disabled. Would they
be able to both get that 100%
exemption.
The disability and
How, how does that work, Madam
Chair? It's just a weird
scenario that I was thinking
might come up, Madam Chair. It's
a great question, Madam Chair
and Representative Black. So the
constitutional language is
basically says that the veterans
shall receive these exemptions
if they're eligible. Um, and so
in the case of the exemption,
you can only exempt to 0. So if,
if you had to um 100% disabled
veterans who cohabitated,
whether they were or weren't
married, they're
property value can't go the
taxable value can't go below
zero.
But yes, they, they would be
stackable if they're both
eligible veterans, they shall
get this tax relief. It's if
it's their primary residence.
And then there's some question I
know has been raised about um
the order of applying these
things, you know, for example,
if you've got a residential
property, it's a primary
residence, and the veteran is
eligible for the $10,000
exemption and a partial or full
um disabled exemption, we'll
have to look at the
constitutional language
carefully to
Determine how those should be,
what order those should be
applied in and to the extent
that we need to provide any
guidance, tax and rev can do
that through rulemaking, but we
do, whether it's through statute
or rule, we just need to be
careful to make sure that we
don't get outside of our
authority under the
constitutional language.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. And
then I get and Madam Secretary,
one quick point as well. I know
with the bill, which I totally
support or the HJRs, which I
totally support co-sponsor. Love
it, voted for it on the ballot,
absolutely. Go to the bottom of
the ballot and I did vote yes on
those. So Madam Chair
representative, I've heard from
counties that
It's not, they're not held
harmless in the bill.
And look localities are not
harmless at all. And I was
wondering, Madam Chair
Representative.
Are we looking at another piece
of legislation as, as referenced
earlier in the testimony,
because I know in my county, I,
I asked my assessor, I asked my,
my
My county commissioners,
everybody, and they said we're
we're gonna lose about $63,000
in revenue, and we don't
necessarily want to have to put
that back on the the other
consumers or other property
owners who are we, are we
looking at that and what's the
status of that, Madam Chair? And
that's my last question.
Madam Chair and Representative
Black, I'm happy to take a stab
at that, but if if our sponsor
or anyone else wants to, to go
to with, it's more of a policy
question than an administrator
or technical question, but um we
have a pretty, we have our arms
around what the fiscal impact is
from moving forward to to
$10,000 in exemption. That's
pretty straightforward. We know
how many veterans currently
receive the $4000 exemption. So
that one's pretty simple. Um,
the disabled and partial
disabled exemption is more
difficult, although it's not a
lot of.
things we provide fiscal
estimates for are pretty
difficult, and we do the best
with the data we have, but that
one is more uncertain. So for
either and both to the extent
they narrow the tax base, then
yield control, uh, acts to
partially at least offset the
revenue loss. So, um, it's just
sort of a two second primer on
yield control, um, yield control
acts to basically try to hold
the county and other taxing
authority who, you know, all the
authorities that impose property
tax hold them
more or less stable in the
amount of revenue that's raised
from the tax base. So when we
narrow the base by removing
certain veteran tacks from the
base, then the tax rate
automatically goes up on
everybody else, but only to a
certain extent. The mill rate
that can be imposed has a max of
11.85%. So to the extent and
area hits that they can't go
further and they may have a
revenue loss. So very long story
short, um, we have a good sense
of what the fiscal impact is of
the 4 to 10.
There's more uncertainty on the
partial disabled estimate, um,
and I would say we need to wait
and and see what the fiscal
impact of that actually is to
counties and others who impose
the property tax.
In simpler terms, Madam Chair,
uh, because of yield control,
counties have to have uh an
amount of revenue that allows
them to pay their bills, and
that's why you have yield
control and so they, there may
be a tax increase, hopefully as
minor as possible. We don't know
quite yet. Uh, and it will be
spread across the entire state.
Spectrum, but yes, when we vote
for something of this nature,
which we all agree with, we're
also agreeing that we may
actually be raising our own
property rate a bit.
Aren't you?
Madam Chair and thank you,
Representative Knight. Another
part of that question which I
I just wanted to clarify, there
is there a legislation that
you're working on that you that
you know of that
Would address that or is that
just?
In the air right now, Madam
isn't something Madam Chair,
that I'm working on, that is a
whole another world of
legislation.
I think generally when we vote
and I voted in support of this
as well. We understand that when
we exempt someone,
We're also accepting a bit of a
burden.
Madam Chair. Thank you so much,
Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative.
You, Representative Lujan.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair. I'm losing my voice too.
Sorry, um, I'm not sick. Um,
Yeah, for, for those reasons, I,
I appreciate some of the, the
questions from Representative
Block. I think you hit a lot of
the issues that we're all
talking about in our um local
government um.
Governments and having this
discussion because there is a
there is a burden, and though we
do have a.
Uh, leverage with the meal
levies, there's still a limit to
those, and even um
I guess the county's catching
County and Torrance County are
at their limits, so they're not
gonna be able to utilize.
That meal levy um.
Um
Process for them and
It's stayed in here about 15
municipalities may not, may also
be at risk, which, you know, uh,
troubling to me is
Um
I'm I'm, I'm gonna read this
some special meals such as those
for conservation, conservation
districts, some hospitals.
etc. are not subject to yield
control and may not have the
ability to be adjusted if net
taxable value decreases. This is
the majority of the revenue loss
forecast.
So then now it's up to us to
decide how we, we need to fix
these sort of things. There is a
And I would, I would make no and
I believe in tax and rev uh
committee, and
Think of the other committee
this over the interim where
there was a presentation of, of
this type of policy, um, Madam
Chair, that, so it does.
There is, there is room for
that, um, um, Madam Chair,
Representative Block, if you're
interested in that, I would.
Have a side bar with.
With some of the local
government here, um.
I just say that and I will
reiterate what representative um
Art de la Cruzade is that we
gave it to the voters. They, we
voted on this and we decided,
and when we do do an exemption,
there's going to be a cost to
that. So, as we're investigating
more of that cost, we might have
to dial some things back, but I
think within, you know, our
budget and what we, we decided
we're we're there, we have to,
we have to um move forward with
this for the, the just reasons,
um.
So I would say um.
I guess my question is,
And knowing this, this madam
chair, um, this, this does not
address the issue with the
With um uh the in providing more
opportunities for things like
mail levies. Is that correct?
I'm sure.
Um,
Madam Chair and Representative
Luhan, this bill does not change
how much can be imposed, what,
what tax rates can be imposed. I
appreciate that question. Um, I
mean, the answer, um,
Yeah, we're just gonna have to
do some more work and do a
little more in-depth work and do
some corrective things if
necessary. Again, you know, we
do have a a robust budget and
I'd just like to announce that
and say that, you know, we did
give this to our voters and to
our and we put this forward
before them. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Representative Barrigo.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you to our sponsor
representative De la Cruz and
uh representative Martinez.
Um, so, Madam Chair, I was one
of the co-sponsors of this bill
when it was originally passed,
and I was um with uh
Representative Alcon,
Representative Garcia,
Representative Martinez and a
few other um co-sponsors and,
you know, coming from a family
of um.
My father was uh honor honorably
discharged from the military
from the army, my husband was
honorably discharged from the
navy, um, and I did work with
the Veterans Coalition, um,
somewhat.
And I know, I think that we all
knew when this bill passed that
there would be some uh
consequences, and I have talked
with some of the, I think it was
Nancy Bears in the in the past,
uh, the treasure of Albuquerque.
Who was not.
Completely in favor of this
bill, um, and she's not here to
say that, but um we had did have
those conversations because of,
um, you know, the unintended
consequences of the fact that
this bill would take away from
our, our tax base. Um, and
basically, and I, and, and.
Mr. De la Cruz's representative,
um, I know you worked for the
county for a long time, so you
understand these issues, these
technical issues very well, and
I appreciate that you brought
this forward. Um, what I'm
concerned with, Madam Chair, is
that, you know, and, and, uh,
Representative Lujan mentioned
our budget allows for what I
think uh $3 billion revenue, um.
That
I
It's been announced in the press
that we have, we have $3 billion
that is available, um, when we
think about, and I think about
my father a lot and I, he was in
Germany, you know, fighting the
Nazis and, you know, I mean.
Our veterans deserve everything
and more because I think that
I go to other states and I, and
I, Madam chair, you know, they
talk about their states being,
oh, it's a veteran state, you
know, it's, it's a, it's a
state, it's a military city.
It's when you go to San Diego
and places like that and when we
come to Albuquerque,
It's like sort of in the
background.
And I said this when I was
counselor, um, is we need to
really be, you know, stepping up
and, and
Reinforcing that this isn't a
military state. New Mexico is a
military state.
And whatever benefits, and I
understand the unintended
consequences that
From a revenue standpoint, and I
appreciate the secretary and her
discussion. What, one of the
issues that struck me in this
fiscal analysis was um.
The inflation index.
And how that um
You know
And I, I guess it's related to
this bill and how it would be um
distributed throughout the
cities and the counties.
Um
And could you expand on that a
little bit?
Madam Chair and Representative
Barrago, yes, the constitutional
amendment provides that the
amount of the $10,000 exemption
shall be adjusted for CPI
inflation in future years. So
under the substitute bill, um,
tax year 2025, it'll be $10,000
and then for each subsequent
year, it will be adjusted
automatically by CPI.
So as a CPI changes, then it
just it changes and, and so.
In and I understand what the
taxpayers approved doesn't state
that, but do the veterans
understand that or is that part
of what this bill is trying to
um correct or trying to define,
Madam Chair Representative
Borego, I don't know that, that
the, the question as to whether
the veterans understand, I think
that's part of what the
secretary of Veteran Services is
tasked with, that's what we're
all tasked with to make sure
that they understand that
benefit. One of the things that
I like about
that particular language in the
bill is that it preempts a
couple of things. First, it
preempts the idea that it will
lose value if you don't adjust
for inflation and, and, and the
second is that we won't have to
bring it back routinely as
inflation changes.
And, and the reason that I
raised that question, Madam
Chair, is that, you know.
there are unintended
consequences in the bill that
was passed by the voters, but
By the same token, I think that
we have a responsibility to
ensure that our veterans and our
military are protected and that
they are given the benefits that
they deserve, um, I'm, I'm still
a little unclear about this bill
and because it seems like it's
trying to, what you said earlier
was that we're trying to
redefine some things, but also
it goes a little deeper because
it's trying to.
Um, supplement in a sense, in my
mind, and maybe I'm wrong, um,
what the
Municipalities in the counties
are losing.
And that
I don't want to see that back on
the backs of our veterans and so
that's the concern that I have.
Madam Chair and Representative
Brago, I I think I'd just like
to clarify the CPI adjustments
are required constitutionally,
and this bill really is just
reflecting the constitutional
requirements so that the statute
is 100% in conformance with the
state constitution, which it
must be. It doesn't go any
further by providing any further
relief or further guidance or
It, it just reflects the
constitutional requirements.
So, my last question, Madam
Chair, is if we in fact have $3
billion in our budget that is
excess. Why are we not
supplementing.
The cities and the counties.
Um
With some of that revenue.
Madam Chair, I'm, I'm not sure
Representative Brago that I
followed the question. I mean,
about 3 million $3 billion is
the state's reserves.
And it can be appropriated at
the
You know, at the, through the
appropriating power of the
legislature, but it doesn't
necessarily connect to this
bill. No, I, I understand that,
uh, secretary. I'm just, uh,
suggesting that maybe there
needs to be a bell that in Madam
Chair, that does supplement that
revenue shortfall.
And
You representative Ianornu.
Madam Chair, I move a do not
pass on house 47 and do pass on
the committee substitute for
House Bill 47.
Thank you.
We have uh do not pass on House
Bill 47.
And they do pass on House
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committe substitute for
House Bill 47.
A motion made by Representative
Ona Nonu and is seconded by Vice
Chair Little. Please call.
Representative A Nonu.
Representative block, yes.
Representative Borego.
Yes, and I would like, um, Madam
Chair, my previous explanation.
Or question
Brough into my vote.
Representative Lu Han? Yes.
Representative Mejia.
Yes.
Madam Fle leader Sapensky? Yes.
Representative Zamora.
Madam Vice Chair Little.
Yes.
Madam Chair Johnson.
Thank you. You have a due pass.
Thank you Madam Chair. Thank
you, members.
Uh, committee members, please
stay in the room for a little
bit of housekeeping.
make
Yes.
Um
I wanna talk about our committee
