And we have 7 items on our
agenda today. Let's be cognizant
of time frame. I believe we have
to be on the floor at 10:30. So
with that, Madam Vice Chair, you
may begin.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Good
morning, everyone. I'm happy to
be here this morning. Uh, if I
may, before I begin, uh, let's
see, I'm going to introduce this
though. House Bill 244, a very
briefly provides for a minimum
age of 28 for a magistrate
judges.
And uh what I would like to do,
Madam Chair, is to introduce um.
Uh, Justice Michael the Hill
this morning and he's got to ask
to, I would like him to uh
address the uh our committee
this morning very briefly. Thank
you.
Thank you.
Um, Michael V. Hill, I'm the
senior justice in Mexico Supreme
Court, and I'm here for two
reasons. Number 1, let you know
that the Supreme Court heartily
endorses this bill, and we thank
you for sponsoring it and
bringing it to the committee.
Secondly, I'd like to introduce
uh Judge Jimmy Foster. He's a
magistrate judge, sits in
Artesia. He's our expert witness
on this bill, and I'm happy to
introduce him. He's uh got a lot
more specifics that I, that I
could have.
provide, but I'm happy to answer
any questions and also Judge
Clipper Miller is here. Um, he's
here to answer any questions you
may have as well. So thank you
so much for the opportunity and
uh
I'll turn it over back. Thank
you.
Thank you, and if you, um, Madam
Chair, if I may give my expert
witness, uh, uh, a moment to
introduce himself.
Good morning, Madam Chair. I'm I
am Judge Jimmy Foster from
Artesia. I'm the president of
the Magistrate Judges
Association.
Thinking and thank you for
allowing us to be here this
morning.
So Madam Chair, with that, um,
we stand for questions.
Thank you. Let's go to the
audience. Those in favor of the
bill, please raise your hands.
Those, OK, so let's go ahead and
take
Those comments one minute,
please.
Madam Madam Chair, members of
the committee, I'm Cynthia
Pacheco, Director of court
operations. Um, we don't, we
don't all need to speak, raising
our hands is enough to show you
that we're in support. This
legislation was created by the
magistrates for the magistrates.
So I asked the committee to
support the magistrate's
endeavors. Thank you.
Further comments.
Supporting the bill.
Let's go online. Do we have any
supporting comments?
Anybody hoping to make comments
and support, please raise your
hand.
OK, let's go back to the
audience. Do we have any
opposing comments?
Let's go back online.
Anyone hoping to make a public
comment in opposition to the
bill, please raise your hand.
Hey, committee members,
Representative block.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. Thanks for
bringing the bill forward. I
have one question, maybe a few
later, if you give me more
answers that create more
questions. But the one question
I have is, why did we pick 28?
What, I mean, I'm 28 right now,
so it's a good age, but why do
we pick it, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, I will defer to my
uh expert witness here.
Madam Chair and Representative
uh came to the age of 28 for a
simple reason, um.
Jurisdictionally, we are
equivalent to MetroCorp.
MetroCorp does have an
educational requirement that but
doesn't have an age requirement.
Uh, so typical, uh, or.
Uh, timelines, graduation at 8
at 18 of high school, 4 years
for your bachelor's degree, 3
years for law school, 3 years
for work experience would put
someone who is looking to sit on
the metro bench at approximately
the age of 28. Um, so we're,
they have an educational
requirement, we're we're looking
to establish an adult um life
experience requirement.
For a magistrate judge and 28 is
where we came up with that.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for that Judge Foster,
Representative, and yeah, that's
pretty much the only question I
had. Appreciate it. Thank you.
Representative Zamora.
again, won't we, Madam Chair.
Uh, Madam Chair and presenters,
thank you for bringing this bill
forward. Am I correct in
understanding that population
over 200,000.
The district over 200,000
changes the, the
Rules
I'm sure.
Madam Chair Representative, uh,
yes, it does the population hits
200,000 requires uh.
an attorney to be a magistrate
judge.
And, and Madam Chair, and, and
the presenter.
Uh, why, why would, why would
that be? What?
I would, why would we need that?
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair and representative,
that was the threshold that was
set by the legislature.
I, I'm sorry, if, if you could.
That that was the uh the
threshold that was set by the
legislature. OK, so that was,
that's already been, that's
already law. Yes, sir.
OK.
And I was wondering why.
Why it would be fair.
But
To the, to the ones.
That don't have a degree as
compared to to do and, but if,
if that's not being changed,
that's not, that's probably not
something we should be debating
here today.
And uh
I think that's all my questions,
Madam.
What is the pleasure of the
committee? We do pass, Madam
Chair.
I have a motion for it. Do you
pass by Representative Lujan,
seconded by Madame Flo leader
Skipansy. Do we have any
opposition?
Seeing none, you have a due
pass.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, committee.
Just wanted to make a comment
with my vote.
Um, I think coming from the
highest court, I think that, uh,
you know, that's why I voted in
favor because I did have some
questions similar to
Representative Block. Thank you.
Thank you.
OK, let's hear how Bill 352
Representative Herrera.
Yeah
And, and, and silent.
In Spanish.
Yeah.
Just leave that H completely
out.
Mhm.
Yeah
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, good to be back
here again. I tell you this is
one of my favorite committees,
um, I'm here to present um a
house Bill 352 and um this is
just an effort to, to uh change
outdated statutes, uh, to make
magistrate courts uh available
to the people over the 50 years
populations have changed, so,
so, um, I can just tell you from
a local perspective that in
Rio Riba, the magistrate court
is in trauma and it's an old
dilapidated.
I want portable building. I
mean, I, I think you could break
in with the baseball bat pretty
easily, really. And so this just
moves our court over to um TA
Tierra Maria and uh where they
have a really good court system
and, and they're not that busy,
so it it makes a lot of sense.
It's not a huge distance for
locals, but I'm gonna introduce
really my expert who is uh
Cynthia Pacheco and she's the
director of court operations.
Go ahead and make this. Good
morning, everyone.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee.
As Representative Herrera stated
what, what we've done is look
very closely at the usage in
each of these locations to
determine where we should pull
our resources to provide better
service to the core customers of
New Mexico.
And with that we stand to
questions. OK, thank you. Let's
go to the audience. Do we have
any, uh, anyone in the audience
who'd like to provide public
comment and support.
OK, let's go ahead and here.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Michael
Lei again, senior Justice from
the Supreme Court. The Supreme
Court strongly endorses this
bill.
Um, I consider the magistrate
courts in many ways to be the
backbone of the judiciary and
the people's courts throughout
the state of New Mexico. This,
this improves the efficiency and
economy of our courts and allows
them to better serve their
people, so we strongly endorse
this bill. Thank you.
Any further comments in the
audience and support.
Any opposition in the audience.
Let's go online.
Anyone hoping to make public
comment in opposition or in
support of the bill, please
raise your hand, say no one.
Anybody hoping to make a comment
in opposition to the bill,
please raise your hand.
Representative Zamora.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, and
presenters. So how are the
communities with this? Have it,
has this been discussed in the
communities and, and see how
they agree or disagree.
Madam Chair.
Oh well, I know I'm Rio rivets,
it's pretty common. I mean,
it's, it's far to go to charma
Chama farther than, you know,
TA, so TA is just a nicer
setting for this court. So I
know in Rio Riba everybody's
sport, but I don't know about
the other districts. I'll let,
I'll let Cynthia take that one.
Madam Chair and Representative
Zamora. So as far as um the
judiciary, all of the judges are
in favor. We all support this.
We have had conversations in
each of these communities.
about what we would do to move,
relocate, expand, and so far
have not had any um any, I've
not spoken to anyone who does
not like the idea who hates the
idea. And if I, if I can let him
turn representative Zamora, I'll
just point out that
All of these locations are also
served by a myriad of
municipalities. So moving a
court from one place to another
in any of these locations by no
means creates a a judicial
desert.
OK.
And I believe that's all my
questions, ma'am I'm sure. Thank
you.
Thank you, Representative Lujan.
A move do pass, manager of
motion for to pass by
Representative Lujan and a
second by Representative Ona
Nonu. Do we have any opposition?
Seeing none, you have a do pass.
2 for 2. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you.
It's my favorite committee
Yeah.
Right, let's move along. House
Bill 365 Representative Garrett,
I believe is on her way.
there
Keep an eye out for it.
Yeah. OK.
OK.
Do you want to start
I just wanna start.
mic.
Let's go, let's move along to
House Bill 428 since
Representative Cadena is here
and we'll stay in contact with
Representative Garrett.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Let me
catch my breath.
Mm
Mhm
Front of you.
You may begin. Yes, thank you.
Thank you, committee, and good
morning. I'm here to present
House Bill 428. Um, Madam Chair,
committee. I'm sitting here at
this table by myself today, um,
for those of you that had the
privilege of knowing my dear
friend Baron Jones. We worked on
this concept over many years
together, and he passed last
spring, uh, so it means a lot to
me that we get to continue this
conversation. Uh, Madam Chair
Representatives, I, um, in a
previous
administration under Governor
Martinez and a Republican
secretary, I worked as the
bureau chief of recidivism
reduction at the New Mexico
Corrections Department.
And in my first couple of weeks,
I was tasked with working on a
policy, um, about where we
housed a certain population of
incarcerated people. And I
worked on that policy and I
talked to experts in the
correctional facilities and the
prisons. And then I went to our
general counsel and I said, OK,
I'm ready. How do we go to
rulemaking? And I was told at
the time, we don't go to
rulemaking agencies exempted
from rulemaking.
And I was stunned. Um, it's my,
uh,
Perspective since then, Madam
Chair and representatives, that
if we have the authority to lock
someone up or to um
Supervise someone's life when
they are on probation or parole,
we as a state should be
accountable to it, to that
authority. And from my
perspective, Madam Chair, um, as
such, the corrections department
should be subject to the State
Rules Act and the New Mexico
Administrative Procedures Act,
just like every other executive
agency. Uh, so simply, that's
what this bill does is bring the
corrections department under the
purview of the State Rules Act
and the, uh, administrative
Procedures Act.
And with that, I'll um be ready
for questions and public
comment, Madam Chair. Thank you.
Representative, let's go to the
audience, those in support of
the bill, please raise your
hands. OK, let's go ahead and
take
Public comment.
Madam Chair, oh, thank you,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Carter Bundy with
asked me, We want to thank the
sponsor for bringing this. We
think transparency in any of our
agencies is good. Um, we know
that there will be people who
are critical of the department,
people who praise the
department, people who are
critical of our members, people
who praise our members, but we
think the more stability and
frankly, the more public input
where there's a time frame where
they can't just change things
every few days. I think that
works to the benefit of the
inmates and the officers who we
respectfully ask for a due.
Yes. Thank you.
Carter. Do we have any further
comments in support? Do we have
any opposition?
Let's take one minute comments,
please.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Alicia Tafoya Lucero,
and I serve as the secretary of
the Corrections department.
And um
I am here to stand in respectful
opposition of the bill. This is
something that I've spoken with
the sponsor about in prior
years, uh, as it's written, the
bill has the potential to
compromise security and safety
and delay the agency from being
able to make swift, uh, changes
when emergent threats are
arising. So, uh, we've come up
with some modifications that we
believe would make this bill uh
able to both achieve the
sponsor's goal of trans.
par ency in government, while
also making sure that we do not
compromise safety. And so, uh,
after this committee, um, Madam
Chair, and if the sponsor would
be amenable to it. I would love
to be able to send her a copy of
um proposed amendments. Thank
you.
Thank you. Do we have any
further comments in opposition
in the audience. Let's go
online.
Hoping to make comments and
support. We have uh Diane.
Diane, can you hear us?
Yes, I can hear you. Thank you.
This is Diane McCash. I was
pleased to see HB 428 rules
definitions for corrections
because as a mother of a son who
has been more than once
incarcerated in New Mexico
Department of Corrections
facilities, I would very much
appreciate a transparent
rulemaking process being put in
place. As far as I know, other
state entities are required to
have the same or similar
rulemaking procedures as are
contemplated here for the
Department of Corrections. Given
the thousands of staff, inmates
and families and friends of
those who are directly and
indirectly affected by the
department.
This just seems like good
governance to me. Thank you so
much.
Thank you so much, Diane.
You have Arthur, Arthur, can you
hear us?
Oh yes.
I worked with the Department of
Corrections for 20 plus years.
Um, I would just like to say
that we support the transparency
in the department's rulemaking.
I wanna ask you to support the
House Bill 428.
Thank you.
Thank you so much, Arthur.
Anyone hoping to make comments
in opposition to the bill,
please raise your hand.
OK, Representative Zamora.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and uh
presenter for bringing this bill
forward. uh.
Madam Chair, uh,
Have something a little out of
the ordinary to ask of the
committee here, uh,
Uh, representative.
With the strong comments that
were made by the secretary, uh.
Corrections.
And, and this, and willingness
to work with you on this bill
and, and, and uh
Maybe come to an understanding.
I would wonder if you'd be
interested in rolling the bill
and, and working on that. I'd
hate to, I'd hate to work on a
bill here in committee and then,
and then some changes being made
to it and.
And we'd be looking at a whole
different bill on down the road.
And if, if Madam Chair could
Maybe hurry up and bring the
bill back.
The table, uh.
If you would even consider that
literature. Matt and
Representative, I'm grateful to
have known Secretary Tafoya
Lucero, and I certainly, um,
know that we've had a positive
working relationship over many
years. I just in my office saw
that she um had come by
yesterday afternoon and didn't
see that till I walked in. Um,
if this bill were to pass out of
committee, I certainly, uh,
would look forward to meeting
with the secretary and her
leadership team before we went
to judiciary, um, to
potentially, um, work through
some of those amendments, but I
would like to continue with.
The bill Heing committee today
and the secretary would have my
commitment to work on those
amendments for judiciary.
Madam and
with all due respect.
The reason I'm asking for that
is, is that way we could see
the, the, the, the bill after
it's been worked on.
And we would get a better
chance, we would have a better
chance to support your bill.
Uh, just, and, and I understand
where you're coming from and
That's your decision and
That's all for now, Madam Chair.
Represented a block.
Madam Chair, thank you,
Representative. So I, I kind of
had the same question that um
represented Zamora had regarding
Potentially fixing it here
before we get to judiciary
because Lord only knows when
that's going to happen, and
Senate bills are starting to
come to our side of the chamber
and I would just love to fix it
here so
we're moving on with the bill.
Madam Chair, point of order.
I believe
Individuals of this chamber need
to be treated fairly and I was
just making a quick point. I was
not gonna go on for a minute.
So Madam chair, that's all I
had.
Thanks.
Senator Barrago and then
Representative Lujan.
Um, Madam Chair, I'd like to,
uh move House Bill 428, um, with
the understanding that it's
going to be amended at
judiciary.
I'm sure I make a subsequent
motion to table.
Where we take that motion,
Representative Lujan.
I'll make my come after we, if
you take the, we have a, did you
have a question, representative
on you?
Madam Chair, the tabling motion
can't be used to suppress
debate, Madam Chair, so we
should complete the discussion.
Thank you. Thank you, madam
chair and
My, my, uh,
My line of questioning is, is
just to support the idea that if
um
If the sponsor of the bill
would, would
Work or have a uh.
Uh
Dialogue with the Secretary of
Corrections and I would move.
Uh, motion after the table
motion.
Thank you, Representative Aa
Nonu.
Thank you Madam Chair and thank
you Representative for bringing
the bill forward. I know we got
a chance to talk about this
yesterday and just to some of
the comments made in the
committee so far, given the
working relationship that I have
had with both the representative
and the secretary, and these are
both women of impeccable
integrity, I trust the
representative to work with the
secretary going forward as as as
representative Blo mentioned, we
are pressed for time as we are
in the back half of the 60 day
session, and I think the impetus
is for us to not slow.
the process and to that end, I
would like to see this bill move
out of committee. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative, um,
Madam Flo leader, did I have you
on the list?
OK.
Uh, Representative Madam Vice
Chair.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair, uh,
the one question I have is to in
looking this over, um.
I'm curious as to the
involvement of whether
I understand this does involve
the parole board as well.
It was my that was my question.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, the New Mexico
Corrections Department and the
parole board are distinct
agencies. So some of what came
up in the analysis was um
blurring that line a bit, uh,
why the language of parolees is
in the bill language is because
the corrections department does
have responsibility, for
example, to prepare parole plans
and then when someone is
released and they're on parole,
they're under the supervision of
the corrections department for
both probation and parole. So in
In that line, the corrections
department would and does have
responsibilities, um, to
supervise individuals on parole
and to prepare them for parole,
but the parole board is a
distinct agency and as of today
and always, they are subject to
the State Rules Act and the New
Mexico Administration Act
already.
Thank you, thank you very much.
I appreciate that.
That's a manager.
Thank you.
OK. Thank you. I don't see
anyone else on the list. So we
have um
A
We had a motion for to pass and
we have a substitute motion to
table.
This call role.
That's what we're calling roll
on the table
to table.
Represented. Yes, the table
representative Borego.
Go to table
Representative Lujan.
Or was it in Mia.
Yes, the table.
Madam Flo leader.
Uh, Representative Zamora.
Yes the table. Madam Chair.
No, Madam Chair.
We have a
36.
Your tabling motion has failed.
So now we're back to our motion
for to pass and the second by
Representative Anya Nonu. Please
call Roll.
Represented you? Yes.
Or a block? No.
Representative Borego.
Representative Lujan.
Representative Mejia? No, Madam
F floor leader.
Yes.
Represented Zamora? No.
Madam Vice Chair.
Madam Chair.
6:30.
Representative, you have a you
pass.
You go down.
You're ready to sit down and
talk.
A Representative Garrett, House
Bill 365.
OK.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
committee members.
Um, I'm here to present House
Bill 365 Public Education
commission staff.
My expert witnesses are Matt
Paul, the executive director of
the Public charter schools of
New Mexico and Rebecca Burt, who
is the chair of the Public
Education Commission and
District 4 commissioner, which
covers Sandoval County and some
other areas.
My first question would be, do
you know who your public
education commissioner is. OK,
so the public education
commission consists of 10
elected commissioners who serve
four-year terms representing the
geographic district that they
live in.
They meet monthly.
They authorize all state
chartered charter schools and
currently 60 of our charter
schools, our state charters and
43 are authorized by local
districts.
Uh, throughout the state.
Um, the key point is that House
Bill 365.
detaches the public education
commission from being
administratively attached and
staffed by the public education
department. This spill would say
they would staff their own state
charter schools office with the
director appointed by the
commission, uh, they'd still be
housed at PED and I, I want to
mention that all schools that
charter you can add as an
adjective, but every single
school.
Regardless of it's a charter,
not a charter, um, is governed
by New Mexico state laws. So
this doesn't change any of that.
Uh, the bill replaces the
references to PD's current
charter schools division with
the state charter office and it
authorizes the office to use the
2% of state equalization
guarantee distributions already
withheld from state authorized
charter schools for
administrative support. So the
charter school
Office would use that already.
Uh directed allocation of 2% of
the SCG of a charter school to
fund what they're doing, uh, the
two, the effective date of the
spill is actually July 1st,
2026. So there's time to do all
this organization and on that
effective date, the personnel
appropriations, contracts,
records, and property of the
charter schools division would
be transferred to the state uh
charter office, and I'd like,
uh, so it's really just giving
this. And
order.
We have a presenter trying to
present her bill.
And we have two representatives
over there, one nodding their
head and trying to convince
everybody else already had a
vote on the bill, and then
they're discussing the bill and,
and disrupted the presentation
of the bill.
Madam Chair,
I, I respond, please?
I was just asking a question.
Have representative Garrett
present her bill.
my moment in time,
so I'm in strong support of
this. It just makes sense that
The office has the staff
directly connecting to them, and
I'm gonna ask Mr. Paul and Miss
Bert just to add brief
Comments before we take
questions.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Matt Paul
with Public Charter Schools of
New Mexico. Um, I speak today
from both uh supportive position
from the charter schools, but
also as a former charter school
division director who served the
PEC um at that time, uh, and the
way the current structure is
now, when you run the charter
schools division and support the
PEC. You work for the PED and
sometimes the um the alignment
is not there in priorities. And
so for example, the way this
looks, when
was charter school division
director is we would, uh, our,
my boss at the time, uh, the
secretary of Ed wanted to use
the school grading system as the
only uh uh uh criteria for
evaluating charter schools. The
PEC has a more uh multifaceted
way of looking at charter school
quality. And so it's just one
way how I'm sending
communications to schools that
are rooted in what we think the
priorities are, but the folks
with the votes may have
different priorities.
So it's not always reflected. It
creates more work for the
schools, um, and this would
streamline that process and
those priorities.
Thank you, Representative. Thank
you, Madam Chairman. Um, my
name's Becca Bird. I'm the chair
of the PEC this year and I
represent District 4,
we, uh, as a commission do
support this bill. The
legislature intended for the PEC
to be an independent authorizer
for state charter schools. We
know that from, from the
beginning. However, the the
attachment that we have to them
does create where we don't truly
get that independence that I
think the legislature intended,
um,
often you try to use the analogy
of imagine the LESC having a
director appointed by the
governor, staffed by the public
ed department, which is very
difficult in order to do the
work that you want to do as an
independently elected official,
which the system as it's set up.
So I think the intention was
there and it's just needs a
little bit of tweaking to get
that true independence, to
continue the oversight and
accountability that we have for
charters.
And with that, Madame Cher we
stand for question.
Thank you. Let's go to the
audience. Those in support of
the bill, please raise your
hands.
OK, let's take one minute
comments.
My name is Steven Carrillo. I'm
the, the secretary of the Public
Education Commission. I
represent District 10, which is
pretty much the north Taos River
Santa Fe counties, and I stand
supporting the bill and of my
colleagues in the comments
previously made in the interest
of time, I'm going to leave it
at that.
Uh, my name is Tim Beck. I
represent District 2, Public
Education commissioner for the
Northeast Heights. I was a
thirteen-year teacher and uh
golf coach at Sandia High
School, and I strongly support
this. I've been there for 2
years and I can see the
challenges that we're dealing
with now, and I tru I'm in
strong support of this. Thank
you.
Hi, good morning. My name is
Rachel Seward. I'm the founder
and executive director of Solari
Collegiate Charter School in
southwest Albuquerque, and I
stand in strong support of this
bill, um, specifically, I stand
in support of this bill because
this is an alignment with the
Charter School Act for um
charter schools to have
additional autonomy when
compared to their traditional
public schools. It is in
alignment with best practice. I
do know that PEC is highly
relational and our, as public
servants, our work is
relational. They hold high
standards for charter schools,
in addition to high levels of
support. Um, in fact, we do have
higher levels of accountability
with working with the.
EC directly through a
performance framework that is
more robust than the New Mexico
visa system, and we also are
participants there. Um, in
addition, working directly with
the PEC and having the staff
work under the PEC would ensure
that we have less of an
administrative burden and can
spend more time uh, supporting
students. So again, I stand in
strong support of this bill.
Any uh opposing comments in the
audience.
One minute, please.
Uh, good morning, chair and
members of the committee. I'm
Chanel Segua, the assistant
deputy secretary with the Public
Education department. Um, the
public ed department exists to
serve all schools in our state,
which includes our charter
schools. Moving the charter
school division under the direct
supervision of the PEC um would
create further division, um,
between the two entities. Moving
the charter school division
under the direct supervision
would also put our locally
authorized chart.
schools at a disadvantage,
because they would no longer
receive the great support that
our charter schools, uh,
division, uh, supports, uh, we
would also have to hire
additional staff with the PED to
support those locally authorized
charter schools and their boards
for training and, uh, technical
support.
Um, all schools, regardless of
um what type will always be
administratively attached to the
public ed department.
And we do
Thank you. Let's go online. Do
we have any comments in support
of the bill.
One minute, please. We'll take 3
comments.
We have middle college, uh,
middle college high school, uh,
can you hear us?
Yes, can you hear me? Sure can.
You have one minute.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Honorable Representatives. My
name is Doctor Robert Hunter.
I'm the head of the Middle
College High School. This is the
state's oldest early college
high school on the campus of UN
and Gallup. If you're unfamiliar
with the model, uh, students
graduate with an associate
degree alongside the high school
diplomas. Uh, we serve primarily
Native American students, and I
just want to speak briefly in
support of the bill. I think it
solves the structural problem
that exists within the charter
school division. If you have it
housed within the public ed
department, it just results in
it functioning as this
additional layer of duplicative
bureaucracy in which it just
structurally
tasks, uh, the charter schools
to provide data that they've
already given to the PED's
various other bureaus, and what
the bill seeks to do is to
streamline this structure of
inefficiency. It brings the
charter school division to where
it belongs under the direct, uh,
you know, supervision of the
public education commission, our
state authorizer. And if you
look at Section 3A, it addresses
this specifically. It identifies
these data sharing agreements
that are designed to mitigate
these costly and time-consuming
redundancies that the current
structure only promotes, and the
streamlining provisions of this
bill could go a long way toward
consol
ating this administrative
burden, so we can spend more
time on the actual work of
improving student outcomes. I
think it also signals the way
forward for developing a model
of efficiency that might
eventually be applied across an
even broader spectrum of
schools. It's very badly needed,
especially the smaller rural
districts, um, we just don't
have the human capital. We don't
have a giant central office to,
uh, comply with all the
reporting requirements of the
PED, uh, which are necessary. So
this is a really good fix, and
for this reason, I respectfully
request your consideration for
the passage of this bill, and
thank you for.
the time that you've granted me
to speak with you today. Thank
you so much.
We have Julia Rivera Tapia near
us?
Yes, good morning and Buenos
dias. Can you hear me?
You have one minute.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, my name is Julia
Rivera Tapia. I've been an
educator since 2005. I am a
bilingual teacher and academic
coach, and currently served as
an administrator. I have worked
at charter schools since 2005 in
Albuquerque at New Mexico
International School. Corrales
International School. I now live
down south where it's beautiful
here, I, I, I worked at races El
Saverin actuallyley Community
School, and currently work at J.
Paul Taylor Academy. The staff
at charter schools division is
competent and professional.
However, they're not always
aligned with the commission that
authorizes us. This can mean a
duplication of efforts to
endless clarity on what schools
can do to be successful with
their authorizer. We ask that
you support HB 365. This will
streamline the request and
administrative effort by
providing the PEC with their own
staff. Please support HB 365.
Thank you for your time.
Thank you so much, Julia. Anyone
hoping to make comments in
opposition, please raise your
hand.
Hey
And then representative.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair, and
I will, um, comment to the point
of our earlier. I
I am a little passionate about
this, Madam Chair.
Representatives representative
I'll take, I'll keep it, but
I'll just say Lujan,
where I am, Madam Chair, I'm not
gonna direct you to the
committee, but I am gonna say
that I am passionate about this
issue because, Madam Chair, this
is further segregation to our
Public education in our schools.
The charter schools, I am not
against our charter schools. I
want to make that very perfectly
clear what this legislation does
is it creates the further
segregation that we are already
trying to
Uh, resolve and solve charter
schools and it's stated
throughout the information and
the research that we've been
given today are no better, no
stronger, no different.
Other than the admitted
administrative functionality of
them and how they function.
Um, away from what our public
schools, our traditional public
schools do. This is the problem.
This is what's at hand for us to
solve or resolve. Further
segregation and giving more or
causing more parody as we just
mentioned by the by PED today,
um, and putting the
administration burden upon PED
for Europe for a pub for the
charter schools administration
cost is another parody that you
are creating. And that's what
this bill does is I'm reading
through it.
Madam Chair, can you tell me
what the costs, the recurring
costs that would be incurred to
PED.
Um, once this is implemented,
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair and Representative,
currently 2% of the state
equalization guarantee.
is taken off the top of every
charter school's SCG
appropriations, that is for the
chartering organizations to take
care of charter schools.
Uh, so, currently this bill
would simply move the staffing
to the charter school office for
the state charter schools who
would get that 2%.
And the other 20 the other uh 43
schools, remember, are chartered
by districts. I think
Albuquerque Public schools
charters 26 schools. APS
receives that 2% uh
State equalization money to
operate their charter schools,
any district that has a charter
school gets that 2%.
Uh, the PEC would continue to
work on charter policies, it's
simply puts the staffing, uh,
under the
Charter authorizer. The other
thing I want to remind everybody
is
All charter schools are public
schools. They are accountable to
everything that every school and
every district does. If PED
requires a certain uh data
report every charter school has
to do that, they may add
additional requirements, but
this in no way exempts them from
doing anything that every
charter school does. Again,
Charter schools, unlike some
other states are totally public
schools in our state.
Chair, I agree with you.
However, why are we segregated?
Madam Chair and Representative.
Um, I would humbly disagree. I
don't think this segregates. I
think the streamlines the
administrative process, it has
to be done.
Madam Chair, would you agree
that the PEC is separate from
PED and administrative
functions.
Um, I'm gonna make a comment and
then ask Mr. Paul to make a
comment.
The PEC by statute is an elected
body whose
specific duty is to oversee,
authorize, evaluate and ensure
that all charter schools are
doing what they're supposed to
be doing and Mr. Paul, do you
want to add something?
Madam Chair and Representative
Lu Han.
The action of the PEC is an
add-on from the accountabilities
that are placed on all public
schools. Um, they are overseen
by various divisions and bureaus
at the public education
department, the uh school budget
and finance Bureau of Special
Education Division, uh, entities
like that, the add-on comes from
uh the authorizing piece where
the charter contract they have
explicit goals for academics,
um, and I will just note there's
a Credo study that's cited from
2019 that was updated in 2023 to
show that
Performance was outpacing
traditional district schools. So
that oversight and that direct
reference to goals and academics
is working, and that's because
of the work of the authorizer.
Madam Chair, again, I, I hear
what you're saying, but they are
still, there are still functions
for charter schools.
And for public's traditional
public schools, they all are
charter schools, but there
actually is another, there are
local charter schools that are
not publicly chartered. Is that
correct?
they let me rephrase that. Are
there any charter schools that
are not publicly chartered. No.
Thank you. So why do we separate
Publicly chartered schools.
Separately from traditional
public schools, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair and Representative,
this is statute.
You, I would agree with that as
well. It is statute and
therefore it is a segregated,
uh, a statute that segregates
two different
types of schools, um, Madam
Chair, uh, I'm gonna get into
the 2% of the SCG. Currently,
that 2% for the STD that goes to
these publicly chartered
schools, what do they use that
for, Madam Chair?
Madam Chair and Representative,
the 2% goes to the authorizing
organization. APS gets the 2%
from its 26 charters. PEC gets
uh the 2% from its uh state.
Taken away from the budget of
each part of each charter
school.
Madam Chair, so
administratively, um,
functioning public charter
schools.
Are they similar? Do they have
to have the same, um.
Guidelines or do they function
differently administratively
than traditional.
public schools.
Madam Chair Representative.
Charter schools or public
schools, they must fulfill all
requirements of state statute
and policy, they
Can be specialized in New Mexico
school for the arts may add arts
requirements, uh,
Uh, Sien Agua in Albuquerque has
specific requirements that
bilingual accomplishment.
Charters exist and I have the
aviation academy where, you
know, 10 kids have gotten pilot
licenses. So charters just are
schools that choose.
To, in response to community
input specialized in something,
it's an add-on.
Rocha.
Again, why I'm not against the
autonomy of what the differences
in our charter schools are, I, I
understand that. However, they
do function differently. Do they
not have their own boards
separate from public school
boards, Madam Chair and
Representative Lujan, yes,
charter schools have their own
governing councils that uh
support the direction of the
school that's rooted in their
mission.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Again, a
difference that I'm trying to
To, to make a point here that
there there is a segregation,
there is a functionality that is
different, the differences from
our traditional public schools
and our publicly chartered
charter schools.
And that to me is creating all
of this.
Uh, new or additional type of
streamlining, and I will say I
understand where you're coming
from on this, but what I am also
saying is this isn't the
solution.
The solution is that all
schools, if they are in fact as
we are confirming here, all
public schools should be under
the administrative.
Um, umbrella of our of PED which
they are, and I know you're
going to make that argument as
well, but there is still
segregation. We are running two
very different lines of types of
public schools, if you will,
Madam Chair. And therein lies
waste.
Waste being that we are, we are
having two different um
governing bodies because public
schools are their own governing
body, Madam Chair, whereas
traditional public schools are
under a, a different governing
body altogether. These are the
issues, these are the problems
that I would like us to come to,
to resolve as we do things in
legislation as we have before
us, we continue to streamline
those differences, and we're not
really resolving what needs to
be done.
the whole, Madam Chair, and
that's my opinion. I understand
that, but I'm not the only one
that holds that opinion because
as if we continue to do this, we
will continue to see parody and
parody from our charter schools
as you continue to see you
continue coming back to us and
asking us for more
appropriations and to be part of
different parts of
appropriations from the SCG.
Um, every year in different
ways, um,
And that's, that's creating,
that's not streamlining things.
Madam Chair, um,
This is a concern of mine. I
cannot support this legislation
until we actually come together
and try to resolve and put us
all together.
Because this is segregation.
This is saying these schools
have are here, these other
schools are here. There's parity
because we are not
It's, I know you're, now you're
doing what I did and you're
shaking your head at me, so, um,
I'm gonna refrain from doing
that and I wanna apologize for
doing that, but I wanna say this
isn't the solution, Madam Chair.
I am not against this. I will
support our public education
departments and opposition to
this until we actually have some
better solutions for our public
education. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Represented a block.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you everyone for being
here. Good to see you again. Uh,
I saw you down in Almogordo, I
think a year ago or so. So thank
you guys for being here. Uh,
Madam Chair, Representative, and
experts. I just had a couple
questions on the bill. I was
reading the FIR.
And I read the bill as well, and
the bill.
Is it my understanding that this
new
Office
It's not new since it's just
being moved, but would it still
be housed at PED, I believe,
according to the FIR it said
Appointed by the commission but
still housed at PED. So I'm just
wondering if that's correct,
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, Representative,
yes, there, that it would be,
that it would be an option, yes.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
yous representatives and
experts, and then the next
question I had about this was,
let me see.
circled it. I need to find where
I circled. OK, uh, on page 10 of
the bill, it says,
The legislative Education Study
Committee and the Legislative
library a report. So we're
adding a report for the
legislative library. Can you
just give me a little info on
why we're adding them. I mean, I
love the staff they're, they're
good folks, but just wondering
why we're doing that.
Madam Chair and Representative,
that's just a technicality of
where reports are stored. So if
you ever wanted to go back and
look at a charter school report,
you could go to the librarian
and she'd do the work for you.
Madam Chair Representative, you
learn something new every day.
So that's good to hear. And so,
Madam Chair, representative, I
think it's, it's good to hear
this, and I, I know we've heard
comments and stuff about about
how the schools are kind of
segregated away, and I just
wanna go from a personal
experience. I, I went to a
charter school in the state.
And I didn't feel segregated at
all when it came to the
The educational curriculum and
Madam Chair Representative, I
know that.
These are lottery scholarships
or lottery.
You enter in a lottery. So, is
that
Available to all students across
the entire state to apply, Madam
Chair, representative, we're
public school students, of
course.
Madam Chair and Representative
Block, yes, any student can
apply to a charter school, and
if they have more applications
than they have seats available.
It's largely a restriction
associated with the size of
their building, then they must
hold a lottery that gives
everyone equal equal chance.
Madam Chair Representative, and
I, I was just wondering because
it's been a while since I
graduated from from school, so
it may have changed, but I
really appreciate all of that,
guys, and thank you for the
answers today and uh
I'll continue to listen to the
debate, but thank you for the
very thoughtful, carefully
written bill. I think that
that's one thing that you do uh
Representative Garrett, you, you
know how to craft a bill very
carefully. And I think it's,
it's something that's good. We
need to be intentional when it
comes to legislating. So, thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative, and thank you,
experts. Appreciate it.
Thank you, Representative Black,
uh, Madam Weis, Madam Flo leader
Skipanski.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
I
Uh, have never really
Dove into
The technical details of the SCG
and public school funding, um,
except when I was very heavily
involved in a discussion around
impact day. Um, however, I have
gotten to know a number of
charter schools in the state,
very well, um, the Native
American Community Academy,
South Valley Academy, New Mexico
School for the Arts, the health
leadership, high school in
Albuquerque.
And um
Uh, Madam Chair and
Representative, I, I think I
just have a couple of comments,
um, and one question, but you
know, I have been incredibly
impressed with the charter
schools that I've gotten to know
really well, um, in part because
they're serving whether it be
the unique talents of a specific
set of students, unique.
Um, creative talents, for
example, or um cultural identity
uh with Naka was very, very
inspired by the times that I've
visited that school. Um,
And for me, I think this
Um, Bill offers some
Efficiency so that those schools
can potentially focus more on
delivering services to the
students, um, rather than, um,
You know, being a small piece of
what is a very large department,
and I just wonder,
representative, that, if that is
part of why you brought this
bill.
Madam Chair and Representative,
yes, it is and I'll ask Mr. Paul
to add to that.
I don't know that I have much
that that's it.
Yeah. Thank you, uh, Madam
Chair, and
Um
You know, the, the
The uniqueness of charter
schools is that they can be a
little bit innovative.
Um, the other very unique thing
that I see particularly because
I know the New Mexico School for
the Arts very well is that they
also do significant private
fundraising to offer some of
these specialized services to uh
their students, um, which public
schools are not always in an uh
have an opportunity to do my
kids went to public elementary
school and certainly we all did
a lot of fundraising to help
with the library and PE.
And things like that. Um, but,
you know, I really appreciate
that we've got some very special
charter schools. Um, second
point I just wanted to make is
that.
The PEC is an independently
elected body, and the attachment
to PED sort of undermines the
The independence of that elected
commission, and I don't know
that they've ever fully
fulfilled their purpose as an
independent commission, um,
uniquely independently elected
by the voters.
Uh, in the way that they could
because of this attachment with
PED which is sort of an artifact
of the, as I understand, uh, the
fact that the
State Board of Education used to
be elected.
And
When that was changed, the PEC
just sort of stayed attached to
that same department.
As opposed to
Creating an entity that was
really looking at charter
schools, um, but I think my
final question is, this doesn't
change.
Um
The requirements that charter
schools need to fulfill in order
to ensure that the students are
adequately educated, they still
have to conform to graduation
requirements and other things
that that are set by PED, so
the, the, this bill doesn't
allow for the PEC to all of a
sudden say, you know, well, math
is optional now or reading is
optional or we're not doing
these things because we're
focused on these other, that
doesn't, this bill doesn't
change any of that. Is that, is
that right?
Madam Chapresentative, that is
correct.
Thank you for that. Thank you.
So I think for me the academic
rigor and integrity is really
important that we maintain that,
um, while we still give the
opportunity for charter schools
to innovate, given the unique
group of students that they
serve, and, you know, I know all
too well for my own kids who are
polar opposites that, you know,
every child is different and uh
sometimes you can get a school
that really specifically and
specially served.
a unique group of students and a
really great way, and I think
this uh streamlining
administrative streamlining that
is here, uh, is gonna be really
valuable. So I just want to
thank you for bringing the bill
forward. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Barrago.
Madam Chair, thank you. First of
all, I want to apologize to my
colleague Zamora. I was simply
asking a question in the FIR of,
uh, the appropriation cause it
says that HB 365 does not
contain an appropriation, and I
know she sits on the
appropriation committee, so I
was just asking her that
question, so I apologize to you
if that um ruined your morning
or whatever, but I simply had a
question and I thought she
could.
answer it, um, and I do bring
that issue up, Madam Chair. Um,
and to my colleague, uh,
Representative Garrett and her
guests, um, it's
The first, uh, line of the
fiscal impact report, and so
that concerns me a lot.
Um, I always, you know, when I
look at bills, I always ask who,
what, when, where, why, and how
much and how much is really
important. And, and so I, I put
that out on the table, Madam
Chair is probably my first
question.
Madam Chair Representative,
there's no fiscal impact because
the money comes out of the SCG
of the charter schools.
So that it says that it has a
operating budget impact.
It, it's not a change, it's more
a transfer of the existing
money.
Doesn't come out of the
But um my question then is if we
are
Creating a new entity in a, in a
sense.
Of charter school oversight.
Um, aren't we, in, in fact
creating another.
Section of
The public school system.
Um, Madam Chair and
Representative Barrigo, this
group exists already within PED.
The difference would be that the
group would then report to
directly to the public education
commission, and that's funded
out of charter school budgets.
We pay for our oversights out of
our out of our budget, and
that's that 2%. So are you
telling me then, um,
representative, Madam Chair, and
your witness that this.
There are, according to this
report, there's 21,000 students
that are being served under
charter schools and the existing
Infrastructure.
Per se
is going to
Continue, and that's it. There's
not gonna be requests in the
future for further money or uh
additional bureaucracy.
That would be my question.
Madam Chair Representative, that
is correct.
The SCG 2% scrape off the top.
Comes out of the funds that are
allocated to charter schools
through the SCG.
Uh
Funding formula. So, Madam Chair
and, and, and Representative,
um, why is it then that we have
had um so many audits about.
This particular issue.
Madam Chair Representative
Guardian charter schools.
There
Uh, Madam Chair and
representative, there have been
audits of a diverse group of
schools.
Including traditional public
schools and districts.
And some charter schools.
And there have been charter
schools that have lost their
charter as a result.
Madam Chair, um, representative,
it's, it's hard for me to
envision that we would not be
asking in the future for further
appropriations, um, and you're
telling me that that is not
gonna be the case. Madam
representative, the further
appropriations would be coming
from.
legislation that applies to all
schools.
For example, we're getting an
increased appropriation to cover
new salaries, 55, 65, and 75
that applied to all schools.
So specifically, uh, there would
be no new requests.
Um, Madam school, madam chair
and, and representative, uh, you
know, in Madam Chair, I'm gonna
tell you, when I was uh
president of the city council, I
led, I was the chair of ABC
schools, and which is a
different model than charter
schools, and it's actually a
very successful model, and I
wish.
We could do that more and it's
very, it's costly because it
involves the family and it
involves not, you know, the
child and bringing the, the
whole kind of
More, um,
It's a real nurturing kind of
system, I guess is what I could
say and and I really applauded
that, that whole system. I love
charter schools. I visited
several charter schools. I
supported charter schools, um,
while I've been, uh,
representative, uh, including
leadership academy and some
other charter schools that I've
actually contributed to, um, I
think charter schools are a, a
really great
Um, framework for education, um,
but I.
You know, creating another sort
of.
Branch of government.
does concern me.
And, and that's why I'm, I'm
still madam chair and
representative. I'm still a
little uncomfortable. I'm still
uncomfortable with the the
notion that we are, if we create
another branch, we're not.
We have to ask for additional
funding.
Right.
Madam Chair Representative, this
bill does not create another
branch. It's simply moves
staffing from PED, uh, directly
under the auspices of the 10
elected members of the
commission. It's not a new
branch.
Thank you, madam chair.
Do I have representative Zamora,
vice chair Little, and then
Luhan for a second time.
Madam Chair,
I move a do pass resentative
Wuhan.
Um
Appreciating where the
conversation is going, um, and
so I would ask regarding charter
schools and their audits. What
was the increase of your
findings and audits this past.
Fiscal year, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair and Representative
Lujan, um,
Because charter schools are
public schools, we're all
audited every year just like a
school district is and I'm not
sure.
Thank you. What I'm getting to
the point is, is that
There have been
Substantial amounts of audits
findings for specifically for
charter schools, Madam Chair, I
wanted
I had written that down, and I
didn't bring that to light.
So with this bill.
Then take, it's taking staff
from PED away from PED to just
go to the PEC. Is that correct,
Madam Chair?
Madam, uh, chair and
representative is spill moves
existing charter school division
employees.
From under the PED.
To the state charter office,
Madam Chair, and I'm just going
to try to close the loop on the,
the funding portions some of the
questions that we're hearing
here today. So the concern that
we have, the concern that PED
has stated today is this would
affect their operating budget.
Is that correct, Madam Chair?
Madam Chair and representative.
It would be interesting to find
out how much of the 2% directly
oversees a charter schools and
is into other things.
Uh, our analysis that it would
not have a significant impact.
Madam Chair, um, representative.
So, aside from that 2% that
you've already accounted for
from the SCG, which I
understand. I'm specifically
talking about the operating
budget for PED. Would that be
affected, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair Representative, all
schools are overseen by the PED.
We can have new schools start,
we can have, we have some
schools closing down due to
declining enrollment.
So it would really be difficult
to give a specific answer.
Understood. So again, I'll
reference with Representative
Bodega was saying there will be
additional costs, potentially,
based upon growing increase
thats unforeseeable, and that's
to her point where she was
trying to make. And not all of
us understanding how the SCG
work and how understanding how
we are.
State budget works. I'm making
this, this, this, um
Those making the conversation.
For the to clarify some of those
things, the operational budget
for PED which was just stated by
PED in our room today, Madam
Chair, for our committee, said
that this would, they would
incur further um costs to their
budget. So I'm not gonna say
that they're lying or anything
like that because I don't
believe that they are, but I
also believe that Representative
Garrett is correct too in saying
that the 2% from the SCG that is
already incurred will then be
stretched, if you will, or would
it not be changed?
at all because now you're gonna
divide it.
It might help me understand
that, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair Representative, the
2% that is supposed to go to the
charter school authorizers would
go to the PEC.
State charter office.
And that 2% now, where does it
go, Madam Chair?
The 2% now goes to the PED
charter school division, which
would move.
Under this law, the statute of
the past.
To the state charter office.
So Madam Chair, there would be
no change in the oversight from
PE there would be no change
every school and every district.
Regardless of if it's an
authorized charter school by a
local district or the state
still has to conform.
to all the requirements and
policies overseen by the public
education department. Thank you,
Madam Chair. I'm making these,
these
So that we can understand this
better, Madam Chair, I
understand your bill better, and
I'll still stand by saying that
I'm, I'm not respectfully will
not be able to support your bill
because of what I've, my
comments were previously, but
there will be additional costs
foreseeable over costs in the
future to PED Madam Chair, for
this because if they're gonna
take their FTEs and move them to
the PEC, then they're gonna have
to do some more work.
Madam Chair, thank you.
We have a motion for a due pass
a second, please call Roll.
So is there anybody in your
name?
Quickly representative.
Mount Chain Representative. Has
this been studied in the
interim?
The this change.
Uh
Madam Chair and Representative
charter schools continue to be
studied in the interim by
this specific
bill has not been specifically
studied the ongoing SCG study.
OK.
Representative on? Yes.
Representative block.
Yes.
Representative Borego
Represented Lujan.
Representative Mejia? Yes.
And I'm floor leader.
Yes.
Representative Zamora.
Madam Vice Chair. Madam Chair,
72.
Representative, you have a due
pass. Thank you. Thank you
everybody for your question. All
right, I see representative
Martinez, HDR 7.
OK, Representative Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, um, today I
bring you House Joint Resolution
7, very simply, what it does is
it removes the uh two-term
maximum for uh
Locally elected sheriffs and
allows them to run.
For as many terms as the voters
will have them.
Um
And I have a sharer of Hilton.
Uh, from Lee County, I believe.
On that may have some comments,
but with that I stand for
questions.
Madam Chair, I know he was
having problems logging on this
morning, um.
But if he's not, I'm, I'm ready
for questions.
Go to the audience.
Those in support of HJR 7,
please raise your hands.
Those in opposition.
OK. Do we have anyone online?
support
Uh, Shelton, can you hear us?
Shelton, can you hear us?
Move along, we have SWOP. Hello,
can you hear us?
Any opposition online?
Anyone hoping to make a comment
in opposition, please raise your
hand.
Do we wanna check with our
expert witness online.
Committee members.
I'll start with this side.
Representative Anya Nonu and
then Representative Lujan and
then Representative block and
then representative Samoa.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Mr. Whip, um, I just have
one very simple question, and
that is um one.
Thank, thank you, Madam Chair,
and you that.
That's a great question. Um,
about a year ago I was
approached by a uh
Sheriff's deputy.
been on for 3 years, I believe.
And he started talking about
continuity.
And how
In a lot of departments, there
is no continuity because by the
time the sheriff um really able
to get his programs going.
Uh, specialized training.
A new divisions, their term is
up.
Uh, so
We had a good conversation about
Why is it that they can only run
for 2 terms, I said.
I'll find out. I realized that
it was part of the Constitution.
Um, then I talked to a few
sheriffs, and they
They agreed that two terms
sometimes is very difficult.
With new technologies coming on
board.
Uh, new ideas, uh, new problems
by the time they reach their,
their
two terms.
Uh a new sheriff comes in.
Uh, so that, that's why.
Thank you very much, Madam Chair
and Mr. Whit.
Present of Luhan.
When would this go into effect,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative Lujan, uh,
because this is a joint
resolution.
Uh, amending the Constitution,
it would be voted on by the
voters.
In the next general election,
which would be 2 years from now.
Or
But 18 months from now.
Um, and then, of course, we'd
need enabling legislation uh in
the following session.
Madam Chair, 3 years.
Perhaps I'm sure.
I would say 2.5 years. 5 years,
Madam Chair, if we had a
An emergency clause and it got
through, through the session, I
would assume. I'm sure, um,
I don't disagree with what
you're trying to do here.
In fact, I think that.
You know, through our, um.
Information that we have here.
This would, um,
This has been coming, uh,
your head, if you will, in many
of our communities, as I've
talked to, you know, many of our
sheriffs through the the rural
counties when I visit my own
sheriff who I really appreciate
and has done a pretty, a pretty
um credible job for us here in
Santa Fe County. Um, I'd like to
see him serve a 3rd term at
least with this just um.
Then just open, have an
open-ended uh time for service,
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, um, if this were to
pass,
Um
And the voters voted for it
then.
A sheriff could run for as many
terms as the voters would have
them.
Madam Chair, then will we be
back here then seeking out
another constitutional amendment
to maybe perhaps limit that.
I don't anticipate that, Madam
Chair Representative.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, in
coming to
How you, um.
Set this up, um, Madam Chair.
A representative, did you think
about maybe, um,
And because these are small
communities too that you meet
those sheriffs somehow.
Um, after their, their term is
up, then have another um
Uh, service opportunity through
the commission or somewhere else
in the county.
Madam Chair, Madam Chair, the
way the law is written right
now, they would have to wait 2
years to serve any
Uh, other office, other elected
office in the county. Uh, but
this is not only for small
communities, this would be
countywide.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
I appreciate your answers. Um, I
don't disagree with you. I just,
there's some technicalities for
me, um, maybe.
If they were able to serve 3
terms and then, you know, have
it, um, but not open-ended. Did
you think about that while you
were drafting this man.
Madam Chair Representative, I
did, and I figured if uh the
voters have the opportunity to
elect me to a limited terms, um,
I think the uh sheriff's
department should have that
opportunity also. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Presented a block.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
first of all, I don't know if
it's an order. I, I know that
Sheriff Hilton is on and he
wasn't able to talk earlier. I
don't know if his mic is fixed
yet. I was just wondering.
check with the sheriff online.
Shelton, can you hear us?
Good morning. Can y'all hear me?
We sure can. Oh, great. It was
on my end, so, uh, Madam Chair,
members of the committee and
representative uh Martinez,
thank you for your time. Um,
I've been listening and I agree
wholeheartedly with the, the
comments that are made and for
me, one of the big things is
continuity. Um, I can tell you
that.
Lee County Sheriff's Office is
over the last 15 years. It had
lost two sheriffs in a short
amount of time, went to a
vehicle accident and one to
suicide, believe it or not, and
I, I would say to support, I, I,
I, I strongly support this with
the continuity aspect of it. Um,
when you talk about 8 years,
you're talking about a short
amount of time to restructure,
um, and I heard some testimony
about technology, um, and just
really don't have a lot of time
to to accomplish a lot of
things. There's a lot of capital
projects that were involved in
with the um
Growing our departments or our
offices moving forward, um, and
oftentimes as sheriffs, we're at
the end of our terms and end of
our careers and
You know, I'm, I'm personally,
I'm, I'm 57 years old and, and I
still have a lot to to provide
and and give back to this
community in this office. Uh, so
simply to retire, um, is not
something I want to do, um.
There's a lot of, a lot of
changes that are, that are made
in a short amount of time with
initiatives that we implement,
um, that can be upended with an
election in 4 years or 8 years.
And again, we're, we're voted by
the people, so as long as we're
voted in, I, I don't see why we
can't continue to serve, um, and
I appreciate this time that you
guys are, are giving me to, to
get my um 2 cents on this. I, I
strongly appreciate.
Uh, Representative Martinez and
on all the representatives that
um are supporting this House
Joint resolution, um, and I, I
think it's a good thing. Again,
it was brought up that it's all
about what the people want.
And uh, so again, I'll, I'll
keep it short. I, I, I strongly
support this and thank you for
yielding me any time to speak on
it.
Thank you so much, Sheriff
Shelton.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Sheriff and uh
representative. So I, I like the
idea, especially cause it, it
brings parity to the
legislature. We don't have
terms, but I do think the one
downside that I have is, well,
the, the upside is, yes, it's
closer to the people, they have
the choice to keep the sheriff,
but I do know when it comes to
any office, there is always the
power of incumbency.
And I know that when it comes to
that, it can be hard to take an
an incumbent. I mean, I did and
I, it's very hard for me to do
that. So, I do think Madam Chair
representative, that that could
be something that could be
In some counties, maybe there's
a really powerful sheriff that
just doesn't want to give it up
and I, I think that would be the
only.
Apprehension I would have to the
bill, but otherwise I think
giving it back to the people,
letting them decide is a is a
better option in my opinion. So,
I don't know if you had any
comments on that, but that's all
I had. Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative Block. I do
agree there are some that may
become entrenched, uh, but I
think the electorate is starting
to wake up.
And I think giving them the
opportunity to make that
decision.
Um, I think it's always a good
thing.
Um, those of us who don't have a
term limits.
Um, some of us may think that we
should have.
But that is up to the people,
and I think especially when it
comes to public safety, law
enforcement, I think even more
so the people should have a
voice.
to and representative, and I
agree and I, I know that other
county offices, at least in my
county, a lot of the time, the
person who turned out, they
become the deputy treasurer, the
deputy assessor and it's like a
revolving door of the same
people even now without the term
limits or with the term limits.
So I think that either way,
there's always going to be
issues and I think the voters, I
would like to empower them. So,
thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative. That's all I
had.
You represented a representative
Zamora.
Madam Chair moveva Dupe.
And
Motion for do pass and the
second, please call ro.
Representative on Ornu.
Presented block. Yes.
Representative Borego.
No
Representative Lujan.
Represented Mia.
Yes.
Madam floor leader.
Oh
Representative Zamora.
Representative on Nonin.
No.
Madam, Madam Vice Chair.
No.
Madam Chair
45.
She said yes to that question.
fails, representative, and I
have vice chair to explain your
vote.
I appreciate you bringing Madam
Chair, Representative, I
appreciate you bringing this
forward and offering an option
to voters to consider, um,
it.
And looking at this, I.
My sense, I would recommend uh
uh in your the further
conversations that come
considering maybe 4 year terms.
Um, or even 3-year terms. I, I
look at the, the number of
years, that's 12 years.
Total for someone to uh initiate
actions, Madam Chair, follow
them through, see how they're
working and finally, Madam Cha
to assess how they're working
and perhaps what uh how they
might prepare someone coming in
to uh take over, so I do
appreciate you bringing this to,
to the table. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, just
to comment on that, they do have
4-year terms currently, um.
But I appreciate the time. I
appreciate the conversation.
Thank you, Representative.
All right, let's move along to
HDR 10.
Representative is here.
Hey, let's settle ourselves and
uh representatives are here, HDR
10. Thank you.
be
Here.
Did you say it was good? OK,
good. Thank you. Um, I'm here to
present
House joint um resolution.
10.
And I'm, I've, I'm honored to
present it on behalf of the many
communities that have asked me
to.
And because this is an example
of why I've dedicated my entire
life to fighting for social
justice. So eachJR 10 is a civil
rights bill.
That affirms the 15th Amendment.
Which is the right to
participate in our democracy
through our citizen fundamental
right to vote.
HJR 10 proposes amending Article
7, Section 1 of the New Mexico
Constitution.
To remove criminal conviction
for a felony.
As a constitutional restriction.
On voter registration
eligibility in New Mexico.
And I'd like to go ahead and um
Introduce um co-sponsor.
Representative Pamela Herndon
and our expert witness is Celina
Guerrero.
And um
You want to say anything? OK.
We'll let uh Selinda Guerrero
say some opening brief opening.
Madam Chair Representatives.
It's 10 is a civil rights bill,
working to fulfill the promise
of the 15th Amendment.
The 15th Amendment prohibits the
denial of the right to vote
based on race, color,
Or previous condition of
servitude.
We are in a historical moment in
this initiative, HJR 10. It is
today's universal suffrage
issue.
Reflecting on the historical
suffrage movement, where we have
overcome race and color, it is
important that we recognize that
if it had not been one, many in
this room today would not be
here working to advance our
democracy.
We reflect on the women's
suffrage movement. Again, many
in this room would not be here
doing this work and
participating in democracy.
And not until 1924 with the
passing of the Indian
citizenship Act, finally
indigenous peoples had access to
the ballot.
But even with its passing, it
was not until the Voting Rights
Act of 1965 that protections
were implemented for indigenous
peoples of this territory as
well.
As we reflect on these
advancements, we continue to
recognize that black and
indigenous peoples of this land
remain significantly
disenfranchised due to
overcriminalization and lack of
polling locations.
Universal suffrage is still at
the forefront of one of the most
important issues to preserving
our democracy.
And access to the ballot for all
people is crucial to fulfilling
this promise of democracy.
1 in every 50 people nationally
and 1 in every 10 for black
people remain disenfranchised
nationally right now.
These numbers reflect a troubled
history of disenfranchisement.
It began initially with the
pushback against reconstruction
under the 13th, 14th, and 15th
Amendments, and eventually black
codes and Jim Crow laws.
We are 155 years of work for
Universal suffrage, still moving
toward an inclusive democracy to
fulfill this promise.
The element in the 15th
Amendment of previous condition
of servitude still has not been
realized. Let us examine what
condition of servitude means. It
means a condition in which an
individual lacks liberty,
especially to determine his or
her course of action or way of
life.
If we truly desire a safe and
inclusive society, inclusion and
democracy is imperative.
Citizenship is the origin of
rights and therefore inclusion
in the democracy is fundamental
to being a citizen in a
democracy. This is not just
about us right now in this
generation, but especially our
responsibility to the 7
generations forward who are
depending on us to create an
inclusive and healthy society
where all our children and
grandchildren will have access
to basic rights and to the 7
generations back whose struggle
we are carrying forward with
responsibility today. Just as
those before us have cleared the
path for your leadership here
today.
Thank you.
Madame Chair, with that we stand
for questions.
OK, thank you. Let's go to the
audience, those in favor, please
raise your hands.
OK, we will take 5 public
comments in the audience. One
minute, please.
My name is Courtney Montoya,
ACLU of New Mexico. The ACLU is
in strong support of HJR 10, the
right to vote is a fundamental
aspect of democracy and a core
constitutional right of the
people.
By restoring a person's right to
vote when they are incarcerated,
New Mexico would no longer
deprive people their fundamental
civic right and allow them to
have a voice in the decisions
and policies that impact their
lives. Felony disenfranchisement
policies undermine the
rehabilitation and reintegration
of people into their
communities.
International law recognizes
disenfranchisement for a
conviction as unethical, we must
live up to our values that we
are a strong democracy, please
vote yes to HDR 10.
Um, Committee Chair Johnson and
committee members. My name is
Deborah. I'm a community
activist and former educator,
now retired from Albuquerque
Public Schools.
House Joint Resolution 10 is an
amendment that would ensure
voting rights for every person
who is a qualified elector
regardless of the person's
involvement in the criminal
legal system. Everyone who meets
the qualifications to vote
should be allowed to vote. I
believe we in New Mexico invest
too heavily in punishment, but
when the punishment is
incarceration, we should not
additionally take away a
person's right to vote.
Inclusion is always the mantra.
An educational setting and
inclusions always gives you
better outcomes. Please vote Du
do pass on house joint
resolution 10. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chairwoman and committee members
for allowing me to join you in
the conversation this morning.
My name is Oren Pope. I'm
currently in my final semester
of the Masters of Social Work
Program at New Mexico Highlands
University as a social worker in
Albuquerque resident as a
lifelong New Mexican
incarceration is a familiar
topic. While rates of
incarcerated New Mexicans are
declining. The state maintains a
rate higher than the national
average, which is in and of
itself, the highest rate in the
Western world. Social Work's
mission of enhancing human
well-being is supported by the
cornerstone principle that there
is immeasurable value in human
relationships. It can be
powerful vehicles for positive
and purposeful change. Restoring
voting rights to individuals is
essential in re-establishing
their commitment to the social
contract, specific duty and to
re-entry.
No matter our backgrounds or
beliefs, voting unites us all,
even when we are divided.
Recidivism will always win when
we neglect reentry. We're
building human relationships and
for public safety, I
respectfully request your
support of HR 10.
I'm good. Uh, good morning, um,
Madam Chairman. My name is Jose
Martinez. I am part of the
Burgaanas robes, and um I would
uh recommend that you guys vote
for HR HRJ 10, um, everyone
deserves the right to vote. It
is a privilege.
And it is a right that we should
be allowed to vote for whomever
we want and in this country.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee members. I'm Molly
Swank, the executive director
with Common Cause New Mexico.
Felony disenfranchisement
suppresses the votes of millions
of Americans, especially those
from low-income communities and
communities of color.
Stripping voting rights remains
a form of criminal punishment
that neither deters crime nor
supports rehabilitation.
While progress has been made in
restoring voting rights to some
formerly incarcerated
individuals. Much work remains
to address this outdated and
biased system. Every New Mexican
deserves a democracy that
empowers all voices and holds
leaders accountable regardless
of a past felony conviction.
Please support, please vote in
support of HJR 10. Thank you.
Thank you. Let's go online. Do
we have any comments and
support?
We will take 3 online.
Richard Mason, can you hear us?
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Dick
Mason, and I'm the voting
election director for the League
of Women Voters of New Mexico.
The league stands in strong
support of HDR 10.
The league believes that those
are incarcerated with a felony
conviction or otherwise
qualified to vote, should be
able to vote.
Further, the Department of
Correction should put procedures
in place to facilitate the
opportunity for incarcerated
individuals to vote. So the urge
the league urges the committee
to give the HAR 10 a due pass.
Thank you.
Thank you so much.
Aerial aerial Prado, can you
guess?
A, sorry, we're having a little
hard, have a little trouble here
hearing you. We'll, we'll circle
back.
We have, let's see, uh, Diane,
Diane.
Yes, I hear you. Uh, this is
Diane McCash removing voting for
people with a felony conviction
was a measure aimed at people
newly freed from slavery in a
measure to keep the power of
full citizenship out of their
hands in conjunction with those
codes that targeted black people
and incarcerated them in
tremendous enough. It's
essentially removed people by
the millions from having a voice
in our country. This was a
foundational miscarriage of
justice in our history that
needs to be corrected. I can
tell you as the mother of a son
who has more than one felony
conviction.
that his eventual recovery from
the addiction that led to his
multiples was in large part made
possible by the fact that he
always knew he had me and his
family in this corner, and that
he mattered similarly to
ostracized people to literally
tell them they are no longer a
full citizen and their voices
don't matter, exacerbates the
separation of us and them. If
people don't matter, feel they
don't matter, and their voices
don't count, then why would they
care about the community that
doesn't care for them. We need
to rid ourselves of this harmful
language while we continue to
assertively deal with the harms
in our communities that have
grown worse due to multiple
factors. Let's clean up our
history while we're at it. Thank
you.
Thank you so much, Diane.
Sure
See
Ariel, can you hear us? I'll try
try again here.
Yes. Am I coming through? Yeah,
we can hear you now.
Great. Thank you. Uh, my name's
Ariel Perrado. I'm a resident of
Estancia, New Mexico. Um, I'll
keep it short. I'm just uh
calling in to ask that you vote
do pass for HCR 10. Thank you.
Thank you so much, Alien.
Thank you. Let's go back to the
audience, those in opposition,
please raise your hands.
Let's go online, those opposing.
Anybody hoping to make comments
in opposition to the bill,
please raise your hand.
Hey Representative Lujan.
Madam Chair, we wanted a point
of order. Uh, there were two
people who were not able to sit
down, but they wanted to speak
that uh could they be allowed to
speak for one minute if they
come in and leave.
I
Yeah, I'm taking limited
comments today. I think we've
We've seen the hands raised and
we're gonna go on to
Representative Wuhan.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, and,
um, thank you, sponsors for
bringing this forward. I
strongly support this. Um,
however, there might be some uh
some technical issues that I
wanted to go over with you. Um,
primarily with the secretary of
state's recommendation that the
short title of the bill be
amended to clarify the
amendment's impact.
As the current short title of
the bill, um, so it would be, so
it would represent to voters as
part of a ballot question. So,
are you working on that or is
that something you would
consider, Madam Chair?
Madame Chair and Representative
Luhan absolutely the Secretary
of State is in charge of how
this is going to ultimately be
presented to the people of the,
of the state. So she will, we
will defer to her in terms of
what needs to be the uh.
The best language, that usually
is, I think what happens with
constitutional amendments.
I believe thank thank you Madam
Chair. I, I would look to her,
her guidance for how you
proceed, um, Madam Chair, um,
the other clarification I just
like to make is from the
Attorney General's office. Would
you like to make comment to that
as, as we would move this if
this this gets onto the belt we
pass this through, this gets
onto the ballot. We'd have to
come back again during the
session for additional
legislation. Is that correct,
Madam Chair? Much like we've
done in the past with other
things.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
you're correct, we would do
that. Thank you.
And
I do note that the, the
corrections department states
that the
Uh, like um NMAG, uh, the
Constitutional amendment would
allow felons currently
incarcerated to vote um.
Hm
There might be some question
here. I would just say that when
you come back for the 2nd round,
if you will, we get this through
that we work on, on those issues
and um move this forward, Madam
Chair, thank you again for
bringing this forward to all of
you who are attending today in
support of this bill, I think
that, yes, the, the history has
um.
Then a disser disservice to us
in.
Um,
keeping those.
It shouldn't be kept down, down,
and we and now is the
opportunity to correct history.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Block.
Madam Chair, and I think
Representative Lu Han.
Covered my one question. My
other question was regarding,
have you guys thought of a
middle ground when it comes to,
instead of just all felons.
We are currently incarcerated,
maybe.
Something
Like, someone who's 50 years old
is a lot different than someone
who was 30 years old who who did
that.
Uh infraction that led them to
become a felon. So have you
thought about maybe a middle
ground process of halfway
through their, their
incarceration, something like
that instead, Madam Chair and
Representative expert.
Madam Chair and and
Representative.
No
And the reason is that we wanna.
The whole point of the
constitutional amendment
obviously is to let the people
decide, but we want to make sure
that we do not continue the
history of disenfranchisement
period of those that have the
right as citizens of this
country and the state to vote.
So if we continue to create
divides, then we're defeating
the intent and purposes of this
piece of legislation.
Madam Chair. Thank you, Madam
Chair Representative, because it
was my understanding that once
you're, you're out,
Of prison
And you're back into society.
You, you have the right to vote.
Once you're released. Is that
correct, Madam Chair
Representative?
chair I'll let the expert
answer.
Madam Chair, Representative.
Um, yes, you're correct. That
did pass in 2022 and um we
implementation was in progress.
Um, unfortunately, people are
still being disenfranchised
right now. We have, um, hundreds
of people across the state right
now, um, who filled out their
voter registration forms who are
no longer in prison, who are
still getting denial letters. So
there's um
Unending confusion within state
agencies to be clear about who's
able to vote and who's not able
to vote. We believe this uh
ballot measure will help to
remove all of that uh burden
from clerks across the state
from having to weed through
registrations and try to call
Department of Corrections and
use those resources that way.
And so, um, we really believe
that this is the right way. And
this is, this is the original
bill from 2019, um, that led to
that bill that
in 2022. And so, where we want
to ask for the full
implementation of voting rights.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, and I, I hear
the argument, right, that
That it's disenfranchising these
voters, but
I don't necessarily believe,
Madam Chair Representative, that
committing a felony.
is an immutable characteristic
like race or gender.
I didn't choose what race I was.
I didn't choose what gender I
am.
But someone chooses to to do a
felony.
Count
That ends in a conviction. So,
how are we seeing that in a
social justice aspect when there
could be victims whose
liberties, life's life's
freedoms have been taken away
from them and their right to
vote is no longer here because
those people don't.
They were killed or they,
they're severely
Maimed and so I'm just wondering
how that can be seen in a social
justice aspect.
Madam Chair, I'm gonna uh begin,
Madam Chair, and just state that
this is not, we're not trying
anybody in this piece of
legislation. We're not further.
Criminalizing or convicting or
participating in that process.
They've already.
Been through that process. So
we're, that's not the intent of
this bill. The intent is to um
let the people of the state
decide um whether their rights
to vote should be instated,
reinstated, and I'll let um.
This
Thank you, Madam Chair and
representative. OK, I'm, I'm
still a little, a little
concerned about that. And then
how about implementation?
Because I know that this would
be a constitutional amendment,
probably would require enabling
legislation, Madam Chair
Representative, would we have a
precinct, a voting precinct at
every state prison and how would
that work?
You're the expert.
Madam Chair, Representative,
yes, initially, um, what the
secretary of state of state and
I have discussed since um before
2019 is uh first uh the
implementation of absentee
ballots, and then eventually we
would would love to have polling
sites actually in um
institutions across the state,
um, and which is not unusual.
It's not an unusual thing.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative. So yeah, I'm
just wondering what that could
cost, and I don't know because
it's not been in place yet, so
we don't know what that would
cost. And so, I know that in
Florida, they had some problems
when it came to the
administrative burdens of this,
they had problems implementing
felon voting and leaving a lot
of uh
Respective voters in limbo,
according to that state. So I
just think that there are some
administrative concerns and then
also just the justice aspect to
something that I, I do have some
concerns, especially because if
you get your voting rights after
you you leave prison, then if
you, if you have the right to
vote, then the other rights that
have been taken away from you,
like the right to be a law
enforcer or the right to own a
gun also should be instated
while you're incarcerated as
well. It would only be, you
know, Santa reason that you
should have those rights as
well, but
That doesn't make much sense to
me either. So that's all I had,
ma'am, sure, no, no need to
respond. Thank you.
Representative, representative
Ona Nonu, representative, uh,
Madam Flo leader Skipancy and
then representative Barrago.
Representative Aarnio I move it
you pass.
We take that motion, Madam Floor
leader Skipanski. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Um,
And representatives, uh.
I do support this, I think for.
Um, many reasons, one of which
is just the
You know, incredibly tragic
history of
This particular right being
removed, unlike other rights.
Um, that are abridged due to
public safety risks, etc. Um,
the linkage of this to
post-Civil War era policy around
poll taxes and poll tests and
had the opportunity to review a
poll test that was used back in
the 60s and I was, I was pretty
stunned at, at what I saw there,
um, Madam Chair and
Representative, uh, the other
thing is,
To me, when you have people in
custody, they are completely
subject to the control of the
state.
And so who more important to
have a voice in the leadership
of the state and those who are
completely at the state's whim.
Um
Madam Chair Representative, I
just, I, I, I did wanna say
that, but I also just wanted to
let you know that um
The long title, as you have it
in the bill.
is the language that will appear
on the ballot.
So, if you move on from this
committee, I would suggest that
you, you visit with the
Secretary of State's office.
And
Determine any concern that she
may have. We've spent a lot of
time in this committee
discussing how best to put
questions on the ballot to
ensure that voters truly
understand what they're voting
on and truly understand the
entire nature of the change. Um,
so, Madam Chair, uh,
representatives, I would just
encourage you all to, to do that
and, and prepare that as an
amendment for the next committee
if necessary. Um, I don't.
I
I'm not familiar with the
specific concern on this, but
um,
I think it's worth
investigating. Thank, thank you,
Madam Chair.
You Representative Barrego.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
thank you, Representative
Herndon, and Representative
Rickval Caballero, um, Madam
Charo and representatives, I, I
thank you for your long
histories, both of you, um,
first of all, of fighting for
social justice. I know, I know
your histories and I've worked
with you for many years, both of
you, and I know, um, and
respect.
What you have done and, and
probably the witnesses that
you've brought today, I don't
know them, but I bet they're,
they've been right along with
you, um, Madam Chair, and
Representatives, um.
During the discussion, I had an
opportunity to pull up the New
Mexico sentencing commission
profile of New Mexico for 2023.
That was the latest one that I
could find.
Um, and one of the things that
it points out, especially for
felons is the composition of
race, ethnicity, and an
ethnicity among adults in New
Mexico with the confined
population.
Sorry, my phone is ringing.
Hispanic and black people are
overrepresented in the prison
population, especially among
males, while white people are
underrepresentative, and that
was according to the US Census
of 2020, Madam Chair and
Representatives and to a lesser
extent both Native Americans and
Pacific Islanders are also
overrepresentative in the prison
population, whereas Asian people
are underrepresentative.
Underrepresented. The other
thing that I that it
talks about in their report,
Madam Chair and Representatives
is the age discrepancy for
people under 30 years old is uh
pretty high.
Or people with felony
convictions, and Madam Chair,
um, I'm glad that our floor
leader brought up the issue of
the 60s because it started, it
got me to thinking, um,
recently, Madam Chair and
representatives, um, you know,
there was a time when marijuana
was illegal and people went to
prison because of it, and now
it's, it's uh it's legal and
there are still people in
prison, uh, who were convicted
for um felonies or.
you know,
So how times change, I think
it's important that we note
that, um, the way that I see
this bill is it's up to the
voters to decide and I think
that the voters are really the
people that are are we represent
and so I, I totally support what
you're doing here. Thank you.
Thank you, ma'am.
Thank you, Representative
Zamora.
You, Madam Chair, and.
And uh representatives for
bringing this bill forward.
I just relate, Madam Chair, I
relate.
The being able not not being
able to vote with punishment.
And
And
Madam Chair and Representative,
do, do you agree with that?
Madam chair and Representative,
yes.
Thank, thank you, Madam Chair.
So then
So then when we punish somebody
when when somebody's
Incarcerated.
And, and given a time of of
sentence.
Madam Chair and Representative,
would you agree that that's a
punishment for the crime that
they committed.
Um, Madam Chair and
Representative, not in the in
the way that you've just
presented it? No.
Ma.
Madam Chair Representative.
Um, thank you so much for your
inquiry about that. Um,
actually, there's no correlation
between voting and um
criminality, and nobody goes to
their sentencing and is told,
you're gonna do this much time
in prison, and you lose your
right to vote. That actually
does not happen in courtrooms
anywhere.
And so there is not a
correlation between losing your
right to vote and sentencing.
And Madame Che and presenters,
I'm sure there's a lot of things
that aren't.
Uh
Relay at the sentencing that,
that you lose.
When, when you get incarcerated.
Madam Chair, I'll, I'll drop
that at that, and then I'll go
to
As to ask him the question has
As the Secretary of Corrections,
Madam Chair, and Representatives
been involved.
In, in, uh, crafting this bill.
Madam Chair
Madam Chair, the expert.
Madam Chair, Representative.
Um, to the extent of discussing
with them, uh, uh, people who
have been disenfranchised in the
litigation. That's also
happening outside of um this
bill work. We have been talking
with the secretary, and this
would actually smooth things
over. The Department of
Correction side has not issued
any has not suggested any issues
with this, um, and it's the
communication between agencies
that's actually causing the
disenfranchisement right now,
which we are hoping that this
bill will repair.
And Madam Chair and
Representative.
I'm surprised.
That the Secretary of
Corrections isn't against this.
Madam chair and, and
representative.
Members of the committee.
Look at what's going on in our.
In our whole nation.
And the passion that took place.
In this last election.
At our national level.
If, if we take these issues.
Inside the walls of a prison.
I think we could disrupt.
The prisoners
And the, and the security of the
prison.
Madam Chair, and Representative.
I, I'd like to hear from both
the representatives that are
sitting at the end of the table.
On that. What's, what's.
How do you feel about that?
What, what about the security in
the prison?
And, and disrupting and the,
the, the person, persons in the
prison, the prisoners.
And causing a riot or a fight,
just one fight and somebody
getting hurt, Madam Chair.
So
Madam Chair, members of the
committee.
Representative, I'm not quite
sure I understand your question.
If you're saying that voting is
gonna cause a riot. Is that your
concern? Madam Chair.
If there's 2 prisoners in there
and they're passionate about the
two different presidents that
ran for president of the United
States this time.
And they get to arguing about
it.
And they cause a fight or a
riot.
Yeah.
That can happen.
If we start doing this and and
because they have the right to
to talk to one another in there
and they speak and they
communicate and, and a lot of
times they're not in their
single cells where they, they're
not gonna fight. They're,
they're amongst the, the prison,
uh
Community personnel, uh, other
prisoners.
And to me, this should be a big
issue to the Secretary of
Corrections.
Madam Chair, and I'd like to,
I'd like to hear both the
representatives answer to that.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, representative.
Primarily what we're looking
here at a disenfranchisement and
the, and the right to vote.
That's the number one issue with
respect to this uh item that's
before.
You, uh, are seeming to overlook
the fact that what you're
describing now in terms of
people not agreeing is occurring
inside the prison or outside of
a prison, so it doesn't make a
difference. And why would you
want to come to uh punish
someone because they're inside
of a prison and not agreeing, as
well as those who are outside of
a prison in that degree.
Thank you, thank you for that
answer, uh, representative.
Thank you, Madam Che.
Representative, Madam Chair, and
Representative, I wholeheartedly
agree with the co-sponsor.
It's happening.
Whether you're in or whether
you're out, the discussions that
you present.
Um, are
On everybody's mind.
We have those discussions here.
We have them in our family. We
have them in our neighborhoods.
We have them everywhere.
So
They, they, that discussion and
if they have the right to vote,
then that they will have the
right to participate like
everyone else has the right to
participate as citizens of this
nation, we have the right, a
First Amendment right, we have
all our constitutional rights
that give us the right, the
freedom of speech, the freedom
to participate, the freedoms to
be equally inequitably protected
under these constitution. It's
the same rights that we want
that we have.
Here, you and I and all that are
out here, the same rights that
we want to
Ensure that those that are
incarcerated, uh, have the right
to vote is a basic right of
democracy.
and, and Madam Chair, I can see
that side of it.
But I believe you agreed with me
that the security could be
Be, be, uh,
And think of the word I'm
looking for. Compromised.
If, if the security of the
prison is compromised.
That, that needs to be at our
forefront of our concerns, I
believe.
And, and if, if.
If, if we feel like we can, we
can take issues inside the
prison.
The compromise the security of
the prison.
To me, that's, that wouldn't be,
that wouldn't be a good thing,
Madam Chair.
We're just discussing the
constitutional amendment, giving
the right to the citizens to
make those decisions. That's
what this bill does. Madam Chair
and representative. Madam Chair
and representative, but we're
doing it in the, in the most
vulnerable place.
With, with the most vulnerable
people.
That, that could cause a problem
within
Prison walls, Madam Chair, uh,
that ends concludes my questions
and, and comments. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative Waa Nonu.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you presenters and expert
for bringing this bill forward.
I did do pass and I got a little
punchy and I realized I didn't
get a chance to actually talk
about it.
I moved it already, um, but I
really just wanted to thank you
for bringing this forward
because
We talk a lot about
Our incarcerated communities,
um, and we talk a lot about
things that we can do to reduce
recidivism, reduce reoffending
action, um, and we talk a lot
about voting and
From my perspective, we talk
about voting.
As the sacred thing that it
absolutely is.
But we talk about it far too
often in my opinion, as though
it is a sacred privilege.
And not a right afforded to
every American citizen.
And I think
Maintaining the dignity and the
act of voting.
Maintains an American's dignity,
no matter where they are.
And I think that that is a
natural precursor to reduction
of recidivism. When you strip
away too much of a person's
dignity in a correctional
facility.
They have to learn.
When they leave that facility,
Not only how to reintegrate into
society, but how to regain too
much of their dignity.
And I think maintaining the
right to vote.
Will help mitigate.
Some of that feeling.
So when we
I say things like,
If we pass this law if we or
this, if this resolution goes to
the public and the amendment is
made and the amendment, the
constitutional amendment gets
passed and it will risk prison
security. I mean, political
speech, to my knowledge, please
correct me, Secretary, if I'm
mistaken. Political speech is
not outlawed in our prison
system. So I don't know that the
act of filling in a bubble is
going to cause someone to be
violent when they have not been
violent over that issue already
or that will add.
to the increase of risk.
I think
That a passage of this
resolution reduces risk.
And maintains dignity. And
that's why I'm in support of it.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representatives. Madam.
We have a motion for due pass.
We have a second, please call
Roll.
Representative on Oran.
Yes.
Represented? No, sir, with an
explanation.
Represented rego.
Presented Lujan.
Visited Mea.
No.
Madam Flo leader? Yes.
Representative? No.
Madam Vice Chair, Madam Chair.
53.
You have emotion, uh.
You have a you pass, and we have
an explanation representative
block. Thank you, Madam Chair
and thank yous representatives,
and I, I see the the impetus
behind it, and I, I know that
the social justice aspects we're
talking about those, but, but
when I come to vote on this, I
think about the victims and the
reason that those people were
incarcerated in the first place,
and I don't see it as an equity
situation. I do not see it as
disenfranchisement, I would see
it the opposite when that
victim, if they were killed, for
example, they no longer have the
right to vote, and the person
that could have killed them.
would, I feel like that is so
inequitable, and I, I do not see
it as some kind of equity issue.
I think that we need to look at
the victims and I I don't want
to slap the victims in the face.
So, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. You have a do pass,
representatives. Thank you. All
right, let's move on to House
Memorial 24.
Representative Chavez. I saw her
earlier.
Madam
Madam Chair.
Since we have just a
Since we have just a second, I
Madam Chair,
Since we have a second, I will
not be here on Friday.
OK, let's continue House
Memorial 24 representative.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair. I'm
here to present house uh
Memorial 24.
And the purpose of house
Memorial 24 is to create a task
force made up of CYFD and
Corrections department, um,
interested parties, I will say,
to really look at some specific
things, um, and one of them
being uh workload in and, and a
case loads in both of those uh
departments, but also to come up
with some recommendations in
terms of recruitment and
retention, we all know um how
high the tune.
turnover is in both of those
departments. And we think that
bringing uh management and
workers together to have a
conversation and make
recommendations to us as a
legislature for some, you know,
possible, um,
Ideas, resolutions would be
helpful. Uh, with me, I have an
expert witness. I'm gonna ask
him to introduce himself and uh
talk a little bit more about
some of the specifics in this
memorial.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Carter Bundy would
ask me, this is really about
empowering you to make um good
decisions about the two biggest,
I would say, life and death
agencies that we have in the
state, uh, public safety is
critical. This staffing problem
has been going on for years.
We've gotten some good raises
over the years. Money alone
won't solve it. I think
compensation is a big part of
it, but I think the thing that
this task force gives you the
opportunity
to get
is direct firsthand testimony
and input from frontline
workers, um, about.
Both in terms of retention, uh,
and of course recruiting, so um
it, it's an opportunity for you
to have more information and to
get input from frontline
workers, uh, the departments and
SO would be represented on this
task force as well, and I think
we'll stand for questions.
Thank you. Let's go to the
audience. Those in support,
please raise your hands. OK,
let's take one minute comments.
Thank you.
Good morning, chair, members of
the committee, Mikeabizzini with
Bold Futures New Mexico. We
support this legislation.
allergies. Do we have any um
comments in opposition in the
audience.
All right, let's go online.
Anyone hoping to make comments
in support of the bill, please
raise your hand.
Anyone hoping to make comments
in opposition to the bill.
Please raise your hand.
OK, committee member
Representative Lujan, just
quickly, this would, Madam
Chair, you would be working with
the state personnel office and
everybody for all the, to gather
all the information and
legislative finance committee.
Thank you, Madam Chair. That's
my own question. Yes.
Canada Berago.
Um, thank you, uh.
Representative and Madam Chair,
um.
So looking at your makeup, why
is there not anyone from um
Um, public safety on here.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
to be totally honest.
We missed that.
Um, so would you consider that,
yes, Madam Chair, thank you. I,
I'm supportive. I just wanna
know that public safety because
initially they're the ones that
go into the homes and so on, and
I think it's important that that
they're also represented.
Absolutely. Thank you.
Representative on you.
I'm sure I move do pass.
Yeah
Motion for a second. Do we have
opposition? Please call roll.
Was on?
Was it a black? No.
Representative Borego.
Yes, with an explanation.
Representative Lujan.
Rosa Mejia.
past.
Madam Flourlier? Yes.
Representative Zamora? No.
Was it a Mia?
No.
Madam Vice Chair, Madam Chair.
53.
How would you pass? Thank you.
Thank you,
Madam Chair Representative
Barrego to explain your vote.
Yes, Madam Chair, I just wanted
to ensure that uh the
representative would uh have an
amendment for the next
committee. So thank you.
Thank you, everyone.
