Good morning, everyone. Let's go
ahead and call our house
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee meeting to
order.
Please.
Representative onion or
Representative present.
Represented Borego.
Or
Mhm
Representative Lujan.
Representative Mejia.
Here.
Madam Flo leader, Representative
Zamora.
He.
Madam Vice Chair. Madam Chair,
we have a court.
Thank you.
We have a quorum there are no
housekeeping announcements. We
just like to say good morning
and begin with House Bill 371.
Maybe get
Sorry, Madam Chair, I didn't
hear that. uh, thank you, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee, thank you for
hearing. We're gonna start with
HB 3 uh 371, is that correct?
OK, uh, Madam Chair, this is a,
uh.
An act related to motor vehicles
authorizing local and county of
uh authorities to allow off
highway motor vehicles to
operate on paved streets and
highways.
I emphasize state highways, not
interstates, within the
political boundaries of the
authorizing entity.
Um, this past, uh,
transportation unanimously, uh,
and with no opposition, we have
um Chris Johnson here with
NMOHBA recreation Resource
directors who will be my expert
witness.
the department,
your expert witnesses with. I
didn't really, he's actually
just with, uh, New Mexico OHBA
recreation Resources Director.
I'll, I'll let him explain,
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, my name is Chris
Johnson, and I'm the uh
recreation resource director for
the New Mexico Off-highway
Vehicle Alliance, and I'm here
to support uh HB 371, and I will
fill any questions that you guys
have. We stand for questions,
Madam Chair.
Thank you. Did you tell us what
your bill is for? Did you
introduce your bill or I didn't
hear it.
Madam Chair, I did.
I can repeat anything you'd
like.
Yes, ma'am.
Let's go to the audience. Do we
have anyone in support of the
bill?
Do we have any opposition to the
bill?
Let's go online.
All right, in favor of the bill,
uh, Howard, can you hear us?
Yeah, so
Leonard members of the
committee. I'm Howard
Hutchinson.
Uh, with the coalition of
Arizona and New Mexico counties.
Or New Mexico County members
have been uh moving for this.
Allowance in the statute, uh, we
already have uh a uh an ability
to do these loop trails on on
county roads, but there's often
been confusion about being able
to enter or cross state highway.
This would be a
Economic development boom for
many of our rural counties and
we hope that you can support
this legislation.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you so much, Howard.
Uh, lay games.
Can you hear us?
Hello? OK.
There you go. Good morning, uh,
Chairman and members of the
committee. My name is Les
Gaines. I live in Grants, New
Mexico, and as a point of
contact for the outdoors, uh,
and recreation committee. We
support this bill, as you know,
in grants we have uh the main
arterial high highways are uh
state highways, ebola, grants,
and Milan all have ordinances
for ATBs and OHPs on their
roads, and it creates lots of
confusion when
every uh legal ATB and OHB
writer has where it says right
on their license plate.
Uh, highway use, and then if we
had the ability to legislate and
change the areas on the state
highways, it would be a big boom
for our community.
Thank you.
Thank you so much, Liz.
James, can you hear us?
Yes. Great. Go ahead.
Oh, you didn't hear me to begin
with? Oh, sorry about that.
All right. Thank you so much,
Lela. uh.
Yes, sir. I'm here. Hi.
Good morning. Good morning,
ladies and gentlemen. My name is
James Coons. I respectfully
request you consider passing HB
371. This bill would allow
clarity to the existing state
OHB law and will provide the
governing bodies such as
municipalities and counties who
have already passed ordinances
or resolutions, and currently
allow HVUs on paid and unpaved
roadways.
within their jurisdictions to
now include state highways that
are within their incorporated
boundaries. The current OHB law
creates confusion to the public
who purchased the required OHV
on-road registration plates from
the state MBD. They believe
they're driving legally within
the communities that allow HVs
on their roadways, but then get
stopped by law enforcement when
they travel onto a state highway
that's within that county or
city that allows OETUs within
their incorporated boundaries.
Furthermore, this bill
represents minor changes to the
current language of the existing
state law that allows OHVs, but
it would allow OHVUs on state
highways within cities or
counties that have already
passed laws that allow eachVU in
their jurisdiction. These
changes would increase tourism
revenue for many towns in New
Mexico as well provide further
access to outdoor recreational
recreation for all New Mexicans.
I also believe these changes
will be also.
Thank you.
Thank you for your comment.
Alright
He went in opposition, please
raise your hand.
All right, uh, Representative
Zamora.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, uh, Representative for
bringing this bill forward.
So,
This doesn't mean we're gonna
see OHB's running down the
interstate, right, um, Madam
Chair Representative Zamora, no,
sir, this only allows the, the,
the counties or municipalities
to allow them on paved streets.
The the confusion, let me, you
heard some of this earlier. They
issued I have one, and they
issued us some metal plates that
give you uh access on highway.
And so it's confusing, but it's
checkerboarded you right now,
but you do the municipality says
we want to run, you can, you,
you have, you're allowed to
drive on the paved streets.
But then you have to go through
a, a, a, um,
Committee
Through the state and, and if
you want to drive on any of the
um state highways. So in Silver
City, for instance, they can
drive on all the paved streets.
Except where Hudson Street and
Silver Heights Street. So what
they start doing is they start
crossing.
Back and forth. Sometimes people
from uh other states come and
they're confused. They bring
their, their stuff that is
registered in other, in other
states and come over to our
state and use it. That's why you
see some of them here and there.
So there's a lot of confusion.
This would, this would kind of
clean that up.
And, and Madam Chair and
Representative, and this doesn't
Uh, overrule.
Uh, what cities or counties
wanna do. Am I correct, Madam
Chair?
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
actually this gives all
authority to your local
municipality. So let's just say,
um,
Albuquerque or Santa Fe says
this isn't happening in our city
limits.
That's it. It, it can't happen
yet, if you go to Gallup or you
go to Silver City or reserve,
and they say, yeah, we're gonna
allow those within these areas
of of our city, they can then
create the restrictions that
they want or open it up to all
paved streets.
Thank you for that, madam chair
and thank you, Representative.
That concludes my question.
Next, I have Representative
Block.
You, Madam Chair, I move a do
pass unless other people have.
Uh.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Yes, I
do have some questions.
Um
My family
Commute uh travels across the
state of New Mexico to uh visit
people down in Mescalero,
Riodoso, all the way up to Taos
and points north.
What I've noticed through there
and even in our area's rural,
rural areas and even in the city
limits, that there are a number
of AT or off-road vehicles.
And there have been accidents.
There have been drivers who were
very young, who were
I don't know what the licensing
requirements are.
I've seen responders have to
attend to those, and they are
deep within.
areas that are off the roads to
uh.
To, um, provide those services,
uh, rescue services in some
case, some cases.
I'm also aware of some deaths
that have actually taken place
out there, out in these rural
areas and um in addition to the
safety factors, I'm wondering,
um,
Where
I see the scars on our lands.
Uh, from these off-road
vehicles.
And I'm wondering one of several
questions and uh my apologies,
madam chairs, there may be a
number of them, uh, tied up in
this, but licensing is one,
training, safety training is
another uh law enforcement views
on this. I'm curious as to
whether how law enforcement
feels about having
Um
Younger people, because that's,
I see the demographics as I go
back and as we travel back and
forth.
Um
And, uh, as well as uh the
established paths for these.
Uh, vehicles, these off-road
vehicles go, are there
established paths or are these,
I've seen it, they go wherever
they can, and you just we see.
A lot of the damage that has
occurred on these roads. So how
will those be uh mitigated,
Madam Chair.
So, Madam Chair, uh, Madam Vice
Chair, thank you for asking that
question. I, I think you
actually are answering the issue
with this is when we have, so,
so let's just say in, in, in
Grant County and you're going
down um the Mimbres area, there
are trails that go up into up
into the mountains, OK?
Currently, this isn't gonna
change anything. This
Of course, we're gonna talk
about the next bill addresses
some of the things that you're
talking about, but on this bill
right here, think of, we have
checkerboarding where you, you
go up on trail.
And it might loop into another
section, but then they wanna go
on another trail and they can
cross the, the highway, but they
can't.
Go up the highway. So to your
point, then they sometimes right
on the side of the, of the
highway to try to get on there.
You're always gonna have bad
actors and, and, and, but this,
this would allow I, in my
opinion as an owner, and I'm
gonna talk as a funeral director
here in a minute to the other
questions, but
To your point, this would fix
that little checkerboarding when
you can't drive, there's 0.5
mile down the road, you, you
want to catch the next trail.
What are you gonna do? Bring
your, go get your, go back the
way you started and then go get
your truck and then load it and
then move it another mile to,
to, to get to the next trail,
people aren't gonna do that.
They're gonna look around and
say, hey, I can make it to the
next thing. Sometimes they don't
even realize that they're not
supposed to be in those areas.
This would make things a lot
less checkerboard, well, a lot
less checkerboarded because it
they they they know that they've
got permission to write within
the municipality or within that
county. If there's restrictions,
then they, they put them on
there. But there are already
Rules and regulations that
address a lot of what you said
on what a driver, you're not
supposed to have all of the
expert witness here uh respond
to that, but basically, they are
already rules that you can't
operate these vehicles. The next
bill that I have, uh, before
you, uh, is actually addressing
some of those things, your
concerns that we can talk about
here in a little bit. But as far
as this, this is basically what
we're trying to do is stop the
checker boarding.
And I'll give the local.
Authority back to the
municipalities and counties.
Uh, by the way, to your, to your
question of of accidents.
As a funeral director, madam
chair, uh, uh, madam vice chair,
I've seen many, many things,
and, you know, we do have a TV
accidents that have happened
over my, my course of 37 years,
but I can assure you we've had
many more motorcycle accidents
that I've taken care of people
that, that have passed away in
that. So there's no
We, all we can do is, is, is
promote good laws that that we
already have in the books. We're
gonna clean up a few little
things there for to address some
of the things that you were
talking about training and stuff
like that on the next, on the
next bill, and that I think
would answer your questions.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative.
So, um
I
It's my understanding that the
Department of Transportation and
motor Vehicles department has
responsibility for carries that
responsibility. Why not just
incorporate this, um, these
ideas into
And enhance what is already
there.
Well, and, and I'll look again,
here, here's, here's the issue
is they're requesting some of
that, but sometimes the
committee doesn't get back to us
or doesn't and and I'll let him
let the expert witness answer to
that a little bit better.
Madam Chair, Madam vice chair,
uh, the state transportation
commission has created the
policy they call CP71 that
already pre-establishes things
that they're going to go by uh
for allowing OHVs on a
particular stretch of state
highway, among them is they
won't allow it on any highways
that are uh faster than 45 miles
an hour. Uh, however, the OHB
Act already allows for local
communities and county
government.
to set lower speed limits on
OHVs, so, uh, uh,
what I've heard from people
around the state is that they
petitioned the state
transportation commission to
open up certain stretches to
facilitate uh going out to
recreational trails, uh, or to
facilitate loops is the one
gentleman was talking about, uh,
however, the state
transportation won't even
entertain those uh uh.
petitions from the local
governments because the of the
pre-established CP71 policy. So
I'm I'm curious as to, uh, Madam
Chair, um, representative, um,
I'm curious as to the rationale
behind why that is not allowed
because I'm also wondering if
perhaps
By changing this to the
municipalities to be responsible
for ensuring all of these
pieces, are they also accepting
liability?
Well, Madam Chair,
Representative, um, and vice
chair, you know, here's the
thing, I mean, I, I'm gonna be
honest with you. I would much
rather be in a side by side than
a moped.
And you get some of these other
vehicles that are on there, and
they're, you see a lot of little
tiny little
I'm gonna call them peanut
sized.
Vehicles that have this oil
trees are sometimes bigger than
our cars.
So we're addressing a lot of
that in the next um uh in the
language in the next bill to, to
enhance that and straighten that
out and clean up the language,
but, um, the, the confusion is
also we have out of staters
coming in and it's
checkerboarding, they're
breaking the laws because they
don't unknowingly.
Uh, I remember, our, our
residents are doing the same
thing. I, and I feel that local
municipalities.
And, and, and we'll know what's
best for their communities, what
they'll allow if they don't want
to have it in their county or
their city.
They just don't adopt it, if
they, you know, these, these
vehicles are already before you
get them on the street, you
can't just go buy one and throw
it, put it on the street. You
have to get it licensed, you
have to prove that you have uh
your signal lights, your, your
rearview mirror, you've got to
have a horn, you gotta have all
these, all these um requirements
before you're allowed to, to
take him onto the onto the
street. Um, we have had no
opposition from uh from that
department, uh, this pasted
unanimously through
transportation.
Uh, to, to address a lot of
your, your issues, madam Chair.
Thank you very much, uh, if you
just give me a moment, let me
see if I have any other
questions.
Madam Chair, thank you so much.
Thank you, Representative. I
appreciate you responding to my
questions, both of you. Thank
you.
I don't see any other names
listed for questions. I do have
a question.
Um, because I wasn't in the
transportation committee and I
didn't hear the hearing in
there.
Um, so I'm reading the
significant issues, the
Department of Transportation
contends that denying the state
transportation commission and
the NMDOT, the responsibility to
regulate the types of vehicles
that can be.
That can access the streets and
highways may negatively affect
NMDOT's performance measures for
safety with the federal
government and performance
measures established each year
for the state. So how does?
Um,
these concerns. Thank you.
um, I'm not sure who wrote that,
that, um, you know, that, that
line, but the truth of it is I
already have that power, except
that it's, again, when you have
a state highway going through
the middle of your town, then
it, it, it, this is a
checkerboarding effect that it's
having. And so, um, we have not
had uh Department of
Transportation itself, um given
the opposition, um, in the next
bill, we're gonna talk about
cleaning up some of the law.
Uh, sometimes game and fish is
confused on when they're pulling
these people over. I mean, if
there's, it's a mess out there.
And so we received, so I paid
for a plate.
A metal plate, like, like if you
had a motorcycle or a metal
plate that says highway use.
It is confusing, and then on top
of that, then they changed it to
a sticker on the side of the
deal that said, I will use. We
have to get insurance so to
Answer your question, the, the
operator has to have insurance
just like any other vehicle. If
you're gonna get that permit to
be on those, on those highways.
I think that would probably
answer your question, Madam
Chair.
OK. Thank you.
We have a motion for a due pass
by represented second by
Representative Mejia.
This Carroll.
Representative on Noni.
Representative block, yes.
Representative Boredo.
Representative Lujan.
Representative Mejia.
Yes. Madame Flourlier,
Representative Zamora.
Yes. Vice chair and vice chair.
No, and I'd like to explain my
vote, please.
Madam chair.
No.
62 and we had an explanation.
Vice chair to explain your vote.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair, Representative, I
appreciate you bringing this
forward in the intent of
streamlining these pieces, um,
I'm still concerned about what
is actually happening out there,
and my hope is that this will,
um, as your bill moves forward
that it will uh resolve those
concerns. So, um, I wish you
well. Thank you very much.
OK, you have a you pass on.
House Bill 371.
And we now move to house Bill
372 as amended.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
We get to that page, man.
Get my
OK, sure, uh,
Committee next bill, House Bill
372 is related to motor
vehicles,
amending the off-highway Motor
Vehicle Act to reflect changes
in the off-road mi uh motor
vehicle industry to improve
registration enforcement and
responsiveness to the needs of
off highway motor vehicle users.
This is clean up language, Madam
Chair, uh, in committee, um, to
address some of the things that
we were talking about, some of
those are for registration. Some
of those are allowing um your
Driver, 00 that's under 18, but
is over 16, is that right?
As long as they have a driver's
license is what I understand to
allow because there's conflict
in the, in the, in the statutes
that you can't have a person
under 18 even if they have a
driver's license with an adult
or passenger in the front. So
this cleans that up, so if
you're, you're gonna teach your
um uh an a driver who already
has a driver's license, you want
to train him on this thing,
you're not supposed to be in the
front seat. It addresses some of
that, um, and just clean up
language like um the size of the
vehicles have changed over the
course of time.
the, the size and and weight and
so it addresses most of those
things. And with that, I think
we stand for questions and
we'll, we'll go from there,
Madam Chair.
You. Let's go to the audience.
Do we have any comments in
support of this bill.
And we'll stay with the
audience. Any opposition?
Let's go online.
OK. I want to speak in favor,
please raise your hand.
We have uh Lee, Lee's gains
again.
These news.
Uh, yes, Madam Chair. Yes, Madam
Chair, thank you. Uh, we support
this bill and grants. It does
kind of clean up the language,
make it a little clearer, also
helps a little funding issues
for uh out of state people and
um it would be good for our
community and OHP and ATV use uh
from in-state and out of state
users.
Thank you.
You can watch these?
All right. Next up we got James.
James, can you hear us?
In favor of this, uh, this, uh,
HB 372 and the previous bill age
371, basically are just cleaning
up existing uh OHV law that was
passed back in 2016, it just
provides clarification to some
of the language and making sure
that there's not confusion in
the wording, uh, it's a great
bill. I appreciate you guys, uh,
putting it forth and hearing it
today. Thank you.
Thank you so much, James.
OK, do we have anyone else,
anyone hoping to make a public
comment in opposition to the
bill.
Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative for
bringing this bill forward.
On page 7.
Line 8.
We're talking it it's on section
3 operation and equipment of
safety requirements.
Uh, Madam chair and
representative.
On, on number 4, it says in
pursuit of
Or harassment of livestock in
any manner.
That negatively affects
The livestock's condition.
When, when you put in pursuit of
In that line.
It kind of, it gives me some
heartburn because
You might have a farmer.
Or a rancher
That has a cow get out.
And he's gonna be in pursuit of
this animal.
Put him back in his pasture.
I have some heartburns with that
there wondering, uh, Madam Chair
and, and Representative if you'd
If this bill does pass this
committee.
Which
I wouldn't support it this way,
but, but if it does pass this
committee, if, if you're willing
to fix that, Madam Chair and
Representative.
Madam Chair, um, Representative
Ro Zamora, I, I, I see exactly
what you're talking about. It
does say, um, you know, that
negatively affects the livestock
uh condition, I would argue that
if you've got a uh an animal uh
uh uh some livestock that's
outside of the fence or your
fenced out area and it's on the
highway or it's on the road and
you're trying to catch it, to
push it back in. I think you're,
it's, it's the opposite. You're,
you're trying to keep that thing
from getting.
killed on the highway and, and
harming someone else. So I, I, I
think the way I would read that,
um, but if you, if you, after,
if this passes, I'd be glad to
work with that to better uh
ease, uh, ranchers so that we
make sure we don't negatively
impact them manager and, and
Madam Chair and
It's all in the eyes of the
person that sees it, you know.
If, if they see somebody.
Chasing a cow or or or livestock
or something on the side of the
road. They
That person might be thinking
that.
That you're, they're trying to
Harass the animals or whatever,
and we'll go, we'll go forward
from, from that.
And, and
It, it talks about livestock.
In any other manner that
negatively affects the livestock
conditions.
So
But, but it never states in any
of this about dogs and cats and
somebody chasing like, like
those kinds of animals to do
harm to them.
Uh, but I believe.
Probably because you're, you're
concerned with livestock. Am I
correct, Representative? I
think, um, Madam Chair,
Representative, this would be
for um probably someone out
there just horsing around, um,
changing, you know, trying to
chase a livestock, your life.
No, yeah, I tried it, you caught
up, you caught that scared me.
All right.
I'll say it again, horsing
around trying to catch her
harass your, your livestock, uh,
I think, um.
Is, is the intent of the
language, I would absolutely be
open to sitting down with uh
yourself uh representative and
address some work smithing to
make sure that we, the intent of
the bill is.
Harassment from an outside
person coming to do that to your
livestock, and yet, uh, um,
protecting and, and uh ensuring
that
Ranchers use that as a tool. I,
and I know they do that, you
know,
we have family in, in, in
Ranchi, Madam Chair and
representative, I think we ought
to look at that and work on it a
little bit. Yes. And then, uh,
and then if we go to page 10.
Line 5 on section E.
It says an and enough highway
motor vehicles shall not be sold
or offered for sale if the
vehicle produces noises that
exceed 96 decibels.
When measure when measured using
test procedures.
So, so say that
Say that, uh, Madam Chair and
representative say that.
I own
One of these vehicles.
And I'm gonna sell it to
representative Lujan.
Mhm
I think she needs one and, and I
would like that and
And this, this law exists in the
books.
But doing a person to person
sell like that, would we have to
actually get that vehicle
tested.
Or, or she receives it.
She might find out and get in
trouble that, that it's too loud
or.
I'd rather her pay the fine.
So
Madam, is that your question Mr.
Chair, uh, Madam Chair
Representative,
or did I interrupt you, Madam
Chair, my question is if I sell
a vehicle to another person,
maybe a family member, does that
vehicle have to go somewhere and
be tested for, for noise.
Um, Madam Chair, Representative.
Nowhere in the section does it
say that, that you have to get
it tested. What happens is this,
that's already a standard. So
what, what, what we're doing is
this, we're just saying, hey,
when you buy one of these, Madam
Chair, uh, representative from a
manufacturer, that's already
code for them, but people then
turn around and modify them,
but, you know, high performance,
uh, uh, mufflers and stuff that
are, that are annoying, probably
annoying, right? So that is what
this is addressing.
So as long as you're not
modifying it in that manner, I
don't think there'll be any
issue because you're purchasing
it that way and you're just
turning it around and and
reselling it, Madam Chair
Representative.
OK.
So it just has to do with the
new vehicle when it's brought
off the, the factory floor, the.
Yes, sir.
came, and then Madame Chair, uh,
Madam.
Madam Chair Representative, and
this is all existing law that
you're talking about here. We're
not, we're not affecting any of
that, sir. OK. I, I think that
concludes my questions, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Madam Vice Chair
Little.
Thank you. So I am, I was
looking through, I saw on the
FIR that the um.
Madam Chair, that there were
analyses that were requested,
but weren't received at the time
of this, uh, uh, of this report
being produced from Department
of Transportation Tax and Rev
and Department of Game and Fish,
and I see that, uh, as I was
looking through them, I saw that
there were minimal, if not any
comments, uh, to contribute from
transportation and tax and rev,
um, but there, the Department of
Game and Fish did raise
A concern, Madam Chair,
regarding and it's, if you would
help me to understand, um.
The, uh, passenger language as I
was reading through this is why
I came to this piece was that um
Their concern was allowing uh a
supervising passenger with
riders under 18.
Um, not all machines are
designed to carry passengers and
improper weight distribution
could lead to accidents, so, um.
And passengers being
In their view, uh, in this.
Analysis was a detrimental to
the safe operation.
Of these OHVs except the.
Or ovis which are equipped with
passenger seating, safety belts,
hand holes, and vehicle rolled
over, rollover protection
structures.
So, um, allowing passengers only
on the ROVs operated by adults
were fully licensed or
supervised youth under 18 and
excluding them from
Um
The offer, excluding them from
ATVs, motorcycles, and
snowmobiles would address this
concern.
Madam Chair
Madam Chair Representative,
would you break that down for me
Madam Chair, Madam Vice Chair.
So this is exactly what we're
talking about where it's
confusing, right? So there's 4
wheelers or someone writes in
the back. That's what you're
addressing.
This is addressing side by
sides.
This is only side by side, so
just like a, you know, buggy,
right, or a car, you're seen as
a driver, you have a passenger,
sometimes you have back
passengers if you have a
four-seater or whatever. So this
is a dressing that you can write
in the front.
Not on, not on a, it's no
different than a motorcycle,
right? Um, uh, motorcycles have
passengers sometimes in the
back, right?
And, and, and I understand what,
look,
I don't want to cause any, any,
any sort of language that's
gonna hurt anybody. This is
actually gonna help us because
if people, they, they, Madam
Chair, uh, Madam Vice Chair,
they got their driver's license
to operate, operate a motor
vehicle, OK? With probably
higher speed rates than this.
I mean people buy all kinds of
different cars.
That and there there's 4 wheel
drive pickups and there's jeeps
and there's all kinds of things
that can do exactly this. I got
it, and if I was 16 years old
and I got my driver's license.
Yet I'm excluded from this, and
I want my parents to sit up
there in the front with me and
just say, Luis, you're gonna
drive this a certain way, um,
you get, and, and they want to
operate this language that is
existing right now says that
they have to sit in the back, or
they can't sit in the front, so
they're sitting in the back.
It's kind of foolish.
So, you know, this is what we're
trying to clean up. Give this is
in no way encouraging people to
ride on the back of a four
wheeler which is meant for one
person usually, right? Uh, and
so that's the same thing, but um
we're, you know, again,
Um, this is just addressing side
by sides, side by side language,
um, game and fish also would,
you know, would, would benefit
from this because what we're
doing is, is right now we have
When people come from out of
state,
They just bring their licensing
there's no, there's no uh
revenue for us.
And so this would address that
they would have to purchase a
permit. This would make him get
the rules. This would make them
do those type of things to clean
up some of this. So they, they,
their cousins in, in the sense,
these two bills that one saying
look, it's strange you're
driving down the, down the, the,
the um highway and then it
stops.
And there's another mile down
the road, you got one another
trail and they don't know
better, so this allows.
The first bill was saying I can
drive to the next trail if the
county or municipality allows
me.
This bill saying you can get
proper training, we're
addressing the language on the,
on the size of the, of the
motor, the size of the vehicle,
um, that they have to get a
permit that we're not going to
receive permits from other uh
other, other uh licensing from
other states. This is a good
bill.
Uh, in addressing those that
confusion. It helps game and
fish, not pull people over and
go, hey, uh, what's going on
here? You're, you're, because of
the conflict in language, um,
it, uh,
It, it doesn't, it doesn't, uh,
again, it doesn't address any of
the, of the four wheeler stuff.
Let's see what else. Um, I think
that's most, most of what I
wanted to express in this film.
Thank you, Representative. Thank
you, Madam Chair. So I think my
last questions will be uh the
difference I see is that this is
an open vehicle you were
describing, uh, Madam Chair,
representative, uh, uh, the
vehicles where people are riding
in the backseat. Those are
Mostly closed and covered, but I
see the distinction between
wanting to make the distinction
here.
And the, the final question that
I have is, um, so does this mean
that people from out of state.
I will have a to receive in New
Mexico license and then if your
first bill does pass, then
they'd have to get another
permit.
To write to uh to uh um.
Uh
drive those vehicles. I'm not
sure if I'm using the right
language, but
Uh
Mm
to be able to access those uh
paths, uh, um.
In in those municipalities.
Thank you.
It's well that's the way I
remember it because they've
changed it, you know. So, you
already are required to get an
off-road permit.
I'm sorry, Madam Chair
representative.
Vice chair, you already required
to have an off-road permit when
you come to the state of New
Mexico.
OK. You're required that. If you
want to get on a paved road, you
have to you have to get a permit
for that too. And in order to be
on a, on a paved road. This is
what I was trying to play on the
other on the other bill, they
have to have insurance. You have
to have, like you do a car or
anything else, so you can't just
say, I just want a permit and
get on the road, causing
liability to the state. No, they
are required to have
Insurance, uh, just like you
would any other vehicle that
you're driving and you have to
meet the requirements in order
for that to be allowed on the,
on the highway. So again, back
to what I was saying, signal
lights, brake lights, mirrors,
you know, and all those
accessories that you need in in
order to be um considered that
you can write on the streets, on
the, on the streets, on the
paved street.
Which they can already do.
If they do that, but then,
Our this bill is just addressing
the cleanup language where the
um conflicting language where uh
uh 1617 year old can drive with
their parent or whatever that
kind of stuff.
Does that answer your question,
Madam Chair, uh, Madam Vice
Chair.
I think you, uh, Representative
Madam Chair, uh, for that
response. It does somewhat.
Thank you. That's the end of my
question.
You committee members.
Madam Chair, I moved to Duac.
Second,
a motion for due pass by
Representative Mejia, seconded
by Representative Block.
Please call ro.
Representative Ona Nonu.
Yes.
Representative Blan? Yes sir.
Representative Borego, yes.
Representative Morego now.
Uh, I'm sorry, what was that?
Yes or no? Yes. 00 no,
representative Borego, I'm
sorry, I didn't hear you. Was
that a yes or no? I did say yes.
Yes, OK, thank you.
Representative Lu Han. Yes.
Or was it a Mia.
Yes.
Madam Floor leader,
Representative Zamora.
Yes, Madam Vice Chair.
Yes.
Madam chair.
80.
have
You, God bless you. I hope you
have a good trip. I'm my
daughter's on the, in the sky
somewhere between Japan and
Washington coming home.
I'm a happy guy right now.
We're happy for you.
Right, representative on the
internet.
All right. Good morning, Madam
Chair. Good morning, fellow
committee members. I'm here, um,
presenting House Bill 448.
Which, um, creates the Office of
housing through the governor's
office. So every session,
especially this session in the
last session, we introduced
bills that are aimed at
addressing the housing crisis in
New Mexico to make housing more
affordable, and we go through
all the trouble that you all are
very familiar with of collecting
FIRs and agency reports and
getting as much data on every
bill, and then we have to weigh
every bill on its merits, and
it's really hard to compare one
To another to decide which way
is the most effective method of
addressing our
Power essentially and where we
should focus here in the, in the
legislature. And unfortunately,
we as a state don't have
infinite resources and can't
fund every single project and
proposed piece of legislation,
no matter how much we like it,
um, and really just need a
structure to maximize our
resources. And as it stands now,
we don't have an effective
mechanism to do that. So the
primary purpose of House Bill
448 is to provide the state with
that mechanism. The Office of
Housing, Planning and
Production.
would create a central body that
develops a statewide strategy to
coordinate state agencies and
local stakeholders in addressing
housing and homelessness,
provide technical assistance to
local governments, aligned
resources across state agencies
and the private sector, address
underlying factors that impact
housing costs and availability,
collect and report data to
describe and monitor the housing
market in regions of the state
in different regions of the
state because, you know what
happens in our rural communities
is not going to be what we need
to.
to do for our urban areas.
Um, and evaluate that data to
identify geographic gaps in
housing availability, and, um,
and with that, I will introduce
my expert, Mr. Daniel Weath. He
is the governor, senior, um,
housing policy advisor.
Thank you, Representative Madam
Chair Representatives, um.
Uh, I've been working on housing
for over 20 years in New Mexico
and for the last 10 years have
been deeply passionate about the
idea that we can do better at
housing within the state, um, we
have a great, uh, agency in the
New Mexico mortgage Finance
Authority, MFA and Housing New
Mexico, um, who operates our
affordable housing programs and
our project-based programs, um,
we really want to leverage the
power of the the various.
happening across state
government. We do a lot of
housing across state government,
um, in sort of silos, um, I
think the other big priority for
us is to really see the needle
move around homelessness, and
that's something that's a
multi-agency response, um, and I
think uh we have a real
opportunity to move the needle
on this with having a
coordinated state level
approach. I think the biggest
thing that we're trying to
achieve is and a massive housing
shortage of over 40.
1000 units, which is driving
affordability problems such as
driving homelessness and also
lower the cost and time it takes
to build new housing, um,
unfortunately, we've seen
declines in uh housing building
permits the last 2 years at
exactly the time we need to be
going the other direction. We're
one of just 5 states with
declines in building permits
last year. Um, so I think the
idea here is to start addressing
the systemic factors that are
driving.
increased housing costs and
making it harder than it should
be, um, and really working with
local governments to support
them and, and by local I mean
counties, uh, cities, tribes,
all the different governmental
entities because everyone,
everyone of those entities in
the state of New Mexico is
facing some sort of housing
challenge and they're really
different. So we want to grow
the capacity for the state to be
a partner with local governments
to address their housing needs.
Thank you.
Thank you, ma'am. Cheering with
that, we stand in for questions.
You. Let's go to the audience,
those in support of the bill,
please raise your hands.
OK, we have many of you, so
let's take 5 comments. One
minute, please.
Um, Madam Chair and members of
the committee, Roger Valdez
Center for Housing Economics. We
strongly support this. I want to
point out one particular
critical thing that is proposed
as a data dashboard.
Um, if you ask the city of
Albuquerque today.
What is the average time from
Permit application for housing
to issuance of certificate
occupancy, they can't tell us
that.
So we need, we have a paucity of
good real-time housing data, and
if we're going to understand how
to manage housing demand and
plan to meet that demand, we
need better data. And so I think
This office will help us begin
to develop some statewide
measures.
Morning, Madam Chair and members
of the committee, thank you for
the opportunity to speak. Uh, my
name is Isidoro Hernandez. I'm
the executive director and CEO
of Housing New Mexico.
As you've heard, there's a great
need for housing, the housing
costs have increased
significantly. Um, there are
several factors contributing to
the increased housing cost and
uh the office of a housing uh
proposes to work on reducing
those costs.
As the state's uh housing agency
who administers housing programs
across the housing continuum. We
support and welcome the housing
office commitment to addressing
the factors contributing to the
increased cost, uh, we believe.
Our separate roles complement
each other, and thank you for
the opportunity to speak.
Uh, my name is Chris Herbert.
I'm the executive director of
the Eastern Regional Housing
Authority, and we have all three
regional housing authorities
here, including the Camino Real
Housing Authority representing
the municipal housing
authorities, and we support the
bill. I won't, I won't repeat
some of the things that have
already been said, we strongly
support it, particularly for our
rural areas and the state.
Madam Chair committee, thank you
for the opportunity to endorse
this legislation. My name is
Doctor Shanna Sasser. I am the
former rural ombudsman for the
state of New Mexico under the
Department of Finance and
Administration, and in my time
in that position, I traveled the
whole state of New Mexico. I saw
lots of visions of workforce
housing, never come to fruition
because these rural communities
don't have the capacity to
manage the complicated nature
of.
Federal HUD grants and the 5
grants that it takes to get a
housing project across the
finish line. And if you look to
our neighboring states like
Colorado and Arizona, they have
both uh mortgage finance
authority, quasi-government
housing groups, but they also
have a housing office that can
help direct guide, provide the
funding and compliance and
oversight and that's the
scaffold.
that the state has lacked for
years to get these housing
projects done, so I fully
support this measure.
Oh, hold on, sorry.
Madam Chair and committee, my
name is Richard Maus. I'm the
city manager for Raton, New
Mexico, and I drove down this
morning to personally talk to
you about this, um,
Going forward, we need a
strategy in the state.
And right now you have very many
cities doing very many things
and ditto, thank you for, uh,
you know, saying everything that
I was going to say, but it's
extremely important that we move
forward with the strategy so we
don't have this chaos and all of
us smaller communities
throughout the state, especially
rural communities can have a
voice in you know what our
future is when it comes to
housing. Thank you very much.
OK, let's stay with the
audience. I am
Any opposing comments.
Let's go online for supporting
comments. Let's take 3.
Um, Mary Ellen, can you hear us?
Yes. Uh, thank you, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, Mary
Ellen Garcia, executive director
of the New Mexico Coalition
Against Domestic Violence.
Housing remains one of the most
significant barriers for
survivors of domestic violence
in New Mexico, making this
critical investment of solutions
that expand shelter capacity and
long term housing options. We've
seen a 45% increase in shelter
needs in a 57% increase in
alternative housing needs. We
call on policy makers to invest
in both the housing solutions
and the infrastructure that is
needed and.
the vital services that
survivors need to find safety
and stability. We do see that we
received an additional $1
million in House Bill 2 this
year, but that is only $32,000
per agency, which is nowhere
near enough. We need an and
solution. This is not an either
or an or, it is an and.
Survivors and service providers
cannot wait. We do require an
additional $4 million into House
Bill 2 to urgently meet the
needs and the stability,
ensuring that we can address the
long term and short term
barriers for intimate partner
violence, uh, survivors in New
Mexico. Capital assistance in
housing funding in New Mexico is
incredibly overly burdensome,
making it difficult for service
providers to maintain and um and
expand their infrastructure. So
this would create powerful and
lasting change, and we cannot do
it without solutions like this
that can really bring everyone
together and address all of the
pieces, because what we've done
in New Mexico address is just
address this and that, but we
need to address it all. Thank
you.
Mary Ellen.
All right, next we got uh
Natalie Green. Natalie, can you
hear us?
I can hear you. Thank you,
chair, members of the committee.
My name is Natalie Green. I'm
the housing administrator for
the city of Las Cruces. The city
is in support of this bill, uh,
while Las Cruces is fortunate to
have dedicated staff, many of
our surrounding communities do
not, and we often receive calls
from those neighboring
communities seeking assistance
in in establishing or building
up their programs. While we're
always happy to lend our
expertise across the state, we
recognize that every community
is different and needs a
tailored approach for its
citizens by its citizens.
This office will provide that
tailored approach in addition to
providing much needed statewide
support, increasing housing
production for all incomes and
help meet the growing need for
all types of housing. Thank you.
Thank you so much, Natalie.
Right, next we got Nicholas
Prince, Nicholas, can you hear
us?
Just sorry about that, Nicholas,
if you wouldn't wouldn't mind
muting and unmuting yourself,
maybe that'll fix it.
Sorry about that, Nicholas,
you're not hearing you for some
reason. We're gonna have to move
on. So we're gonna move on to
uh.
Jackie, Jackie, can you hear us?
Mm
So sorry about that. We're
having trouble hearing you guys,
um.
Try one more here. Sorry about
that. Uh, we have, uh, Build New
Mexico. Can you hear us?
We're having some technical
difficulties here and are unable
to hear you, um.
OK, we're having technical
difficulties, and I'm gonna
assume we don't have any
opposing comments online. So
we'll go to committee members,
representative Lujan.
Thank you. um, thank you, Madam
Chair. Uh, I do appreciate this
legislation and the
The collaboration of efforts as
we, we heard.
During um
Elsie and then now HAFC. I think
this has been one of the biggest
efforts, uh, I've seen our
legislature move forward and
support. Um, can you tell me,
I'm looking at the 8 FIR.
Um, current funding did I see
it?
FY 25 it says it's gonna, uh,
require 86 $86 million and then
moving forward, um, into the
258 and uh the 3rd year, the
total cost is gonna be 600 and
$3 million. How are you going to
leverage other funds because we
know the need is great.
Madam Chair
Madam Chair Representative, um,
I would just know the, the
funding for the offices in HB2
already. Um, so the, the actual
core funding, I think the
opportunity here, one of the
things that I would point out is
that um right now because we
don't have a state agency, there
are certain grants and other
resources that we're not able to
take advantage of, um, at the
national level and even in the
private sector, so that's one
particular area. I think there's
also a huge opportunity for
increased efficiency.
with our our current programs.
Like I said in the introduction,
we have a whole range of housing
programs happening across
different agencies, and as we
begin to align this work, I
think we'll get a lot more for
the what we're investing by
scaffolding these programs by
strategically aligning them,
eliminating duplication, um, and
generally advocating for new
ways to grow housing resources.
Madam Chair, um, um, as you've
been, um, expanding, developing
what this office would do. I, I
just want to
com m end you on that because I
had some concerns with it last
year and um.
Um, moving ahead, I, I, you,
you're covering everything, and
I think that that was really my
my, from my perspective, what
needed to be done too, and
you've really captured that and
and really done the work, Madam
Chair, I think that this, this
is a.
This is a a wonderful thing and,
and again I would address with
the DFA um.
The attachment of the office of
the housing to the DFA allows
for a lot of that um that
working and, and planning, but
it's as far as planning with our
local governments, is that also
the functionality of, of why
you're putting it at GFA, Madam
Chair.
Madam Chair Representative, yes,
the intent is there's a lot of
opportunity in being sort of
co-located with the local
government's division where most
of our housing funding flows
already where they're
established relationships with
local governments, and we can
work to to grow those
relationships, we can work to
hopefully be more efficient in
the way we move funding to local
governments. I think that's one
of the issues that we see an
opportunity in in how things
operate right now. We also bring
housing expertise to the process
of funding allocation, which
Right now, we don't necessarily
have technical housing expertise
within the local government
division. A good example would
be the community development
block grant program from HUD. We
on the state level don't use
that funding for housing and
could be part of the reason is
because it's technical and
tricky to use that federal
funding for housing, local
governments, they get it
directly use it for that, but
the state does not, so that's
immediately one area we could
look to expanding housing
investment statewide,
particularly for rural areas.
Thank you, Madam Chair, I
appreciate that. And one of the
things that um that um DFA is,
is um mentioned here in, in the
FIR is um
Perhaps needing a new tool.
Uh, to identify existing state
housing and homelessness
efforts, and that was one of the
things that the challenges that
I thought was, was at hand as
well, um, Madam Chair, um,
Representative, um, again, have
Because I am um serving on
appropriations too. I know that
moneys have been allocated and
moved around, and I understand
those things, but I do still
have some concerns, but I do
understand that there is, there
is working benefits between,
with the, the Office of Housing
will do along with um MFA.
And
Um, some of the things are, what
would you say, how is, how are
you bridging that relationship
or the, the differences between
those two agencies manager.
Madam Chair Representative, I
think, you know, first off,
we've been meeting with MFA
fairly regularly over the last
year to coordinate it, um, both
the structure of this office and
some of the larger things we're
working on, like data, um, we're
certainly doing our best to
advocate for funding um for all
areas of housing and across the
housing spectrum, we think
that's a really important um um
principle for the state that we,
that we need broad investment in
housing, especially right now.
Um, and we continue
to find ways to collaborate with
both the mortgage Finance
Authority, their staff and
board, and how we tackle these
things to make sure that what
we're doing is coordinated and
impactful um non-duplicative and
is really growing, um,
The ability for our state money
to have impact. I mean, I think
that's the best case scenarios
we were the things that we're
working on the systems level
make our state dollars go
further.
Thank you, um, Madam Chair, so
you would in, in that
coordination, if there's
planning in in uh in projects
that you feel would be better
served through the mortgage
finance authority you would
move, that's a collaborative
effort or decision that could be
um made that they would, they
would take.
On those projects, Madam Madam
Chair Representative, I, I would
really like to see the state not
be in the business of
project-based financing for um
housing. Um, we're not equipped
for it. It's um MFA has the
structures for underwriting the
speed to do it, uh, all those
things are in place. Um, I think
that's the best practice to see
that moved out of government,
because government often can't
move quick enough, um, and the
time that we add in projects
costs money and hurts
affordability. So
I think our model of having
project-based finance run
through the mortgage Finance
Authority is a best practice
model for states that. Thank you
so much. Um, and, uh, thank you.
I, I, I support your
legislation.
We have representative Barrego
and Representative Block. Thank
you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
Thank you, uh, representatives,
and your guest, um, I
Yes, the first thing that I
would have to say as you're
speaking my language a little
bit here, um, having been a
professional planner for a long
time, um, I do have a couple of
questions, um.
And I know that there's an
overall strategy for this
implementation of this bill and
some other bills, one of which,
by the way, Madam Chair and
representatives was shot down,
unfortunately, which was my
bill, which is studying the
permitting process, which was HB
335, actually not shot down
totally it was tabled, so I'm, I
guess there's still a little bit
of glimmer of hope there, um,
the other bill, um, that, and
And, and just for the record,
Madam Chair, and, and
representatives. Um, I do have
another bill that's HP 492,
which is an economic development
planning bill Bureau, um, and I,
you know, one of the things that
I long uh representatives and
Madam Chair have had issue with
the state is that we don't have
enough planning, and I know
there are people that don't see
that, but I do. I mean, I think
there's a true need for plan.
and, and creating linkages and
creating um, you know,
intergovernmental discussions on
issues, especially when we try
to put housing next to
transportation quarters and
making sure that their
environmentally um sound and uh
you know, just creating a carbon
footprint for people that they
don't have to travel to their
their workplaces very far. I
mean, these are the kinds of
things that we
really need to instill and I, I
really support this opportunity,
um, to create a government
office that deals specifically
with housing, um, and I've had a
lot of conversations with Izzy
about this, but one of the
things that I, and, and his
staff with which I see in the
audience, uh, one of the
questions that I have is.
How do, how one of the things
that I don't see in this bill,
and you might want to consider
adding something regarding
sustainability, because I don't
see that in the bill. I see some
us relating to immediate needs,
but I'm talking about the future
and the sustainability, so if,
if there's a way that I could
influence this bill a little
bit.
To talk about the sustainability
of housing for the long term,
and if there was just a little
raisin there, it wouldn't matter
who the governor is, um, we
would be setting these
mechanisms up in these
frameworks up to ensure Madam
Chair and, and representatives
that these, these goals are
going to be
Implemented no matter who the
governor is, no matter who the,
you know, I mean, who's in
leadership? So I would ask that
you guys look at that in here
somewhere is to include some of
those terms, um, and I'm sorry,
I'm a planner, so, you know, I
get, I get very passionate as my
fellow core heart the other day
talked about passion in her one
of her bills. I get very
passionate about these items and
how we create those carbon
footprints.
To
ensure that
This type of housing, whatever
housing levels and types are
being built on major quarters
where people can take those
transportation, you know, those
linkages are occurring, um, that
allow people to live, work and
play where they live, where,
where, where they are and not
create what I see on the west
side of Albuquerque in my
district, Madam Chair, um, and
I'm sorry I'm long winded right
now, but it's, I am passionate.
about this, um, you know, we
travel across the river.
On a regular basis to get to our
jobs and instead of bringing
those jobs to where we are, so
that
People are actually.
As I said, live, work and play
where you're at.
And you're not creating a bunch
of environmental hazards on the
way to work.
Um, so that's one of the things,
Madam Chair, that I have, um, is
how we create that, that long
term sustainability and reduce
our carbon footprint. Um, Madam
Chair, and since I have the
floor, I'm sorry, um, the other
thing that I want to talk about
is um.
And I'm sure Mark, you already
thought about this, but um,
Daniel housing types, like, you
know.
I'm sorry. I thought you were
looking at me when you said
that, Daniel Marcus, Marcus
right Daniel.
I'm sorry. That's right, Daniel
the other day I asked somebody
your name and they told me Mark
and I was like I thought his
name was Daniel. So here we go.
But anyway, housing types and
one of the things that I think
about is when I think about the
homeless people, you know,
there's so many different types
of people that are homeless.
Um, you know, getting people off
the street and into some kind
of.
Behavioral health or whatever
they need, and, and then
creating, and we did build some
of this housing on 2nd and
Lomas, that gives them the
opportunity to get off the
street, so there's one housing
type and then maybe eventually
helping them get into maybe an
apartment and then eventually
helping them buy a house, so
there's so many different
housing type levels, and I just
want you guys to, to think about
that, um, and you probably
already have, but
I raised that issue, and I've
had long conversations with Izzy
and his staff about that. So,
Sorry, I was long winded. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
in a block.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representative
experts or representatives,
experts. So,
Uh, first of all, I just, I
heard in the comments that New
Mexico currently is prohibited
from receiving funds.
Because we don't have an office
like this, can you tell me which
specific funds we're not able to
get, because I know we have
NMFA, we have
Uh, the local government
division of DFA we have uh New
Mexico Community Development
Council. So can you tell me a
little bit about that and what
issues will alleviate when it
comes to getting those funds
from those sources, Madam Chair,
representatives.
Madam Chair, uh, ranking member
block.
Yeah, I, I don't have a, a
specific case example I can
point out that um since our
establishment under executive
authority, we were able to apply
for youth homelessness systems
improvement grant from HUD, um,
that's something that wouldn't
have happened had our expertise
not been available to do that,
um, and then have the project
program management to implement
it. Um, I don't have an exact
list of those things, but those
are the types that's a good
example of the type of thing
that normally could.
just passed us by. I think
there's some other things we're
looking at, including, um, you
know, some land use and planning
grants and other things that
help the state support local
governments around that
regulatory frameworks, removing
obstacles to new housing.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative and expert Mr.
Daniel, sir.
It's you, you have two new
titles. So Madam Chair, I'm
wondering because I, I just, the
way I look at
Making legislation is, I want to
make sure that government runs
more efficiently and we get the
best bang for our buck when it
comes to tax dollars, and Madam
Chap representative, I'm just
wondering when it comes to this,
I've seen some other states
programs.
They have had some hiccups. I
have seen in California there if
the Department of Housing and
Community Development.
And there's been a lot of money
that has not really been
accounted for, and there has
been some missed opportunities,
so I just want to make sure when
we're creating this department.
For this office, Madam Chair,
that we have some checks and
balances as to where that money
is going and
And how we have a account for
every $1 that we spend. So I to
representative experts, I'm
wondering if you would be able
to maybe give me some more
information about how New
Mexico's is different and how we
will have total accountability
of these dollars.
Madam Chair Representative, I'm
Daniel can answer this question
a lot more effectively than I
can, but I believe there is a
reporting um system in process
that annually reports to LFC.
At least one, at least annually.
That
And Madam Chair Representative,
I would add, um,
The, the particular structure
you're referring to in
California is very different.
Um, they flow a lot of funding
through their housing office.
That's not really the model that
we're using and in many ways, I
sort of see us as sort of an
anti-bureaucratic agency where
we're actually trying to create
more efficiency with how the
state works and how its money is
being used, um, to us, we're
looking at having a really small
team that's leveraging the
existing resources within state
government to accomplish what
we're trying to do, and we have
plenty of resources throughout.
Government doing things, there's
homelessness programs in CYFD.
There's, you know, uh, there's
foster care stipends that cover
housing. We're doing all these
housing things across the
government right now, but
they're not necessarily aligned
or leveraged, and there's a lot
of duplication and we think
there's an opportunity to align
the more strategic with that
funding and get more from what
we're investing. I think
homelessness is another example
where that's happening, right?
We're spending a lot of money on
homelessness, and we're not
seeing the needle move, partly
because there's not a bigger
strategic framework.
Both at the state and the local
level and to coordinate. Madam
Chair and Representative, so
then I, I agree. I think it's
good that we, we won't be
duplicating efforts, and I see
that that's in in the
legislation in places.
But Madam Chair Representative,
I'm wondering, would this office
have the authority to tell CYFD
you must close down your
programs, put them under our
hospices and ensure that we as a
central hub are the ones
responsible for the housing when
it comes to this. Does this have
the authority to do that, Madam
Chair, Representative.
Madam Chair ranking member, um,
no, uh, there is no, um,
statutory authority to supersede
the authorities granted to other
agencies, but as an executive
office, we do report directly to
the governor who is the chief
executive, um, and it is our
hope that in coordinating
closely with cabinet secretaries
and program level staff that we
can work collaboratively to make
all these things work better.
Um, I don't think we need, um,
statutory authority and, and
don't seek.
that.
Madam Chair and Representative,
and actually that, that was one
of the big concerns I had with
the legislation, because when it
comes to these long term
programs that we have and all
these moving parts when it comes
to housing.
We want as much stability as
possible. And so Madam Chair
Representative, when I look at
some of our agencies in
government, especially in the
executive branch, we've had
multiple secretaries. We've had
people in and out of offices and
Madam Chair Representative, I, I
would be more comfortable if
this was
Maybe a an executive director
and maybe a few people
overseeing this office in
something that was not
necessarily administratively
attached to the governor's
office because we would have a
lot more stability because these
people were appointed by the
legislature, for example, and in
concert with the governor, then
there would be a lot more
long-term frameworks, and that's
kind of one thing that I saw is
potentially a red flag when it
came to just these, these big
projects, maybe million dollar
projects, we want to make sure
that.
There's the same people in that
office to help administer those
funds from now to 5 years from
now, 2 years from now, whatever
it is, Madam Chair
representative. So I don't know
if you have some comments on
that.
Sure.
Madam Chair ranking member, um,
I would say, uh, we are too
concerned with the long term. I
mean, I would offer that we are
doing this work right now and
we'll do it for the next 2 years
and if this bill doesn't pass
it, this work will sunset with
the current administration and
so the our ultimate goal is
creating a long term strategic
approach. Um, I think a way to
think about is it we're always
striking a balance. I think it's
incredibly important to have the
executive office because we need
the ear of the governor and we
need housing at the table.
As a priority issue for the
governor and I think that's an
important piece that would carry
through. I think we could look
at administrative structures
like a strong deputy director,
right, who would be
non-appointed, all the other
staff would be um
You know, long term staff, and
so having, you know, durable
staff, um, even if the, the
ultimate director is appointed
by the governor having that
continuity and staff would help.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative, and I, and I
understand that and I
I think I, the problem that I
have at least with with this
current administration's way
that they do things is they
don't get a bill passed.
And then they say, oh well, then
we'll just buy executive order,
create a new office and then
come back and then guilt you
guys, in my opinion, and
creating this new office because
we've already done it. And so
Madam Chair representative when
it comes to actually
administering these funds, I
want to make sure that it's long
term, right? I want to make sure
that we have the
The actual frameworks, Madam
Chair Representative, and so I
guess that's, that's one thing
that I'm kind of
Not necessarily startled by, but
something that I want to make
sure that if we are going to
have these funds, we're getting
them from federal sources and
even nonprofit sources that
they're most effectively used.
And so,
When we don't really have any
administrative authority to tell
other agencies, please let's
take your programs, put them
under our hospices, and then we
also only are accountable to one
person, the governor.
I find that to be
If we have a new governor in 2
years, I'd be just horrified to
see all the work that we put
into this program now.
Go away, potentially with a new
governor or whatever it is. So
I, I see the point of the
legislation, but I still, I'm
scared about some of those.
There was a technical details.
So, I'll continue to listen to
the the debate, but I don't know
if you have any other comments
regarding that, Madam Chair and
representative.
Madam Chair, ranking member, I
would offer that, um,
No, I think this is a first
step, and it's our hope in being
administratively attached to DFA
that that can serve maybe as an
incubator as it has for other
offices or other commissions in
the past and that this may
evolve as we uncover what the
actual core needs are and where
the most important things are
and we have, um, you know, 22
more, at least 1 more
legislative session under this
governor to amend or uh revisit
this, um, but I would offer that
I think this is a really big
first.
up and if we don't, uh, move
forward with this legislation.
Um, we were guaranteed that
these efforts will sunset um in
a couple of years. So that's
what I would offer and I
appreciate your questions.
Mature.
OK, I'm gonna call on
Representative Luhan for a 2nd
time, and then I have
represented a Berego.
Please be quick. We have 5 more
bills. Thank you.
Madam Chair, I believe I was on
the list
for the first time. OK. Madam
Chair. I will call on
representative Zamora, and then
I'll go back.
Thank, thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh
You do a really good job, you
just missed me this one time
and, and I just, you hurt, you
hurt my feelings.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Uh
Madam Chair and, and
representatives and, and expert
witness Daniel.
Uh
How much money
is an HB 2 for this, for this
new uh
Office
That we're creating.
Madam Chair Representative
Zamora, it looks like 86.2
million was appropriated in HB 2
for this program.
86.2 million.
Yes, sorry, I couldn't get my
mic on Madam and Representative,
do you know where that 86.2
million came from? Mem
representative as it is in the
budget, I believe it came from
the general fund.
So, so it didn't come off any
other side came directly from
the general fund.
And Daniel King clarify if you
have Madam Chair and uh.
Daniels, is that correct?
Madam Chair Representative, um,
the actual budget item for this
office, I think you're referring
to the numbers in the fiscal
impact report, but um the actual
budget for the office is $2
million.
Um, that's the cost of the
office. The additional money
refers to potential um other
sources of funding. There are um
right now in the best we can
track, there's about $130
million in housing money in HB
2, that is not dedicated to our
office, that is dedicated to DFA
and we would certainly work with
them to make sure that money is
used efficiently, effectively
and expeditiously, um, but that
is not money.
specifically appropriate to our
office, our office does not
exist statutorily, so you can't
have money appropriated to it
right now. So,
Madam Chair and, and Daniel. So,
so 2 million is to create the
office. Am I correct? And then,
and then, uh,
We, we talked about a figure of
86.2 million in 100, a figure of
130 million.
So, so if this office is
created.
Is there 82 million for this.
Office to to manage or is there
130 million for it to manage,
Madam Chair Daniel.
Madam Chair Representative, um,
the, the amount of housing
funding, I mean, this is, this
is essentially making an
assumption that we would be
managing all the housing funds
in the state in that 130 million
there are specific
appropriations to local
governments that we would not
have, you know, don't have
control over there's
appropriations of specific
projects, um, we would provide
oversight and technical
assistance in the distribution
of that money to make sure that
projects are
Um, certainly, uh, specific
projects or program designs are
effective, that the application
processes that the local
government division uses to
distribute that money are well
designed and efficient, um, but
we do not have um sort of sole
discretion over those funds, if
that makes sense. Um, I would
say that probably key places
where we would be involved,
there's about $20 million in
funding for that would be for
the balance of state to address
homelessness. That is an area
where we would be really
engaged.
engaged around distributing that
money and designing uh the
structures for doing that and
how we work with local
governments to get that money to
the ground, but I just want to
be clear, we are not in control
of these um investments that the
the House side of the
legislature has proposed in HB 2
has passed.
And, and Madam Chair and
And representatives in Daniel,
uh,
You know, what, what I get
nervous about and causes me some
heartburn.
And uh
Me, me and you sat and talked
about it the other day.
I
is the more
The government gets into
housing.
I believe
The more the housing will go up.
If, if we see, if we see $130
million going into the programs.
How do we manage that?
In a way that we don't make the
house that costing the cost of
housing go up.
Madam Chair and Daniel, would
you care to, to make some kind
of statement to that.
Madam Chair Representative, this
is um certainly a really
important uh perspective to
offer. Um,
I would say
Our core focus is on reducing
the cost of housing and building
new housing, which helps ease
housing prices. Um, and, and
then, and one of the things that
we can think about, yes, there
are potentials for when we add a
lot of money into the demand
side of housing when we don't
have housing, that can increase
costs, right? Because you're
increasing the capital available
to absorb a limited supply of
housing. We're trying to work on
the other end of this. I'd say
particularly in reference to
The, the significant amount of
funding the state is considering
investing in homelessness. We
have a, an unprecedented
homelessness crisis, increased
87% since 2017. It's 47% higher
than the national average for
unsheltered homelessness. We are
in a critical situation. Um, I
think it's incumbent on us,
especially when we're talking
about that level of funds that
we be strategic and one of the
big ways that we want to make
sure this happens is by
introducing really good data
practices around this.
Um, we want to be outcomes
focused. We do a lot of, uh,
sort of
Intuitional uh approaches around
housing and homelessness, and I
think we want to move to
data-based approaches that
really focus on what are the
numbers, what are these programs
accomplishing and be able to
come back in the legislature and
show what these investments have
achieved on the ground in terms
of actual numbers and be able to
advise legislators to say, maybe
this program didn't put up
numbers, and we should not do
that again, or this is a really
promising program that did
really well. And so moving to a
more uh outcome.
s - ba s ed approach to how we
do funding for housing.
And, and, and Madam Chair, and
Daniel, but
And I, and I, uh, it almost
seems like I go just around in
circles with this.
But, but what
What I look at is.
How much of this?
130 million.
It's gonna be 24s and boots on
the ground.
Mm
And then, and then how much of
the 20 million?
To study homelessness and try to
make that better. How much of
that is gonna be 2 by 4s and
boots on the ground.
As long as we're creating all
these funds and all these
departments.
And everything
Are we just, are we just masking
the problem that we have that we
didn't make any progress.
What, what, now we're gonna put
another, another.
Office together.
To study what the other offices
are doing. And, and that's my
frustration in all this.
It's not, it's not that that the
state doesn't have the money.
To put into, into housing.
But I'd like to see it spent on
2x4s and land and, and building
homes.
And, and then
Even when we do that.
And we don't let this housing
just be market driven.
By the way, this, this country
was created on market-driven.
And, and if we as a government.
But these kind of money into it,
we actually make the prices go
up, I believe.
If, if it was all market driven.
And people couldn't afford to
buy houses.
And people quit buying houses.
The contractors and the lumber
people, that produced the 2 by
4s and, and produce the nails
and produce the shingles and all
that would have to lower their
prices somehow.
If
If they wanted to stay.
In business and and keep
surviving. So, so then you see
the markets go up and down and
the prices of the 24.
We've been seeing
Lumber prices go up and up and
up, and I know there's several
factors in it.
I know, and, and, and you see it
at the federal level.
about what the new
administration is doing and, and
how negotiations are taking
place between different
countries. We know we import a
lot of our lumber from Canada.
We know there's some issues
there.
But, but what scares me
And, and I'm gonna support this
bill.
But I have concerns about how we
govern.
And how we do these things.
And where these monies go.
I'd like to see
I'd like to see this $86 million
going to lumber and shingles
and, and concrete.
But yet we're creating another
office.
To help the rest of the other
officers and departments.
To do a better job.
And, and I have concerns with
that. It just
And I want that on the record. I
want, I want people to know.
What we're doing here in Santa
Fe, how much money we're
spending.
And where is that money going?
Can we track that money to a 2
by 4 at the end of the day, and,
and
After we run all these programs.
What did we accomplish?
With all this money.
And to me, that's, that's what
we need to be looking at it as
legislators is.
And, and, and then also realized
that when when government starts
getting in the housing business.
And, and, and assisting.
rent
Past and everything else, it
just makes it go up.
And we actually wind up hurting
the people and, and Madam Chair
and
And uh Daniel and
Representatives.
Me and Daniel sat down the other
day and talked also about
Some of the empty housing that
the state has.
In its possession that's not
being filled.
Because
There's some people out on the
streets.
Homeless people that
Don't understand and don't.
Have
The ways to to
qualify for the housing as far
as filling out the paperwork,
getting it all done, and having
some kind of stability and what
they've done. I had a cousin.
that educated me real well.
That lived on the streets.
And this cousin, Madam Chair.
And representatives and members
of this committee and, and
audience.
Didn't have the knowledge and
the capacity.
And it wasn't because he wasn't
smart, he just never educated
himself in this part of the, of
the system.
But he was living on the streets
and my wife.
Bless her soul took him.
Basically by the hand.
And went through all the
paperwork and all the fight that
she had to go through.
And finally got him in an
apartment.
And he was so proud and happy to
be in that apartment.
After living on the streets.
Pretty much.
He was so happy and he thanked
my wife time and time again for
doing it.
But it took a lot of her time.
An effort and investigating the
system.
To get him in there and that
apartment was empty and open for
him, and there's a lot of other
housing that, that stayed in New
Mexico has.
That's empty and open, and we're
not filling those slumps, Madam
Chair and Daniel, would you
agree with, with, with that.
Madam Chair Representative and
uh let me say I appreciate you
sharing your personal story and,
and you're spending time with me
the other day to talk about
this. And I know um Debbie
worked really hard to help your
cousin and that's the kind of
work that we're talking about
funding with this $130 million
and the work I want to do within
the state is figuring out how to
lower those barriers for a
homeless person to move into a
house takes about 8 agencies,
starting with DOH Vital Records
moving to MVD moving to uh the
MCOs and
Medicare benefits and um SNAP
benefits and all these different
steps. And right now, we're
expecting some of the most
vulnerable people in our
community, oftentimes with
behavioral health impediments
and other issues, substance
abuse issues to navigate those,
right? Or someone on the ground
to do that work. So some of what
we're proposing to do uh as
concepts with some of the money
that's been proposed, uh, are
things like navigation centers
where we can get people settled
into, even if it's a short term
housing situations start.
getting them case management,
start getting the medication,
start getting them services and
start pipelining them into
longer term housing, and I would
just also offer to touch on your
earlier comment. We are coming
at this from 100% market based
approach. I think that's
something that we've ignored as
a state, um, part of our
problems we just don't have
enough housing, and the group of
people that need assistance when
you don't know, have enough
housing grows and grows and
grows till we're talking about
helping nurses who make 100,000
dollars a year to buy houses.
That's not an affordable housing
problem. That's a housing supply
problem. And if we're
successful, we'll be shrinking
the group of people that need
assistance down to that very,
very core group of people who
like your cousin who really do
need financial assistance to be
uh stable, right? And so that's
our goal is to really recognize
the role of market, recognize
that I do, I mean, even market
rate housing, governments really
involved in that, right? Already
from the city.
you know, county, state, federal
level, governments involved in
housing, and then the private
sector just has to do it for us,
right? We need to blend this and
make that collaboration work
better for everyone.
And, and Madam Chair, and
Daniel, and that's, that's why
I'm telling you, I'm supporting
the bill.
And, and, and I like it.
But, but I also know that what
we're doing.
As it's, it's
It's
Repercussions maybe or, or
whatever, however you want to
say it, maybe put uh
Newton's law of motion for
every, everything you move
there's an opposite an equal
reaction or I don't remember the
exact words to it, but, but we
used to we used to talk about
that in the private sector, on,
on the job that I worked on
before is if we do this, how is
this gonna affect it here?
And, and I think your biggest
challenge, and I'd like to see
how it goes forward.
Is getting those homeless people
into that office. Just like my
cousin didn't go into any of the
offices that could have helped
him.
How are you gonna get those
homeless people into that
office.
Even if we open 10 offices or
100 offices.
And, and how are we going to get
him in there to
To, to
Be able to grab a hold of their
hand and guide them through the
system and put them in a place.
And, and
And then I also wonder, Madam
Chair, and, and, and
representatives and Daniel, how
we're gonna deal with the
anti-donation clause when we're
going with money directly to
private citizens.
On the street and, and, and
that's a whole different thing
we could sit here and debate all
day, but, but somehow we have to
get past that.
And get those monies to directly
to those private citizens that
need the help.
Madam, Madam Chair.
And if, if you care to respond
on that a little bit, but
But we do have some strict,
strict guidelines in the state.
That, that, uh,
I think, I think somehow we need
to figure out and, and work on
Madam Chair, that concludes my
questions.
Thank you, we'll move on to
representative Lujan for a
second time quickly, please.
Thank you, ma'am. I really
appreciate the time that this
takes for this series of a a
topic, um, and I believe that
representative Zamota bring out
some really important um topics.
I just would like to say the
anti-donation clause, that's why
MFA exists, um, but we also have
RFPs and other processes through
our state that allow for this
office to function well. My
question really quickly, uh, a
couple of questions. How many FT
Madam Chair, with this office
hold with the $2 million that's
been appropriated so far.
Madame Chair Representative, we
currently contemplate 6 to 7 FD.
And we currently have 4 staff.
Man that's a small office, we
need to, uh,
It needs to grow a bit, um,
Madam Chair, and then I'd just
like to clear up a couple of
things with $1030 million that's
in the budget. I knew that there
was
Uh, $50 million that was a
non-recurring funding that was
appropriate to MFA, but now it's
being directed to DFA and my
question, uh, that I want to get
the correct with these
appropriations going to this to
DFA.
Uh, for housing initiative, um.
Uh, projects, I don't want to
call them projects, but for
efforts, I guess.
Um
If what is your capacity because
you have a small FT uh how, what
is your capacity to get these
money spent, Adam you.
Madam Chair Representative, um,
I'm not sure what specifically
you're talking about about the
money being moved from uh MFA to
DFA, but they're the, the
largest allocation for uh
addressing homelessness, um,
actually is refers only to
transitional housing and
behavioral services and others
and and homelessness prevention.
It is not specific housing
development funds, which would
be more typical. Our advocacy
would be to also provide funding
to MFA's Housing Trust Fund in
addition to those funds to be
able to make sure that we're
addressing the entire.
continuum of housing issues, not
just homelessness. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you. I thank
you for that, for that answer.
So just to clarify that with
these, these additional all this
funding that we're trying to
Um, move forward that if um
That those fundings can be moved
across to MFA if needed, Madam
Chair.
Madam Chair Representative, um,
absolutely, and there's certain
instances where we're talking
about projects-based finance
that MFA is the appropriate
place to have those funds. So if
it's development related, yes,
that's often the best place to
be there.
Thank you.
Thank you. I have a, a
representative Barrago Barrango.
Thank you, madam. At least you
didn't call me Delgado like uh
one of our other reps, um, thank
you, Madam Chair, uh, and
representatives, I'd like to
move that House Bill 448. Do you
now pass?
You'll have a motion for due
pass by Representative Brego and
the second by Madam Vice Chair,
please call roll.
Representative Nonin
Representative? No, sir.
Resent Borego.
Yeah.
Representative Lujan
represented Mejia. No.
Madam Vice um uh Madam floor
leader, Representative Zamora,
yes.
Madam Vice Chair.
Madam Chair,
yes.
62, you have a due pass.
You representative and Daniel,
you have a you pass?
A committee members, I'd like to
move a Senate Bill 109 as
amended. Next.
Uh, I see our senator in the
room, so, and I believe that's
ourselves and uh welcome Senator
Souls.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I
appreciate you allowing me to go
a little bit out of order. I
very much appreciate that. Um,
Senate Bill 109 is from the PRC.
We've had the PRC functioning
for 2 or 3 years now, and as we
went back through, there's a
number of places where what's in
statute does not match with the
new structure of the PRC for the
most part, this bill sent at 109
is fixing and cleaning up that
language. Uh, it clarifies.
What the chief of staff does,
which is Choya Cordry, who is
here with me, and what are the
functions of the commissioners
and making sure that the
language that we have in the
bill matches what is in fact
actually happening in practice,
um.
And so there's a number of
things where it, it adds and
clarifies chief of staff as
opposed to the commission,
because they are very different
functions as to what they do. On
page 13, there's a fairly large
addition, um, for matters
involving public businesses
using the subject public
business means matters within
the commission's constitutional
statutory regulations. Again,
most of it is just very
technical cleanup type of
language. I do have to experts,
uh, the chair of the
commission is here with me as is
the chief of staff and if each
of them can say just a few words
about what this bill does and
doesn't do, and then we'd be
open for questions.
Thank you. Please go ahead.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
committee. Uh, my name is Pat
O'Connell. I am currently the
chair of the New Mexico Public
Regulation Commission. Uh, thank
you for hearing this bill. Uh,
the senator did a great job of
describing the nuts and bolts of
of what it is. It's a
modernization, it's clarity,
it's alignment, uh, we're 2
years into a project of uh
reinforcing the professionalism
of the agency and this bill will
be very helpful in accomplishing
that. So again,
Thank you and looking forward to
the conversation this morning.
And Madam Chair, the chief of
staff said she has nothing more
to add at this point. It's here
for if there are technical
questions and clarification. So
with that, we're open for
questions.
Thank you. We'll go to the
audience. Do we have any
comments in support of the bill.
Any opposition?
Let's go online.
Oh, I do. Oh,
Shera, Mr. Ron Horse, I didn't
see your hand. Thank you.
OK. All right, thanks. Uh, good
morning, uh, Madam Chair and
members of the committee sharer
on horse with P&M. We thank the
sponsor for his work on this
bill. SB 109 supports the
important work of the public
regulation commission. It is
forward-looking and helps
optimize operations at the PRC
SB 109 supports PRC's
mission-driven goals to carry
through with its work to serve
New Mexico and its constituents
and customers for these reasons,
ENM supports SP 109.
You should.
Little brother, I didn't mean to
forget you. Any other comments
in the audience.
OK,
let's go online for supporting
comments. OK, make comment and
support. You have Michael
D'Antonio.
Michael, can you hear us?
Yes, thank you, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, Mike
D'Antonio with Xcel Energy. We
are one of the investor owned
utilities that is regulated by
the
Uh, PRC, uh, we stand in full
support of the bill. We
know that this is cleanup
language and it'll just help
streamline the operation. I
wanted to point out that the
chair of the commission is
there. He's missing the global
basketball game, which is kind
of started here in about 10
minutes, which I'm going to run
in 10, so there's dedication for
you from the from the chair of
the commission. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you so much, Mike.
Anyone else hoping to make any
comments in opposition.
Hey, committee members,
representatives Zamora and then
Vice Chair Little.
A chair I move to pass.
Do we have a motion for you pass
a second. Do we have any
opposition?
Seeing none, you have a due.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, and
committee. Very much appreciated
and have a great day. Yes, thank
you as well. OK.
Let's move back to housing,
house bill 453.
Madam Chair
Madam chair,
I just, I just want to say I'm
here for um, Senate Bill 135
when we come, when it comes up.
When it comes up.
Go ahead and take a
3 minute break 3, yeah.
Righty, let's continue.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, so we are
going from talking about
very large projects and very big
numbers to address the housing
crisis to a much more
Focused project. So House Bill
453.
Creates the creditworthiness
assistance program.
Which is a program that really
supports landlords who want to
rent to potential tenants who
for every other reason except
for a negative credit score,
qualify for an apartment. They
are gainfully employed, they are
steadily employed. They just
have a bad credit score that
bars them from renting a
particular apartment or house. I
want this program would do.
would be allowed that tenant to
rent that apartment or house.
And then if that first in that
first year of their lease, if
they default on that lease, this
fund would cover the property
manager for the remainder of
that first year's lease. And I
have an expert wit witness to my
friend Kathy McGill is also here
with me today and I'll let her
introduce herself.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, Catherine McGill, I'm
with the New Mexico Black
Leadership Council, and we are a
community benefit organization
located in the heart of the
international district, uh,
where more than 60% of the
individuals who are renters are
cost burden for the the cost of
renting. What we see is a lot of
people being displaced, trying
to rent into the market who may
have some credit challenges, and
so
this particular bill removes the
creditworthiness from the
discussion about renting to
people who have prioritized
paying their rent, um, and as
the representative said, um,
they would qualify, but this is
one of the requirements in an
application that might eliminate
them, and so this is a policy
alternative, and it is not a
renal assist program, and I
think it's important to talk
about what it is not, um, it's a
guard rail for landlords to
be able to rent to people who've
had credit challenges, and it's
also a way to provide access to
renters who need to be housed.
Before we go to public comment,
Madam Chair, I would just like
to point out that we brought
this exact version of the bill,
um, last year. It was heard in
um health and it passed with
near unanimous support. I
believe there was one chair. And
with that we stand for
questions.
Hey, let's go to the audience.
Do we have any comments in
support of the bill?
OK, one minute. Madam Chair,
members of the committee, uh
Roger Valdez, Center for Housing
Economics. This is probably the
most important housing
legislation that the legislature
will consider this year. Um,
this
Um, take seriously the notion
that renting, housing is a risky
business.
And it also invests in people
who are struggling to improve
their
Their situation and working
hard, making a living, but have
some Mars on their credit, and
it invests in those people and
in the people that want to rent
housing to them.
And I, I hope that it will get a
unanimous support. It is better
than tenant landlord law, which
actually doesn't really work
that well, and it actually will
help real people that are
struggling in the economy to
make ends meet and we'll help
them move to the next level of
recovery and success in finding
housing. Thank you.
Thank you. Good afternoon. Um,
Madam Chairwoman and members of
the committee. My name is Robin
Powell. I'm the senior policy um
director for the um mortgage
Finance Authority or Housing New
Mexico, um, we would be um
administering this bill um
through our office if it does um
get past. What I can tell you um
is that we administer similar
programs that support landlords,
um, and they do in fact bring
new rental, uh, units to the
market, and they also
provide landlords um with
resources, um, that also keep
rental units on the market, um,
and so we know that programs
like this do work. So for that
reason and um for the other data
we support this legislation.
Thank you.
If you will
with the audience I.
I don't think we have any
opposing comments.
Let's go online.
We supporting comments and Lynn,
can you hear us?
I can't. Can you hear me? Sure.
You have one minute.
Great, thank you. Good
afternoon, Chairwoman and
committee members. My name is
Annelyn Hall, and I am the CEO
of Prosperity Works. I'm here
today to ask your support of HB
453. New Mexico is facing a
housing crisis and we have many
New Mexicans that are unhoused
or precariously housed. This
bill is an important step that
supports households who have
funds to pay for housing, but
have lower credit scores. This
program would give landlords the
ability to say yes to potential
tenants knowing that if they are
unable to pay their rent, that
the housing
worthiness Assistance program
would be able to help.
As a state, we need multiple
solutions to the housing crisis.
This is one piece of the puzzle
to affordable housing for the
Mexicans. I urge your support of
this bill and thank the sponsor
for all her work on this bill.
Thank you.
Thank you so much, Anne.
Anyone else hoping to speak on
this bill, please raise your
hand.
You
I have vice chair little and
then represented a block and
then representative Lujan. Madam
Chair, I'd like to move a do
pass. I'll roll on those motion
that motion represented a
block.dam, and thank you,
Representative. I'll be, I'll be
quick with my questions. Uh, so,
first question, did we do any
kind of studies to see how this
would work.
And see if it did work, uh, kind
of like a pilot program or
something. And then also what
metrics are we gonna be looking
at to make sure that this is
indeed working.
Madam Chair Representative, um,
I will take the first half of
this question. Cathy can follow
up. So in terms of studies, we
have modeled this after a
program that is working very
effectively already in Oregon.
We adjusted some of the numbers
to make it fit, um, the New
Mexico population is
considerably smaller in our
entire state is a population of
Portland, so, um, we didn't have
to fund it quite as heavily as
the Portland program.
But it has been working in
Oregon successfully for I
believe 1515 years. I don't want
to entirely speculate on that
number, but Kathy, if you'd like
to follow.
Madam Chair, and
Uh, ranking member block. There
is a program in Oregon that we
used uh for empirical data to
find out whether or not this is
something that we could
customize for New Mexico, and
it's called a rent guarantee
program, essentially it's a
co-signer, uh, program that's
that is a revolving fund, um,
and it is working and, and we
have a handout that has a
dashboard from the Oregon
program and also talks about the
rent guarantee program in Oregon
that is working.
We also know that there are
private sector, um operations
that do the same thing as this
program and also, you know, just
family members who provided
co-signers uh to be able to take
creditorthiness off the table
for other family members. So
what this does is offer those
individuals who don't have those
supports, the opportunity to
have a rental, you know, to, to
be able to have a, a guarantor
for their rent.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative and, and I
understand that and
I, I'd have to look more into
what Oregon is doing and I, I'm
sure you have all those numbers
somewhere, but Madam Chair
Representative, uh, so,
I understand the plight of these
people. I totally get it. When I
was out of college, my credit
score was like.
Horrible. It was like a 5030 or
something.
And it was terrible, and so I
only could really get rent from
sketchy people on Craigslist and
stuff.
Madam Chirps, I do get the point
of this, but Madam Chair
Representative, I do want to
make sure that
I, I have to, I've had some
concerns from my district of
landlords who say, well, we're
scared that this could.
Although it's, it's a good idea,
it could incentivize people to
be more careless when it comes
to the properties because there
is kind of a guarantee, kind of
a buffer, and I'm just wondering
if that has been a problem in
Oregon, and do we first see that
as a problem in New Mexico,
maybe if, if, uh, since there is
guaranteed, OK, we, we could fix
whatever the problems are with
this, I think it's 5000.
Then maybe people could be a
little more careless when it
comes to rent. And so I don't
know if that's something we've
addressed in this.
Yeah, Madam Chair
representative, that is not a
huge concern, um, because as you
know, many, I mean, we do have
private property owners in New
Mexico, but for the most part.
These are companies that are
still looking out for their
bottom line, their businesses,
how they make their money and
they want to make sure that
they're manage like that their
properties are properly managed.
So
Yeah, that's not, that's not a
major concern with this.
I
Um, to representative Zamora.
Um
was talking about a personal,
um,
Example of what happened with
the cats and trying to get into
housing and, and I'll use a
personal one as well. My mother
was a teacher, and there was
always more month than money, uh
but she prioritize paying um the
mortgage, the rent, uh, for us
as children to have stable
housing and so we know that that
there are individuals in the
community who are looking for
housing stability. So this is
really housing stability
program, where we are vetting
people before we put them.
Uh, on the program. So unlikely
um that we will have a huge
default rate, which they have
not had or experienced in
Oregon.
I guess that's too loud.
I don't really need it, but so
the um, you know, so people are
vetted before they are qualified
to be a part of the program and
um it's, it's
We're not gonna say that that it
won't happen, but we know that
it will be the exception rather
than the rule. The people who
are on this program will default
primarily people that are single
heads of households,
grandmothers raising
grandchildren, uh, who have had
challenges uh with credit scores
for a lot of life reasons and,
you know, people who um have
those credit challenges deserve
to have stable housing and
that's what this is about.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative, and, and I thank
you for that. And so today, I
probably, I'm probably gonna be
a no on this, because I just, I
want to look at all the things
in Oregon that I, I didn't know
specifically which one we were
targeting or after this, but I
do think that when it comes to
education, I did like that
aspect of the bill, that there
needs to be some kind of
literacy, financial literacy
component because for me, it
took a lot of looking for my own
credit score to figure out how
to raise it to above 800 now,
cause you have to get more
credit, you have to
build it, always be on time. I
was always on time, but
apparently, I don't know. I was
young or something. And there's
so many factors that go into a
credit score. And I do feel like
it can be a barrier for people
because a lot of people don't
learn that in school. They don't
know what to do when it comes to
credit, and it's weird because
the credit market, they hit you.
A lot of the time if you pay off
a card.
Like when you pay off a card,
your credit score goes down 30
points.
close an account, so you really
have to open a bunch of accounts
at the same time have as much
credit utilization capacity. So
I do think it's something that
needs to be looked at because in
my opinion, it's not very fair
that
You're gonna get penalized for
paying off a bill or something,
but I do like the idea of the
bill. I'm probably just gonna be
a no because I need to look at
that data and you know me, I I
love data, but thank you both
for the information and I will
certainly be looking into this
before it hits the floor, which
I hope it does.
Thank you.
Presentative Zamora.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Representative for bringing
this bill forward.
So, so there's $250,000 involved
in this bill, right?
And is that already funded uh in
HB2 or?
Yes, Madam Chair Representative,
when I mentioned last year that
this is essentially something
that we've, we already ran it
last year and the only reason
that it failed was because it
was not in the budget and that
money has made it to HB 2 this
year.
Madam Chapentative, what happens
when that money runs out?
Well, that is why the fund is
recurring, um, it is not a
traditional recurring fund in
the sense that we don't
anticipate this money will run
out. When we're talking about
these renders is uh Miss McGill
mentioned earlier, Madam Chair
Representative, these tenants
are previously vetted. There's
then also a framework in here
for MFA to administer.
A um, Reddit.
Building education system, uh,
be that a seminar class. We
leave that to MFA, but it is
outlined in the bill. So, and as
I mentioned before, these
tenants having been previously
vetted.
A landlord is not required to
rent to them, but they are
gainfully employed. They want to
pay their rent, that credit
score is their only hurdle. So
we don't anticipate that we will
have to tap into this fund much
at all, which is why the initial
ask is so low.
Madam Chair,
Representative
What happens if the money runs
out.
Does it just stop and nobody get
then, then the, the contracts
don't get paid out.
If, if, if things were to go
South
And this money was to be
expended.
And you have contracts signed
with
Less lessors.
Less.
Lassie
people that that signed
contracts with you and the money
runs out.
You're in trouble.
Madam Chair, representative, Am
I correct?
We, um, based the amount of this
pilot project for the revolving
fund um to cover up to 1000
tenants, and that would be
monitored by MFA, so, you know,
we would not enter into more uh
guarantees and we had money to
pay for it in the event of a
default. However, as we stated,
Patrick Henry said, I know of no
other way to judge the future
but by the past, and we have
looked at what's happened in
other states, Oregon
specifically, and they have not.
had a default rate that would uh
allow the fund, revolving fund
to be depleted.
And, and Madam Chair, an expert
witness, so
How much money was put into the
account or into the fund.
In Oregon, if, if we're gonna
use Oregon as a
As an example, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, uh, representative,
don't have that exact number.
It's at least 5 times the amount
of what we're asking for in our
revolving fund. I can get you an
exact number.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair and thank you presenters.
That's all the questions I have.
Representative Lujan, thank you,
Madam Chair. um, just, just to
clarify through the bill itself,
it is the, the funding will come
out of the affordable.
Uh,
housing,
Madam chair, yeah, so that and
so the reason why you only have
$250,000 in the FIR and that's
just the start, the recurring uh
funding to provide staffing for
for the um for this program. Is
that correct, Madam Chair?
Madam Chair Representative, so
the staffing will be provided
essentially through MFA. The
staffing already exists. The
money for the fund is to cover
any defaulted leases.
Which we don't expect there'll
be there.
OK, Madam Chair, thank you for
that.
OK.
All right, well, then I was, I
was, um, I needed that
clarification as well as as
Representative Zamoa was asking
some of those questions, so that
is for the default funding,
which is a very minimal amount,
but that would be a recurring
funding of 250 a year out of the
budget. Ma, Madam Chair
Representative, when I said it's
not a traditional recurring
fund, we don't anticipate that
we will all, so it's not a
situation Madam Chair
representative where the fund
depletes all the way and then we
top it up, it would be more like
we come back.
2 or 3 years, see how much of it
has been spent and see if we
need to top up back to the 250.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, so
being non-appropriations again a
recurring funding means you're
gonna get this year after year.
So, um.
Just on that basis, I, I would.
Maybe later have some more
clarification on that, Madam
Chair. Um,
And as I'm looking through the
bill as well, few pages, um, on
page 3 when we have, uh,
subsection I of the listing of
all the infrastructure
improvements, that's because
that's what's in the Affordable
Housing Act. Is that correct,
Madam Chair?
Well, that's fine.
Yes, madam chair representative,
yes, that is what is existing
statute. This is all existing,
OK. Those are my, my questions,
um.
And
I think because uh.
your definitions, Madam Chair,
there it is. I found, I think I
answered all my other questions,
but yeah, I just want some
clarification on that.
And maybe we can talk more
offline on on the reoccurring
amount. Thank you, ma'am.
He's a breaker.
You, Madam Chair, and, um, I
just thought some things as I
read this at like at 3 this
morning, um, and
Yeah, it's kind of what we do,
but the one thing, um, well,
first of all, I want to welcome
your guests, representative and
Madam Chair, Cathy McGill, I've
worked with her for many years,
um, and a lot of different
programs, um, I, I commend you
guys for doing this the way that
I see this bill is it's sort of
a hand up and not a handout, and
I, I very much appreciate that
for housing because I think
there's there's such a need
right now to help people get
into a stable housing
situations. What I did read in
in this bill was what it does
and not and and also what it
doesn't do, this is not rent
control. This is not, I mean,
all the things that it's not,
but also the things that it does
do, um, and I just wanted to
mention that um I had a question
about the 1.6 million, um, and
The statewide landlords
assistance program was 1.6
million available and so that
this sort of compliments that a
little bit. Is that correct?
Uh, that was my only question.
Madam Cha representative, can
you tell me where you're seeing
that 1.6 million? Are you
looking at the FIR and I'm
looking on the 2nd page under
administrative implications.
The yellow copy on the 2nd page.
You see where it says
administrative implications, so
this.
Program
There is a current statewide
landlords assistance program. So
this money is kind of separate
from that sort of complimentary,
and that was the
question that I have. Yes,
because this program essentially
is targeted to a specific
population of people who don't
qualify for any other programs,
unfortunately, Madam Chair
Representative, because they
make too much money. Um, they
have the money to afford an
apartment. It is really just a
credit score that is prohibiting
them from being able to rent.
And, and Madam Chair and
Representative, your um
partnership with the MFA really
gives me um
I guess, um, in terms of how
this program would be
administered and, and knowing
that, you know, it, it will be
administered in a very positive
way, so I very much support
your, your bill, madam uh, Madam
Chair and Representative, and I
look forward to voting in favor
of it. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you. We.
We'll go back to a do pass
motion by Vice Chair Little.
And a second by Representative
Lujan.
Please call roll.
Oh, I go 2nd.
OK. Representative onion or no?
Yes.
resented block. No, sir.
Representative Borego.
Yes.
Representative Lujan.
Resented Mea
No.
Madame Flourlier, Representative
Zamora.
No.
Madam Vice Chair.
Yes. Madam Chair, yes.
I 5 to 3 vote, madam chair, you
have a best.
You have a due past
representative and thank you,
expert witness. Thank you.
OK, Representative.
Good afternoon, uh, good
afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the, of the
committee. um.
I'm here today, uh, because we
have a crisis in New Mexico with
our young people aged 18 to 29
to register to vote and their
turnout rates. We have some of
the lowest in the country. We
want a future of this state to
be politically engaged and
that's what this bill does, it
invests in today.
Um, over the summer,
I had a group of interns from
Sandia High School and UNM and
they researched how we could
improve this youth voter turnout
rate, and the single most
impactful thing that they found
that we could do is to give them
the ability to vote. Only 21% of
young people turn out to vote in
our elections compared to nearly
50% in the rest of our state.
In cities and counties across
the United States that have
implemented a policy similar to
this one, they see youth voter
turnout rates in the high 40s
and 60s. And most importantly,
over time, those young people
continue to vote into their
twenties. What this bill does
specifically is give people over
the age of 16, the ability to
vote in regular local elections,
special local elections and
municipal elections that are not
held with.
Regular local elections.
Young people in our state can be
tried as adults. They can pay
taxes as adults and young people
can be legally emancipated from
their parents. Young people
should also be able to cast
their ballot in local elections.
I have here with me my expert
today, executive director of
Equality New Mexico, Marshall
Martinez. I'll turn it over to
him.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, um,
and I want to express my
gratitude to Representative
Parajon for carrying this
legislation. Equality New
Mexico's statewide LGBTQ
organization that's been in
existence for 31 years, 31
years. Um, and this has been a
priority piece of legislation
for us for the last few years.
And there are a number of
reasons why. The first and
foremost is that across the
country in the last year, over
1000 school districts have taken
on policies in their local
school boards to.
pack, discriminate against or
prosecute LGBTQ young people in
their classrooms.
The reality is queer and trans
young people are watching their
very existence be debated in
school board meetings across the
state of New Mexico, this very
month, and those folks do not
have an opportunity to engage
with those school board members
because the reality of our
electoral system is most elected
officials engage with the people
who could vote for them, rather
than the people who maybe they
ought to be looking out for in
school districts, but this goes
far beyond queer and trans
students.
And it goes beyond uh school
board elections and school board
policies.
Uh, across the country, every
single year we see an increase
in the number of cities and
counties that implement curfews
for people under the age of 18.
This impacts young people who at
16, like many of us sitting at
this table, probably had a job,
maybe were engaged in
extracurricular activities or
just wanted to hang out with
some of our friends and we're
not doing anything wrong, but
those debates about curfews
exist without the input of young
people because they don't have
eligibility to vote.
So as equality in Mexico moves
forward and, and hopes that you
will support this legislation.
We would like for you to think
about the very unique impact of
policy on people who are 16 and
17 years old, policies that are
being decided about them and
entirely without their input.
And those are the reasons that
we are here to support this, uh,
this piece of legislation. Thank
you.
Madam Chair, that concludes our,
uh, our, um, our little speeches
and we shall not turn it over to
the committee for questions.
Let's go to the audience. Do we
have an audience who would like
to express their support.
OK, let's do one minute
comments. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Nathan
Swara. I'm the program manager
at Equality New Mexico, and we
stand in support of this bill. I
started working my first job
when I turned 17. I was trusted
to drive a car at 16, and I've
been diving into and sharing
which political candidates best
support my family's values since
I was 15. I'm 23 now, and I
remember those days vividly. I
remember the vast amount of
interest and care I had in our
democracy and how it works, only
to have those feelings pushed to
the side, because there was no
avenue for me to engage
civically. I was a constituent
only in name.
not power. Changing the voting
age in New Mexico to include 16
and 17 year olds in local
elections will increase civic
engagement.
And participation for the rest
of their lives. The 18 to 24
block is now and has always been
the least participatory group of
voters. The following block of
25 to 34 has the second lowest
participation, engaging voters
early ensures that this number
will grow over time, forming a
stronger and more effective
democracy.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Arturo Castillo and I'm
the director of equity and
culture at Conservation Voters
New Mexico or CBNM, um.
Data shows that allowing people
to participate in the voting
process at a younger age
empowers them to become engaged
lifelong voters. Young voter
participation means having a
larger impact on school boards
and city councils to push them
to recognize and act on local
issues, including the impact of
the climate crisis. The leaders
of the climate change movement
across the country and the state
have largely been young people.
This will connect um those young
people to their political power
and through this connection we
can ensure that they stay
involved and ready to impact
state and federal elections as
soon as they turn 18. Thank you.
Chair and members of committee.
My name is Kat Sanchez. I'm the
policy director for Bold
Futures. Bold Futures is a
statewide reproductive justice
organization by and for Black
indigenous women and people of
color.
Municipal elections have the
most direct impact on young
people, particularly with regard
to school boards. Those
decisions involve not just their
education, but access to local
resources or revisions to local
regulations that are specific
from one community to another.
Within the reproductive justice
movement, the foundation is
sovereignty. Body sovereignty,
yes, but also sovereignty for
decisions that are best for
yourself and your life.
To that end, the ability to be
included as a voice in the
systems that impact you is key
to building sovereignty and
self-determination. We support
HB 526 and urge do pass.
OK, we'll stay with the
audience. Do we have any
opposition?
Let's go online.
We'll take the two.
We have uh Matteo Lujan. Matteo,
can you hear us?
Uh, yes, I can hear you guys.
Great, you have one minute.
Members of the committee, my
name is Matte Lujan. I am 17
years old and I'm here in
support of House Bill 526. 1st,
we must acknowledge youth are
more informed and engaged than
ever before. We are actively
participating in discussions
surrounding pressing issues such
as education reform and LGBTQ
rights. Secondly, studies
indicate that individuals who
begin voting at a younger age
are more likely to remain
engaged citizens throughout
their lives. By introducing 16
and 17 year olds to the
electoral process. We can
nurture a culture of civic
responsibility. Thirdly,
Many of us young people are
already contributing to society.
Personally, I work at Menschies.
If we are expected to shoulder
these responsibilities, it is
only just that we have a voice
in the decisions that affect our
lives. We must take this
important step towards a more
inclusive and representative
democracy. Thank you.
Thank you so much Matteo.
Anyone else want me to speak on
this bill, please raise your
hand.
OK.
We have uh Augustine Montoya,
Augustine, can you hear us?
Hi, I'm sorry, it looks like
we're having technical issues
again, and we've cut out, but
um.
Is there anybody who was hoping
to speak on in opposition to the
bill.
Hey Representative Lujan.
Oh, thank you, Madam Chair. Um.
I just want to say thank you for
moving this this bill forward.
My one question just is uh um
Just as we are allowing 17 year
old citizens who will be 18 by
the the general election to vote
in primaries with this then
include 15 year olds that are,
if this passes, 15 year olds,
we're gonna be turning 16 to do
the same.
Might be a cleanup thing.
You
Uh, Madam Chair and
Representative, we have our, um,
we have the Secretary of State
office here with us, who is able
to um provide some comment on
that.
Oh, perfect. One time I squatted
in here already this year if
y'all remember, um, committee
members, Madam Chair, it's good
to see you all this morning,
Lindsay Bachmann with the
Secretary of State's office. The
bill is specific, um, in, in who
would be included in that
qualified resident is defined in
the election code currently as
as someone who meets all
eligibility requirements except
for age, um, in the election
code. And, and those um folks
can already pre-register with
our
office, so they're already folks
who are 16 and 17 year old, um,
years old who are in the voter
database, and you're correct
that if they're 16, I mean if
they're 17 and going to be 18 by
the time of the general they can
participate in the primary, but
for the purposes of the bill
before you, there's um language
on page 4,
lines 3 through 8 that discuss
um the 16 year old threshold.
So, 15 year olds, um, is not
meeting that threshold.
Thank you. I might add that
since we're doing that for, or
that's the standard now that
maybe you want to amend that so
that it's a standard.
Uh, for your bill as well. I
think that aligns us with what
we've already had to go through
and so we don't have to come
back and, and, and repeat that.
Um, other than that, I, I would
just say that getting
Getting our youth involved in
elections and being able to vote
is has been uh one of the
primary, um, things I've done,
um,
And making sure that they
understand their, their rights,
and this would just expand that
and I would just say like there
are so many 16, even 15 year
olds that are working right now
that are contributing in so many
ways to their families and to,
you know, um,
Our workforce and everything
else, I think that they do have
a voice and I think this voice
is represented in this
legislature.
vice uh representative block.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representative and,
and experts, and I don't really
have too many questions about
this, but I did, I do have some
concerns when it comes to the
other things that 16 year olds
are not allowed to do, right,
when it comes to this age. So,
Madam Chair Representative, I
just looked it up, uh, pretty
easy to find, you can't do jury
duty.
You can't sign a contract unless
you're emancipated, you can't
get married.
You can't own a gun.
You can possess a rifle or
shotgun, but you can't own a
gun, you can't buy one.
Uh, you can't really work
without a permit.
At certain ages when it comes to
tattoos and piercings, that's
18, you need your parents'
permission.
Uh, until then, and then you
can't gamble, you can't drink,
you can't smoke.
You can't even buy a pack of
smokes. So when we're, when
we're talking about this and
putting these, I'm, I'm all for
empowering people to want to be
involved in
In government, I think it's
super important. All ages when I
was younger, I couldn't vote at
the time that I was helping
campaigns and in 2014 when we
actually had some good things
happen according to my opinion
when we won back the house, the
state house, and all these good
things that happened, but
I do, I do see the problems and
the incongruence when it comes
to our laws and certain things
that you're allowed to do. And
if we give people the ability to
vote in these local elections.
But they can't really utilize
the very freedoms that we're
trying to allow people to
legislate. I just kind of have
concerns regarding that, and I
don't know if you guys have any,
any comments on that, but uh it
was pretty much just a, just my
opinion.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative Block, and I
think you're entirely right.
And, um, and I would say two
things about this, right? The
first thing I would say is that
This country, this state, and
our municipal bodies have always
been entirely arbitrary in
making decisions about at what
ages folks might be able to do
those things. Um, now you have
to be 21 years old to buy
tobacco products, but when I
began smoking, I bought them at
18. Uh, those decisions change
all the time, right? And the
second thing that I would that I
would just say is that when
we're talking about school board
policy and we're talking about
municipal policy.
Uh, those are not the folks who
are making decisions about
whether or not you can own a
firearm. Those are not the folks
who are making the decisions
about whether or not you can.
Purchase cigarettes or alcohol
or go to a casino. But those or
get married, but those are the
folks who are making decisions
about whether or not uh you have
an after school program to go to
if you don't have parents at
home or you have a younger
sibling.
How many of us were 17 years old
and required to rush home after
school to be there for our
younger sibling because no one
in our community was showing up
to elect a school board who
ensured we had after school
programs. Um, and so I think,
you know, to your first point,
we, you know, there's a lot of
arbitrary nature in which we
make these decisions, but this
legislation is specifically
about school board elections,
city council elections, the
places wherein the
infrastructure for allowing
young
people to begin their lives in a
healthy, safe manner. Those
decisions are being made at this
exact level and what we're
asking for is for folks to be
engaged in those decisions.
Madam Chair and representatives
and, and no, I, I get that. I
think that's super important
when it comes to younger people
getting involved.
I'm all for people going to
school board meetings and making
your voice heard, right? Because
some of those those meetings can
get super dicey. I've been to
some down in my neck of the
woods, and my goodness, it's
crazy, not lately because we, we
changed members of the school
board and there's lists.
attention, but I do think that
it's super important because
some of those margins in those
races are tight. I know people
who have lost races by 10 votes,
and so I do think it's good that
we're getting people involved,
but also I hear the argument
when it comes to gun regulation,
specifically, they always say,
oh, the younger people's brains
are not developed till 25. So we
shouldn't be empowering younger
people to be owning firearms and
so when I hear that argument in
retrospect when I see this bill
we're saying they now can.
be 16 and be voting. I, I kind
of have problems when it comes
to the incongruence in those,
those laws, and I know that this
would not necessarily be
relating to guns specifically,
but I do know that localities,
they, they passed resolutions
and even ordinances regarding
that, even regarding health care
and things like that. So they
are really huge important
decisions, and you can't really
get a procedure done in a
healthcare setting unless you
have your parents' permission at
at certain ages for certain
things. So I don't know if you
have any further
Comments on that, but, but I do
think that if we're gonna do
this, we should also do guns, we
should do ability to get
piercings, tattoos, things like
that when it comes to this on
the state level because we're
going to make one exception, we
should make exceptions across
the board.
Thank you, Madam Chair and uh
Representative Block, just
really quickly, uh, there's been
some, you know, I'm not exactly
sure which specific studies
you're referring to for the 25
year olds, but, um, you know,
the NIH recently came out with
um a study February 2024,
analyzing the complexity of
adolescence versus um adults and
their reasoning and found that,
you know, they don't really
meaningfully differ. So we think
for specifically making
political decisions and I have a
whole other list of other um.
literature that we could, we
could go through if there was a
little bit more time, um, but
you know I, I'll, I'll turn it
over to my expert if he has
anything to add, but I, I would
say that, you know, as we learn
more about the young brain,
we're learning that for these
specific decisions politically,
they are able to make those
decisions in the way that adults
do.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Replock. the um representative
block. The thing that I would
say specifically is that um
What the NIH study and other
studies have have referred to is
what is called cold cognition,
and this is the act, uh, this is
the decision making process that
is thought out in advance. Um, I
think it's, it's no surprise
Representative Block, you and I
are going to be on different uh
sides of a discussion about
firearms. That's always going to
be true, right? But the reality
is that um when someone is
headed to a voting booth, um,
even with all of the uh chaos
that happens on election day.
You've taken
time to make a decision to cast
a ballot. You've taken the time
to think about the impact of, of
that vote. You've, you've made a
decision to do so on purpose.
That is the act of cold
cognition, which is rational and
which um Representative Parejon
mentioned is the rationality
that that is almost identical to
that of adults. Now, the act of
picking up a firearm and pulling
the trigger does not require
that long term cold cognition,
and that's one of a dozen
references we could.
make just to point out what, you
know, to stay on the topic that
you had said. And so what we're
saying is that young people do
have the ability to think
logically and rationally, and
they do so in circumstances
wherein there's time to do so.
Madam Chair Representative, and
I, I still have, I'm, I'm still
holding out hope for maybe your
stance on firearms to change.
No, I'm, I'm just kidding, Madam
chair.
But I'm gonna try to, try to
convert you someday, but uh I do
think that when it comes to
that, I, when I was a kid, my
grandfather and other folks in
my family, we learned about
firearms really young. We
learned how to, we learned what
not to do, what to do, and I
think that when it comes to
those kinds of things, there
also is a big discussion to be
had, but I really do appreciate
the thoughtful.
Approach to this. And I think
that when we're looking at
cognitive studies and looking at
the brain, there's always new
science coming out, right? So I
do think when it comes to that,
and we are going to give these
16 year olds the right to vote.
I think when it comes to other
things about bodily autonomy,
like we talked about, you should
be able to also get a tattoo.
You should be able to get a
piercing. You should be able to
to get um a minor medical
procedure if it's needed at the
moment, right? So I, I think if
we're going to equalize those
things, I'm all for it. So thank
you, Madam Chair, and
Thank you, Representative and uh
Marshall. Thank you so much.
OK, thank you. I have on the
list representative Vice Chair
Little, Representative Brego,
Representative Zamora, and
Representative Anya Nornu, Vice
Chair.
Madam Chair, I would like to
move a due pass.
Before we call the question,
Representative Barrago. Thank
you, Madam Chair, and, and
Representative and your guest
Marshall, um, for coming today.
I, this is fascinating, you
know, I, I was just looking at
how many uh states in the union,
I had to go back and remember
how many states we have in the
union, so I was googling like
how many states are there now?
Because Puerto Rico and not.
Being considered a state and all
that.
Anyway, um, Madam Chair
represent I'm sorry I get
long winded sometimes, but I
went back and I counted the
states, by the way, this says 15
and there's 16.
Um, so whoever wrote this, uh,
bill analysis.
Just FYI, um, yeah, sometimes
those things pop out, so I, I
counted 16 states that have this
law already in place and doing a
little calculation, Madam Chair
and Representative, that comes
to 31% of our states in the
union already have this
legislation in place. I just
thought I'd throw that out, um,
and I was going back, Madam
Chair and Representative, to
think about my youth at what
what I was doing at 16.
and 17 years old and um I was
at, I had just moved from a very
small town to Albuquerque to
UNM, which was like a whole
experience in itself, Madam
Chair and Representative.
And that was it, 16.5, 17. A lot
of kids graduate at those age,
ages, you know, they're, they're
already taking college courses
at those ages, and I, you know,
I think um this, I think about
like some of my nephews and
nieces who are 16 and 17 or
maybe just a little bit older
than that and
You know, how do we engage them
in the democratic process and
some of them don't want to be
engaged. It's, it's really
upsetting sometimes because I
think, you know, how do we get
these kids to want to be engaged
and to, and to understand, you
know, there, or some of them
have just given up and maybe,
you know, they just don't wanna
participate.
And so I think this is a
fascinating bill. I think this
is a great way to sort of engage
the younger people in what's
happening in in our society and
our democracy, and, you know, I
think
Um
I support the bill. I will tell
you that, uh, first of all, but
secondly, there's the other side
of the coin, like 90 year olds,
you know, that are disengaging
also, and I, and I offer that
because I think that we need to
have all of our um society
engaged in democracy because I
see the other side, Madam Chair
and Representative, um, like our
seniors that don't understand
technology, you know, and they
don't know how to get online to
to and maybe even some of the
remote areas like the
The tribal areas where there,
you know, our technology is not
working very well, um, and
they're not astute as to how to
engage themselves in, for
example, um, online meetings or
things like that that we're
using a lot of now. So I just
throw that out also, is that,
you know, there, there's the
other side of the coin as well,
and I think that, and I know
that's not the bill before us
today, but I think that forces
us to think is keeping
everyone engaged in our
democracy. So, um, I do support
the, the bill. Thank you for
bringing it forward.
Presented Samoa.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee and
Representative for bringing this
bill forward, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative, when you crafted
this bill,
Did you have intentions to
particularly address the LGBTQ
community, Madam Chair,
Representative.
Chair Representative, yes. Thank
you for that answer. And, and
Madam Chair.
And, and representative.
I
If I'm understanding the bill
right.
We're gonna have students in
school.
Voting on school board members.
Is that correct, Madam Chair and
Representatives representative,
yes.
Madame Chan and Representative.
At that age, don't you believe?
That the, the more
Of a challenge that we put in
school for our kids.
The more
We're gonna excel on their
education.
Madam Chair and Representative.
Madame Chair and Representative,
do you mean specifically for
elections, making it harder for
young people to vote?
No, Madam Chair and
representative, if we make
school more.
Challenging
Harder for them
And, and, and, and, and put
challenging.
Questions in front of them and
educate them in those things.
I'm talking specifically about
school.
If we push him in school to
learn more.
Do you not think that's better
for their education, Madam Chair
and Representative.
Madam Chair and Representative,
thank you for that question. I
think it's one piece of what
makes um students successful in
schools.
And, and so I, I would take
Madam Chair and Representative
that
You agree.
With that then, that, that, the
harder we push them, the more
educated they'll become. Madam
Chair and Representative, then
if we take.
I would say that the, the, the
Maybe the actual truth about
about us humans, we're naturally
lazy.
If I, if I get a chance to come
to this committee or I get a
chance to stay home. I'd rather
stay home and kick back.
And, and I think
Overall
Most of us are that way.
And, and, and Madam Chair and
Representative, how is this
gonna help?
In the schools
If the students.
are gonna vote
Or people that are gonna make
life easier for them in school,
Madam Chair and representative.
Madam Chan represented excellent
question. I think that, um,
We don't necessarily know if
they'll vote to make things
easier in schools and young
people will only be a part of
the population that's voting,
right, we'll still have a large
adult population voting.
Madam, Madam Chair and
Representative.
I think if we let the kids run
the school.
I think we're in trouble.
And I think that's exactly what
this is doing.
And, and, and I don't see.
LGBTQ in the bill or anything
like that?
And I just don't agree that we
ought to be crafting a bill.
For one specific.
Group of people in the state
when it comes to voting, Madam
Chair, I'm so mad right now.
That I'm gonna stop my
questioning.
And I think it's BS that we do
bills
to specifically target people,
Madam Chair, that answers my
question.
Representative Lujan, we are
back. Representative uh
representative Amora is finished
and so now we're going with.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representatives. Um, all
right, let's turn the
temperature down a little bit,
so I'm not going to repeat too
much of what my colleagues have
said.
But I definitely agree that this
legislation will encourage civic
engagement in children in the
earlier you can start that, the
longer that they'll be voters.
They will be lifelong voters,
and I think if we can get
children engaged younger,
sooner.
That is a good thing. Um, I
also, it's just like a personal
pet project of mine. I, I
remember.
When I was in school, I think I
took social studies in 5th
grade, I think maybe 2
government classes in middle
school like one national one New
Mexico history, which wasn't
really government, that's like
New Mexico history and then
another maybe government or
civics class in high school, and
that's kind of it. You and you
walk out and you ask a kid like
what they know and maybe they
can list the three branches of
government. Um, but it feels
like, and that was when I was in
school, and I know that a lot of
those programs have been cut
since, so.
It feels like
When we, it's not fair, Madam
Chair Representative, you see
these men on the street
interviews and people cannot
answer their most basic
questions about American
government to the degree that
nerds like me are deeply
embarrassed and Parajo, I'm
sorry, I'm lumping you in with
the nerds, um, Madam Chair
Representative, um, so I, I want
to stop that. I want to
encourage
Um, are you to learn about their
government, to learn who makes
decisions for them, and to know
that they have the power.
To select those people who make
those decisions. So I'm very
much in support of this bill. I
think there's no better lesson
in civic engagement than the
right to participate in it.
And to engage in it sooner, um.
It's not fair. I said I'd turn
the temperature down. I think
I'm gonna turn it up a little
bit.
We don't see LGBTQ people or
children specified in this bill,
so I don't understand.
How this bill can be crafted
around them. Madam Chair
Representative, I do believe
that they will be supported by
this.
But I think an assessment that
it was written for them is
unfair. This bill, Madam Chair
Representative, is written for
children.
It is written for all of New
Mexico's children. I think it is
very important, so I do have a
question here, Madam Chair
Representative, I will get to
that. In the title, it says that
um it's allowing children 16 and
17 years of age to vote in local
elections, municipal elections.
And special local elections. So
Madam Chair Representative, can
you give us some examples of
what, um, types of elections.
These kids will be allowed to
vote.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative, and I, of
course, will make space for
Lindsay to correct me, um, but
the intention, the understanding
is we're talking about the
school board elections. We're
talking about the city council
elections and special local
elections would be, in my
experience, like the bond
election that happens off of the
regular local election ballot.
So if there's a special election
in Albuquerque to approve a
bond, to build a new high
school, and that election
happens in July, as opposed to
the normal regular local city
council.
election, they would be eligible
to vote in that election as
well. So we're talking about
The vast majority of the state
votes in the regular local
elections and that a school
board members, city councilors,
mayors, etc. in that off year,
there's no off year anymore, but
that off year in between the
others.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. So you
mentioned the school board, so
kids will be able to
participate, Madam Chair
Representative in
Crafting the board that makes
decisions about how
Public schools in their area.
are run, essentially, is that
correct, Madam Chair
Representative?
Uh, Madam Chair and
Representative Ononorni, yes,
and it is, but it is worth
noting that the state
legislature sets graduation
requirements, the state
legislature sets the number of
school days the state
legislature sets, um, the
framework around how the
education must be delivered, the
standardized tests, etc. But
school board, local school
boards make decisions about
whether or not school starts at
7 a.m. or at 8:00 a.m. and ends
at 2:00 p.m. or 3 p.m. Local
school boards make decisions
about
Uh, the budget they're going to
spend on buses and the number of
bus stops they're going to have.
They make decisions about
whether or not the high school
has on campus or off campus
lunch privileges if there's
going to be a parking lot there.
Madam Chair Representative to
local school birds make any
decisions around curriculum
that's taught in schools.
You know, I'm sure it was
representative no. OK, so they
wouldn't.
Necessarily, they're like a
child's vote wouldn't
necessarily then have any impact
on.
Voting for a school board member
who wants to reduce the number
of like hours that are spent in
the classroom because a school
board does not make that
decision.
OK. Thank you for clarifying
that point, um.
I think there was maybe a little
bit of miscommunication.
Uh, around that issue. Thank you
very much, Madam Chair
Representative. I believe that
concludes all my questions.
Thank you. I'm gonna go back to
Vice Chair Little's motion for
do pass.
OK
Oh, second by a representative
Brego, please call Roll.
Representative on Nor now.
Represented block.
No, sir.
Representative Borego.
Yes.
Representative Lujan.
Representative Mejia.
No.
Representative, uh, Madam Flo
leader, Representative Zamora.
Oh, with an explanation.
Madam, Madam Vice Chair.
Madam chair.
Yes.
Madam Chair, with the 5 to 3
vote, you have a due pass.
You, we have an explanation by
Representative Zamora.
You, Madam Chair. Madam Chair, I
believe it was clearly stated by
the presenter, uh,
representative that
This bill was crafted for LGBTQ,
uh, community.
And I believe that's a very
strong statement, Madam Chair.
Thank you.
Thank you. You have to pass.
Madam Chair and Representative,
please present your bill. We are
ready.
Thank you, Vice Chair and
committee members. We have
Senate Bill 163.
It is the same bill that we
passed unanimously in this
committee, uh, my bill was
House Bill 194.
Uh, my bill didn't travel as
fast and as far, so we're gonna
go ahead and go with Senate Bill
163.
The only difference is, um, we
have added an emergency clause
to Senate Bill 163, which is an
act relating to public schools,
permitting public school
students who are enrolled or
eligible for enrollment in
federally recognized Indian
nation, tribes and Pueblos to
where tribal regalia.
At graduation ceremonies or
public school events.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Let's go to public comment
first.
Um
Anyone in the audience opposing
him.
Online, please.
When hoping to make uh comments
in the favor of the bill, please
raise your hand.
Anyone hoping to make uh any
public comments in opposition to
the bill. Please raise your
hand.
So
Thank you. I will go to the
committee now. I see
Representative.
We have representatives Moura,
followed by Borego,
representative Ona Nordie.
Um
Oborego twice.
That's OK. And Representative
Block.
All right, so let's go ahead
with representatives.
Madam Chair, I move with do
pass.
OK
We have
a do pass motion from
representative Zamora and is
seconded by Representative.
Black.
Any opposition?
All right, do you have a due
pass, madam chair.
Thank you. Oh, OK, so now we
will go on to house Senate Bill
135.
And representative Lujan is
presenting on behalf of Senator
Wirth.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
Senate Bill 135 proposes
amendments to section 10-8-5 of
the New Mexico statutes
annotated to allow legislators
who are not on a primary or
general election ballot to
receive reimbursement for out of
state travel related to
legislative business. The bill
removes existing restrictions
that prohibit reimbursement for
lame duck legislators, those who
have not filed for re-election
or have been defeated.
In an election without requiring
approval by a 3/4 vote of the
New Mexico Legislative Council.
Madam Chair, without that a
stamp for questions.
You audience, there's so many of
you.
And
And uh my
So represented a block.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative Lujan. So I just
had one kind of question that
could lead to more questions and
I don't know. So how much, how
many times has this happened
before where there has been a
representative who got defeated
but wasn't able to be in and out
of state function or something.
I'm just wondering what problem
we're trying to solve with this.
Oh wow, Madam Chair, I would, I
would say there's, I mean that
that's gonna be a higher a
double digit num or or more
since we've, you know, since
this happens repeatedly, um,
just this last election cycle, I
believe there were, there were
several.
Um, so I would say, um, that's
something I have to look into,
but what this allows is for them
to continue the work and the
representation and the time that
they have in their official
office. So I think that's
important, that's what this bill
addresses, Madam Chair.
Thank you Madam Chair.
Representative Shucks, I thought
you would lead me to another
question, but
That's all I had. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Madam Chair.
Members.
Representative Onan Arnu.
I just have one quick question,
Madam Chair Representative, so
would this also apply to
say somebody who was appointed
to a position.
A legislative position and they
Like in a, in an off year, so
they weren't on any ballot. They
might be on a future ballot, but
if they go to a
seminar or something out of
state and they want to fly to
understood. I myself was in that
same predicament, um, I
don't believe so, um, as it's
written, but
Yeah, because this would be,
this would be particular to that
you'd already have to be have
been elected, uh, is my
understanding, but I could, I
could verify that but thank you
for that question. Let's get
that, I'll get some
verification, but as I read the,
the bill itself and the
information that
Does it seem to be the case
other than that they would be in
an official capacity and
therefore could be covered, but
I don't know explicitly, Madam
Chair. All right, thank you,
Madam Chair Representative. That
was all I had. I was just
curious. Committee members.
Representative Block.
I moved to pass, Madam Chair.
Have a motion for you.
to pass by Representative Block
a second by Representative
Brego. Do we have any
opposition?
Seeing none, you have a due
pass.
Sure. Did you have a
Thank you committee members. We
are adjourned. Have a great day.
Yeah.
