definitely until we hear from
the sponsors.
So with that, we'll begin with
House Bill 398, Representative
Duncan.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee. um.
Today we're here to discuss
House Bill 398, it's relating to
insurance, amending the health
maintenance organization law to
modify the time for examinations
of health maintenance
organizations and contract
providers from 3 years to 5
years. It's an OSI bill, um,
Madam Chair and committee.
want to afford your expert
witnesses to say a few words.
Elizabeth.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee,
Elizabeth Johnson, Associate
general counselor at OSI, and
this is Alma Tapia. She's um in
our examinations bureau at OSI.
This is just a very simple bill
that was requested um by our
examinations team that would
bring the timelines a little
closer to what are standard in
other states, so it's gonna
move, give us 5 years to conduct
an examination of an HMO instead
of 3 years, and that is um
More in line with the model, the
model.
OK, thank you. Let's go to the
audience. Do we have any
Anybody who'd like to speak in
support or opposition in the
audience. Please raise your
hand.
Seeing Nan, let's go online
quickly, I don't see one.
Anyone hoping to speak in favor
of the bill, please raise your
hand.
Anyone hoping to speak in
opposition, please raise your
hand.
I see none.
committee members,
Representative Barreco, Madam
Chair, I move, uh, to pass on
House Bill 3982. Do we have any
opposition?
Seeing none, you have to pass.
Madam.
Go right ahead, Representative.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
committee, uh, I am here to
present uh house 369 OSI Bill 2
of who knows how many you have
today?
Uh,
Uh, oh, perfect, relates, um,
this relates to insurance, it
modifies certain time frames and
fees for licensing, um, I have
my two OSI experts here if you
guys need further explanation,
with that, we stand for
questions.
OK, let's go to the audience. Do
we have any, anyone who'd like
to speak in support or
opposition of House Bill 398,
seeing none. Let's go online. I
don't see anyone.
Committee members.
Madam Chair, move a do pass on
House Bill 369.
We have a motion for due pass by
Madam Fle leader Skipanski and a
second by Representative Anya
Nonu. Do we have any opposition?
Seeing none
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Now we'll move along to house
Bill 540.
Have I changed my mind morning,
Madam Chair. Good morning,
committee members. So House Bill
540.
Just creates a standardization
process for the counties by
which, um, vacancies and
legislative vacancies are
filled.
Um, we have seen
Several, uh, appointment seats
open up in the last two years,
the process has been different
every time, and we just want to
standardize that process.
And with that, I stand for
questions.
Let's go to the audience. Do we
have anyone who'd like to speak
in support or opposition of
house Bill 540.
Anyone online?
OK, committee members.
Um, Madam Chair, I had a few
questions.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative, so what would
happen if, and I apologize, I
got home so late last night. I.
Did not have time to read this
bill before today. Um, as I
usually do, and I'm just
wondering, so what happens when
The board of county
commissioners.
submit names that are found to
be ineligible based on this.
What, what would happen in that
scenario?
So as we are requiring that they
submit more than one name if a
name is found ineligible, since
we're asking that more than 1
may be submitted, they would
have to move on to the next
eligible name.
Um, if all names are found
ineligible, that would create
kind of an interesting
situation. And so I'm not
actually specifically sure what
would happen in the event that
every name on that list.
Comes up ineligible. I think we
just continue down the list into
the next eligible name.
Madam Chair, um,
Representative, so, so this is
requiring
Someone to have lived in the
district since the Secretary of
State proclamation, which is
certainly the requirement to
run.
Um
Or so, so, um, let me just have
a chair.
So, for example, if you were
going to run in the 2024
election lived and been
registered in the district since
the proclamation, which
typically occurs sometime in.
However, if a vacancy occurs.
Basically what this would do is,
so say in.
June of 2026.
There's a
This legislation would say that
the people who are eligible to
be appointed would have had to
live.
In the district since.
January of 2020. Sorry, Madam
Chair, representative, did you
say if the vacancy occurs in
June of 2024? Yes, I'm sorry,
June of 2026. So, so.
The election cycle occurred in
2024. The general election.
The proclamation would have been
issued in January of and so the
vacancy.
If it occurred like towards the
end of the term, the person
would have had to have been
through.
You
18 months at least at that
point. I'm sorry, 2.5 years is
basically what this is saying is
that I believe, Madam Chair
Representative, that that is the
case.
Madam Chair, I don't know, and
I, I know that you are.
Uh, there's, there's another
primary sponsor on this bill, I
just don't know if, if you all
are amenable to.
Um, changing that to the date,
the vacancy occurred.
Or, or something similar just
because.
I think we may.
I, I really understand well.
What I appreciate about your
intentions, but what I
appreciate about this
legislation is that we are
Ensuring that a vac uh that when
a vacancy occurs, all of a
sudden you don't have 10 people
moving into the district.
To
Compete for that appointment.
Um, because, you know, ideally
we have individuals that have
lived in the district.
Um, and are committed to the
district and you know, are are
there for sort of the long term.
Um
However,
It seems like a much higher bar
than what we currently require
for
Uh, someone to run. And so I, I
just, I, I would love to see
that be a little more.
Consistent
Um
Because if you, the requirement
currently is that you live in a
district in January when the
election of state.
Your
Taking office about a year
later.
Um, and so,
You must have lived in the
district and you end up serving
in office. However, there's no
requirement but had to live in
the district for move into the
district like right before the
proclamation.
Um, and so this, it seems like
it's just putting a higher bar
on appointees.
Uh, please feel free to respond.
Yes, ma'am, um, um, Madam
Leader, I just want to make sure
that we're referencing the date
that is listed on page 4, the
bottom of page 4 in the new
language that the
Individuals shall have been
registered to vote and resided
in that district continuously
since the date of the Secretary
of State's proclamation for the
most recent previous general
election. Is that the
OK.
And I don't have a pencil. Let
me grab something actually.
Yes, Madam Chair, and, and, um.
I'm looking at also, it's also
on page 2.
Lines 1 through 3 and um Madam
Chair Representative, absolutely
right.
Um
Mm
It's also
It's also on page 4. OK, and you
would just, Madam Chair
representative, you would just
like to see more consistency
with the timelines between what
we would like for appointees to
require to be more consistent
with what we require of current
candidates. Is that correct?
Yes, Madam Chair Representative,
and I.
I'm afraid I don't have a
specific suggestion at this
moment. Um.
I mean, I do think that the
And maybe it is that the
residency.
Can be confirmed before.
Uh, at
At the time that the vacancy
occurs.
But
I think we're just asking
because, because the vacancy can
can occur up to 3 years after
the pro um general election
proclamation, which just seems
like a very lengthy residency
requirement.
Madam Chair Representative, um,
I don't disagree, um, and the
fact that that you you said you
don't have a current um
suggestion for that resolution
is kind of uh why we brought the
bill in the first place and I'm,
you know, I'm not saying that,
of course, to be argumentative
at all. It's just that, yes.
It's kind of hard to find.
A resolution, just given what
we've seen in appointees and the
appointee process across the
state, especially, you know,
this year and last year and how
it's been wildly inconsistent
every time. So I do appreciate,
Madam Chair, Madam Leader, um,
the, the desire to have it be
more consistent with the way,
you know, current candidates are
qualified, so I will definitely
bring that back.
To the team and see if we can,
um, tighten that up a bit, uh,
see if we can make the
Um, residency requirements a bit
more in line cause it is quite
lengthy, but
Now I, I see what you're saying,
Madam Chair, Madam Leader.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I
will.
Continue to ponder a solution
and I'll, I'll yield uh.
The floor, um, while I do that.
Thank you.
Thank you, floor leader, Madam
floor leader. Do we have any,
uh, representative Barrago?
I'm sorry. Thank you, Madam
Chair, um, and thank you,
Representative, um, and I
appreciate that you're, you're
trying to clarify this whole
process and um I have a, had a
different issue than uh Madame
Floor leader, but since she
brought that issue up.
Um
And just to expand on that
issue, but I also have another
issue, um, with regard to the
residency, it would be nice to
see something in here that
defines residency because I
think that there's been
instances in the past.
Where residency has not been
clearly defined, so it would
kind of be nice to see that
definition in here, um, kind of
in response to what she, uh,
Madam Floor leader was
discussing.
My issue, um, my original issue,
uh, Madam Chair and
Representative.
Is the length of time that it
takes.
Or the governor to appoint.
The
Individual.
I mean
I heard a lot of rumors waiting
for this last vacancy.
And it just like, you know, it,
it just, it seems like if we
have a set time for the governor
to make to act.
Hopefully those, it, it this
ways some of those rumors, um,
in the future, because it was
like, well, what's taking so
long, you know, and I, I don't
know if you want to consider
that or not, but I think that
might be something you would,
you might wanna look at Madam
Chair representative, we do
actually consider that, that is
on page 5 of the bill in um
subsection B.
Words at the bottom of the page
16.
Um, and we do have language in
here as well, that that's what,
that's the time frame for the
governor to appoint in the
instance of a senator and there
is also language in here as well
for the time frame to appoint um
for a representative that is on
page 2, 19. So we did set up a
time frame for the appointee to
actually be, be selected by the
governor.
OK, so let me understand this
then.
Um, so within 7 business days of
receiving the list.
Uh, one or more boards of county
commissioners.
The governor within 30 days. OK,
I did miss that then.
So she has 30 days or or whoever
it is, whoever the governor is,
has 30 days.
Represented
Madam Chair Representative, that
is correct.
OK, and that's the same.
OK, I did miss that. Thank you.
Thank you, man.
Madam Vice Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, a
couple of quick questions. I
hope, Madam Chair, I am curious
as to.
The um.
Uh, let's see, oh, the, so this
bill would require that um
eachport County Board of
Commissioners.
Board of County commissioners uh
are going to be adopting the
procedures to be used. Did I
miss in here? I'm wondering if
If, uh
Those counties might have
different.
Uh, if they might be
standardized and my question is,
Madam Chair, uh, whether the
Secretary of State, what the
role might be in helping guide
them. I imagine I'm very, I'm
aware of the Secretary of
State's office, uh, convening
their county clerks, um, not
long after the legislative
session ends so that they update
them on any uh changes that have
been made to statutes in
relation to
actions. I'm wondering, is it
anticipated that the um the
Secretary of State's office,
well, I'm not sure of the word
to use, certify, uh,
Uh, review and maybe concur with
each county's.
Plan, uh, uh, for the procedures
to fulfill.
Um, because I do see that the
the county.
Uh, uh, if they didn't have it,
and maybe they already did. I
don't wanna make presumptions,
but if the county didn't have a
process.
To, to laid out, um.
Or is revising it. I'm just
wondering if it might be a
little more uniform.
Or
No
Madam Chair and Madam vice
chair, um,
I'm not sure I got your entire
question,
so, um, uh, were you, sorry,
could you, yeah, I'm sorry.
Could you just let me ask, I
think the better way for me to.
Pose a question is, uh, Madam
Chair,
Uh, could it be that there will
be a standardized.
I says written process that
might be offered for county
commissions to consider.
Madam Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
that is on page 4.
And starting at line 3, section
G and H.
Um, but I believe the second
part of your question mentioned
the Secretary of State's office,
which I don't believe is policy
now.
Um
In terms for how
County commission when county
commissions make an appointment
or have an appointment process.
I don't believe the Secretary of
State's office is involved in
that currently. Nope.
Thank you, Lindsay. That was
convenient.
Thank you. So then, um hello,
Ms. Buckley.
I just wanted to, uh, so then I
will conclude my question then
with um uh whether
The Secretary of State's office
might
Um, want to assist counties are
there plans for the Secretary of
State's office staff to assist
with that process.
Uh, at the county level.
And if, if there's a response,
that's fine. If not, it's just a
question. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee sponsor, um,
Representative, it's good to see
you all this morning include
sort of an overview of
Of this new statute in its
presentation. You're right, we
do those frequently and
immediately, um, before, but
outside of that, um, we, we, we
don't, um, participate.
Thank you so much. I appreciate
that information. Thank you,
Madam Chair. That's all my
questions.
OK.
So,
So, Madam Chair, um, given the
concerns that I've heard from
the committee, I think it would
maybe be a good idea since we
were considering rolling this
bill to Monday anyway, if we
could.
Let's see, tomorrow is Sunday.
If we could roll.
Either to Monday or Wednesday to
make.
To consult with the other reps.
Some which aren't even in the
state at the moment, um, just
make sure that I consult with
everybody before we make any
changes to the bill and then
bring it back with the input.
today. OK.
Thank you very much, so we will
um hear House Bill 540.
Monday
Or Wednesday.
We have to prepare an amendment,
um, just given the 24 hour
period of Wednesday would be
preferable. Thank you very much,
Madam Chair.
You committee members will, uh.
Here
how Bill 540 on Wednesday and we
are calling representative
Anaya.
Morning, Madam Chair and
members, I am a vice chair Dixon
is currently in House
Appropriation, so I am putting
on a House Bill 86 on her
behalf.
Um, hospitals 86 deals with the
crime reduction Grant Act, um,
which was passed in 2019, and
these grants are used to support
local innovation and strategies
to reduce crime and recidivism.
The grants range in size from
tens of thousands of dollars to
100s of thousands of dollars,
uh, and, uh, they have been
awarded to entities all over the
state.
Um
The
One of the purposes of the uh
Crime reduction grant program.
was the fact that uh law
enforcement recruitment and
retention as well as recruitment
and retention of prosecutors,
public defenders, corrections
officers, and mental health
workers were added in 2022.
However, in 2023, we created a
completely separate funding
stream for those purposes. So,
Um, we're just trying to
basically clean this up so we
don't have so much overlap
between the two grant programs,
um, and the other program is
well funded and so, um,
including these purposes in this
grant program is causing
problems with accounting and um
so, so basically we're just
trying to keep this focused on
the original.
Intention.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, madam floor leader.
Let's go to the audience. Do we
have anyone who'd like to speak
in support.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Douglas Carver. I'm the acting
director of the New Mexico
Sentencing Commission, and the
commission supports the removal
of this purpose from the crime
reduction Grant Act, it will not
affect.
The overall functioning of the
act, and I'm happy, Madam Chair,
to answer any questions you all
might have about the crime
reduction Grant Act while I'm
here. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Bennet Bauer. I'm for the, I'm
the chief public defender and
just wanted to address something
here. We're not in opposition to
the bill, but I, I think there's
some information that was
presented about the public
attorney workforce capacity fund
somehow taking over the position
and adequately funding
recruitment and retention for
public defenders and DAs, um, I
don't really believe that's
true. Uh, first of all, the need
for
funding for public defenders and
DA's offices, especially in
rural areas, is really critical.
Our vacancy rates in those areas
and our ability to recruit and
retain people. First of all, we
don't get them from UNM Law
school, primarily, which
graduates maybe 5 or 10 students
who go into criminal law around
the state that's maybe 5 that we
get and we need 3 to 4 times
that number. And so we recruit
out of state, and we have to pay
the uh
to keep people. So we're
concerned about the continuing.
That's good. Thank you.
Do we have any further comments
in support or opposition.
Let's go online, uh, one minute,
please.
Looks like here we have a M.
Montoya, Mr. Montoya, can you
hear us?
Yes, good morning, Chair and
committee members Marcus
Montoya, a judicial district
attorney and president of the
New Mexico District Attorneys
Association and rarely are Mr.
Bauer and I aligned, but we
certainly are aligned on this
issue. Um, the retention fund
that was created a couple of
years ago. I, I was, uh, uh, I
did benefit from that and so
those monies are no longer
available and so they they were
greatly appreciated, um, uh, I,
I can't say the recruitment
retention monies were effective
in my district in keeping, I was
only able to.
utilize it for 3, but the
funding is incredibly important
in, in one facet of how we're
trying to um increase our, uh,
staffing and, and mitigate our
vacancies to better address
legal access, particularly in
rural areas like Mr. Bauer said.
So, um, though we don't take
necessarily a position on this
bill. Uh, the funding is
critical and I I can say that um
if monies were available to us,
we don't want to
Surrender any channels, this
being one of the channels,
though I've never used the
sentencing commission for this,
it would be of great benefit and
um
For that, thank you for allowing
me to speak this morning.
Thank you so much, Marcus.
OK, thank you, committee
members.
Representative Brigo.
I, um, I would like to make a
motion that we.
Approve House Bill 286.
We have a motion for to pass.
I'll go ahead in a second. Do we
have any opposition?
Please call Roll.
Representative on. Yes.
Representative Blanc,
Representative Borego, yes.
Representative Lujan,
Representative Mehia.
No. Madame Floor leader.
Representative Zamora, Madam
Vice Chair.
Yes, and I have a comment.
Madam Chair.
Man by a vote of factor one,
the, the motion passes.
You and vice chair to explain
your vote.
Thank you. I voted yes, thank
you, but I also want to um
I don't have access to the House
Bill 2 appropriations, and I
know that there was a lot of
funding that was provided this
year and I'd just like to have a
moment to work with double check
and see whether there was
funding, um, included.
Uh, for the purposes that you
were describing. I, I can't
recall off the top of my head
right now, um, that we can work
offline.
Thank you.
OK.
Hey, Representative.
Thank you, Chair and committee.
Um, I am here to talk about
house resolution 4,
this resolution, um, is brought
forth by mostly freshmen
legislators that would um allow
um, let me make sure I have the
language, right? A member or
member elect to prefile
legislation. Uh, and so, right
now, um, as a member elect, I
could not prefile legislation. I
had to wait till the beginning.
of the session, uh, to start.
And, um, so I think it puts our
districts, those of us who have
um districts who are brand new
in the legislature at a
disadvantage when we're not
allowed to prefile. Um, and so
with that, I stand for
questions.
Thank you.
And or online.
Committee members.
onion and then vice chair
Little.
So I remember my, my first year,
um.
Had lots of
Awesome ideas for legislation
and the fact that I couldn't
prefile was very irritating to
me, um, and I gotta tell you,
like a little part of me is
doing that like I had to get
hay, so you have to get hazed,
but that's not a good reason not
to support a resolution. So I
will be supporting your
resolution.
Madam Vice Chair.
Thank you. Um, I was just
wondering, Madam Chair, um, is
this process established
anywhere else?
Um, Madam Chair, Representative
Little, uh, no, right now the
house is the only place where um
member elects new legislators
can't pre-file, um, the Senate
has different rules, and so
that's why we introduced uh this
process today.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Hey, committee members.
Chair, um, we would do pass on
House resolution.
OK, thank you. We have a to pass
on.
Yes.
Oh, do we have any opposition?
Seeing then, you have a.
Thank you, Chair. Thank you
committee.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members. Uh, what this memorial
does is direct the legislative
finance Committee to analyze,
um, I would turn your attention
to the back page of the
legislation, page 4, and it is
requesting the legislative
Finance Committee to investigate
the impact of the
administration, um, the
Department of Governmental
Efficiencies actions, um,
terminations of federal
employees on uh
Residents of New Mexico, um, and
Madam Chair, I would just say I
think this is really important,
you know, it's interesting. I
was looking at some social media
last night and I saw a post from
um a woman who said her
husband's appointment was denied
at the VA, uh, and so then I
clicked on, on that profile to
see if there was any update, um,
and she said it, she had been
told it was due to terminations,
I clicked on the profile.
to see the update, and she said,
oh, actually.
I was misinformed. There was a
scheduling problem. Um, and so
we need to
Know the truth and the data and
really understand the impact of
what is happening. I think it's
really important for the
Residents of New Mexico to
really understand the facts, um,
rather than dwelling in sort of
rumor or fear, um, because for
in that example, um, actually it
had nothing to do with uh a
change in administration, uh,
what it did have to do with,
with some kind of scheduling
mishap.
Um, and so that just makes
people uncomfortable and
fearful, important too.
Uh, uncover, uh, and really look
at the data.
Hey, committee memberrico.
My, my, my, let me repeat that.
I would like to make a motion
that we approve House Memorial
45.
Do we have any opposition?
Seeing none Caro.
Representative Norden?
Representative on Nordin? Yes.
Representative Block,
Representative Borego.
Representative Lujan,
Representative Mejia? No, Madam
Flo leader.
Representative Zamora, Madam
Vice Chair. Yes.
Madam Chair, Madam Chair, but I
vote 5 to 1, the motion the
motion passes.
leader, you have a do pass.
OK,
it's me again, we are going to
continue House Bill 540.
Go right ahead, representative.
Madam Chair representatives
repeating all the things I said
earlier. Um, so actually I had a
conversation with Lindsay from
the Secretary of State's office
and they specified that the
Secretary of State's office,
it's their preference that they
be left out of the individual
appointment process from the
counties. They do not want to
participate in that specific
procedure, so that is the
updated information that we have
from their office.
Do we have any other questions,
uh, committee members.
Representative Mejia.
Sheriff representative Anna
Marie.
Can you explain the, um,
the bill, Madam Chair
Representative Mejia, since you
were not here when we did this
earlier. So what House Bill 540
does is it just standardizes the
process by which county
commissions and commissioners
make appointments in vacancies
and when it's not the election
year.
Thank you for that. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Hey, madam floor leader. Madam
Chair, I would move a do pass on
House Bill 540.
OK, we have a motion for do pass
by Madam floor leader.
Is there anybody you?
Representative Representative
Borego.
Representative Lujan,
Representative Mejia.
Yes
Madam Folier.
Representative Zamora, Madam
Vice Chair, yes, Madam Chair.
Yes. Madam Chair, by a vote of 6
to 0, the motion passes.
You have a
You, you never know what
happens.
It's right.
