with House Memorial 35,
Representative Matthews, while
we wait for the others. Thank
you.
You may begin. OK, thank you,
thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, um.
So, this memorial is a and I
think maybe the best thing we
can do with it is also roll it,
but I just wanted to
Um
There was apparently a um
the memorial that the drafter
sent to me. We were trying to
meet the high time limit, the 24
hour time limit and uh it wasn't
the final version.
And so, um,
But I did want to
Um
Just raise the question and,
and, and give you a slight
overview because I think we may
come back hopefully on Monday
with the correct memorial, but
um,
So this memorial is part of a
It, it fits into a a bill uh 442
that uh I'm also caring and that
is to thank you very much. That
is to do something about the
woeful state of the lack of
regulation, the lack of
Um, places for people to go who
are having problems with
manufactured housing, also
called mobile homes, not called
trailer parks.
Um, and where we are is that.
Um, after
The RLD regulates the con the
construction of of mobile homes
and the installation in the
parks and then from then on
there is no additional.
Over, over oversight by anybody.
And so we have situations where
people are doing even, even
though the mobile home park
provides the utilities will be,
is it responsibility of the
landlord up to the point of the
mobile home itself, uh, we have
people who are doing in parts of
the state without natural gas
through the winter.
Uh, without electricity,
sometimes without water.
Um
And so
I'm sponsoring a
And here's Mr. Mali.
And um
You come up.
Sorry, I don't.
No problem. Well, he, he is a
savior on this. I mean, we have
worked together on a number of
these mobile home issues. Uh, I
have a number of mobile home
parks in my district.
Um
A lot of the one of the biggest
ones is 55 plus. There's over
700 people living there, um,
they're scared to death. The
park's going to get sold out
from under them. That's a
different bill, um, but they're
also really, really concerned
about the, there's
The mobile home loan Act, the
Mobile Home Loan Act, the Mobile
Home Act allows uh landlords.
Uh, there's the leases are 30
days and they are raising the
rent sometimes 2 and 3 times a
year.
And it's just making it's an
impossible situation.
It's financially not tenable and
so, uh,
The Superintendent and I have
talked a lot, and so what we
want to do, if nothing else we
get from the session and that's
why Memorial is is part of this
bigger picture, but if we can't
get the other bill passed that
would also provide some
additional remedies, if we could
at least get a working group put
together.
And Mr. Bailey is willing to
head it and his agency take a
lead role, um,
And so that we can start to
create a statutory framework.
Um, to start to deal with with
this situation. There's over
32,000 New Mexicans who live in
mobile home parks.
Um
It's 170% of our housing stock,
380 manufactured home
communities.
San Juan County has the highest
rate of manufactured housing.
Um, in the state, um,
We put this out and as I say,
it's got a little didn't get
quite the right language in it,
but uh the good thing was that a
number of the agencies
responded, the attorney
general's happy to participate,
the governor's office.
PRC complained about what it
would cost him, but other than
that, everybody was on board,
so, um, let's see if, uh, what
I'm gonna do is roll it so we
get the right language in it
because there was an error, um,
but maybe you could.
Say a few words about how you
see this unwinding, Madam Chair
and members of the committee,
uh, when Representative Matthews
came and spoke to me right
before the session, turn your
mic on so you could be heard.
On Zoom. Thank you.
So
Alright.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. Thank
you for the opportunity. When
Representative Matthews came to
me and asked if I'd be
interested in assisting her with
this, obviously I was very
interested in it.
I handle a lot of the code
compliance issues when they're
installing these but if y'all
already call back started last
January we've been in the news,
everybody's been beat up these
folks are trying everything they
can, not just on the rent side
of it, but on the installation,
the, the park, the water, the
gas, we still got two parks down
south that were.
Still trying to get the gas up
to all the residents, water, and
all kinds of stuff. So it's a
huge issue, a huge problem, and
every time they see manufactured
or mobile home park that they
can manufactured housing
division we don't have the
authority to handle anything but
the code compliance issues but
this thing's a spider web of all
different things that
intertwine. So I'd more than
happy, and I think it's a great
idea that we start forward and
get a group together from all
the different agencies in
different places and from the
outside input too from outside
individuals whether it's park
owners.
Residents, tenants, anything
along that line to try to figure
out how do we fix this stuff and
what, what direction can we
possibly go all the way from the
infrastructure coming apart and
falling apart where they don't
have the utilities they need to
the rent and the issues that go
with rent. I mean, there's
things you have to consider with
that too, so, uh, we're more
than willing to take a part and
help out with this and share it.
OK, thank you. So do we have um
anyone in the audience who
wanted to uh speak and support
or opposition of this memorial,
OK. Let's go ahead and do that
while you're here. Thank you.
You got it. Thank you. Um, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
uh, my name's Doug Ottersberg.
My wife and I are generally
known as mom and pop operators
of manufactured home communities
here in Santa Fe and in
Albuquerque, and we support this
uh with some caveats. Um, it
requests that multiple state uh
departments develop
recommendations for a state
regulatory framework, um, yet it
predetermines rent control is
the solution.
And I submit that current
regulatory framework, well, it
might use a little tweaking,
works fine and that additional
regulatory interference is not
the solution to problems created
by regulatory interference in
the first place.
That manufactured home
communities offer one of the
most affordable, non-subsidized
housing options for people is
not in dispute.
Um, while there's great demand
and need for this form of
housing. Um,
It has been the supply has been
limited.
And while there are a lot of
people that there's a lot of
demand. Got it. Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
Daniel Warwa, the Governor's
Office of housing, and here to
say that we're happy to
participate in this process,
manufactured housing is a really
important part of naturally
affordable housing in the state,
um, and so we're looking forward
to participating along with RLD
and the other stakeholders in
this process. Thank you.
We'll put your name down. Any
other comments? OK, let's go
online.
OK, so in support, we have
Leslie. Leslie, can you hear us?
Hi, uh my name is Leslie Gooch.
I'm actually um in support of
the comments that um were just
made uh by Mr. Ottersberg, uh,
and Mr. Bailey. Yeah, and I just
want to commend Representative
Matthews, uh, for taking a step
back and taking a look at the
larger picture. My name is
Leslie Gooch. I represent, I'm
with the manufactured housing
Institute, um, and so we are the
national organization that
represents all segments of the
manufactured housing industry,
and uh we would
like to work with you to
address um fine policy solutions
to support your residents of
manufactured housing communities
in New Mexico, uh, we do
believe, uh, that it's important
to make sure that there are
unintended consequences for
those policy solutions that
would potentially discourage
investment, um, or risk park
closure, and that's why we think
it's so important that before uh
you pass legislation.
Um, that we do have the
opportunity for dialogue so that
we can work together and protect
uh the residents who have found
living in manufactured housing
communities, um, to be something
that they're uh they enjoy and
that they call home. So thank
you very much. Thank you so
much, Leslie. Anyone else hoping
to make public comment in
support of the bill, please
raise your hand.
None. Uh, anybody hoping to make
public comment in opposition to
the bill. Please raise your
hand.
OK. So Representative Matthews
and Superintendent, we will, uh,
roll your bill until Monday.
And then we'll go to that that's
what you want to do, correct?
Thank you. If I, if I may, um.
The issue of rent control, what
we call rent stabilization was
one of the things we've modified
to make it a more inclusive
process to try to figure out how
to deal with the rent issues,
and I just want to assure
everybody we're, we're really
working to find something that's
gonna work for we absolutely
understand that that
While the tenants have to feel
very comfortable in and feel
respected and
He is also important that the
people who own the parks.
are part of the process because
if they're not happy, they're
not going to maintain those
parks and we wanna we want an
overall solution to this problem
that works for both sides. Thank
you.
Our Representative Luhan
quickly.
I mean, I just thought we were
going through the process and
then the bill would be brought
back, but if it's your
intention.
Like
OK.
for the time.
The paperwork got messed up
somehow. Thank you. Have a good
day. See you Monday. OK,
committee members, let's move
along to hernandez.
HB4.
So
um, representative, we have a
committee substitute. Is that
correct?
Sure.
Move the committee substitute
for discussion.
Do we have a motion to, to
discuss the committee substitute
in a second and staff is passing
out the committee substitute
right now.
Hm
Madam Chair, would you like me
to get started while it's
getting,
um, Madam Chair and members of
the committee, I'm here today to
present House Bill 402, a
crucial member to improve access
to dental care in New Mexico by
addressing slow and inefficient
credentialing by insurance
carriers. Insurance
credentialing is the process
that involves verifying and
validating a dentist
qualifications, licensure status
and compliance with insurance
company requirements.
Through credentialing dentists
established contractual
agreements with dental insurance
companies allowing them to be
reimbursed for the services they
provide to a patient.
New Mexico has a severe shortage
of dental providers, especially
in rural and underserved areas,
slow credentialing delays a
dentist's ability to see
patients and receive payments,
making it harder to recruit and
retain providers. Many dentists
wait months for approval, which
discourages them from practicing
in New Mexico.
Uh, in 2023, the legislature
unanimously passed Senate Bill
232 to address the same problem
for physicians, however,
dentists were not included. And
so this bill will um add them to
that, um, makes it 30 days from
the time that all of their
paperwork is in, um, and then
there is um additional time in
case there is issues um with
background checks or paperwork
or all the fun stuff that could
go through dental credentialing.
Um, what the
a substitute does is it
incorporates um the amendment
that was made in House health to
change the word physician to
dentist, um, and then, uh, it
expands the bill to not only
include dentists, but also
dental hygienists per the
recommendation of the House
Health Committee, and that's it.
Um, I would like my, my expert
to introduce himself real quick
and then we will stand for
questions.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Tom
Scripps. I'm the executive
director of New Mexico Dental
Association, um, and a dentist
in Albuquerque.
Um, we're very supportive of the
bill and thank uh Representative
Hernandez for bringing it. This
has definitely been a problem
for uh dentists and um we're
appreciative that we'll have
this possible relief. Thank you.
With that we stand for
questions.
OK, let's go ahead and um
Do we have any questions or
comments regarding the committee
substitute, I'd like to adopt it
so we can go to the audience.
Madam Chair.
I
OK
Uh, can you read the, the, the
point.
Yes, uh, Madam Chair, the 202
number is 231-438.1.
OK.
Alrighty, we have an adopted um.
Committee substitute for House
Bill 402. Let's go to the
audience.
Uh, do we have any comments in
support. Let's go ahead and do
one minute comments.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee.
My name is Roy Soto. I am a
registered lobbyist for Choice
Healthcare Services. It's an
organization that provides
dental services to kids, um,
both in rural areas and in
underserved areas currently have
13 clinics from Demming to
Gallup, South Valley, Los Lunas,
Taos, this bill, uh, will
expedite getting more physicians
out into those areas.
Also, I would like to thank the
sponsor for bringing this bill
forward. It is much needed.
We're in desperate need for more
dentists in rural areas. Thank
you, Madam Chair and members of
the committee.
Thank you. Do we have anyone
else who'd like to make a
comment and support.
will stay with the audience.
I'm assuming no opposition.
Let's go online.
Anyone hoping to make public
comment, please raise your hand.
OK, looks like we have a
Michael, uh, Michael, can you
hear us? Yes, can you hear me?
We sure can, Michael. You have
one minute. Thank you, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
My name is Michael Moxie. I am
the registered lobbyist for the
New Mexico Dental Association
and on behalf of our nearly 600
dentist members across the
state. We support this bill and
ask that you move it forward.
Thank you.
Thank you so much, Michael. OK,
moving on. Looks like we have
David. David, can you hear us?
Can you hear me? We can, David.
You have one minute.
Hi, I'm David Montanais. I'm a
general dentist practicing with
Presbyterian Medical Services in
Bernna Leo. I'm also the
immediate past vice president of
the American Dental Association,
where I had the opportunity to
represent over 161,000 member
dentists. Is a dentist who's
been working with Medicaid my
entire career. This is a huge
barrier for dentists, especially
and uh barrier to care, uh, we
look at dentists who are
graduating with upwards of
$300,000.
worth of debt, uh, this, the
delay in the credentialing
process
limits the amount of care that
they can provide to the patients
and delays their ability to
enter into the workforce. So I
urge you to pass this bill. I
think this is a step forward to
help lower some of the barriers
to care. Thank you.
Thank you so much, David.
Anyone hoping to make public
comment in support of the bill,
please raise your hand.
Seeing none, anybody hoping to
make a public comment in
opposition to the bill, please
raise your hand.
Thank you, Representative Lujan.
Would you pass, Madam Chair.
for due passed by Representative
Lujan and seconded by
Representative Zamora. Do we
have any opposition?
Seeing none, you have a due
pass.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee.
Thank you. Have a good day.
OK, moving right along.
There you are, representative.
Morning, Madam Chair.
I get started.
Go ahead.
Yeah, OK. Um, thank you, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
House Bill 554, um, is an effort
to basically look at.
Improvements in the opportunity
to build housing around the
state. Um, many of you got 1000
emails from me early in the
session about, um, a housing uh
forum that we were having once a
week, um, with a, with
bipartisan chairs,
Representative Dao and I, one of
the major, um, highlights of
that was this policy initiative
on looking at using commercial
um areas for residential zoning.
Anything that's zoned commercial
can now potentially be a
residential um opportunity to
build as well as allowing for
accessory dwelling units being
built across the state.
Um, that's sort of the basic
overview with me, of course, is
Daniel Weworth, um, at the
Office of Housing, and with
that, we'll stand for questions.
we do have a
OK, let's go to the audience. Do
we have any
madam chair.
Oh, we have an amendment? OK.
I move the amendment for
discussion.
A representative, would you like
to read the.2 number?
Hey, please read the 0.2 number
and uh tell us about your
amendment. Uh 652.1. Um, the
amendment, um, is essentially
ensuring that in.
reinforcing that for those um
policies and local government as
it pertains to ADUs, um.
Essentially preempt any of the
policy that we have before you,
um,
The other issue is ensuring that
this is not retroactive for any
current covenants or just making
very clear.
For any current covetants or or
um
Uh, policies in place that these
restrictions wouldn't happen
until after this policy is a
committee members, do we have
discussion or motion on the
amendment? Madam Chair, um, as
the copy of the bill that I have
has the amendments in context,
so the page numbers and line
numbers may not be lining up
quite correctly. Can you tell us
where those changes are actually
are in the bill.
Sorry, ma'am, I actually would
like to correct our um
amendment.
Um, I think we just
The intent of the amendment and
it should be very simple.
Um, was to, um, essentially
ensure that
Um, homeowner association
restrictions should not be a
basis for denial of a building
permit once this would be
enacted and again, what date of
this in action?
And so the instead of the local
ordinance policy or regulation
policy regulation or
Should just be.
Um, neighborhood or home
restriction.
That, um, line 11, those 5.
need
Sure
So on, um,
Page 6, line 11, in lieu of the
current um proposed amendment
number one.
You don't want that proposed
amendment, we would like to
strike.
Neighborhood or homeowner
association restriction.
11. I'm not following on the.
Document I have in our binders.
doesn't have line items here,
line numbers.
OK. Well, it's OK, um, may I see
your copy and I can follow.
I apologize.
Family
OK. OK, so we are on page 6,
after um letter F.
Um
It starts a local ordinance
policy regulation or the
original, the amendment before
you was meant to strike that
out. We do not want to do that.
We only want to strike out the
line beneath the neighborhood or
homeowner association
restriction.
And that's the intent of the
Uh, we didn't want HOAs or
neighborhood, um, owner
associations to impede the
ability to build ADUs. So that
was the intent.
And I'll try to speak louder.
Um, uh, so that's the intent of
this amendment, um, in lieu of
what's before you,
unfortunately.
The drafting error.
So madam chair my, if I may,
sorry, um.
So, uh, page 6 F should read a
local ordinance policy,
regulation.
Shall not be a basis. Is that
how that should read? Correct.
Madam Chair
Yes. So I think it would be.
The wording of the amendment is
page 6.
Line 10.
After the 2nd comma, insert or.
And then
Strike
Or and then.
6, 11, strike neighborhood or
homeowner association.
Is that right? Or do we need
restrictions restriction as well
as restriction, so correct.
There's the second part of that
is page 6, line 11, strike
neighborhood or homeowner
association restriction.
Striking.
While they made copies of the
original bill, let's go ahead
and have you do um
Memorial 40. Is that OK?
is not OK with the committee.
OK.
That
No.
When they don't have numbers on
the side they're not, it's not
the original. Got it, got it.
Thank you.
Oh my God.
We're gonna do house Memorial
40.
Representative, let's try again.
Thank you. House Memorial 40.
Um, hopefully this is bringing
good vibes to you, Madam Chair.
Um, this is House Memorial 40,
which I believe this, um,
The Committee has seen a form of
this in the past. There's a, a
wonderful group of veterans for
Peace of pacifists that have,
um, argued.
For many, many years, um,
against nuclear war. There's a,
a, a large group across the
state that meets regularly to
talk about peaceful initiatives
across the state.
Um, the memorial before you is,
is uh from a group of people
that are looking at
opportunities in government to
draw in more peaceful practices
into the work that we do across
state government and um within
the role of, of the memorial is
to have that sort of
conversation about how can we
integrate that type of knowledge
and practice into state
government.
Um, and with that, Madam Chair
I'll stand for questions.
Hey, let's go to the audience.
Do we have anyone who would like
to speak and support.
Please, thank you.
Morning, Madam Chair, Committee.
My name is Ronald Sosi. Um, I am
a retired paramedic,
firefighter. I worked um 27
years doing public safety and I
think uh I've benefited from
having those kinds of structures
in place that allow firefighters
and police to perform their work
and the last few years of my
career, I worked on the
alternative response unit here
in Santa Fe, um, which opened my
eyes.
The types of calls that we ask
um law enforcement to address,
many of which is this kind of
work around um resolving
conflict and building um
peaceful interactions in
communities and having that
structure, um, the fire
department structure to provide
that service, um, made a huge
difference. So, um, exploring
other places that we can, um,
support this effort, um, at a
formal state level, I think
would go a long way. Thank you.
Do, do we have others who would
like to make a comment and
support.
Any opposition?
My right hand stepped out for a
moment, so we'll come back.
Um
We'll come back.
Online comments.
When Ivan returns with that, uh,
Representative Luhan.
Madam Chair, thank you for
bringing this forward and and
that um addressing.
Um
That amendment that we just just
corrected. I think these are,
these are important and
necessary steps that we need.
Um,
But my, I guess my question is
just to make sure.
As I'm going back and forth in
and out to the um.
That when we have these, when we
give, we change the zoning, is
that, that's what we're doing in
this, is that correct, Miss
Madam Chair Madam Chair, I think
we're on, uh, house Memorial 40
now. Oh, we already passed the
other one. Sorry, that happens
when you step out.
Well, peace. Peace is all we
need. My apologies,
Representative Lujan. Thank you.
Chair a little.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
Thank you, Representative, for
bringing this forward. Um.
Um
As I was reading reviewing this,
I was thinking, um.
I couldn't help but think.
Finally,
This practice of um
Oh, I can't remember the term,
uh, has existed in peace
peacemaking, peacemaking, uh,
um.
Uh, entities and tribal
communities has been going on
for.
Uh, very long time and only in
the last relatively 25 years or
so, has it been given an
official title. So I think um I
think that this is a very
important bill.
Uh, to bring forward since,
especially in combination with
what we've been working with to
try to address crime and the
underlying social ills that are
taking place.
Um
And so I think that the timing
of this bill of this um bill
coming forward is perfect in my
mind.
Um
I see that an example I was
giving earlier, uh, as I was
looking at this was.
Reviewing it was uh, I had
family unfortunately who.
Who, um
Uh, we're alcoholic and
They could go off and be
provided treatment.
For this, for the alcoholism.
But it didn't change the
community at the time the
practice was and this was a long
time ago.
And so what I've seen changing
differently is that the
community becomes involved.
This, this idea that it's a
village that.
Quite literally helps people,
because you can take the person
out in my experience, I'm
watching this.
And they can get treatment and
they're happy, they want to
have, be on the straight path
and do well.
They come back into an
environment for the, for those
that love them or care about
them are not prepared to deal
with the changes and the support
structures that they need.
So, it that that holistic
approach, I think is what's
identified here. It's a bit of a
um an extension of this.
And so
Because of its nature too, uh,
the.
Issues that come to these tribal
courts or in this system, uh,
outside of the tribal
communities.
Um, it involves again.
Um, and because of its serious
nature, I was.
Wondering, Madam Chair,
representative.
Um, the Office of Peace, I don't
know, it just doesn't give it
the
Respect the gravitas that I
believe that it feels. I was
just wondering if
Uh, this, when the study takes
place is the name might be
considered. I'll just put on the
table, but I.
Thank you. Yeah, Madam Chair,
we're all about making the brand
correct. So whatever would give
it the, like you said, the
gravitas, the um elevation
required, you know, it's, it's
such an important integration
into all that we potentially do.
Um, and thank you, yeah, thank
you for your comments, but I'd
be, we would be open to other
naming.
Thank you, Madam Chair, I
believe that was my only
question. Thank you.
You vice chair, let's go back
online for public comment and
support.
We have Charles. Charles, can
you hear us?
I can hear you and thank you
very much, Madam Chair, and, uh,
uh, Charles Goodmacher here. I
am a registered lobbyist, but on
this, I am speaking for myself
as a citizen of New Mexico, uh,
and somebody who coincidentally
holds a certificate group
conflict resolution, uh, from
some past experiences, uh, this,
uh, uh, wonderful memorial. I
urge you to pass it. Peace, as
we've heard, is not just an
international issue. It's an
issue, you know, um,
that affects all of us, how we
resolve conflicts among each
other and what would be your
Um, as a society, how we work
together. So I urge you to pass
this resolution or memorial.
Thank you.
Thank you so much, Charles. OK,
we have M M Ward near us.
Hello? Am I audible? I can hear
you. You have one minute. OK,
great.
Madam Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
members of the committee.
HM 40 at projected minimal cost
would create a committee to
study the feasibility of
creating an office of peace and
uh an alternative uh title could
be Office of Peace Building, if
that sounds more
Um
Majestic if you would, uh,
violence is frequently top of
mind during legislative sessions
with differing approaches
regarding what to do about it.
Don't miss this opportunity to
prevent violence or the
recurrence of violence. The FIR
indicates that no other state
has an office of peace. I'll
point out who, however, that
there are offices of dispute
resolution throughout the
country for civil issues. It's
time to look at providing
resources to all elements of
society to reduce the risk of
violence.
And therefore crime. New Mexico
has a chance to be a leader in
this area, please vote for HM
40. Thank you.
Thank you so much, Ann.
All right, we have Kurt, Kurt
Rager, can you hear us?
Yes, good morning, Madam Chair
and members of the committee.
This is Kurt Reger, the director
of Lutheran Advocacy Ministry of
New Mexico and Lutheran advocacy
also speaks for the uh Mexico
Conference of Churches, and I
too would add my name to the
enthusiastic support for the
passage of HM 40, uh, is one,
committee member said, I think
the timing is perfect for this
bill. I couldn't be more
appropriate and we're intrigued
by the possibilities, so, uh,
would simply encourage uh the
passage of this memorial. Thank
you. Thank you so much, Kurt.
anybody hoping to make public
comment in opposition to the
bill, please raise your hand.
Saying none.
OK, thank you. Representative
Zamora.
Is your name on here? No.
And of Luhan.
Yeah, I'm on the correct
memorial.
I'm sorry. I think this is my
favorite piece of legislation,
probably.
Today, um, I, I am, I, I'm
certified mediator myself and um
we do have the office, the ADR
office under the GST and um they
do do trainings through our
state in a conflict resolution
and mediation, we have the
Every state employee has the
opportunity to uh choose
mediation when they're having
conflict.
I just want to make sure, you
know, put something like that on
record to it, uh, let it be
known and, and remember that
that is happening, but this, you
know, um, even here.
in this building is so
Important. Uh, I just want to
share a quick, um,
Reference to what I'm getting at
uh recently and Representative
Madam Chair Representative
Romero was in the committee when
I
I set up a a very um
Atypical, um, hearing where I
had
Two conflicting parties sit at
the table with me because I
believe that conflict resolution
and modeling uh mediation type
of resolution, especially when
we have really intense or very
hard subject matters in front of
us really does work, much to
what representative of uh Vice
Chair Little said, part of my
training was with um and uh
indigenous uh modeling of how,
how, excuse me, I get a little
emotional because it works and
it's an important.
And I've been criticized as well
as uh
Our sponsor here today I've been
criticized for doing just that.
And I wanted to just say how
important that is and how
important this piece of res uh
this piece of legislation is.
We are all humans here.
We are 99.9%, you know, the same
or have similar, um,
Backgrounds and information and
beliefs and values, and I just
like to say that this is, this
would be um
critical to all of our work that
we do.
And how we find resolutions and
solutions to these intense
issues that are in front of us,
Madam Chair. So thank you so
much. This is my.
favorite piece of legislation.
Thank you.
Committee members, vice chair
Little.
Not sure I'd like to move a do
pass, please.
Motion for due passed by Vice
Chair Little a second by
Representative Lujan. Do we have
any opposition?
Seeing none, you have a you
pass.
All right, let's go back to
House Bill 554 with your
amendment. I still have your
copy.
OK.
on the bill. Um, thank you,
mentor. So I think you have the
copies of
So Madam Chair and
Representative, I just wanted
I want to get this straight. So
we started
A while ago we had an amended
bill.
But the, but the amendments in
context aren't gonna pertain at
all now.
They are, Madam Chair. They're,
they, we're not reversing any of
the previous amendments and the
amendments I should say, Madam
Chair, are in an effort, uh, to
work with bipartisanly with
Representative Doo to ensure
that we're on the same page as
we cover the state with this
policy. Um, so they will make,
they will remain. OK, so, so
we're starting with an unamended
bill.
No. No, I think we were just
trying to um explain and
understand that we could fall,
everyone could follow along with
the newly proposed amendment and
I'll just, I'll just go along
with the process and I'll see if
I can figure it out.
Thanks in another committee.
She's hoping to join us.
So we are on page 6,
And, um, in the new, well, the
printed bill that was has line
numbers. That was the whole hold
up, I believe, so we were
looking at um page 6 line, um.
11.
10 and 11.
Um, striking out after
regulation or all the way
through line 11 to restriction.
And that's, that's the change.
And otherwise, the next, um,
number 2 on the amendment as
proposed was correct.
Madam Chan representative. So
the 2nd
Change in your amendment happens
or doesn't happen?
Yes, we would like number 2 as
well. OK. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
OK, Representative Romero.
And we reviewed the amendment
back to you, or you can you go
through the entire amendment?
Yes, Madam Chair. So, um, 22
amendments. The first one, I'll
walk through once again, age 6,
I believe you now have the line
numbers from number 10 after
regulation, the word or strike
or.
And then through line 11,
neighborhood or homeowner
association restriction.
All of that will be stricken
through.
Um, and so it should read newly
a local ordinance policy
regulation.
Oh, shoot, we need to say or
regulation.
Shall not be a basis.
Add the word or to line 10.
and then
Do we all have that and then
your inserting implemented after
the effective date of 2025 Act.
Yes. Do you, do you want me to
walk that after restriction? Do
we have that committee members.
OK, so I'll move to adopt the
amendment. Do we have any
opposition?
We have, uh, an amended bill.
And so now we will go back to
you. Do you have any other
comments?
Uh,
no, madam Chair. We'll stand for
questions. OK, let's go to the
audience. Do we have anyone in
support?
Do we have anyone in opposition?
OK.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Brent
Moore. I'm a registered lobbyist
for the New Mexico Association
of Realtors, and we stand in
opposition to this bill. This
bill presents a difficult issue
for the realtors. The realtors
are in favor of more housing.
They're in favor of affordable
housing. Uh, the realtors had a
long debate about this bill
because it is trying to
accomplish those goals, but the
mechanism that it chooses raises
the concerns for the realtors.
Ultimately, because the bill
requires local authorities to.
accommodate additional dwelling
units and other housing and
commercial areas. We landed on
the site of local control. Uh,
but at the same time, realizing
that there needs to be a
solution to housing by mandating
the allowance or the
accommodation of the accessory
dwelling units and the, the
commercial housing. We believe
that you're taking that decision
away from uh the local entities.
Uh, we are very committed to
trying to find solutions to
housing and would work with the
governor's office and the
office.
housing to try to find those
solutions. Let's see.
Thank you very much.
Thank you. Do we have any uh
comments online.
Looks like we have Charles.
Charles, can you hear us?
Yes, thank you very much again,
um, Adam Chair and members of
the committee, uh, I'm Charles
Goodmacher speaking on this
issue on behalf of Healthy
Climate in New Mexico. It might
be seem counterintuitive that
housing issues might
Not be a concern to a healthy
climate in New Mexico, but I'll
tell you when, when there's
housing that is mixed with
commercial areas.
One effect is that there is less
need for automobile or other
types of transportation, you
know, consuming energy, uh, and
so on, creating more pollution.
So when people live closer to
commercial areas, it's better
for the environment, it's better
for all of us. Please support
this bill. Thank you.
Much, Charles. Anyone else
hoping to make public comment,
please raise your hand.
Anybody hoping to make public
comment in opposition to the
bill, please raise your hand.
Seeing none
Hey, thank you, committee
members. Representative Zamora.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you presenter for bringing
this bill forward. So,
Why is, is the
Major public transit location.
Why is that listed?
To itself and, and, and brought
out in the bill.
You, Madam Chair. So in an
effort, so I think that was one
of the amendments made, so maybe
go back to the amendments in
context. We made the
public, Madam Chair, but we
don't have the amended
amendments in context now
because we went back to the
original building.
Madam Chair, I don't have
amendments in context in front
of me.
Madam Chair, but
This, but this changes the whole
bill and now I, I have to review
them.
Yeah
So the amendment
Context is page 6, section F.
Madam Chair, I'm sitting here
trying to understand the bill
and I get thrown one from you,
we went back to the original, I
get thrown over my shoulder and
It just
I'm not ready for this. I just
I can't, I can't debate a bill
that
That I don't
I mean, it's all just a mess in
my head now.
And, and we didn't, we didn't
somehow.
It all got
Right back to the original bill
and, and then amendments and
context, and I don't have
amendments and context. I have
the original bill and it just
I, I would like
To roll this bill, and I would
like to understand the bill.
Before we debate the bill.
Madam Chair and, and
representative.
I don't, I don't know what to
tell you. I'm just, it's just a
mess in front of me.
Madam, Madam Chair, uh, in
representative, I wonder if it
would be helpful if the sponsor
went through.
The amendments that were in the
previous committee.
And then the the amendment we
just adopted and just walk us
through those. Would that be?
Helpful.
Because in the previous
committee are, are, uh, Madam
Chair, what we would have all
reviewed.
Previous to today.
And then we've added that one
amendment, um, just now.
So I wonder if that might help.
Madam Chair.
Representative, so I would like
to recommend that the sponsor.
Review the
Amendment
All of the amendments using the
original bill.
Since they have numbers.
And so put your
Amended
skills and context aside.
And put the original bill before
you.
And representative will go
through all of the amendments
that pertain to this bill. Madam
Chair, I moved the table.
Either we roll the bill or we
table it or we do something
where we can come together on
this and not,
not have this already
addressing this bill
representatives, so I'll hold
your motion for a roll call. So
in the meantime, I'd like to
have
Go ahead and go through all the
amendments. Uh, thank you, Madam
Chair, again, this isn't an
effort to work with
Representative Doo on these
amendments. Um, she's
unfortunately presenting in
another um committee right now.
The original amendments on page
4, I believe, with the
amendments in context or to
limit the transit op opportunity
rather than put a blanket over
it, limit it to um passenger
rail stations, um, the
The reason for that, Madam
Chair, was that in
Representative Doo's district,
some of the more lucrative, um,
commercial areas that she didn't
want to devalue for residential,
um, we're right next to bus
stations, so we're limiting this
to just rail stations at this
point. Um, that was the First
Amendment, and that was the only
amendment.
The transit locations next to um
Just that portion for commercial
building.
Madam Chair, apparently uh
representative Borego doesn't
have the right bill either in
front of her.
So this is, it's just, it's just
all a big mess.
It is. That was the First
Amendment, Madam Chair. Um, and
then the second one that we just
approved now.
Um
was about ensuring that um HOAs
and neighborhood associations
could not um
delay the building.
And talk about the whole bill.
At some point, Madam Chair.
Which it it doesn't really
change the weather it was
amended or not, the
broader objective of the bill
is.
Still, still here.
What would you prefer, Madam
Chair, I'd like to proceed with
um
Viewing the bill with the
amendments. Great. Just start
from page one.
If you have to name out the line
numbers and what was stricken
and what was added. Let's just
start all over with the bill
with the amendments. Thank you.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. I
just went through that. Would
you like me to go through it
once more?
OK.
Um, we are, I don't know what's
in front of you, so I will just
reference both copies of the
bill on the amendments in
context, which was presented
before you.
Um
In your packet originally we
had.
On page 4.
Line, um, before section 2, we
added passenger rail station and
struck out, um, all transit.
Do you want to speak to we did
that.
Um, Madam Chair and members of
the committee, we're really
trying to make this as
bipartisan as possible, and one
of the concerns that we heard
from existing communities that
are single family residency is a
concern that like a multi-family
apartment complex would be built
in their single family
residency.
And so the concern was bus
stops.
There are existing bus stops
near.
Uh, traditionally single family
residencies that are only
residential zoning. So by making
this transit stop, a bus stop
instead, those are commercial
areas and that's really what
we're trying to get out here is
looking at the bus transit
stops.
I mean, I'm sorry, the train
stops, not bus stops.
So then if that was the first
change in the previous
committee.
If we go to the change that we
just made today.
Um, what we wanted to do was
ensure that neighborhood and
homeowner association
restrictions were not a
preemption to being able to
delay or deny a building permit.
And that's what we struck today
on page 6, letter F.
And it should be the same on
either copy of whatever you
might be looking at. We just
struck out neighborhood or
homeowner association
restrictions, and Madam Chair,
members of the committee. So it
can't supersede those.
It can't supersede a homeowner
or the covenants, and we wanted
to make that clear. It, it
seemed clear in other sections
of existing law and other zoning
areas, but to make it clear, um,
they can't supersede those
homeowner association and um
covenants and that was, so
you've got even the Walmarts and
the Walgreens and the and the
Wendy's here in town, they have
a covenant and they have a
pueblo style, and that's part of
the aesthetics and the, the
aesthetics was under.
question and being able to
preempt, uh, these types of
neighborhoods or, or zones that
are local, and so that that was
the purpose of this amendment.
Thank you committee members, do
we have this?
Questions, concerns, discussion
on the amendment.
OK
Um, can we move to adopt the
amendment?
Second, OK. Do we have any
opposition?
You mending.
OK, you have an amended bill.
So now I have representative
Barrego for a question on the
amended bill.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and uh
thank you representatives.
Let me just start by saying that
Oh my God.
OK
OK. Let me, let me just, uh,
begin my comments by saying that
zoning is very complicated.
Um, and I've been doing zoning
for
32 years.
Um, so I just want to put that
out on the table, Madam Chair
and Representative.
Um, has there been any kind of
study?
Uh, before this bill that talks
about local codes and ordinances
and how this would interact with
those local codes and
ordinances.
Adam Chair representative, um,
there's been a lot of informal
studies, not one specifically
looking at this issue, I think I
would point to a recent Pew
article that pointed to uh sort
of burdensome land use
regulations being one of the
main drivers of affordability
issues in our state. I know
anecdotally from having worked
on 7 local housing plans around
New Mexico and every one of
those communities, there were
burdensome issues with the local
zoning code, often thinks that
local governments wanted to fix,
but either couldn't.
because of local political
pressure, or a lack of capacity
and ability to do this. I would
also just point out that the
other sort of research base for
stuff like this is that the more
consistent rules are around the
state around zoning, the better
the impact in terms of people
being able to adopt that in the
private sector being able to
utilize those. And so this is
the other advantage of something
like this. Adam Chair and
representatives and uh
representative, I would
definitely support your idea or
You know, I know what you're
trying to accomplish here is to
get more affordable housing and
more housing, which is
desperately needed in New Mexico
and I certainly don't want to
impede that, but, um, having
worked with are more recently
with our city zoning code in
Albuquerque, we just implemented
that and one of my first concern
that I have is that we are
preempting local z zoning
authority and that concerns me
some, especially when we
haven't looked at each of those
codes around the state, um, to
see how
This would fit into their
Um
Existing zoning codes that
concerns me a lot.
Um, and I'm just gonna give you
an example, um, Madam Chair and
Representatives, um, in
Albuquerque, we already allow
accessory dwelling units.
Um, so,
I'm just wondering when I look
at your requirements for um lot
size and it says there's no real
lot size that
You know, for, I mean, what I
understood in your bill is that
there's not really a, a limit on
the lot size, um, but what if
you have a really small lot size
like you have like in older
neighborhoods like Berellas or
Martinez town where you have
like really, really small lots.
Lot sizes because there was
many, many years ago, Madam
Chair and Representatives, um,
You know, there was a lot of um
irregular planting and planning
that was done in those areas,
and uh many of those areas are,
are, um, redevelopment areas.
Um,
And now you're coming and
putting in another unit.
Into those small lot sizes and
then what concerns me, Madam
Chair and Representatives, is
that we really need to think
about that because there are
concerns for fire, making sure
that they're able to get in and
I did see that you have 5 ft
setbacks and 10 ft setbacks in
the rear, which is consistent
with our code.
But, and I, when I say our, I'm
sorry, I mean Albuquerque's
code. Um,
It wasn't that long ago that I
was doing this, um, so,
The, the, the concern that when
you have uh a lot size that
maybe only 25 ft.
For example, um, and then you're
putting another unit into that
and it's less than maybe 25 by
100 or something like that, um,
and you're putting another unit
in there, um, or even a smaller
lot size in some instances we
have like
20 ft 20 ft lots.
Um, and then you're putting
another unit in there.
Making sure that fire is, and I
don't see comments in here from
any of the fire, um,
You know, because if there's a
fire, they need to have enough
room to get in in there and, and
turn that fire off because it
then really becomes a a true
health safety. I'm, I'm not
opposed to what you're going,
you guys are doing. I'm just
suggesting that these are some
things that really need to be
examined, especially when you're
mandating.
You know, to the state of New
Mexico that you can do this. And
sort of preempt those local
zoning.
Restrictions, um, the other
thing is when I think about
multifamily dwelling units, and
it says that you can do up to
10.
Um, you know, multi-family
dwelling units.
Typically, Madam Chair and
Representative when they're,
when we're looking at those
types of lots, um, you know,
we're talking about density.
And we're talking about how
those based on square footage of
the lot.
So the, the calculation doesn't
always fit in to just adding 10
more units. It, it.
It's a, it's a calculation and
it's a formula based on the
square footage of the lot.
And um so I mean, these are
things that.
Really concerned me a little bit
about this bill, madam Chair, is
that I want to see what you guys
are doing move forward, but
I have some real concerns and
when I hear the realtors.
Tell me
You know, we're not supportive.
I also haven't heard from any of
the homeowners associations. I,
I actually sit on my homeowners
association on the architectural
Review Committee, and, you know,
there are often conflicts with
zoning and the homeowners
requirements. So, I have some
concerns, madam chair, about the
bill. Honestly, I.
I want to see us move forward
with this, but I just
So like there are some things
that.
Need to be answered.
Madam Vice Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for bringing this forward. I
also.
I'm glad to see um this bill
brought forward, uh, the idea of
it, um, I do have some uh
questions, if you could help
guide me on this, um, one, as I
was reviewing the FIR um.
And the technical issues and I
was just making reference to
this, um, and the FIR that came.
Um
Uh
The 2nd page, the last paragraph
on technical issues, um, there,
it just um notes that there was
a reference made to section 1
F3.
Um, multi-family adding
multi-family residential housing
and commercial zoning districts,
and we had that conversation
earlier. Not a problem, but um
in um
Section 3, which is page 7.
Of this document, um, did you,
it, it was just raised a
multi-family a reference made to
multi-family housing and not
multi-family residential
housing because that brings me
to my next, uh, to a question.
So I was wondering if perhaps
maybe that was just an
oversight.
Madam Chair.
Perhaps, and I'm just trying to
get to the same FIR that you're
looking at have all of our, here
it is, um,
We, we would be happy to, um,
Make sure that it was the same
definition, um,
so that it was, it would.
Mimic the multi-family
residential housing.
It is the same thing. We, we
intend for it to be the same
thing. OK, great. Thank you. Um,
I was, um, I'm glad to hear that
because my, uh my next question
is on um
is on how
This creating these smaller um.
Uh
Units
How do we ensure the intent is
to, is to create a residential
uh increase the number of
dwelling units. And I think
doing it this way makes sense in
terms of infrastructure, the
area that I'm at.
It, uh, that my represent uh
infrastructure is quite limited.
It's very expensive because it's
on the west side of Albuquerque.
Volcano, um, assault and all of
that going in there. So I can
see how having established
infrastructure, water, power, so
on. Um, could facilitate, uh,
building residential units. I'm
wondering though, is how do we,
if the intent is to provide
residential housing, well this
Language in there, um.
I worry about, I've seen a lot
of our homes in our neighborhood
go to uh Airbnbs and verbos or
whatever short term rental units
and how.
Um
If the intent is to, madam chair
of the attention is to create
more residential housing. How
do, how might we ensure that
that happens. Thank you. Uh,
thank you, Madam Chair. So we
had looked for a number of
different incentives. What we
understand from the data is that
more housing is more housing,
and that the um encroachment
perhaps of vacation homes, and
that is not actually, um, while
it is a concern, it doesn't, um,
the more we have, the more we
can
build the, the more we can, um,
ensure that we actually have
homes available and it provides
the opportunity for the long
term. Some of the incentives
that we've looked at potentially
attached to something like this,
not in this legislation, but in
the future is having a long-term
rental tax credit attached to
something like this, or, or an
incentive to be able to build
this for that long term. Um,
that's not in this bill
currently. Those are some of the
other opportunities and, um, we
can talk about.
With my expert work because some
of the other great Madam Chair,
Vice Chair, I would say, um,
there are some tools for local
regulation around that. It also
offers some anecdotal
observations that oftentimes
people um may invest in making a
guest house for the purpose of
doing a short term rental,
oftentimes there's at some point
convert to long-term rentals
too, and if you put too much
restriction at the top level.
And actually could limit
investment in short term
rentals, right? And so you want
people to build these optimally
we would have enough housing,
that wouldn't matter if people
wanted to short term rental or
not. A lot of the problems with
short term rental arise because
of our severe housing shortage.
And so, um, there are some
regulatory mechanisms that local
governments can use, including
owner occupancy requirements and
other things like that, but that
shouldn't probably be at the
state level, um, in, in the, in
the statute, that should be a
local issue.
Thank you very much for that,
um, information, uh I know I'm
currently uh in an Airbnb here
in Santa Fe and talking with um
the woman who owns the property,
she prefers long-term rentals
versus short term. Um, they
become, as she was describing,
uh, her experience to me, um,
it's, it's challenging, uh, to
keep going through and so she's
found that um for her.
Um, longer term rentals, um,
actually work better for her
and.
I would, Madam Chair, also, um,
I appreciate your comment
because I.
put this in perspective about.
Housing, we're just trying to
increase the number, the numbers
of homes.
But um
Uh, and I think this is a step
towards that, um, and I
appreciate, uh, Representative
Borego's, uh, comments as well
to be given some consideration,
but um I think this is a.
Um, a good way to start. Thank
you very much. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Committee members represent
Berego.
Sorry, madam Chair, there's one
other thing I needed to raise
with regard to the west side,
especially in my district, um,
and my district is mostly
developed, but I, uh, I know
that, uh, representative Little
has some areas in her district
and representative Garrett, um,
that are not developed yet, but
one of the things that is not in
here and just FYI is we have a,
a whole um
Uh, issue regarding view planes,
and I noticed that it, uh,
you're talking about 36 ft, but
You know, one of the concerns
that I have is that in our code
based on um our, our code, um,
when I talked about earlier
about how we develop higher
density, you know, based on the
lot size, we also have uh uh
protection of our viewplanes,
especially when we're looking to
the east, and even with like,
um, you know, when you put like
an air conditioner or the whole
units on top, that's all.
in, in the protection of our
viewplanes. So I just wanted to
raise that issue also, Madam
Chair, because it's an important
issue in some of our districts,
um, especially like along Coors
Boulevard, where we have some
still have some vacant lots, um,
And I just, I just thought I
better throw that in for
clarification, Madam Chair, this
was, that was only for the
multi-family, not the ADUs. So
it wouldn't, it would, that's
what I'm referring to, Madam
Chair and Representative is the
multi-family, when you add
additional units, um, you know,
there's there's a whole
protection, there's a whole sort
of design um protection for our
viewplains on the west side, so,
um,
It's important that
If you're adding density that
those view view planes are
preserved. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Representative Lujan.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
As we're, you know, continuing
this big conversation throughout
the session on how we improve
and create density as we need
it, so, so badly in New Mexico
and obviously I'm here in in
Santa Fe, where we have some,
um, a lot of restrictive zoning,
um,
That is prohibitive to us
getting to uh affordable.
Um, housing, how are you
defining the, oh, give it back.
How are you defining the um?
this bill, uh, define affordable
housing or or differentiate in
any.
And the scope of that.
not, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Um, and also.
Does this, ma'am, is this uh?
Does this take away any of the
authority from our local
governments, Madam Chair.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative,
no, it just two things first
opens up commercial space for
the build of residential and
then clarifies what the
opportunity to build an ADU
would be. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Good work. I think, you
know, you've had
Uh, some good discussion in here
as well, Madam Chair, um, I
guess one other question I have
is, as we're, as this bill will
um and pertains to allowing
Housing, uh, traditional housing
to be built alongside
commercial, uh, zoned areas. Um,
are there a specific types of
commercial, uh, uh, are you
differentiating the type of
commercial zoning, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair Representative, this
just treats all commercial zones
consistently, um, and, uh, I
think in this case it's also
worth noting that the density
that's called out is relatively
low density, uh, for
multi-families, so we're
probably talking more like 3
plexes, 4 plexus, and we are
actually multi-family apartment
complexes, um, it would be the
density that you'd see, say, on
the east side of Santa Fe, where
you see small multi-unit mixed
in with a house and a guest
house that level of density. And
so
in that way, I don't think it's
um um.
Intensification of the local
zoning, I think what it does is
save often a year or multi-year
process of getting an approval
of change of use from commercial
to residential, so it saves time
and money in terms of that
process. Thank you for doing
that, Madam Chair. I think these
are important steps, um, and
getting, uh getting a lot uh
resolution to the problem of
housing and now we need to do
that. So thank you, Madam Chair.
To committee members.
What is
And Chera would move a due pass
on house bill 554 is amended.
Second.
Oh yes. Did you want to go back
to your
Um
We had a motion by
Representative Zamor at table.
Do we have a second? We have a
second. Please call roll.
For tabling the bill. We
Representative Boa Nonu not a
table
a block represented Borego.
Representative Lujan.
Representative Mejia.
Madam Floor leader.
Oh.
Representative Zamora.
Madam Vice Chair.
Madam,
Madam Chair.
And I'm sure by 33 to 3 to 5
votes of motion fails.
motion to table fails.
Representative on Arnu you pass
motion by uh Madam Flo leader
Skipancy. Do we have a second?
Seconded by Representative
Luhan, please call Roll.
Representative Aarne.
Yes.
Was it a block or was it a
borego?
Yes, and I'd like to explain my
vote. Representative Lujan.
Yes. Wait a minute. What was,
was the promotion?
Oh, no, and I'd like to.
OK. Representative Ferrier votes
no. Representative Lujan votes
yes. OK. Representative Mejia?
No.
Madam Flo leader.
Yes.
Representative Zamora.
Madam Weer? Yes.
Madam Chair. Madam chaired by a
vote 5 to 4, the motion passes.
Representative Borrego to
explain your votes.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
well, you know that I would like
to support your bill. I don't
think this bill is ready. Um, I
think that there are issues,
particularly on the west side,
uh, with regard to how this bill
would be implemented. I think
that home, um, the local zoning,
it preempts local zoning
authority, and um I don't think
there's enough information to
show that we've worked enough
with our local um jurisdictions,
um.
I also am concerned, Madam Chair
and representative with uh the
realtors and the homeowners
associations. So thank you.
And you have to pass.
Representative Herndon, do I see
you in the room?
House Memorial 34.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I'm before you on
House Memorial 34 and House
Memorial 34 would request the
Supreme Court to convene a
statewide task force to assess
the current legal services
available to victims of domestic
violence in New Mexico. It would
ask them to identify gaps in
services available, especially
for victims of domestic violence
who are indigent and make
recommendations for the design
and implementation of cost.
effective legal programs to
address those gaps.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Mary Ellen Garcia,
CEO of the New Mexico Coalition
Against Domestic Violence, and
we do sit here and stand in
strong support of this, uh,
memorial. We know that in New
Mexico access to civil legal
services greatly improves a
survivor's chances of securing
an order protection safely, uh,
receiving the necessary services
for safety planning, and we know
that doing this work for 25
years myself, that access to
civil legal assistance is.
And it is dire at this point.
Currently, New Mexico Legal Aid,
who is the largest, um,
nonprofit survivor services who
assists with um free access to
order of protection, uh,
attorneys had to lay off 28
individuals because of funding
cuts recently. Um, frequently we
receive emails that they are not
able to take any new cases in
particular, uh, parts of the,
uh, county, uh, particular parts
of the state, as well as
counties that do not have access
to any civil legal attorneys.
And so having an opportunity as
a state to truly look at this,
address the gaps, address the
needs, and put forth
recommendations that can truly
impact change would drastically
change um the landscape of civil
legal services in New Mexico.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee.
with that we stand for
questions.
Thank you. Let's go to the
audience, those in support,
please raise your hands.
Any opposition? Let's go online.
Anyone hoping to make public
comment in support of the bill,
please raise your hand. We have
winter. Winter, can you hear us?
Yes, I can. You have one minute.
Good morning, um, chair and
members of the committee, I, um,
rise in strong support of this
bill, as Mary Ellen was just
speaking about our civil legal
service situation and legal
support situation for not only
victims of domestic violence and
survivors, but um for all of
folks in poverty and um honestly
at modest means are in a
desperate situation in terms of
um
nowhere to go for assistance and
um our, just in my um
organization, myself and one
other attorney I've taken on
divorce cases involving um
involving significant violence
because there's nobody else to
do it. And um yes, we need
support. We need housing, um,
and, um, I think the study is uh
At least proves what we've been
saying for a long time. Thank
you.
You so much winter.
Anyone, anyone else hoping to
make public comment, please
raise your hand.
Anyone in opposition to the
bill, please raise your hand.
Saying none.
committee members,
Representative Wuhan and then
Representative Brego.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair. I think this is really
um.
I mean, I wish we didn't, I wish
we just funded this completely,
Madam Chair, um, been working on
that funding along with
Representative Herndon to make
sure um that we are trying to,
you know, meeting the demands
of, of our communities and those
that are, uh, suffering through,
um,
Domestic violence, um, I, I just
wanna thank you for this. I just
recently received a call, um,
Um
With the uh with the victim that
needed uh in my district that
needed services. We do have
services.
Provided with we are um.
That was just for immediate
housing and and what happens if
they do move forward because
they have legal costs and they,
they need um further.
Uh, protections, Madam Chair, I
think that this is.
So significant and, you know, a
lot of victims go back, um,
Back to an unsafe um space or
household because they do not
have.
Um, services they don't, they
don't have um uh provisions for
them to really take next steps
in the legal system, and it's um
it's a hardship, um.
That unless you've gone through
it, you, you don't understand
it. Um, and I just like to say
that, you know, I don't even
like to say that these are our
survivors out there, but this is
really important and and the
work and I know what you're
You're trying to do, but um I
just urge us to continue to work
on those budget, the budgets
really fund these programs.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Boreco. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I'd just like to make a motion
for approval of House Memorial
34.
Thinking for, uh, thank you so
much for bringing this bill
forward. Um, I think it is very
pretty important. My question
is, I noticed in all of the task
force members, um, that were
listed here.
Um, there is no reference in the
bill made to uh tribal nations.
Um, pueblos or uh tribes and I'm
just wondering uh if that was
just happened to be an
oversight, um.
As it was, as it is indicated
even in the FIRs.
The analysis that uh native
women, native people, uh,
because it is not limited to
women, but native people
experience some of the highest
issues of rates of domestic
violence, so I'm just Madam
Chair, um, members of the
committee representative Little,
thank you for raising that
question. So no tribal members
were not excluded, and I, let me
just point to a specific
provision.
It, it talks about uh a
cross-system collaboration among
many stakeholders, judicial
officers and uh personnel
attorneys, advocates, I assure
you that this, this, um,
This bill and this study will
not go forward without including
native um native tribes members
are, whether they're male or
female. So I, I do want to
assure you that that was the,
that is the intention and that
will occur.
Thank you, Madam Chair. That was
my question.
OK, thank you. Committee
members.
Representative Barrago, a motion
for you pass, we have a second?
Second by Representative Lujan,
do we have any opposition.
No opposition. You have a due
pass on Memorial 3. Thank you,
Madam Chair and members of the
OK, let's move along to House
Memorial 27.
morning, Madam Chair. Good
morning, everyone. Just give me
one moment while I
My laptop unlocked here.
OK. Good morning, Madam Chair.
Good morning, committee members.
As you can see, I'm not
representative Sarato. She had a
passing in the family and is
traveling today. So I'm pinch
hitting for her, um, house
Memorial 27.
calls for LCS to direct an
interim committee to develop
recommended rules that were that
will govern the implementation
of constitutional amendment,
which was approved by voters in
2022. During the 2022 election,
voters supported an amendment to
the Anti-Donation clause that
allowed an exception to allow
funds and resources from the
state or political subdivisions
to support residents who need to
connect to the main line of
essential services, in
particular, the amendment allows
these public funds to help
residents get their
last mile connection to
essential lines such as energy,
internet, water, wastewater, or
similar services. And if you
have a copy of your constitution
handy. This is on page 121.
And since then, we have not
established the rules or
implementing language for this
change to the bill, and this
memorial empowers the interim
committee at the direction of
LCS to help craft recommended
language that can make this bill
workable. And again, um, all
this memorial does is ensure
that we're putting together
recommendations to implement the
desires of the voters of New
Mexico. And with that, Madam
Chair, I stand for questions,
sort of.
You
representative, let's go to the
audience. Do we have comments
and support?
Please raise your hands. Any
opposition?
All right, let's go online.
Anyone hoping to make public
comment in support of the bill,
please raise your hand.
Seeing none, anyone hoping to
speak in opposition to the House
memorial, please raise your
hand.
Seeing none.
OK, committee members,
representative Luhan.
I, um.
I would, I believe that we
already have.
In place, um.
So contracts in place for for
this study, this is already
happening.
We have the middle mile funding
is federal, most of, most of the
funding is federal, are federal
dollars. Um, we already have, I
mean, we've already
Found a
How do you say, uh, way around
the, the concert, the um
anti-donation clause for this
funding to be established
process,
so I'd be just curious and
there's representative
Hernandez, um, why this is, uh,
why this is needed, and I'm
sorry, rep you didn't hear what
I just said. I believe that
we've already resolved or solved
this, or maybe just partially I
could be um incorrect, but we
already have um
In place
A way for us to.
Help pay for this middle mile,
uh, most of the funding in our
federal.
Federal funding that we already
have, I know that there's um
work amongst the providers and
they are doing this work, ma'am,
so I'm a bit confused with this
manager.
Um, Madam Chair, Representative,
uh, just because you weren't
here for the beginning of this
question. Don't worry about it.
Um, it's my understanding
representative, um, that this is
not about the funding itself,
it's about rules to implement
the funding correctly.
Again, Madam Chair, I, I think
this is already um.
Somewhat figured out, I think
getting around the we've.
figured this out, but I, I mean,
I'm open to
Knowing more about it, and I'm
sure.
Thank you, ma'am. Madam Chair
and in a committee. I do
apologize for, for, um, coming
in late.
Um
Uh, when, uh,
House Memorial 27 is my, um, is,
is really about trying to ensure
that, uh, especially in, in the
rural communities that
implementation is, is, it will.
Will come through and Madam, I,
I know, um, that during the
interim is is when when we're
able to do a lot of that deep
dive into um it could be
challenges and barriers that
are, that what we're facing and
so and that's why we're wanting
to address this during the
interim session, uh, to bring
all parties together. Thank you.
Thank you. I, again, um, and I
know specifically like during
the the fires and floods that we
had in Riodoso, the providers
came together many, I mean.
Um, I learned a lot of this
information because I went to a
convention specifically on
broadband and infrastructure,
and I believe um.
I'm not against us getting more
information. I'm not going to
vote against this, to be quite
honest. I'm just gonna, I'm just
wondering how this, why this is,
this is coming forward because
these efforts are already in
place as far as I'm concerned,
manager, but that's all I have.
Thank you.
And Madam Chair, just a quick
response, um, rep Serato has
spoken with DFA and was asked to
create a memorial for the
purpose of the intern, which
would um create rules to put
this in place.
Thank you.
Again, that's why I'm not, I'm
not like in full opposition, I
understand like, but the, but
these things are already, this
is already happening, this is in
place because this is critical
infrastructure and under
critical infrastructure and
under our constitution and the
and the the value of the need
and, and why we have to
have this in place is already
defined as far as I can see it,
as far as I was told because I
had to do some deep research
because I was looking at other
legislation.
Did you, oh, OK. I was like, I
didn't know if our, our, our
minority leader had expertise on
this, Madam chair
but she's welcomed. I know she
does have expertise, but, um,
uh, I don't, is anybody here
from the utility that, that is
uh.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. I have representative
vice chair Little and
Representative Barrago.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'd like
to move a de pass.
Senator Brego, OK, we have a
motion for due pass by Vice
Chair Little, a second by
Representative Barrego. Do we
have any opposition?
Please call Roll Representative
Representative Block,
Representative Borego.
Revis of Luhan.
Represented Mejia.
And I 4 L of, uh, Madam Flo
leader, Representative Zamora.
No.
Uh, Madam Vice Chair.
Yes
Yes, Madam Chair.
Yes. Madam chaired by a vote of
5 to 2, the motion passes.
Thank you, madam.
How would you?
Hey, let's move along to house
Bill 343 representative.
Armstrong.
Leader Armstrong.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I, uh,
want to tell you guys how
hard it is to work in this
committee, and I appreciate all
your hard work because it's
very, we can hear a lot of
things going on, um, even though
they're beautiful, it's very
distracting, so I was just
anxious and, and, um, so thank
you for your patience. Um, I
would help you, uh, try to get a
different committee room, Madam
Chair.
So with that, Madam Chair, um,
I'd like to uh introduce.
Um, oh my gosh, committee
substitute for House Bill. No,
that's wrong. 343, yes. Health
and Human Services Committee
substitute for House Bill 343.
Uh, what this bill is doing is
makes uh
Makes the health department to
lead Kara agency with more
specific expectations about
roles and responsibilities of
care coordination, including
in-person and active support
following up with families to
engage in with them with two
referred services focusing on
upstream support for families
impacted by substance use
disorder and now allow plans of
safe care to be created uh
prenatally, focuses on support
and connection to services for
families, including
All the families that use plans
of safe care are connected to
home visiting services and
substance um.
Eustaceorder Prevention and
treatment. With me, Madam Chair,
today I have, um, Gina De Blasi,
who is the secretary designee
for the Department of Health and
uh Teresa Casados, the CYFD
secretary, and ma'am, we do have
an amendment.
Pass out the amendment.
You've received it over a week
ago.
We had a committee, uh, uh,
submitted? Was that the
committee. We're not doing the,
we're doing the amendment.
Yeah.
So sorry, um, I will run
upstairs and grab it if I'm
afraid we don't.
OK.
If you would like
Yeah
Can you make the right.
It's two-sided.
No
So, um, let's go ahead and hear
from your expert witnesses and
then we'll go to the audience.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um,
first, Madam Secretary, go
ahead. I mean, just point of
order, are we?
Going to have the uh we're
waiting for the, OK, thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, um, as
indicated Teresa Quezados, CYFD
secretary, um, I just want to
first, um, thank Minority Floor
Leader Armstrong for working
with the department and
Department of Health. I think
that this has been an issue for
quite a long time, ensuring the
safety of infants that are born
substance exposed, as she
mentioned, this bill does do
some work to include prenatal.
Um, it's one of the reasons that
we feel it's incredibly
important to start this at the
Department of Health as the
public health entity.
For, um, New Mexicans and
especially children in care.
We believe that this bill covers
that. It keeps individuals safe.
It works with families, which I
think is critically important
in, in working through this
issue and ensuring the safety of
children and ensuring the.
availability of families to care
for those children. So there
have been many changes,
including the plan of safe care
has been amended, um, but I
think most importantly, it puts
it at a department that has the
ability to go out and do the
work with those families, with
those entities. It's still
involves the MCOs, but it
creates the care navigators at
Department of Health, um, to do
the work that we need to do to
keep children safe. It has
safeguards to involve CYFD at
the appropriate times so that we
can then do investigations, but
also works with our family
services unit to ensure that
families are able to be lifted
up and get the services that
they need. So, um, I, with that,
I will pass it off to my
colleague, Ms. De Blasi,
secretary at DOH.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, thank
you for your time this morning.
Gina De Blasi, secretary
designate for the Department of
Health, um, I don't have a whole
lot to add other than what um
Leader Armstrong and um uh
Secretary Casados put forward
other than we will be taking a
public health approach.
Uh, to this program, which is
extremely important, uh, the
Kara navigators at the
Department of Health will be
intensive case managers.
Um, working with uh families to
ensure that they, they get the
services they need. We're
standing up uh weekly case
reviews will be coordinating
with uh the uh managed care
organizations as well as CYFD
when appropriate, um, working
with early childhood education
on home visiting, and also the
healthcare authority who has
oversight of the managed care
organization. So this is really
a cross agency, uh, program that
requires a lot
of collaboration and support and
uh one of the goals that we have
is to ensure that we, we, we set
this program on a foundation and
put processes in place that are
outlined here within this bill
that really sustains and um
outlives this administration, so
that it's, it's set up uh for a
path going forward for success.
Thank you. We stand for
questions.
I think we need to move the
committee sub and the amendment
for discussion, so I would do
that.
um, representative Brego, we
don't have a committee sub.
we're gonna review the amendment
now.
Well then I'll just move the
amendment for discussion.
We have a motion to move the
amendment for discussion on 2nd
and I'll have a
Representative Armstrong to go
through the amendment.
you. Thank you, Madam Chair.
It's 2314.
40.1.
And um starting on page 15, line
22.
Uh, after program insert or home
visiting program we're adding
that in, which we think is a
central, uh, on page 16.
Line 8, after the semicolon
insert or
On page 16, line 9.
Strike or and insert in lieu
thereof and, and strike the
10th.
In the line 10 in its entirety.
On page 18, 9, strike procedures
and insert.
Um, uh, in lieu thereof rules,
and on page 18 between.
Oh.
E
Page 18, line 9.
Um, strike procedures and
insert.
In lieu there of rules.
Uh, on page.
On page 18 between lines 9 and
10 insert.
Number one, providing training
to hospital staff, birthing
center staff, and prenatal care
providers on the screening brief
intervention and referral to
treatment programs.
Online, uh, number 6 is
renumber the succeeding
paragraphs accordingly.
On page 7, I mean number 7, page
20.
Line 8
Strike the number 5 in
parentheses and insert.
Lee thereof parentheses number 6
on page 20.
Line 16.
Strike the number 5 and insert.
Number 6.
OK.
And on page 20, line 22, strike.
The number 5 and insert the
number 6.
And on page 22 line 11, after
the period, insert the closing
quotation marks and strike lines
12 through 20 in their entirety.
He can I repeat that last time
on page 20.
Line 11
After the period insert the
closing quotation marks and
strike lines 12 through 20 in
their entirety.
And then on page 23, line 3.
After health
Strike the remainder of of the
line. Strike line 4.
And strike line 5 up to shall.
And then on page 28 4 strike.
Of health.
You committee members, do we
have any questions regarding the
amendment.
I have a question. And, and this
is
Maybe more for the committee or
maybe for my understanding of
all this, Madam Chair.
But we just went a couple of
bills go through, through veins
and we had a big old
To do with it. And we're, we're
is our committee or our system
falling apart, Madam Chair, or
if this amendment was introduced
a week ago and we just receive
it now.
And, and there's quite a bit to
it.
And
Or are we falling through the
cracks somewhere where we could
Do a better job or or what's?
And
Madam, I, I, if I may, I need to
apologize because I, I, I put in
the amendment and then we
thought we might do another
committee sub and so we sent
that so I created the confusion,
uh, on Madame Chair's part, and,
and her assistant, her lovely
assistant who I adore, um, that
that that created the confusion.
So it is my fault. I decided not
to do the committee sub and just
the amendment. So I, I take that
responsibility, um.
Committee members.
I guess I'll just deal with my
frustrations, Madam Chair.
You representative Zamora, um,
there are many um circumstances.
Sometimes it's our staff,
sometimes it's me, sometimes
it's our presenters sometimes
it's office equipment. There are
many circumstances and we are
doing our best.
And so, um, with that.
I'd like to know if we have any
comments.
Regarding the amendments.
Representative Lujan.
I'm just, I wanna understand
too, I think we do have the
committee analysis for these
amendments in place. Is that
correct, Madam Chair?
All right, thank you.
I'll move to adopt the
amendment. I have a second. Uh,
do we have any opposition,
seeing none, you have an
amended.
Yeah.
Yes, so
You have an amended.
House, Health and Human Services
Committee substitute for House
Bill 343 is now amended.
Let's go to the audience. Do we
have any comments and support?
Do we have any opposition?
Let's go online.
OK, online and support. Anybody
hoping to make public comment in
support of the bill, we have um
Marilyn, Marlin, yes.
Yes, thank you. Can you hear me?
We sure can. You have one
minute. My name is Marilyn Beck.
I'm the founder and executive
director of New Mexico Child
First Network. We stand in
strong support of this bill. I
also, um, and I think I just
want to say on the amendment, I
also think
That on page 28, and you can
look at this in the committee,
but I think the striking of and
the department, um, on page 28,
I think it was supposed to be
page 27, line 24, um, I'm not
sure it makes sense on page 28,
so you can look at it, but
super, super strong support and
I'm happy, and this is great.
Thank you so much.
Thank you so much, Marilyn.
Right, we also have uh Jeremy.
Jeremy, can you hear us?
Hi, thank you, um, chair and
representatives. I just want to
say I'm in strong support of
this bill, um, for someone, a
family member who has had a car
plant failed multiple times and
have helped other people with
their care plans. This is
something that needs to be done.
So I am in huge support for
this. I hope it serves the most
innocent victims of this
epidemic. Thank you.
Thank you so much, Jeremy.
OK. Any anybody else uh hoping
to speak in favor of the bill,
please raise your hand.
Seeing none, we will move on to
uh anyone hoping to speak in
opposition to the bill, please
raise your hand. OK, looks like
we have a Mica.
Micah, can you hear us?
Yes, good morning. Thank you,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. Mike if it's any of
both futures New Mexico, and we
opposed 3 HB 343, just due to
its close connections to CYFD
and we truly appreciate the
sponsors for all their hard work
to maintain a health care focus
healthcare focused, however, we
are concerned, um, that multiple
competing bills and overlapping
plans of safe care policies will
create conflicts if all are
past, we are in support of a
health care focus, um, plans of
care like this legislation, but
if the
goal of the legislative body is
to implement a clear and
effective plan of safe care
policy, we urge a streamlined
approach that prioritizes
healthcare-based solutions
without CYFD. We strongly
support legislation that moves
care and plans of safe care care
to HCA like HB 205 and the
healthcare system is best
equipped to handle these cases,
ensuring medical professionals,
not child welfare agencies are
responsible for care, and the
shift would provide a more
effective healthcare driven
approach that truly supports
family. We thank the sponsors,
we think
Um, we really truly appreciate
the, the legislation coming
forth this year with the
Healthcare Focus. Thank you.
So much, Micah. Anyone else
hoping to speak in opposition,
please raise your hand.
Seeing none
Thank you.
Vice chair little.
Madam Chair, I would like to
move a deep pass.
Do we have any representative
Barrego before I call.
Prego and then Representative
Lujan.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair, and,
and thank you, madam for later
and your guests. Um,
So, on page 15 and 1617.
1819. I know that's a lot of
information all the way up to
page 20 I guess. Um.
And I
I'm actually learning a lot more
about CYFD. I'm not, I'm
certainly not an expert in, and
I'm glad that you have your
experts with you today, but
Could you tell me sort of in a
nutshell, cause I, I read
through everything that's
crossed out and then I read
through everything that's
inserted.
Kind of in a nutshell, can you
tell me what was removed and
what was, you know, like in a
nutshell, like how they're
different.
Most certainly, thank you, Madam
Chair and Representative. I'm
gonna let the secretary, um, do
that.
And I know, you know,
respectfully, Madam Chair, and,
and, and Madame Floor leader to
our children's well-being. I
know it's not easy to do this,
and I, I admire you for doing
this because I think it's
Something that we've heard loud,
loud and clear from our
constituents at CYFDU has got
some issues, um, and I guess my
other question in, in addition
to that would be and and I know
this can't be in a nutshell, but
How they how they're different,
the two sections, but also how
it improves CYFD.
Certainly.
Um, Madam Chair, Representative
Barrego, thank you very much for
that. I think a lot of work
initially this bill resided or
this program resided with the
healthcare authority. And as we
know, they are not a direct
service provider, so they were
contracting with the MCOs to do
this, which created some
confusion and it wasn't clear,
you know, who was responsible
for which aspects of that. So
we've taken that and we've
rewritten that bill so that it
still includes the managed care
organizations, but they have a
very defined role of what that
is, um, it also includes the
Department of Health and it
gives clear roles and
responsibilities of who is
responsible and at what point
they come into the situation.
Um, we also changed some of the
language that made it more
mandatory for them to engage in
a plan of care, um, and that
there are then um requirements
if they don't engage and you'll
see that laid out there. I think
the last thing that we did in
changing that was changing the
plan of care to a plan of safe
care, and we
separated out services from
supports so that we still want
to support families in whatever
way that we can or what they
need, but we want to make sure
that when they fill out their
plan of care that we're really
looking at what services are
needed for them to be
successful.
Madam chair and Madame Flo
leader in um your witnesses.
So
Let me just
Look at this from a
Real life kind of situation. If
a child is taken into care
through CYFD, um, and there is a
substance abuse issue, then
these requirements kick into
place. Is that correct? Am I, am
I understanding this correctly.
Um, Madam Chair, Representative
Brego.
If a child is taken into care, I
mean, these requirements come
into place in the very
beginning. So when the plan of
safe care is completed, um, by
the MCO care coordinator at the
hospital. They're working with
both Department of Health and
CAFD at that point in time. If
they feel that the child is at
risk.
Um, we would then immediately go
in and look at that. If they
fill out the plan of care and
there's something put in place
and they believe the child can
be safe at home with that plan
of care. It gets referred to the
Department of Health and their
care and navigators would engage
with that family to ensure that
there aren't any barriers for
them and fulfilling the plan
that they've selected. And then
they're in close communication.
So if at any point in time, they
feel like there's a risk to that
infant, um, then they would
engage the services of CYFD.
Otherwise
as um Secretary de Blasi said,
it's from a public health
standpoint, that they would then
be there to support that family.
And ultimately, Madam Chair and
Representative, it is the goal
of of departments and myself to
That that be the last resort
that CYFD get involved. That we
want that to be the last resort.
The first resort is we want a
safe, healthy baby. We want a
plan of safe care for that, uh,
prenatally or, or, uh, infant,
and
And then that that system set up
for them to follow that plan of
safe care. The only time CYFD
gets involved is if they decide
not to follow the plan of safe
care.
Thank you so much. I, thank you,
Madam Chair, for that
indulgence, but you know, people
who are not in the system and
don't have children, um, and yet
want the best for our, our
children, um, that's why I'm
asking these questions because I
want to understand how that
process works, so I appreciate
that.
Representative Lujan. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Um, thank you,
presenters. Um, so, this would,
this bill would then um.
So it require plans of care.
To include a referral to the
family infant toddler toddler
program.
Um
So this is where the
intervention services would be.
How I'm sure.
Madam Chair Representative Liu
Han, um, yes, and other services
as well. So it's not just the
fit program, but it's other home
visiting programs as well, the
same time, the plan of safe care
will also have other referrals
and other services that the
Department of Healthcare
navigators will be following up
on to ensure that those supports
and services are in place and
working directly with the
family. So then, Madam Chair,
the infant.
Excuse me, the family infant,
toddler program would then be
the one, the program to
Identify if services aren't
being followed and then have it
uh CYFD step in if necessary,
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair Representative Lu
Han, the uh the fit program or
the other home visiting program
would engage with the Department
of Health, which would be the
care navigators at the
Department of Health to ensure
that plan of safe care was being
followed. If it wasn't, and
through our assessments and
follow through and working with
the family and we felt that, uh,
the newborn was at risk, then we
would then engage with child
protective services at CYFD.
Thank you. I think that clears
up some of the, the
Kind of confusion, um, also, so.
What if there's a program, uh,
that is not affiliated with the
state, madam.
with the that are doing home
visiting and and such. Madam
Chair, what is their recourse?
Madam Chair Representative Lu
Han, same process, because the
plan of safe care will be
working with the providers. All
the providers that are
identified and ensuring that
those those appointments that
the Plan of Safe care is being
followed that anytime we have to
intervene and work with the
family to determine what some of
the barriers are. We'll work
with, we'll work with them to do
that. But if we do identify that
the infant is in danger at risk.
That's when we would uh refer to
child protective services over
at.
CYFD for them to conduct their
investigation that clears that
that that's where we were in the
crux of things. Also, so the
prenatal portion of this, where
is the intervention there if you
can just sum that up for us,
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair Representative Lu
Han, that would be, we'll be
working with um the primary care
physicians, OBGYN will get
training out, Department of
Health's done a lot of work on
the expert training already
right the screening, uh, brief
intervention referral to
treatment and we'll just, uh,
we, we will continue to do that
in our last committee hearing,
it was recommended, perhaps we
should think about Project Echo
to help get that out. So, um,
we're also be working on that as
well. Um, manager, uh,
representative.
So there's more work to be done
here as far as figuring out
these because we, we did take
out procedures, correct? And so
this will be outlined in rules,
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair Representative
Lujan, yes, thank you. I
appreciate that. So there's,
that's where that work will be
done. Um, I have to note in the
FIR that there um
The conflicts that they, they
mentioned are conflicts with
this bill with House Bill 205,
House Bill 173, a Senate Bill
458.
A duplication of Senate Bill 43
as introduced in conflicts with
the appropriation in the general
Appropriation Act, that's what's
concerning, I think, mostly to
me is how we're going to amend
that so that if this is the bill
that we need moving forward.
How are you, um, addressing
these issues, Madam Chair.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
as we know, um, there was a
plethora of CYFD bills
introduced, um, ultimately, the
governor is the one who has the
pin.
And if all of these cross the
line, which is some people's
concern, the governor can make
that decision on with a line
item veto, with a veto, with
whatever she wants to. We've
been working in conjunction with
the governor's office, um, with
the secretaries, um, I think I'm
signed on to all of those other
bills. We all in this room and
every single person in New
Mexico knows.
That we
New Mexico wants answers and New
Mexico wants a change. And
that's what that's all we're
trying to do and ultimately the
governor has the authority to
do what she does with her pen.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I
appreciate that answer. Thank
you.
have um a do pass motion by Vice
Chair Little.
And I
Seconded by Representative
Zamora, do we have any
opposition?
Singan, you have a.
Thank you for your patience.
OK, now.
One
Yeah
Thank you, you may begin. Thank
you. Thank you and I'm always
happy to be last, madam chair,
cause I get to hear everything.
Um, so, Madam Chair and
representatives, uh, we have
before you House Bill 416. Um,
this is, uh, basically,
I'm not gonna read this really
long uh title, but basically
what this is, is a cleanup bill
and my guest today is Anthony
Montoya, the general counsel for
PERA and also Greg, um, Trujillo
who's sitting in the back who's
the executive director of PERA
and uh Madam Chair, if you'd
like us to go through each of
the changes, they're, they're
fairly simple, um, this bill
actually came from the PERA.
Board and um we stand for any
questions.
OK, thank you. Let's go to the
audience, those in support.
Those in our position,
would you like
let's go online.
Anyone hoping to make public
comments in support of the bill,
please raise your hand.
So you know, we'll move on to
anybody hoping to make public
comment in opposition to the
bill, please raise your hand.
See that.
Hey, committee members.
I,
uh.
Representative Zamora.
I would you pass motion by
representative Zamora. I will
second.
Do we have, you have a question?
Representatives.
Luhan.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
And I'm uh
As I'm going through our FIR,
the FIR really quickly. Um, what
interests me, interests me in
this bill is, does this help or
does this address because of
just let it bless you.
Um
I see this is very, very
specific. This is no way
addresses it, um, some of the
issues we've seen in other, um,
legislation to
Um, a fix or amend the cola.
For retirees.
Madam Chair and Representative
Lujan, this does not address the
colas. Thank you, ma'am.
To any opposition to the motion
for a due pass.
And a second. Seeing none, thank
you.
Madam Chair.
we adjourn, we have a motion to
readdress.
Sentative Ona Nonu. Madam Chair,
I move a do not pass on House
Bill 402 and a due pass on House
government elections in Indian
Affairs Committee substitute for
House Bill 402.
Thank you. I will.
Do we have any opposition?
Seeing none, we have a due pass.
Thank you.
