Was closed.
Rise education offered to us by
Representative December the
generated from the Lansing
Representative Fajardo.
Thank you bye.
Dear lord we come before you and
are we ask for your wisdom lord
we ask for your discernment
we've hit the halfway mark of
this legislative session lowered
that we have so much work still
to do or.
We ask that your open our eyes
so that we can see.
Rio we ask that you open our
ears so that we can listen and
you compare our hearts so that
we can understand board.
Learned.
Fundamental tasks that we have a
printer shoulders the decisions
that we have to make and often
the stress that we go under can
be overwhelming sometimes are we
us we pray that you guide us and
direct us that you give us
wisdom.
That you give us patients.
And that you help us to find the
common ground and help us to to
do the things that we need to do
to make this state the best
place for all of us for we thank
you in Jesus name amen.
The gentleman
Representative Chatfield would
you please let us in the pledge
of allegiance.
Senator plans Medicine saluting
New Mexico's flag.
Good morning Mr speaker.
The house.
It's.
Monday.
I'm.
The next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business no objection it is so
ordered morning everyone.
Good morning.
Announcements this morning.
Mr speaker this is
Representative Anderson on
present for the day session
thank you.
Representative Anderson.
Assume that you're here.
we have a need we have here in
title up on your name plate.
on the floor.
Thank you Mr speaker on behalf
of the entire delegation thank
you.
Some housekeeping and go to
third meeting I believe the
order bills is been sent out.
I will start with messages the
gentleman from Bernalillo.
This
the next order of business
messages.
Thirteen.
Mr speaker I'm directed to
inform us of the Senate has
passed Senator fifty nine
Senator ninety six.
I
emergency clause Senate bill two
eighty six of.
Much of the class and grant us
respectfully submitted.
Senate chief clerk this is.
Mr speaker I'm directed to
inform us that the Senate has
passed Senate bill fifty one of
fifty two from.
As.
Senate bill one twenty two as
amended.
The current house respect this.
Senate chief clerk this is
really injured.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
The next order of business
introduction of legislation.
No objections or procurement.
Senate.
Introduced by senator Daniel
Ivey Soto.
To to redistricting establishing
the timelines for this creation
and draw of election districts
allowing for adjustments to the
remains of ancient tensions
following the redistricting
process defined in terms of
twenty twenty chapter nine
section one decline amid C.
Senator Stewart as amended.
Having been read twice by title
is referred to the state
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee then see
Judiciary.
Senate bill ninety two as
amended introduced by Sen Lopez
and afternoon to missing persons
requiring confidentiality of a
fun person status and location
in certain circumstances thank
you to recommended Senator
ninety two as having been read
twice by title is referred to
the consumer public affairs
committee those Judiciary.
Senate I introduced by Senator
Steinborn and after reading to
implement removing exceptions to
the requirement for secondary
school students I think I.
Senator thirty five having been
read twice by title is referred
to the Rayburn veterans and
military affairs committee hands
commerce and economic
development.
Senate.
The.
Senator Campos for the
legislative finance committee
and natural to education
including hardware necessary to
establish from broadband
connectivity among students
teachers and educational
resources and definition of
education technology
infrastructure and public school
capital outlay act.
Crying the public school capital
outlay council to establish Kerr
to fund education technology
infrastructure to ensure that
those expenditures are in
accordance the development of a
state education technology
infrastructure network
discrimination CENIC Senate bill
one for the for the.
One forty four having been read
twice by title is referred to
the Education Committee then to
appropriations and finance.
Senate leaders by Senator
Stewart.
An afternoon to reserve funds
increasing.
Access appropriation from the
general fund before the portion
of the excess is transferred to
the to the tax stabilization
reserve changing.
About the balance of the excess
extraction tax assistance fund
is transferred to each year from
the taxed nations are to the
general fund operating reserve
Senator fifty nine.
Having been read twice by title
is referred to the
appropriations and finance
committee this taxation and
revenue.
Senate as introduced by Senator
Rodriguez and after the public
has
maintained the maternal
mortality and morbidity
prevention act to clarify the
types of cases reviewed by the
return on chairman of the
committee if.
The ship membership powers and
privileges requiring approval of
the secretary of from committee
actions providing for an
executive committee clarifying
membership.
The committee providing a
deadline for rulemaking has
tremendous success amended.
Is that about ninety six ninety
six and then having been read
twice by title is referred to
the Health Human Services
Committee insisting governmental
actions and Indian Affairs.
Senate seven inches by Senator
serve on the interest or finance
oversight committee an afternoon
to finance operators in New
Mexico finance ability to make
loans or grants from a lot of
project fund for certain water
projects declined emergency
Senate bill one thirty seven.
Thirty seven having been read
twice by title is referred to
the appropriations and finance
committee.
Two eighty six as amended
introduced by Senator Ivey Soto
act relating to congressional
vacancy elections providing
tempering regency procedures for
the conduct of congressional
special elections held during
the Corona virus disease twenty
nineteen pandemic in twenty
twenty one providing a repair
declined emergency Senator two
eighty six as amended.
Is having been read twice by
title is referring to the state
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee intensive
Judiciary.
Senate introduced by Senator
Hemphill for the legislative
education study committee and
act relating to charter schools
providing preference for
students whose parents are
employees of the charter school
Senator fifty one.
One.
Having been read twice by title
is referred to gauge Education
Committee as labor veterans and
military affairs.
Senate.
Senator and natural unemployment
compensation preventing certain
extended unemployment benefits
Senator fifty two Senator
fifteen tomb having been read
twice by title is referred to
the labor veterans and military
affairs committee.
Senate as amended introduced by
senators
and representatives last of an
Action leading to economics
enacting a student athlete
endorsement act.
Position of limitations against
student athletes and certain
other individuals are in
competition from the use of
their name image likeness
allowing for the professional
representation of a student
athlete.
Informatica rising from the
minutes of the student athletes
name image or likeness Senator.
Ended.
Ninety four as having been read
twice by title is referred to
the consuming public affairs
committee that's commerce and
economic development.
Senate.
Introduced by Senator Ortiz Y.
Pino an actual professional
licensure amending a provision
of the pharmacy act to remove
the prohibition against non
pharmacists use of pharmacy
insignias or devices Senator one
twenty two is amended.
To.
Having been read twice by title
is in front of the commerce and
economic development committee
this health and Human Services.
Has sixteen introduced as.
Representative Armstrong.
Senator advisory of catching
County House memorial sixteen.
Sixteen having been read twice
by title is ordered not printed
and placed on the speakers
table.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
This.
The next order of business
committee points.
No objections so ordered
correct.
Judicial.
To.
house bill one thirty four as
amended has had it under
consideration of points on it
station that if you passed as
amended.
Respectfully submitted Gail
Chasey chair.
Mr speaker move adoption.
Transaction a favorable economic
report on house bill one forty
four as amended all those in
favor please signify by saying
aye.
And I.
Representative.
Mr speaker public affairs
committee to.
This bill to twenty six has had
it under consideration present a
condition that affects as
amended and referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Liz Thomson chair.
Is the printer and the
interactive on the single vote
and reflected in the journals of
their acted upon individual
hearing objection it is so
ordered the clerk to read Bill
two seven six to pass.
Judiciary Committee.
House resolution six to pass to
the state government elections
in the first respectfully
submitted Elizabeth Liz Thomson
chair.
Mr speaker move adoption.
Adoption of favorable container
for House Bill to twenty six is
amended.
Bill two seventy six and house
joint resolution six all those
in favor please signify by
saying aye.
On this is me committee reports
are dotted.
Mr speaker Mr governor elections
Indian Affairs Committee for
house bill one seventy eight has
had it under consideration
reports and recommendations to
pass respectfully submitted
Georgene Louis chair members of
the committee was renting Act
funds in November for the
Germans on interactive on
individual hearing objection it
is so ordered her to read.
Hi.
Can pass an institutional
commitment respectfully
submitted Georgene Mr.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Current option will twenty
percent.
House built one seventy into
forty four always in favor
please signify by saying aye.
All those of those many reports
without.
Mr speaker services can.
For hospital to to has had it
under consideration persons
recommendation but it did not
pass the house hunt and Services
Committee substitute for House
Bill two zero two two passed and
referred to the Judiciary
Committee Representative
Armstrong chair unanimous
consent and pursuant to go to
act on the single and referred
to in the journal so they're
acted upon individually
transaction is so ordered where
to eat.
House Bill to.
To pass the.
Is to the commerce and economic
development committee.
How to ten.
Do not pass but has Services
Committee substitute for House
Bill to tend to pass and just to
state government elections
Indian Affairs Committee.
House bill two fourteen.
Yes.
The labor veterans and military
affairs committee.
How to move to.
Two passed as amended immense to
the Judiciary Committee.
House.
Two passed as amended
respectfully submitted Deborah
I'm passionate.
Move adoption.
No federal committee report on
house bill two to.
Committee report health and
Human Services Committee
substitute for House Bill to
attend Senator committee report
on house bill train I was
amended unfavorable Committee
for House Bill to intimate a
favorable committee report
health and Human Services
Committee searching for House
Bill to ten and how's posed for
fourteen to twenty as amended in
to forty as amended all those in
favor please signify by saying
aye.
All.
The uniforms adopted.
Mr speaker education been
referred house bill two thirty
two has had it under
consideration forcing of
recommendation that it do not
pass but that house Education
Committee substitute for House
Bill to thirty two day pass
Representative G. Andrés Romero
checked.
Speaker move adoption of the
committee report and option and
I will report on house bill two
attention a favorable committee
appoint Education Committee
subsidy for House fourteen
thirty to all those in favor
please signify by saying aye I.
It was reported that.
Mr speaker education.
Hospital two sixty six as a
consideration for the
recommendation that a deposit as
a member and referred to the
state government elections and
in the first committee
respectful Chandra Sanchez.
Speaker move adoption of the new
report and options
has won two six six as amended
all those in favor please
signify by saying aye I.
All this was may three point
four.
Mr speaker other cultural
resources community hospital two
zero seven I've had it under
consideration for some
recommendation but it did not
pass but that house agriculture
water resources committee
substitute for house bill two oh
seven do you have an answer for
the provision of the finance
committee respectfully submitted
director of the chat.
Mr speaker move adoption option
of an unfavorable committee
report on house bill two of
seven but a favorable committee
report.
Source committee substitute for
house bill two oh seven all
those in favor please signify by
saying aye I.
His name reports about the.
Reports about the.
Mr speaker Energy Environment
and natural resources committee
has been referred house consumer
and public affairs committee
substitute for House Bill to
most folks have had it under
consideration.
Asian but it did not pass about
House Energy Environment and
natural resources committee
substitute for House consumer
Public Affairs Committee
substitute for House Bill to
move sixth two passed
respectfully submitted nothing
co chair.
Mr speaker move adoption
transaction and unfavorable for
House which was expended
favorable committee report on
initial resources committee
sensitive for the consumer
Public Affairs Committee
substrate for House Bill to a
six all those in favor please
signify by saying aye.
On this was me reports about
the.
Mr speaker.
And natural resources committee.
Has been a two sixty five.
The consideration of
recommendations do not.
But that house and natural
resources committee substitute
for hospital to sixty five to
passed and referred to the state
government elections and the
first one is but from the
commission.
Mr speaker move adoption
transaction and think of an
unfavorable committee report on
house bill two sixty five it is
sensible Committee report.
Asian as resources case
sensitive Russell to sixty five
all those in favor please
signify by saying aye.
On this was may coming up once
about the.
Mr speaker and finance committee
members been referred house bill
two and house bill three as
amended has had them under
consideration forcing of
recommendations that do not pass
but that house appropriations
and finance committee substitute
for house bill two and three
trump has respectfully submitted
Patricia A. Lundstrom checked.
That option Mr speaker.
Transaction of unfavorable
committee reports on house bills
two and house bill three as
amended but a favorable
committee report on the
appropriations and finance
committee substitute for House
Bills tune three all those in
favor please signify by saying
aye.
I.
This was me.
Committee report is adopted.
Mr speaker.
To us taxation and revenue
committee substitute for House
Bill eleven as amended by the
Senate finance committee I have
had it under consideration for
the same has duly inroad grows
preparatory December officers of
the house respectfully submitted
us chair.
Mr speaker move adoption please.
The option of a favorable
community board on house
taxation and revenue committee
substance House Bill in the lead
and all those in favor please
signify by saying aye.
I.
This was me Representative opted
for the record reflect those
copy of house taxation and
revenue committee substitute
house bill Levin.
Has medicine with an emergency
clause has been signed by the
officers of the house in open
session.
This is a fun one side.
This
makes business announcements and
miscellaneous business.
Junction sort of we have sent
bills.
They needed appropriations
referral.
Representative chamber house
bill thirty eight Representative
Chandler.
And we're adding an appropriate
a referral to the appropriations
and finance committee house bill
thirty eight to the
appropriations and finance
committee.
Bill two eleven.
House Bill to eleven
Representative Dow.
We're adding a referral to the
appropriations and finance
committee house bill two and
eleven to the appropriations and
finance committee.
Two three six Representative
Roybal Caballero hospital two
three six we're removing the
referral to the Judiciary
Committee house bill two three
six Representative Roybal
Caballero.
Removing the referral to the
Judiciary Committee.
Twenty two Representative
Armstrong house bill one twenty
two.
We're adding a phone today
appropriations and finance
committee house bill one to two
cents to the appropriations and
finance committee.
A third meeting.
Gentleman.
Sentencing has announced.
Representative Chasey.
Thank you Mr speaker I just
wanted to let you and our
members who may have known him.
I wanted to let you know that
Jack Thomas who served with us
for one term two thousand eight
he was elected and he was for
Rio Rancho and he died on the
seventeen last week so
I think that one of the
gentleman from Santa Bernalillo
may have served with him in this
county commissioner.
And we just wanted to let
everybody know we'll probably do
and the morale for him in the
thirty day session in hopes that
we're all very in person and we
can
We'll have a couple stories
about Jack Thomas he was a
wonderful person.
When I were in the same freshman
class with the representatives
cooking all court I believe
because of Quinn and I are the
only remaining members from the.
As a two thousand in Jack's with
this and.
We really enjoyed having him
here Camille rise for a moment
of silence in memory of of the
the late former Representative.
Thank you members.
the gentleman from Bernalillo
Sandoval Representative Ely.
Thank you Mr speaker I just want
to add that well I didn't have
an opportunity to serve with
Jack Thomas here again on the
Sandoval county commission for
four years and a more fun a
committed public servants would
be fine Jack which is wonderful
and.
Well Rio Rancho.
I just want to make sure to say
that we don't have
Our plans that will serve as.
Our own money to buy a true
project in his memory and I'm
sure his widow padding with by
video from people thank you so
much for.
The gentleman.
Representative Maestas.
Mr speaker honorable members of.
I will turn it over to.
Co sponsor representative about
the.
Generations Representative
Serrato.
Thank you Mr speaker can you
give me to that point Sir
respond announcements move
adoption.
Thank you very much.
The Mr speaker to other than I
saw the venturi I was very moved
Representative Thomas is a great
great then great Democrat great
representative and will be
missed by a lot of folks.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you members of the house I
wanted to bring it to
everybody's attention in case
you don't know Representative
Edwards on the land has been
quite ill and in the hospital
for now he's counting on seventy
one days
he's.
A strong Hooper.
very resilient and he's not
giving in Mr speaker he's
fighting and rehabilitating and
doing everything in his cell
humanly how're and exercise the
mental strength and physical
strength
See that he gets back home but I
wanted to share that so that Mr
speaker and all the members of
this house after the many many
years that of his service to
this house and as chair
and I just want when Frank I
think it was chair of the house
Canson Revenue Committee
That we keep him in our prayers
and that we wish him a speedy
recovery and the speedy return
to his home and the love and
comfort of his home which is
what he wishes the most
important as he continues to
keep the surprised on Facebook
and asks us for our daily
prayers and positive thoughts
his way thank you Mr speaker and
thank you members of the house
something went to offer him a
thought or prayer in whatever
way is our members
tradition.
Thank you gentlemen.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
This.
And then I moved
in.
Transaction is so ordered.
I ask unanimous consent that has
been suspended.
A little show all those present
at this morning session
a pleasant afternoon session
transaction in this order Mr
speaker I ask unanimous consent
rules be suspended the report
shows that the
phone in the.
Subject to the.
Approval of the business
committee.
No objection it is so ordered.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
This.
That makes.
The.
Representative.
Sorrento
on item number two.
I'm sorry I'm looking at the
gentlelady from Bernalillo and
of course I know that you're my
neighbor years Santa Fe
generating apologize.
Representative S. economy
running on your first bill.
Yes Mr speaker can you to that
point.
point of order just briefly
Representative Crowder wanted to
bring up the point of order on
this and on the committee
referral so I don't know if this
is the proper time to do that
but
Representative Crowder one to
bring phones over.
Was the time to talk a committee
referrals at the time there
maybe.
I mean is.
On has been added to your point
about how it's going to yes it's
about house bill eighty two that
it did not go to appropriations
and there's a four hundred
Our approach General does not
mean this not a point of order
so we can have the gentleman is
discussing during the debate as
the freak as he often does thank
you Mr speaker transaction
necessary for placing House Bill
intended on final passage has
going to
made general insurance plan her
first bill.
I thank you Mr speaker I'm AT AT
to the historically
underutilized businesses
opportunity act creates the home
certification for businesses
owned by women and people of
color it allows the state to
offer training to these hubs as
they bid for contracts and
purchasing as well as creates a
searchable database on these
businesses and tracks thank
contracting but with hubs as
well in particular this program
would enable the tax revenue
department to identify New
Mexico small businesses owned by
people of color and women and at
the same time hubs could then
work with business supporting
nonprofits to learn how to
navigate steeping process and
qualified.
And then did the General
Services Department convention a
database of qualified hubs in
track how often hubs are would
contracts the total number of
these contracts all the bill
would also enable current
contractors with the state
utilize the help desk database
in but identifying for potential
subcontractors it does not
create setasides it does not
create point systems it just
allows the state to really track
and and create a database that's
in the that allows us to really
track how these businesses are
doing with purchasing as one
sixty six major communities of
color and this bill ensures the
state dollars are being used for
economic growth right here at
home and in that those are going
towards businesses in other
reflection of our population so
if I may I'd love to ask who
sponsor the gentleman from
Bernalillo Representative my
asked to say a few words.
Representative Maestas thank you
Mr speaker honorable members of
the set up though that this
proud to co sponsor this bill
with representative from Santa
Fe as you as many recall about
this but I think this may be the
it's passed the house by about
three times in different forms
there is a comptroller office in
the state of Texas is that
similar to our auditors since
the new administration came and
the secretary of GST General
Services Department Kenneth
Ortiz and his staff have re
crafted the bill and it will be
under that departments Authority
but it's it's a fantastic bill
it's kept you know upwards of no
over a trillion dollars of Texas
money in the state of Texas by
designating Hobb certified
businesses to contract or
subcontract with that state's
procurement and we want to join
our friends and learn from that
experience so that more
procurement dollars goes to
in state contractors and allows
them to build their businesses
and build our communities
economic thank you Mr speaker.
Representative Crowder.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
please yep.
Yes Mr speaker I will yield to
the gentleman from on sorry
curry.
Thank you gentle lady Mr speaker
just a comment I noticed that
this bill does have a fiscal
impact.
it's it is a recurring fiscal
impact year after year after
year Mr speaker would seem
appropriate to send this to
House Appropriations and in
finance.
for review I know we just passed
a budget out of the body today
read it on the fourth.
And and
I am concerned about the number
of bills that have a fiscal
impact they're not.
being vetted by the
appropriation committee are
added into the budget process so
just want to make a comment Mr
speaker gentle lady thank you.
Gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln representative Nibert.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady you.
Yes Mr speaker I would to the
gentleman.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady just a couple
questions on page three line
seven I see.
This so let's requires the
business of the fee to be all
for that fifty percent.
And my question is a lot of
businesses in New Mexico are
owned.
The police by maybe two partners
a husband a wife could own a
business and yet if their own
fifty fifty I read this
correctly that business would
not qualify is that correct.
Mr speaker gentleman.
I am going to consult on with my
witnesses real quick and just
introduce them on their
secretary Kenneth Ortiz the
General Services Department GSD
director purchasing market rate
in New a Jason Weaks
representing the Hispana just
give me one moment.
Thank you Mr speaker the.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen I spoke with witnesses
and yes that is that is correct
on the fifty point zero one
percent major women slash pick
people of color but the intent
is to ensure that is businesses
are major of those groups.
Madam Mr speaker and gentle lady
I'm really sorry to hear that
because there's so many New
Mexico businesses that are owned
fifty fifty they would have to
engage in some creative business
development plans to change that
to qualify Mr speaker my
secretary.
Lines the eighteen of the
following.
Is there anything in this
legislation that would alter the
competitive nature of our
procurement process.
In other words are these
businesses given.
Priority or a mandate that the
agencies utilize these
businesses even though another
business I have a more
competitive competitively priced
offered for the agency.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Chavis and Lincoln hi and know
that as I mentioned in my
opening remarks there's no
setasides or any.
additional points awarded to any
organization I just allows these
historically underutilized
businesses to receive additional
training and and also be part of
a database on that would be
searchable and available to
contractors for potential
subcontractors and also allow us
to track that data to on the
better understanding of the
state how we are
where are C. dollars are going
towards procurement of.
Madam Mr speaker and gentle lady
In section five B. on page six
it says the.
The goal is to of contract
directly with historically
underutilized businesses or
indirectly through
subcontractors and I just wanna
make sure the the intent is not
to
forced agencies to nor
competitive bidding
and I'm concerned that this
line which may require
contracting that would require
agencies to accept a otherwise
non competitive the.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln no they did again there
are no setasides there are no
there's no additional points
awarded in the contracting are
being processed so it would not
impact on bidding process in the
way however it would allow these
companies and businesses to
access more information on more
training that they would need
allow us to track as well.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady for your quest for
for your answers.
As for the debate the gentleman
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you Mr speaker the.
Thank you.
Representative bringing this
bill I there are parties bill
that I'm I'm excited about.
The the gentle lady of.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Lee ideal to the Representative
to the gentleman from.
Thank you very much
Mr speaker gentle lady my first
question and and your your co
sponsor the representative from
Bernalillo may be.
They just have the answer for
this it does appear as as was
stated in his opening opening
remarks.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
That this is the third or fourth
time that this bill some version
of this bill is come through.
And
I'm I'm just curious during each
of those.
Steps and processes what was
there never a disparity study
done.
To establish the need for this
fact in and the baseline for how
we actually track and set
targets.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady.
Mr Mr speaker and gentleman I'm
going to go and had to my my
cosponsored the gentleman from
Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman from the general from
Santa Fe questions the
This bill up they made it to the
Senate for two years ago did not
receive a message last year but
it passed the house two years.
But both years prior to that
our our former colleague
Representative Youngblood was
one of the co sponsors in the
last year of her term in Texas
the disparity study was done I
think in nineteen ninety two and
then there how legislation came
a couple years later we didn't
do a disparity study no one's
propose that from from either
executive that has seen this
bill and I think the reason is
because it has no setasides it
has known of five percent Bombay
has no quarters it has no
mandatory language in the bill
it's merely an opportunity to
To keep these I'm cert
businesses at the forefront on a
website do we so they can
organically build relationships
with these larger primarily out
of state.
A contractor that may not have a
relationships with local small
businesses and
And and keep good stats and see
where that were procurement
dollars are going.
Thank you Mr speaker.
From Bernalillo.
My second question would be.
Why are we.
What was the impetus for leaving
veteran owned businesses out of
us.
No.
Mr speaker and gentleman there
is already a set aside and a
process for those businesses
that are currently on again this
is to to allow us to evaluate
how state purchasing it realized
insure that your to have a
better understanding of the
understanding of how businesses
owned by women and people of
color are interacting and
participating in our State
purchasing.
Thank you Mr speaker
Mr speaker and the lady news
finalize this bill would exempt
the legislative legislature
courts and local government.
From this process.
Mr speaker and gentleman give me
one moment to check in with my
witnesses.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman that extension is that
the store will exemption that
has been the case since within
section of those groups and it
it since their inception.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady
as this bill continues on.
Would would that be a friendly
amendment if you would be
willing to pursue on the server
side.
Mr speaker and gentleman at this
time no because we are looking
to again use this as an
opportunity to evaluate our
purchasing process and so we
believe at this time in
consultation with a GSD and here
do the keeping it as it is which
would be the best course of
action.
Thank you Mr speaker going at.
I.
Understand your position I I
just feel very strongly that.
We should be tracking this if if
it's important enough practices
state agency level is very
important to track at the at the
court and at the municipal level
as well.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
Several of the document read
prepping for for house bill
eighty two.
We have a concern with respect
to the equal protection clause.
News can you explain Mr speaker
and the lady
the representative from.
From Bernalillo.
How we're confident that we are
not violating the equal
protection clause thank you Mr
speaker intelligence.
Thank you Mr speaker Angela give
me one moment I I feel I know
the answer I want to check with
my witnesses to confirm.
Okay.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman and you know I did
check my witnesses and was what
I thought you know again we're
not treating any setasides we're
not creating any you know
additional points in the in the
procurement or bidding process
this alone allows us to track
and a better understanding of
how we to work with these folks
doesn't engage with a protected
classes in the same manner and
so this really just gives us the
opportunity to have an
understanding and you know
potentially formulate a plan for
the future to ensure we're
doing.
But again that this primarily is
to track information to better
understand where on the state is
in this process.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady to so taking that to the
next point
Mr speaker gentle lady who owns
the data and and how was that
become available to the public.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman you know the process
total work essentially is that
TRD will you know enable that
that that certification process
and then that data will be
available in a searchable
database through GST General
Services Department and they
will manage that and that will
be available so that again when
contractors look at looking to
subcontract you know what
business are looking to to gain
that
certification they'll be able to
understand do that through that
process and again on the putting
those in the bill that allows
facilitating on non profits to
be able to work with these to be
able to work at these companies
or organizations to help them
through that process as well.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady.
You may mention just a few
minutes ago
about Mr speaker and only about
the use of this information in
the future.
I think it's too far off target
what would be an ultimate goal
of.
Four years down the road with
the status in your eyes if you
don't mind thank you Mr speaker
and the leader.
Mr speaker a gentleman and you
know I don't know what the
status is meant to be quite
Frank that's my concern is that
we don't have a real tangible
understanding of where the state
of purchasing processes and if
we're actually on ensuring that
businesses that are capable of
serving the state are are are
having access in the ways they
can perhaps their businesses are
able to to to fill some of these
you know purchasing I have no
idea this process and so what
this bill allows us to do is
have a better understanding
create that database and really
allow that to happen so again I
can't make that kind of
speculation at this time only
because I don't know what the
data says.
Thank you Mr speaker and the
lady I think the only thing that
that I have is for the
representative from curry's
remarks that this does have a
clear appropriation to the fact
that this did not go through and
is not part of House Bill to
does this person concerns that
for me.
I look forward to seeing how
this continues on thank you Mr
speaker and going to your
doctor.
Mr speaker I think you the floor
amendment I would I would like
to move and then it will provide
to.
Just
Representative room of this bill
does not making appropriation.
has moved house.
One one.
Team house bill eighty two is
amended it has been passed out
generating to please tell us the
to to number at the bottom of
the bill.
number two two OO one four point
one generating
to explain her amendment.
Thank you Mr speaker on house
floor amendment one addresses
technical concerns from the tax
act's and Revenue Department we
work together on this language
and both the secretary of that
department and I feel that the
amendments will enable the
department to receive ensure the
proper information to administer
the program as well as provide
providing some clarity in some
definition in particular lines
amendments one to sorry so under
starting with the man wanted
strikes the house commerce and
economic development committee
amendments for five on they will
come back in a moment on a on
number two online one a certain
page one teen inserts sections
one five of this.
In striking the where this on
and then in page two on one
twenty five inserts that
It has average gross revenue
from the preceding three county
years it's not just a five
million dollars as reported to
the taxation and revenue
department on page two on that
same line changes an average
number of New Mexico resident
points to employees in New
Mexico online three I'm sorry
Page three line ten Mr speaker
I it strikes and and insert
definitions for nonprofit entity
that allows them to utilize that
information from the federal
income tax
forty to make sure they have
that information from the IRS
and it also adds back in house
commerce and economic the
committee amendments for I and
then number six is re lettering
so it's in the proper order and
number seven on page three of
one twenty two it allows the
taxation and revenue department
to utilize current information
from the federal government so
that they can make so they can
they can use that information on
the ownership of the kids for
certainly under utilized and
status that way they're not as
the state reinventing the wheel
and he and number eight looks
like a very long
very along
set change really it just adds
to the to the statute the very
and line that secretary of GST
and the secretary TRD are able
to share information to carry
out of.
Those are the thank you.
Germany is there debate on the
amendment.
Representative Scott.
Representative content and
comment on the amendment.
Yes Mr speaker I apologize.
Still having issues with the
technology will gentlelady
yields.
Mr speaker yes I will yield to
the gentleman from the.
Just one quick question are.
Representative Allison.
What your membership for.
H. two one twenty four New
Mexico resident employees for
our Lutherans.
Please madam producers for.
Information please we'll have to
the legal residents.
Mr speaker of the gentleman no
again this is hello this is the
language of tier two uses in
referring to but employees of
New Mexico in New Mexico
employees and so we wanted to
make sure that language alligned
that was by the request of the
department.
Okay question thank you Mr.
For the debate on the amendment
gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln.
Thank you Mr speaker will
gentlelady yields.
Mr speaker I will your
government from Travis.
Mr speaker two points.
If we are adding.
Several pages and is largely
sections six.
There is the title of the.
Bill not be to be.
Revise this too well.
Mr Deputy.
Okay hold on for one second and
gentleman sorry Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Aug anyone want with my
witnesses thank you.
Thanks.
Thank you Mr.
So sorry I just checked in and
as you know we have distracted
by LCS well and really because
the section six would not
substantially substantially
change the bill itself only
Johns in that speech trump is
just enable communication
between those two these two in
the bill itself because of that
you know the title refers to
substantiated changes to the
long since that is not on that
is that is not required to
change.
The title of the bill.
Mr speaker and gentle lady it
looked to me like section six.
Thanks is down and Tarly
different road and I was a bit
confused by the length and
breadth of section six.
Because it seems to depart from
the first five sections of your
bill which is to allow.
Some consideration given to
these types of businesses that
are owned by women or by
no minorities and.
This section has nothing to do
with that issue
Of of the point out.
Changes to through five of the
men in our existing statute.
All of the only name it does is
at the underlined text on page
five.
Think about.
For K. and I was
thank you we were at the.
All of that of the only other
question I would have Mr speaker
and gentle lady as.
If.
That information.
Now can be just Senator by the
General Services secretary.
There is all that information
then becomes subject to your per
request.
Thank you Mr speaker Angela give
me one moment we'll consult with
my witnesses.
Mr speaker the gentleman I just
checked in with that secretary
of of a GST and and their
general
Services their general counsel
on and see what they said was
that specific personal tax
information would not be able to
be confronted but if the
business was help certified and
that information would be able
to.
Mr speaker gentle lady thank you
for answering those questions I
of just for the length of it was
a big one thank you Mr speaker
thank you John.
Amendment.
Is there objection to it.
Hearing none has learned in the
one to house bill.
Others injection and all those
in favor of adoption of house.
And has related to signify by
saying aye.
I thank
me.
You guys have in house one to
house bill eighty two is amended
as a doctor.
There's further debate on the
the gentleman from Lambert
Senator Scott.
You.
Thank you Mr speaker yes I will
yield to the gentleman highs and
preach restrictions on to.
Mr speaker gentle lady to.
The use of our instances of the
word Cheryl.
And then falling for.
develop goals for the.
For the.
Under utilized businesses.
And our concern is critically.
Interpreted as a quarter.
Mr speaker and gentleman know
that would not be considered
because as I mentioned are no
setasides and no on additional
points awarded for any of these
things these are objectives
within the agency understanding
their their their roles but
again these are really to better
understand the data more than
anything else there's nothing in
here we created a site or
additional point.
Mr speaker point reading
sections of.
Senator grew with the state.
And here if you'll allow me.
Sure wish agency specific goals
for their use.
It was businesses first Richard
Pryor.
Posted acquisition.
Mr speaker gentleman these goals
you all for that sector are not
binding goals there are no
consequences to agency should
they not hit these internally
created goals on and again if
there was interest in putting
setasides Oregon additional
points out and laid out in the
bill that we specifically have
not done that this bill.
Okay.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
general for your answers.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative Garcia.
Thank you are is the most
beaker.
The gentle lady from Santa Fe
yield.
Mr speaker I will yield to the
gentleman from
early in.
gentlelady from Santa Fe.
Surprise surprise surprise.
You come face to face with the
rookie sales director.
So I'm one of which.
You did have you take off on
your first song on the first
song of your first bill on this
floor and I just want to kind of
review for you the speaker
gentle lady from Santa Fe the
caliber of songs that you have
to I'll do.
And and what you have to have or
come close in terms of a
compatible song is some of the
songs that are outstanding
chamber has some and that
includes another whole lot by
song.
I hope you're trilingual.
Representative said just that I
thought we had a Rogers and
Hammerstein song we are a sports
anthem we had a beautiful opera
song.
also.
In that as bad as a result which
is a balance we had a Spanish
Ranjit are.
We've had a punk we've had a
country.
Our rock.
Rock and roll in the and the
children some I don't think it
was trickle trickle that'll
started but something like that.
So you can see that we have
different John are going on in
terms of a rookie's first song
and now.
That's here one and two and a
three.
The same.
Mr speaker and gentleman I will
be us if you are from the great
listen.
Why men great til they gotta be
great don't text me tell it
straight to my face best friends
that we done in the salon chair
shampoo press get you out of my
hair only the rest Mr speaker it
may change
what it's here for the.
The.
Representative.
All.
As the director I think she's
get that's a higher score
that'll kind of border over the
top in terms of this bill moving
forward is the most because.
As for the bill.
Generated a close.
And hopefully get some of those
those dance moves as you close
generating everyone's pretty
impressed.
I thank you Mr speaker on into
the body I want to thank my
colleagues for the conversation
I hope you will support our
efforts to develop a data at the
data and and the support needed
to ensure their state dollars
are serving our communities with
that Mr speaker I move that H.
B. E. two is twice amended do
now pass.
House Bill to.
And we're still in the second
vote
Senator has of course that
everyone will vote no in the
switch the vote at the last
second for the sake of we need
in his anxiety levels please do
not waiting to the last second
to switch votes if you want to
do that just keep in mind we
want to keep everybody happy and
safe thank.
The vote is now open.
In the.
Close.
Thirty seconds to close.
To call the members who don't
have a recorded vote.
Representative.
Representative yes
Representative Stansbury.
Right in front of fifty two
permanent fifteen negative house
bill eighty two as amended has
duly passed the house.
Next item eight.
Hi gentlelady from Bernalillo
Representative Sariñana are you
ready on that item.
Yes I am Mr speaker would you
give me to that point.
The front sensor for placing
House Bill three on final
passage is been taken gentlelady
to explain the.
Thank you Mr speaker as the
thirty one is amended modernizes
New Mexico military co twenty
dash twelve dash fifty one raven
cardinal knowledge so that it
aligns with the federal military
code Mr speaker I stand for
questions.
Mr curry.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady please you.
Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman from curry county.
Thank you generally it's not
often we see a bill that has to
do with the.
The code of military justice and
it caught my attention
And as I look through that are
trying to figure out exactly who
does this bill apply to.
since we're talking about a
military justice.
Issue Mr speaker and kind and
this is a place to only in New
Mexico in New Mexico only the
National Guard.
Okay and this is my
understanding that's only the
National Guard if they are not
assigned to active duty is that
correct gentle and if they have
not been federalize that is
correct if you okay and
gentleman can you tell me
approximately how many.
folks are international guard
that are not assigned to active
duty in the mall.
Mr speaker Mr
gentleman I cannot and do not
know the number I'm sorry.
Mr speaker Jordi do have an
expert witness for.
Thank you the.
In the state.
Thank you Mr speaker kind of.
Seeing no further debate.
Generated close.
I'm sorry there is.
So when we have members of the
chamber and and I'm used to
people being finished and they
sit down and of course about
doing that so I apologize
gentleman we're waiting on an
answer your question I
apologize.
Thank you Mr speaker.
I take a second thank you ma'am
line.
Speaker.
Thank you Mr speaker and I don't
seem to be able to get on the
line.
Of gentle lady Mr speaker that
that's okay I would like to have
an answer we have an opportunity
at a later time to text more let
you know you're very curious so
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady that's all my
questions thank you for the
debate the gentle lady from
Santa Representative Powdrell
Culbert.
This.
The.
Of this with the lady of.
Mr speaker I yield to the kind
thank you madam Sierra County.
Thank you this is because of
lady I'm just curious are you
that my love the listening but.
Is this.
How does this affect our
National Guard is.
Mr speaker kind gentle lady this
only is for the National Guard
and all we're doing is
modernizing that the military
code that specifically for
raping part on knowledge it's
three paragraphs right now and
we it's it's modernizing it is
making it more detail is
it's just going through and
saying if if you rape someone
this is what happens if you
commit sexual so this is what
happens it also changes when it
changes in defense it it does
say marriage is not a defense
for any conduct at issue in any
prosecution under this section
so it's it's just modernizing it
it's really bringing it up to
the same code as are you C. N.
J..
Okay and bring that up some
photos that are bringing it up
symposium yes Representative.
Ms our Mr speaker finally I
didn't hear what you said I'm
sorry.
The lady I'm just trying to find
out if.
Doing this yes in this low does
it coincide with everything else
with other departments and the
rest of the fence.
the only Mr speaker Clinton lady
I can tell you is it nears the
UCMJ which is pretty New Mexico
law so that mirrors the CMJ okay
all right thank you Mr speaker
thank you the lady.
The
gentle lady to close.
Mr speaker I move house bill
thirty one as amended do now
pass.
Thousands of house bill thirty
one is amended the vote is now
open.
Thirty seconds to close.
The.
As members who do not have a
recorded vote.
Representative Anderson.
Yes Representative Anderson both
yes Representative chairman.
The
and the furnaces unique and has
been thirty minutes has duly
passed the house.
Next with the item nine.
Chairman representative of this
are you prepared on that item.
Thank you Mr speaker I'm
prepared will you get me to that
point please with the fourth
option necessary for placing
House Bill fifty six as amended
on final passage has been taken.
The gentleman to explain.
Thank you Mr speaker house bill
fifty six makes several changes
to laws related to human
trafficking and sexual
exploitation of children by
prostitution including expanding
the definition of the crime of
human trafficking verifying the
tactic law enforcement may use
to identify and apprehend
individuals engaged in those
crimes increasing consequences
to those who commit those crimes
and expanding the protections
available to victims of those
crimes Mr speaker and the body
we've seen this bill before we
had bipartisan support and and
before I turn it over to my I co
sponsor representative Thompson
I just want to talk about human
trafficking it's a type of crime
that involves the use of force
fraud coercion to compel a
person to perform some type of
labor or commercial sex human
trafficking can happen in any
community and anyone can be
traffic regardless of age race
gender or nationality
traffickers might use violence
physical and psychological
torture manipulation or false
promises of well paying jobs or
amount of relationships to
entrap victims into trafficking
situations.
So this is really a crime that
involves everyone across the
board and last time we had and
we received bipartisan support
when it passed the house and I
urge this body to vote in favor
of this bill and now Mr speaker
I am going to turn it over to my
co sponsor Representative
Thomson.
Thank you Mr speaker I will be
very brief so this this bill
does a few things one that I
think is really important is
that takes the criminalization
of the victim out of the process
right now if you are trafficked
for sex work you can be
prosecuted as a prop I mean you
can be prosecuted and we we
don't want them to be further
traumatized it also Mr speaker
and brings up current our
current.
Thank you it is there is a worse
punishment for trafficking in
drugs than there is for
trafficking in human beings so
this will bring up the age of a
minor to it will be a first
degree felony if the person is
under eighteen currently I
believe it's only a first degree
felony if they're under fourteen
and I still do you are the
fourteen fifteen sixteen
seventeen year olds as children
so we we are trying you are
respond to what's happening in
the state and and making better
for the victim the survivors and
and make sure make sure that we
treat the perpetrators
appropriately and with that Mr
speaker I will tell you that our
our expert witness is mark
provides for Basco from the
attorney general's office and he
will be with Representative
Lewis thank you Mr speaker we
stand for questions.
Concern for.
Representative Maestas.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Bernalillo you.
Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker delayed
from early I just up.
This bill I think was
introduced.
Last year at all maybe the year
before that so.
Miss you know look at it for the
first time the there's a couple
things I just want to talk about
what is it us the members just
to premiere as themselves with
the with the store not a call it
sort of sex offender
registration notification Act
it's a big deal for governments
to do this and so if you're
convicted of a particular crime.
Then you're required to to
register and so I like the
language with regards to
Human trafficking because you
could be human trafficking for
labor purposes as well as sexual
exploitation and so this one
makes it clear that.
You know sex of sex people who
are on the six bedroom sex
offender registry should be
affects sex offenders in fact Mr
speaker joy from Bernalillo
under the old act it was the
kidnapping of a minor and then
we or no and it was false
imprisonment and we changed it
to also present with the.
You know planning on doing a
sexual assault kidnapping
planning on doing a sexual
assault so it's it's always good
to get that language clear some
happy for that but there's two
things I I have issues with and
and and and and and I'm going to
not support the bill because
they're they're they're big
issues the big issue if you look
at the the the definition of
conviction.
Why Mr speaker Joint Memorial
why do you change the definition
of conviction that we all know
in New Mexico law that a
conditional discharge is not a
conviction.
What do you what do you wish to
change the definition of
conviction for the purpose of
this act only.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you John and I'm just going to
confer with my experience and as
representative Thompson stated
it is mark progress grew with
the attorney general's office.
You Mr speaker and thank you
gentlemen so that was done for
two reasons so the first reason
was really to reduce ambiguity
so there's a lot of confusion
right now over who is required
to register under are not the
next one is to expand judicial
discretion over registration so
those are the reasons why that
definition working.
Thank you thank you for that Mr
speaker is only from Bernalillo
gentle gentle lawyer from the
AG's office there of there is no
computer.
As to who registered as a sex
offender and who does not.
If you get convicted of these
crimes even if you get a
deferred sentence which which
means you don't get sent to
prison
or suspended sentence you know
or a partially suspended in
other words you get a deferred
sentence and you still have to
register however if you get a
conditional discharge then you
don't have to register so that
in fact given the judge much
more discretion in that one
percent of situations where
someone is entitled to a
conditional discharge you know
maybe a twenty year old with a
seventeen year old or whatever
the the the conditions for a
recommendation was charter so
rare
but you're taking that away
you're taking away all judicial
discretion of and sometimes it's
in the state's interest to have
a plea agreement that involves a
conditional discharge and so
you're taking that away but
here's the worst part Mr speaker
gently from him.
Because this is not a criminal
act it's a symbol Act.
The government can do stuff
retroactive.
And retroactivity is
Is
you know if you look at the
district conservative principles
of governing it's it's it's
frowned upon to say the least
it's very very back so let's say
there's twenty or thirty or
fifty I don't know fifty or
twenty folks who got a
conditional discharge back in
the day of they're going to
register under this act.
We we can't do that to people we
can't do stuff retroactive that
that's not what government
should be doing
so I just I should keep that in
mind with regards to the statue
limitations Mister speaker July
from Bernalillo
Why did you remove we've been
struggling with the special
invitations for homicides
The second we murder my opinion
should not have such limitations
why did you remove the statue
limitations for these for these.
Point.
Section three Mr speaker gently.
Mr speaker and gentleman sorry
about that I just had to consult
with my expert witness and this
is treated like other first
degree felonies the intent was
really to get rid of the threats
that are posed by the
traffickers and also
in in especially when we're
talking about
folks that are being for and in
terms of immigration status the
threat there is really a
deportation.
Mr speaker gentleman you are
still muted thank thank you Mr
joy from Bernalillo so thirty
dash fifty two dash one.
Is is what is what crime what
crime are we extending the
statute of limitations.
So I understand so it's just the
human trafficking statute I
understand I thought you were
increasing the statute for all
the sex offender registration
type crimes
if you are so you're proposing
Mr speaker gently that there is
no statute limitations that
there's no and it's time and
that's a very rare occurrence in
criminal law it is it brings the
only should apply to homicides
in New Mexico to place the
homicide and first degree
violent felonies so.
Before gonna bump given tracking
up to a first degree viability
doesn't capture it anyway.
Mr speaker and gentleman I'm
consulting with my witness here
and he says it's up five years
for a third degree felonies.
I see thank you thank you and
then.
I'm sorry Mr speaker and
gentleman and then
It's unlimited for.
For violin so it's it's
unlimited for violent first
degree felonies and that's the
current state of the law thank
you thank you Mr delay no that's
correct it is the current state
of the law so that begs the
question.
If we're gonna move human
trafficking refers to be why
would you have that language
it's it's their big credibly
difficult crimes to successfully
prosecute.
They're very very very labor
intensive need cooperative
victims the the the victims just
want to be free that I want to
come back a year later and
testify much less ten years
later for twenty years later.
there's simply no way you can
get a conviction.
Ten years down the road
it would be almost impossible
and so there needs to be
You know if a prosecutor has two
cases on his desk Mr speaker
gentle lady or or her desk.
And only has one data do a trial
you do the crime it's the most
recent
and that's why we have such
limitations in our laws and to
extend outward indefinitely
doesn't really increase public
safety
In my mind of Mr speaker jelly
Cup couple other questions in
the
and this is why I was against
the the fact that human
trafficking statute in the first
place is because we have crimes
on the books that was a
criticism The New Mexico does
you don't New Mexico that that
it's it's not against the law
human traffic right so we
created the statue of human
trafficking and that's why we're
raising the penalties now
because what we created back
prevent statute a specific crime
in statute trump's a more
general point in statute so when
you create the specific crime
and we put it as a third degree
it actually lowered penalties
and then I gave the speech in
the in house judiciary and the
prevalent deaf ears because if
we currently have in statute but
we have child abuse which is a
first degree crime.
On and then we have a
kidnapping.
Which is a first degree crime.
And so and you can stack those
crimes if if under certain
circumstances and you can get an
indictment up to thirty six
years there's multiple victims
of two fifty six of two hundred
years and so the law as written.
How the statute is incredibly
broad the kidnapping statute is.
Infinitely broad and so I would
suggest the prosecutors use
those two statutes to capture
these crimes but you can't you
can't if you're making the
allegations you have to use this
statute and so it's it's
important we get it right on the
bottom of eighteen Mr speaker
gentle lady on the bottom of
eighteen oh we say the magic
words
In this section.
One moment I'm a bit and.
So those are the double jeopardy
is my point the
double jeopardy is prohibited in
the federal constitution in
state constitutions it's
something that the founders
rejected.
Act that somebody is is tried
twice for the same act or
charged twice for the same at.
And so what we're trying to do
in this statute is of we're
trying to usurp.
constitutional law in statute
and so here's what we're trying
to do is we're putting in
statute.
On the bottom of page eighteen
believe section six each
violation of this section
constitute a separate offense
and shall not merge with any
other offense well that's that's
all well and good but you can't
like put in statute some
something that from the
constitution and so in my
opinion the prosecutor is
prohibited from using child
abuse statutes in certain
circumstances prohibited from
using connecting statutes in
certain circumstances prohibited
from using private a witness
statutes under the circumstances
and so you're locked in your
locked into charging a person in
successfully prosecuting a
person under this statutory
scheme that we entitle human
trafficking and it's incredibly
difficult because you have to
prove way much more you have to
prove up more elements of the
crime so to speak by using the
statute so I so that provision
of is it doesn't take us off the
hook in my opinion and then
lastly on sticking with state
sticking with page six Mr
speaker base nineteen section
six you talk about restitution
and restitution as we all know.
In criminalizes initially paying
for what you did if you you
know.
Basta somebody's of.
you know if you need somebody's
car and you're found guilty you
need to pay for a new paint job
you need to pay restitution for
of physical damage or or or
maybe even medical expenses or
whatever there's fines income
level we rarely use them this
one has a restitution.
Restitution actually maintains
that abusive relationship
between the victim and the
offender many of time
and stresses the victim out
because because nobody pays
restitution so these folks are
gonna go to prison for ten years
twenty years and I want to get
out you want to pay restitution.
I know it's a good idea it's
what should happen in the
perfect world what was the logic
on including restitution on on
on a crime so that the person's
going to go to prison on a
probation.
Was the the what's the logic in
the public safety.
Goal with restitution in the
statute.
Mr speaker gently.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you the gentleman so we did it
here so that the victims can
maybe be made whole so
restitution here is an essential
part of the tribe trafficking
victims protection act and I
believe that's already in
federal law as well.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
and and you're never going to
make the victim hole
Under the circumstances there is
no.
Justice for these horrific
crimes and I know that's
horrible to say but but I've
been in those courtrooms I've
been with those victims walking
out of the courthouse once on
the phone one when I was able to
successfully send somebody to
prison and there's no.
Sense of like you know.
closure or making someone whole
and then not getting restitution
just kind of frustrates folks
more and more and then if they
don't provide restitution Mr
speaker gently then they go back
to prison on a technical
violation so so states and and
our state included are moving
away from fines and fees and
restitution and the way we do
that is through the victim's
reparation Fund and and that's a
more modern better way to do it
is we find out of house bill
two.
The victim's reparation
commission we fund out of
finding of of folks who are
convicted fifty Bucks are on
about depending if it's a
misdemeanor or felony Mr speaker
Johnny from Bernalillo so anyway
there's money in that fund and
they can get that money quicker
they can get that money
immediately to offset Hospital
of costs and hopefully there's
more the way we actually change
that such a couple years ago to
to be more flexible to get more
funds to victims quicker
in the interest of justice if
it's in the interest of our
state
to compensate victims not to try
to nickel and dime folks twenty
years later it just doesn't work
even though we wanted to and so
it's just I would just want to
commend you commend your fellow
sponsor we just scroll through
the last ten page of the bill
and see if I notice anything but
this is a big deal it's a big
left I want to thank you for
bringing four there's aspects of
this bill that we have to get
done we have to add these crimes
to the registry
keep in mind any new registrants
falls on the county sheriff's so
it's an unfunded mandate on the
sheriff's so we have to keep
that in mind we don't have a
provision to take some of the
forty degrees off the books in
twenty years or so you have the
political will to do that but
we've got to maintain that that
number so that the shares can
adequately monitor these folks
and so because of the
retroactivity.
People people sign that plea
agreement people left the
courthouse both the prosecutor
the judge and the defendant
defense lawyers they all left
the courthouse knowing that that
person was not enough to
register obviously if they
violated probation in the news
the conditional discharge and I
have to register and nobody has
a problem with that but
retroactivity for sex offender
registration is a big deal
and and I just you know discount
support we have to move forward
we can just grab people backward
in time it's it's on just it's
it's it's it's just something
that
we should definitely consider
not doing it if
If the conversation arises in in
the Senate.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
Julie.
Thank you for the debate the
gentleman from Chavis
Representative Ezzell.
Mr.
Mr speaker I yield to the gentle
lady.
Mr speaker gentle lady thank you
for this bill.
Few years back are reported to
be on the house for about an
incident that happened in my
particular district.
The shares Department of Travis
county was notified of the
building Representative not
actually not a building it was
the band.
Tribe or.
That was twelve feet by forty
two feet.
That was parked on some land out
there.
And somebody reported they
thought somebody might be going
on whenever the sheriff's
department rolled into this
property.
Thank.
Could hear lots of noise coming
from this building.
Thanks a lot on the back end of
the and they found over eighty
over eighty ladies and gentleman
young men and women in their
that had been kidnapped and
brought over from south of the
border they were being held
there against their will.
They were keep in mind that more
than this what is usually in the
house chamber.
Locked inside a twelve point
forty two thank.
They were being fed one tortilla
a day and a glass of water a day
their shoes had been taken away
from them they were all piled
outside so they could start
right away because of the
conditions of that past.
The thing there was there should
have been a hundred and sixty
shoes.
They felt close to four hundred
to do so piled out there so that
means that this activity has
gone on for quite some time.
These young men and women that
are sheriff's department found
in there.
They ranged in age from sixteen
to twenty two.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
These people that.
Did this heinous act to those
young people probably under the
guise of.
We will get to to the United
States so you can better your
life they would be if they lied
to the sand people.
They were kidnapped.
When it comes right down to it
they were kidnapped homeland
security stepped in we don't
know what happened to those
people.
That we're.
Running the show to bring all
these.
Kidnap victims in.
So what happens in a situation
like that whenever the people.
Work hard what kind of
conviction will play.
Be facing.
Over what they have done to the
sand people because these young
people were brought in for.
Sexual exploitation as well as
running drugs.
The people that were in charge
of it we're making these trips
back and forth from south of the
border of contagion the United
States.
What will they be facing if this
bill passes.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
I don't know about that
specifically.
unfortunate circumstances but if
if we were just talking about
trafficking and adults and they
would receive a minimum of nine
years and so again you know what
we're looking to do here is
really ensure that those
traffickers are held accountable
for their actions and ensure
that the bank accounts are not
right and and and sounds like in
this case that you're
referencing you know they
wouldn't be friends to be
imported so that they can feel
safe and coming to report
everything that that's been
happening in that regard.
Mr speaker thank you very much
but maybe I'm just stated what I
was trying to say the people
that did the kidnapping that
bribe station people to come on
I will thank you where.
You know you you don't want to
stay here I will thank you for.
And they brought him into the
United States those people are
kidnapped and brought these
young people they were here
illegally.
So what happens to them or they
just sent back to where I came
from said you'll take care of.
Mr speaker and gentle lady are
you talking about the kids that
were here is that correct now
you're talking about the people
that third them yes thank you Mr
speaker and thank you John a
lady so again if if those folks
that lowered
of the kids to come into the
country if they were found to
actually have conducted at sex
I'm thinking Representative
those programs and they would be
responsible under this law.
Mr speaker it wasn't that people
were committing the sexual
crimes on the young people they
were harboring they were holding
all state.
Of those young people to be able
to prostituted send people and
also to help them as far as
running trucks go so.
Which is going to carry the most
participaron of the.
Finalization for those people.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I I
will get you an answer let me
just go with my witness thank.
and thinking gentle lady so
what you're talking about and
I'm glad to use the word
harboring because that's one of
those birds that we used in this
piece of legislation and under
this bill and under that
situation the the offenders
would be.
Prosecuted as a first degree
felony which is about eighteen
years the other crimes like
soliciting like a drug
trafficking those would be under
a different
A different act and in in in
those instances sometimes they
can't be prosecuted because of
jurisdictional issues as well so
that's why it's great to capture
them under this bill because if
it's shown that they are
trafficking these requests and
they would be then subject to
that first degree felony.
Yes.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
thank you very much for that
response.
There is one area of your bill
but I do have concerns and
Mexico border that are.
These are the people that were
held like animals in this body.
They were physically restrained
even though they were not tied
up or anything like that they
could not get out of that box
they were living in human waste
you Mr conditions were
deplorable.
I don't see in the definition of
physical restraint in your bill
to like to dress up thanks.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady.
Our.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
falls on page eighteen line
eighteen.
thank you madam speaker I
apologize for that and and and
gentle lady let me grab a
couple of minutes with my expert
witness please thank you very
much.
Thank you madam speaker and
thank you gentle lady I'm so
this is another example of where
we're being consistent with the
federal trafficking act there is
no definition there in addition
most states don't have this
definition because it's commonly
understood so that it doesn't
need to be defined so when
you're talking about physical
restraints a common
understanding and this is been
also held by federal law in
cases of that you know whether
someone is locked basement or
locked in a room or tied up
whatever that basis then it's
broadly and interpreted as
physical restraint.
Madam speaker and gentle lady.
But that could also be use
psychologically whatever
somebody says if you even try to
get away even though I'm going
to leave the door unlocked or
whatever the case may be I will
kill your family.
With that.
It could also be a form of
restraint as well is that
correct.
Even though it's not
specifically defined in your
would that be applicable as
well.
let me check on that.
Sorry about that it madam
speaker and
gentlelady let me check on that
verbal form of threatening with
my experts.
Madam speaker gentle lady go to
page nineteen under number three
but if there is.
Address it in the were using the
word harm it's not talking about
restraint.
So.
There's lots of circumstances
here on field that we're might
be leaving.
You.
Not not tied very well.
And thank you gentle lady so if
you go to page eighteen which is
the the page before the one you
were referencing
it's in the definition of
coercion where they're at their
it states that it is causing or
threatening to cause harm so in
the in the example that you
twelve that would be applicable
there.
I apologize for that I didn't
read up higher I was reading.
Terry well Mr speaker.
You thank you madam speaker and
gentle lady from Bernalillo.
Unless we do something to
protect patient paper that are
being kidnapped and brought to
our state illegally.
Five people that are here
illegally.
Threatening to do harm to our
society as we.
Enjoyed the benefits of not
having stuff like this going on
in our own backyard we're
making.
I'm just glad it's brought to
the forefront.
And madam speaker and gentle
lady I do appreciate the effort
thank you very much and thank
you for your response.
There is further debate the
gentleman from curry county
Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam speaker will the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
please you.
Madam speaker I yield to the
gentleman from curry county.
Thank you for bringing this
forward I I noticed on the FIR
that the administrative office
the district attorney's the
administrative office of courts
legal offices of public defender
office the Attorney General and
others have all
responded when they received a
copy of this bill so my question
is gentle lady.
Are any of these organizations.
Finally supporting or have the
endorsed this bill.
Madam speaker and and gentlemen
we did hear testimony and to
committees and let me just check
and see if we noted.
Whether any of them supported we
did make some changes based on
the public comments that we
received from probably some of
those groups or entities that so
let me just comes up with my
expert in seo Heat and confirm
that information place.
Thank you Tom gentle lady thank
you.
Madam speaker I could jump in
here just a little bit of the
gentle lady will
You.
Madam speaker and gentlemen I'm
happy to yield to my co sponsor
and hopefully he has that
information but I'm also
obtaining it as well.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
and gentleman if you look on
page or the funding are just
above the fold that are meant
implications if the
administrative office of the
yes the elimination that so they
have I I won't read it you but
they are supportive of what we
are trying with this bill
particularly around the amending
the statute
The statute of limitations.
Thank you gentle lady and Madam
speaker could you repeat that or
help me find that on page four
of the of your FIR just above
where it folded performance
implications at the bottom of
the page the paragraph right
above that.
Thank you for pointing that out
I was just curious if any of
them are are supporting it
openly or if any of them have
endorsed this the.
I I do appreciate you pointing
that out that's very helpful
gently Madam speaker.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentle lady and gentlemen I did
consult with my experts and
we believe that the district
attorney's office did support as
well as the New Mexico's
sentencing commission.
And the commission is actually a
nonpartisan group of support
excuse me group of experts
although we have the law office
of the public defender providing
comments and suggestions a still
opposes even though they were
grateful to have had our expert
Mr for Basco work with them to
trying to address their issues
and the I believe that the
administrative office of the
courts remain neutral and I
think they.
Yeah that that's all I can find
for now.
Okay and and thank you madam
speaker gentle lady I did not
hear you mention internet
general's office they happen to
say whether they support or
oppose.
And madam speaker and gentlemen
I believe that they did support
the bill in committee.
Okay.
Speaker and gentle gentleman I'm
sorry to interrupt but when we
first started working on this
bill last year I was actually
working directly with the office
of the Attorney General they
brought the bill and asked me to
work with them on it and our
expert witness is from the
attorney general's office so
they may not have publicly.
Supported but but it is
essentially their bill at their
they are are experts with this
thank you madam speaker.
Thank you kindly appreciate the
additional information and now
so madam speaker and gentle lady
from Bernalillo.
Would it be okay to disclose to
your expert witnesses.
Madam speaker and
Gentleman our expert witness is
marked for Basco and he is as my
co sponsors stated with the
office of the Attorney General
and his position is.
Let me just get that for you
assistant Attorney General.
Thank you very much John legend
thank you I appreciate you
taking time to to ferret out
those answers for me I
appreciate it very much thank
you generally thank you madam
speaker I'm done.
There's further debate the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
Santa and Santa Fe counties
Representative Lord
thank you madam chair and well
the kind lady from Bernalillo
county please yield.
Madam speaker I yield to the
gentle lady thank you
So.
This win for Committee and I
remember we have a lot of good
testimony on it I wish I could
remember who was there because
we did have a lot of really good
yes money from a lot of experts
on their and I'm am going
through my original paperwork
and I have all this new
paperwork that is quite lengthy
so excuse me if I jump around a
little bit so I do have a
question because it looks like
there was a bunch of amendments.
When I saw this before but I
just have some general questions
or right now if someone
traffic's a person to the and up
on the sex registry.
Madam speaker and gentlelady.
The only end up and these are
not if it is for sex trafficking
so it does not include labor
trafficking.
And they must have a sex offense
listening.
I think thank you Representative
thank you madam chair is that
what makes this different this
bill different madam chair is is
portion that you added in there
about human trafficking now.
Madam speaker and gentlelady.
Yes okay thank you I appreciate
that.
again excuse me as I go through
here.
madam speaker so it looks like
one of the other amendments is
that we change thirty dash six
eight just for from sixteen to
the age of eighteen is that
correct.
Madam speaker and I think we
Madam speaker and gentle lady
that that is not an amendment
that okay what the bill is okay
thank you for getting a little
confused about talking about
what's in amendment versus what
the bill does so we we have one
minor amendment so I just don't
want people to feel like they're
not they are not tracking with
that that is what the bill does
and and what the question you
asked before this is a human
trafficking bill so it's not the
amendment that made a human
tragedy it has always been the
Human track bill thank you for
the clarification that some
madam chair so what we have now
is we're adding human
trafficking were change in age
from sixteen to eighteen and
then we've also and not
amendment I apologize so what we
may different now is that
racketeering is now also added
to this is correct.
Not as an amendment but just to
this bill itself.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
yes so we have added human
trafficking to the definition of
racketeering.
You.
Thank you madam chair.
Okay so the definition of harm
has been expanded.
I in the bill not the amendment
including physical or non
physical harm psychological
financial so every way that
somebody could call where
somebody to commit sex crimes is
that correct.
Madam speaker and gentleman not
just sex crimes that the
traffic.
Labor trafficking as well yes
thank you for that correction on
their so madam speaker and
gentle lady so the harm
definition is already actually
in case small so what we're
doing here is were codifying it
as well.
I'm trying to bring for the
points of why this past in both
of the the committees because
what we're trying to do is we're
trying to take people that are
human trafficking and punish
them and and rightfully so.
And I agree with all of this on
their
It was a part in here they did
have a question on to the bill
raises human trafficking from a
third to a second degree felony
accepted the persons under
eighteen and that makes it a
first degree felony is that
correct.
Madam speaker gentle lady
correct thank you.
Okay if I do remember correctly
and and please correct me if I'm
wrong
It also added that the person
that was being.
Trafficked sexually headed out
was not corrected I remember
reading that and there has been
a little bit since I've read
this bill that they could that
they could have an out to not be
charged for for prostitution
Madam speaker and gentle lady
that is correct we we are we are
essentially trying to
decriminalize the yeah I really
like that portion of thank you
madam chair.
If I have anything else that
might be all that I have I'm
trying to again just point out
the good things in this bill and
why that it passed unanimously
in in both section doesn't mean
it doesn't need to work before
it hits the Senate side.
But I'm trying to point out that
the whole point of the bill was
to.
Give women who are being
sexually trafficked a way to get
out of being charged in
prostitution which I think is
great I think that people are
human trafficking
Should be on the sort of list
and I overall think it's a good
bill probably does need some
work but I totally understand
what you're trying to say and
what you're trying to do is
bring in for this bill so thank
you that's all I have for ninety
of my time.
Seeing no further debate the
gentle lady to close.
Thank you madam speaker and
thanks to the colleagues.
For all the great discussion
with that madam speaker I now
move that house bill fifty six
to pass.
We are on final passage of house
bill fifty six as amended the
vote is now open.
Forty five seconds remaining.
The vote is about to close.
The clerk to call the remaining
names.
Representative Brown.
I was yes.
Yes.
Representative.
Representative Cook.
Representative.
and.
Representative Roger Montoya.
Yes Representative Rod.
Yes Representative Andrea
Romero.
Yes Representative Andrea Romero
votes yes Representative from
the.
Yes Representative.
Yes Representative Stansbury yes
Representative.
Yes.
By a vote of sixty three in the
affirmative and three in the
negative.
House bill fifty six as amended
has duly passed.
There has been a request for the
gentleman to remove their
jackets.
State like hello.
Is the gentleman from Bernalillo
county ready on item number ten.
And madam speaker let the record
reflect that all action
necessary for placing House Bill
eighty three on final passage
has been taken.
The gentleman to explain the
bill.
Thank you madam speaker so house
bill eighty three is going to
change the graduation
requirements for high school
students so I think we have a
lot of bills particularly more
recently but for a lot of
legislative sessions that are
looking at adding or subtracting
various requirements by this is
an approach to look at high
school education more
holistically so very broadly
we're moving from twenty four
credits to twenty three credits
this is to accommodate for a
move to six class schedule weeks
for students
That's really the attempt to
what we're looking at here on
the some of the other changes to
know Madam speaker and body is
that the math requirements will
stay at four so we had
discussion in the house
Education Committee about the
number of math credits that'll
states for with a minimum
requirement of the algebra one
English credit so we have
amended to include a minimum
requirement of the published
nine in which ten and then we
included financial literacy as a
half credit option
along with economics of the
language read students will take
either a half credit of
economics or a half credit of
financial literacy now the the
the reason why it gets paired
with economics is because in our
economics content standards
already you a huge section of
economics for students is
already devoted to financial
literacy so no matter which
student chooses they will be
getting financial literacy
either as the whole half credit
for as a large part of their
economics credit
Another thing that's that's
notable in this bill is that
students are allowed to trade
one of their core requirements
for a capstone class so you want
to think of this as an
independent study class where
students can use this time of
course guided by a teacher in
the field that they're choosing
in order to help them through
this independent study and what
they may be pursuing in that it
follows all pertinent content
standards
That that's the super important
change that will be making but
broadly Madam speaker body it's
about giving students
flexibility what we're including
in these courses is
Classes that will count for
various credits but ultimately
it being
setting students up for either
the work place for for higher
education and giving students
flexibility and really buy in
into their education I think in
terms of requiring students to
take particular classes that
takes away the the liberties and
and the flexibility for students
to really truly buy into their
education and really own what
they're doing in the classroom
so I want to mention one other
thing is that in the bill you
have possibilities for these
different credits so like one of
the points of contention has
been a culinary arts as a
science well it still has to
meet science standards and so it
has to go through the approval
process through the public
education department that this
class does me said requirements
for a particular class or a
particular field in order to get
credit for it so again the
suggestions in the bill are just
that suggestions they can go
above and beyond
depending on PED approval but
with that madam speaker all
stand for questions.
There is debate the gentleman
from Santa Fe County
Representative Hernandez.
Thank you madam speaker and
representative
Question so most of those of
most of the changes in this bill
are I am very supportive of you
to replicate our children more
ready for
workforce on the one question
that I speaker I yield to the
gentle sorry I apologize.
So I you know I haven't heard
this bill yet but I was reading
through it
why and why is the requirement
for New Mexico history being
taken out of our history and
cultures been taking a beating
over the last year he just
explain why that is no longer a
requirement.
madam speaker and gentleman that
that's a really good question so
I teach high school social
studies in particular U. S.
history and currently in our
standards middle school does
require New Mexico history
already we have it as a half
credit but the decision to to
remove it has been because in U.
S. history and this goes to the
way I teach my class and I know
a lot of other teachers to as
well as to really make sure that
they're incorporating US history
into their
New Mexico history into their US
history curriculum right we're
part of of this nation and its
broad history but really to make
it relevant to students is to
really bring it home so I think
the way that I look at the
standards is we go from the very
Close to home in middle school
with New Mexico history and then
we brought in by going through
US history world history and
then one thing I should say
gentleman and I know this is out
of the purview of you of your
question but it reminds me now
one of the things were including
is a full credit of government
and civics so really focusing
with students that once we give
on this social studies
background in this historical
background that they're able to
start seeing themselves in the
process is that we put forward
much of like what we're doing
here.
Madam speaker and and
Representative thank you so much
for the answer
you know I I feel like New
Mexico history is very important
to our residents and our and
our.
You know history and so I'm
bringing a hand written
amendments to bring New Mexico
history back into this bill.
As I move the amendment.
I would like to move the
amendment.
Can you identify the.
There isn't a tool to number on
it.
The gentleman to explain the
amendment.
So the the amendment is our
house credit back into the ninth
grade for New Mexico history.
Okay and the amendment is on the
website.
gentleman from Bernalillo is
this a friendly amendment.
Madam speaker this is an
unfriendly amendment I think
adding a half credit another
half credit really takes away
from the scope of the bill in
trying to bring in a sector six
credit day I certainly
appreciate the the suggestion by
the gentleman in this is
something obviously as a U. S.
history culture and social is
history to the your social at a
high a
As I explained in my opening is
that we're really going for
incorporating New Mexico history
into US history broadly and yeah
that would further not work with
with the bill that we're
presenting so I haven't seen the
amendment I know it's hand
written and heard
with that I would say that it's
in front.
Is there debate on the
amendment.
Madam speaker and representative
so the amendment is not all of
requirement of another half
credit it just gives the option
to take New Mexico history as
part of social studies credits.
Madam speaker and gentleman
where you placing it in.
The bill.
We need to educate in that sense
sheriffs screen Representative
K. subsection for.
We do can you point me to the
page miss madam speaker and
gentleman.
Give me give me a second.
Switchover.
So it will be page nine that.
Nine and ten of line.
Okay Sir H. and the line up I.
Madam speaker and and gentlemen
the the issue is I'm looking at
the and I think this.
Came up last time is that I've
been looking at the amendments
and contexts so that would be
the bill as it stands now and I
don't think your amendment would
apply to what we have.
Further amended the bill.
Madam speaker and and
Representative give me one
second I was looking at the
original portion of the bill.
Let me find it in the.
The amendment in the amended
version.
Still Page ten right above
number five the version I have
doesn't have one numbers.
For between three and.
The section four and section
five.
Subparagraph.
I.
Madam speaker gentleman I think
this would have to remove some
of the striking points from the
rest of the bill I don't think
it's just a matter of a one to
one spot
if the if that's what you're
proposing I mean I would rather
see this madam speaker and
gentlemen if it's drawn up but I
would say that it's unfriendly
for now and it seems like the
amendment proposed amendment
would needs more.
Debating on the amendment of
Representative from the
gentleman from San Juan County
Representative Eli.
Thank you madam speaker the
gentleman from Santa Fe County
family you'll.
Yes I yield.
Thank you madam speaker I am a
graduate of the public school
system in New Mexico but I
remember undergraduate.
I threw Mexico history in middle
school and so I decided page.
Mexico history in high school so
my questions madam speaker the
the gentleman you could just
explain to me.
Why he thinks it's important for
us of the state to have.
Mexico three taught in high
school.
Madam speaker and representative
thank you so much you know New
Mexico's history has really been
canceled I'm literally torn down
last year Mexicans histories
important to all residents and
our nation both the good and the
bad you know for New Mexico
becoming an official call in the
here our state in the fifteen
hundreds all of our rich native
American history to becoming a
state in nineteen twelve and are
invaluable contributions so that
had project World War two
without teaching our state's
history without remembering
stakes we cannot learn from our
mistakes I for one am very proud
of being in New Mexico and we
must preserve our history and
culture at our schools by
teaching it in high school.
That answers your question.
Thank you madam speaker.
I do recognize the the
importance of medical history
and we are you need.
I think among states because we
have such a provide varied and
rich cultural history is going
to cross many races and many
background so in New Mexico
after is quite unique.
but I wanted to the bad.
Additional those for students so
madam speaker if we have.
State of six or seven period.
Classroom day.
does the a half unit was that
you in terms of single semester
this postmasters.
Madam chair and representative
with is is right met with the
for a half units which are we is
one semester are not forced.
but if the representative for I
think personally I would like to
try mental match This bill.
Madam speaker gentlemen I mean
it's your amendment.
Representative.
Madam speaker and and as I
understand
Without your amendment history
may be recorded for maybe pause
part of.
World history.
but I felt like that would
depend upon the the text books
selected.
And the future and that course.
And so I think if I understand
German to.
Of what you want is to make sure
that actually history is taught
madam speaker each and every
student in New Mexico and it not
being dependent on hold history
incorporating the costs of the
affairs of the.
Speaker and representative that
would be a fair assessment I
feel like the children of New
Mexico do you need to be taught
as as much of our state's
history as possible to get the
full understanding and
appreciation for our culture
that they can.
Not a figure that I certainly
I know in the future.
Like chairman Romero would have
no problem corporate entities
but I also understand Madam
speaker Representative.
From the.
Federal point that we need to
make sure that New Mexico
history in part to our students.
Along the way prior to
graduation so I don't have any
further discussion debate on the
amendment thank you I'm speaker.
The gentle lady from Chavis
Representative Ezzell.
Madam speaker thank you very
much gentleman from Santa you
know please.
Speaker Representative audio.
Madam speaker I think this is an
excellent idea depending New
Mexico's rich and varied
history.
To educate our young people
where.
Mr speaker.
Every evening from possible and
not not outside working for
sitting here on the house floor.
I enjoy watching television
shows called jeopardy.
And I can tell you the number of
times.
Under.
State capitals of miscellaneous
for whatever the case may be
there is often the not my
question regarding.
New Mexico one of the questions
are not right very recently is
an elevation what is the highest
capital in the state in the
United States.
And most people usually say in
front not right in Santa Fe New
Mexico.
It was last week strippers
thank.
The New Mexico.
Mr speaker from the southeast
corner of state.
And we are no.
I'm getting bad echo.
I am
From the southeastern corner of
the state.
And we in my area had over the
state park in the state of New
Mexico and that is bottomless
lakes.
We also have Carlsbad caverns
located down there
All the.
Bear.
Smokey bear I I need to say that
creek Smokey bear.
We use them in captive New
Mexico where this little bear
was found.
believe the economic impact
here.
And linking the Mexico that
history goes back I can't tell
you how many years.
As a young child and that was
after New Mexico did become a
state.
To all five of us kids and
whenever we went on vacation it
was somewhere in the state of
New Mexico.
My dad left the blind fish so we
would go to trauma and see all
the beauty that's a fair.
We would explore things like.
Nobody's business because we
couldn't afford to do anything
else.
We would go over the four
corners area.
And that was someone like Gary I
grew up in.
Mr Madam speaker and gentleman
from Santa our kids need to know
where they came from where their
ancestors came from what the
background is on our state Mr
speaker
Mr.
Isn't that hard for these kids
to the learned the importance of
the state in New Mexico.
Through.
Learning about.
Are great the land of
enchantment history Mr speaker
madam speaker excuse me I
apologize madam speaker and
gentleman from Santa I do fully
intend for this amendment thank
you very much.
The gentleman from San Juan
county Representative Strickler
also wish to speak on this the
amendment.
The gentleman from San Juan
County Representative Montoya.
Thank you madam speaker this
gentleman from some of on the.
Madam speaker Representative I
yield.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentleman.
A couple of a.
Years ago several years ago
nastier and gentleman when the
Olympics was taking place in
Atlanta.
For New Mexico were called in to
get.
Tickets to go to the Olympic
events.
And as people were calling it a
very common occurrence was.
People from New Mexico we're
told.
We need to contact our
consulate.
To be able to get tickets to go
to the.
Olympics that was being held in
America folks didn't even
realize New Mexico.
Was
part of America.
And
that's interesting because New
Mexico has a really unique
history.
The New Mexico territory.
which Santa Fe was the capital
of all of the New Mexico
territory was almost one half of
the entire nation.
The.
Santa Fe capital itself is the
longest.
expanding capital.
In the nation.
Not only is it the highest
elevation but it is the longest
continual capital in in the
United States.
I I do believe that many of the
teachers will take the time to
go over this rich history.
but.
This is being left up to chance.
And I and I and I don't think
that's a good thing I know that
I think in seventh grade there
is a New Mexico history
requirement in seventh grade I
don't remember seventh grade I
don't remember some great all
much less anything I learned in
seventh grade.
when kids are a little bit older
and you're wanting to have if
you want to have a you know a
sense of ourselves.
I think it's important that The
New Mexico history.
He talked I think it's important
for.
kids who are who are moving here
there's a lot of folks who are
transplants in New Mexico they
don't know anything about New
Mexico.
And
In the last year I think I heard
you say that that we've seen New
Mexico history take a beating.
And we had we had
Statues of been pulled down you
have the.
A lot of New Mexico history has
been.
look at negatively and in
reality I I think we need to
know the good the bad and the
ugly Mr speaker and and.
Madam speaker and gentleman I
think
The only state in the old saying
goes if those who forget history
are destined to repeat history.
And I think I think it's very
important that we
Make sure that we don't allow
New Mexico history be forgotten.
And I and I think
it's important for our kids.
Are rather than just here
Just.
Negative things in general
about.
About history I think we need to
be able to talk about things
academically how New Mexico was
established when it was
established
And.
And then speaker and gentleman
from all the history a long way
there has been some very
A brutal history in in New
Mexico's history and if we if we
forget that as well I think
that's a disservice so
Madam speaker and gentleman I
believe the section that you
alter.
To
actually just returned back
into.
What is required I believe that
that the bill that's before us
actually removed this half
credit out of being a
requirement of ninth grade.
Curriculum I and from what I
understand all you're doing is
placing it back in you're
putting it back in the section
where it's and
I'm not a requirement but in an
option it is a to be in the west
and it could be
An opportunity for those who who
want to take that
that course and and and the
speaker and gentleman
I think it's very important I
think this is something that
that we.
Our history.
Is not just green Chile and
Mexico thank New Mexico gets
reduced to yeah you go to New
Mexico green Chile and cheese
burger.
I think we're we're a lot more
now.
Families that have been here
four hundred plus years.
longer than in and many of the
east coast Madam.
Mexico was established in the
City of Santa Fe was established
so
It's unfortunate that that New
Mexico history become a casualty
of what is a very good deal the
idea for
financial literacy to be taught
from one half the time I think
that's very good.
but with that
ma'am Madam speaker and
gentleman is that I mean that's
how I feel about this is that
described it all your intentions
with thank you.
Yes.
Mr speaker then Madam speaker
and representative.
Well I I think this is a good
amendment and madam speaker hi.
I would hope the body would that
would support thank you some.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo
county Representative Trujillo.
Thank you madam chair Madam
speaker and gentleman from
Is the coral I.
I think it is representative of
all.
Third of all.
One of the concerns that are
being with this amendment is the
fact that
for those of you who have not
been educators.
Mmhm and of this evil gone to
school.
you will have had.
New Mexico New Mexico history
how to that one point to another
but if you look at the state
standards.
Mexico history through
throughout the specialty in
fifth through eighth grade the
work that's been done over the
course of time has been to
ensure that students are
receiving an appropriate.
Equitable education but that is
inclusive of.
And if the scene of the bill the
pin drop of inclusive in the
formation about their cultural
heritage their language the most
difficult to rural issues of
concern that the.
they reflected maybe I am
confused Madam speaker and
gentleman from Santa where
you're dropping this one that's
already included thank you madam
chair.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
county Representative Stapleton.
There's been a motion to table
house floor amendment number
one.
A vote of yes and the amendment
will be tabled a vote of no and
we'll be back and debate of the
bill.
the amendment I'm sorry the vote
is now open.
Twenty seconds to close.
The clerk to call the remaining
names.
Representative Chandler.
Representative Cook.
Representative Johnson.
Yes Representative yes.
By a vote of forty two in the
affirmative twenty four in the
negative the amendment has been
tabled.
We're back on the bill the
gentleman from Santa Fe County
still has the floor.
Representative Hernandez.
You still have the floor.
Representative.
There's further debate on the
bill the gentleman from San Juan
County Representative Lane.
Thank you madam speaker the
gentleman from Bernalillo county
you'll.
Madam speaker I yield to the
gentle.
Thank you madam speaker I I just
actually one offer a couple
comments
I I have the pleasure prove the
serving on the health Education
Committee and I actually
applaud.
Of the gentleman from Bernalillo
for taking on revising our
graduation standards I think
it's it's welcomed.
and there's a couple things I I
like in particular that I think
you're going to help our
students movie for one of this
concepts of the capstone course.
I think it's a it's a great idea
to that students can use to take
control of his or her own
education and one of the things
I like about it is that the end
of the capitol court.
you have to actually give a
presentation to either a group
of teachers are panelists and I
think there is a great value and
a student having to stand up and
defend what is your sheet a
learn and and what what they
believe and with regard to that
particular subjects I think that
that's a welcomed addition and I
think it's upon wrinkle for our
students to be more involved in
their own educational process
and.
That's what we want from our
students this is not to be drugs
but to to have by and and and
lead the way with their own
education I think that have some
course.
The creative way to achieve
that.
The other aspect I appreciate is
including a half credit optional
and other economic through
financial literacy.
To me financial literacy is is
one the concept that we have the
state should be teaching who are
graduating high school students
I think the strongly important
and I've had conversations with
the gentleman from Bernalillo
along these lines as well and.
Financial literacy have
topics isn't it better that are
truly able to help our students.
Not just the state poverty but
but ultimately crushed property.
And and their their concepts
that you literally are going to
need from a tiny graduate until
the time you enter the grave
each of us have to deal with
twenty on some level and so we
can become accustomed to dealing
with that well.
learning about things.
You know such as credit card the
functions how to do a income tax
returns.
budgeting all of the concepts
that we deal with a little if we
can get that within the reach of
our children in a way that they
understand our students going to
do volumes for our state.
And so I I I think that's an
important issue as well I will
say since we're sticking with
poor credit.
I would like to the
that financial literacy become
requirement and maybe that's
something that I will we'll try
to ruffle the arm of German
Romero in future sessions
because I do think it is very
helpful to our our populace into
our students so
I just want to close by saying
appreciate this bill thank you
you know sixty percent to read
direct graduation requirements
so I appreciate it thank you
madam chair.
There's further debate the
gentle lady from Travis
Representative Ezzell.
Madam speaker thank you very
much the gentle lady from
Bernalillo you'll.
Madam speaker I yield to the
gentle lady.
Madam speaker thank you very
much gentleman
I read this bill.
At that time I'm still in my
first semester here for this
particular session and I was on
the health education.
Education Committee are really
really enjoyed it.
And Mr Madam speaker and
gentleman I notice that on page
nine if your field line
nineteen.
Moment to get there if you don't
need to.
I noticed that help to has been
taken off but L. two for one has
been included can you tell me
what else referred to was grown.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
yes so the algebra two
requirement in ninety I need
this case and in in house
education and it came up in the
state government committee as
well as that the algebra two
requirement there is expanding
its reference in the LESC report
about how requiring an al two
classes almost become like this
this on threshold so to speak
for for students in order to
pass in order to demonstrate
their competency in high school
however it's become
according to to this study and I
struggle to find it now that you
just a question but that the
curriculum when you set
requirements like this that are
difficult without any sort of
justifiable reason become
watered down so that students
can pass it so in doing this
bill I mean that's one of the
things we struggle right is
giving on the liberty where we
could for students in order to
you know in their math skills if
they want to incorporate
carpentry into that the would be
able to write so the the
conversations around setting a
minimum for round algebra one
was to make sure that students
were ready academically with
algebra one to either go into
the the other classes that they
could use to attain their their
other math credits or they could
go on kind of the higher
education tracks in order to
seek out math and the math that
they may use for the university
level or the math of the for
workplace training so that was
really the reason why tend of
the minimum requirement of
algebra one was amended in to
the spell.
Madam speaker and gentleman
thank you very much for that
explanation.
The.
As if we had a I can't recall
ever having used my old for two
I use my geometry all the time
so.
Madam speaker.
And gentleman from Bernalillo.
Whenever we're seeing all these
plans changes take place we are
not getting to the point I hope
not and I want to to verify this
is not where we're heading with
this now like the top of your
head
And.
Speaker and gentleman.
We're not.
Making this workstation people
that are going on to college or
a university that they're not
having to start their freshman
year by having to take remedial
class can you.
Give me some.
Promised this is not where this
is heading I can't see if it's
student does receive a lottery
scholarship I don't see that
first year being spent on
remedial classes that should
have been completed what I would
all they were still taking the
last four years of their.
high school.
Before they graduate.
And madam speaker and and gentle
lady.
I mean I I you certainly can't
make any promises but one of the
things that I think is is
particularly important to note
about the bill is that the
students each year are subject
to their next step planned so in
the guidance of the
administrative interns
counselors and there educators
or teachers in the classroom
that they're having to come up
with I next step plan to help
guide them for what there are
options may be they're going
into a career technical we can
go that route if they are trying
to go to page occasion they can
go that route or if they're
looking to switch the word one
pathway in looking to switch to
another on that we be flexible
enough to accommodate that and I
think that's the role of the
guidance counselor the school
administration and and the
teachers to help guide students
in those directions certainly my
role as a teacher it's I see
that as as one of the.
Most important things that I do
is is try to help students and
guide them into the classes at
the need for what they'd be
needing and hoping to achieve.
Thank you very much for that
Madam speaker and gentleman also
whether we're talking about
changing the curriculum it's
going to be if this bill the
Has there been any contact with
higher is.
To ensure that these classes the
future and people are taking if
they do make application for
college or university that they
will be accepted as a hard core
curriculum and curriculum
without having to go back like I
said earlier.
Have to go back with group
meeting of class.
As any sort of dialogue been
been done between PED and
higher.
Madam speaker and and gentle
lady that I'm not too sure about
how the the public education
department does or has I should
say has come up with the
standards for each of the
curriculum areas but I have been
a part of
PED discussions on changing
social studies standards and
that process has been inclusive
of higher education to give them
you know kind of like the heads
up right in that these are what
the students are learning in
their high school are expected
to learn and are being taught
and then for higher education to
to have a say in that as to what
their expectations are so I mean
I can't say for sure because for
certain madam speaker and gentle
lady but I would say that there
has been a lot of due diligence
on the part of of the Public
Education currently and Public
Education Department of the past
to ensure that's the case now
that's not saying necessarily
always happens on but which is
why I am sponsoring another bill
for our legislative education
study committee in order to
study higher education so we can
kind of start getting a more
holistic picture of our of our
K. three sixteen all state
education system in New Mexico.
But whatever you're saying that
also we also have to keep in
mind that there are certain
students that don't want to go
on to higher learning they want
to go to a technical school
which is equally as important
that they are learning to trade
that they are going to be able
to make a good living by going
to the school so I'm just gonna
call it K. through twelve right
now because I'm just that way.
Madam speaker and gentleman on
page twelve of your field.
Slides I I believe produce uses
is.
Is your status here the students
might choose any three science
courses.
You have agriculture listed down
there.
Is that accurate culture class.
Can it can it be.
FFI.
And the reason I'm bringing that
up decisions students that are
involved in FFA they also learn
about.
Feeding they also learning about
all the different aspects of
biology they are all learning
from.
Reproduction in animals there
you know the list goes on and on
so is with the FFA account as a
medical call as a a science
class.
Madam speaker and gentle lady so
the the list of these
requirements so long as they
were presented to the public
education department in cleared
for a science credit meaning
that they would be able to meet
the benchmarks the state
standards for
a science.
We would be able to yes and also
I mean for FFA students as well
if they wanted to do a capstone
class like Representative lane
was suggesting what could
potentially use that as a
science replacement on our
participation and and work with
the teacher on for filling those
standards along the way.
I think that's a very good
example of.
to be included in the science I.
Having the FFA Department
curriculum right.
Madam speaker and gentleman.
From Bernalillo on page thirteen
of your bill.
Line fifteen.
For those and that might be
listening from home.
To give a short overview for
financial literacy.
Is that shall be offered as
molested.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
I'm sorry I'm in the amendments
in context but are you saying.
The.
It is under section and three
elective credit and it's talking
about.
It is now.
Madam speaker and gentle lady to
stay to help clarify things yes
the the offered as an elective
for financial literacy has
stricken in its place it's been
moved to all of our requirements
I think the the the gentleman
from San Juan had said he was
going to try to work me to get
that included as a requirement
this bill is including it as a
requirement so students can
choose between
as economics or financial
literacy but like I stated in my
opening economics in its
curriculum is already very
inclusive of
the financial legacy.
Madam speaker and gentleman from
Bernalillo I guess I'm.
I don't have the.
All the.
Yes so you're saying that
financial literacy has been
moved to someone did not did I
understand that right.
Madam speaker gentle lady yes a
half credit and it's for
language so economics or
financial literacy but students
have to take one or the other.
So that Mr Madam speaker and
gentleman financial literacy is
now being offered as this fall
and in along with either
economic or financial literacy.
But we're not going to make our
staples realize.
What made up our state.
The New Mexico history would
have been wonderful following
along the same lines as
financial literacy defense just
me.
Madam speaker gentleman I do
appreciate your answers thank
you very much.
There's further debate the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
county Representative Matthews.
Thank you madam speaker and will
gentleman from Bernalillo county
please speaker I yield to the in
order.
Thank you
Madam speaker gentle gentleman
I want to see you for a number
of years and one of the people I
worked with twenty financial
literacy to high school students
through an online program.
And the reason I raise my hand
to ask a question I I believe
that class was a dual credit
class so I actually don't
remember that real strongly but
I wonder if your bill
a rumor has a representative
it that that PED is doing away
with dual credit classes for
high school students taking
classes for example at the
community colleges.
Is that accurate.
Madam speaker and and gentle
lady so according to the bill
yes part of the the the stricken
language would be the
requirement for dual credit
classes for all students now
this doesn't mean that students
cannot participate but it would
be part of one of the pathways
should they so choose in order
to participate in a dual LED
dual credit class.
Madam speaker the gentleman
Can you explain the reason for.
Making that change.
Certainly Madam speaker and
representative I think that the
the idea in not having those as
requirements is to really open
up that freedom for students to
really choose so students that
are driven will be moved into AP
classes or dual credit classes
as the statue reads now but as I
see it as as a teacher and and
from what I hear from districts
is that there's a lot of
movement between students on
taking
dual credit or AP classes and
then moving it from mid semester
on for various reasons into a
regular class this being a
tremendous obstacle for for a
lot of our students in
completing the requirements AP
or or dual credit so this would
leave it up to the districts and
and these the thing to keep in
mind gentle lady to and and body
is that these are more
requirements districts can also
make things more stringent and
if there are classes that we
discussed such as financial
literacy at the district wants
to make that a math class they
can so choose but these are bear
bear requirements for schools.
madam chair.
Madam speaker still Madam
speaker
gentleman thank you for that
answer I just want to clarify I
had many many students in my
classes who were dual credit
students from high school and
they were fabulous and they
really enjoyed the opportunity
to.
Get a jump on college and the
other thing I would note is the
community colleges are are.
In schools and was a great
opportunity to encourage
students to get into learning a
trade which are excellent jobs
well paid
and we're not producing enough
people who
Do that so I just.
If I understand your answer
correctly students can still
take dual credit but it's not
going to be acquired and I
understanding that correctly.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
yes that that is exactly.
Madam speaker at the gentleman
is there any effort in this
revision to introduce students
to
What what I'll call trade kinds
of careers.
Madam speaker gentle lady yes
that that is definitely I'd say
one of the strengths of the bill
is that if you look through the
general requirements
this is pointed out by the
gentle lady from Chavis and if
under the math section we have
construction building are that
could be offered as a math
credit on things like plumbing
could be offered as maybe a
science credit if you're looking
at physics but I think that's
definitely one of the strengths
of the bill as it is being able
to give those students
flexibility I'm kind of talking
about them as pathways
informally but the bill
certainly opens up for students
to to be on a particular pathway
either CTE higher education but
the flexibility is there for
them to accumulate their credits
and yes you know obviously they
don't necessarily have the full
picture of what they're going to
be doing freshman year for
example come junior year if they
wish to move from a higher
education sort of pathway to to
the trades and they'd be able to
do that and not have to worry
about playing catch up with
their credit or all I picked the
wrong pathway and now I have to
make up all these credits they
would already have them because
that's the system we're trying
to set up your.
Madam speaker a gentleman thank
you very much for that answer
and I'm really glad to see that
that's happening and then I just
want to go back for a second.
As I'm and and pinned down so
the dual credit.
Financial literacy class for
example that CNN has been
offering for years to high
school students.
Would still be an option.
But not a.
Requirement in the in and I
understood
just trying to be sure I
understand what we're doing
here.
So so madam.
Speaker and gentle lady so I I
think there's a just a little
bit of confusion and I'm gonna
try to to to work on that so in
the bill schools.
Would.
Basically be required at this
point to offered to their
students financial literacy at
the school site maybe this does
mean some sort of partnership is
pool credit it could take that
form but you could have students
that choose to take this as a
potential
dual credit opportunity but it
would really depend on the
district in order to work that
out so if they're if they're
able to they could enter into
that agreement with CNM and
offered that particular schools
for dual credit so for filling
that requirement for students
and I gaining that college
credit for it as well I hope
that clarifies things in the
money the water Madam speaker
engine waiting.
Madam speaker gentleman that
that was wonderfully clarifying
and did not muddy the waters and
thank you very much for your
answers and for your work on
this bill
I yield back.
The gentleman from Colfax curry
Harding quay Roosevelt San
Miguel and union counties
Representative Chatfield.
There we go.
Thank you madam speaker doesn't
deliver the yield.
Madam speaker I yield to the
gentleman.
Madam speaker Mr chairman I
really enjoyed here in this bill
during our Education Committee
and I felt like I needed to
stand up and speak in favor of a
for just a minute
As Baker gentleman if I were a
child and wanted to.
go to college one thank you bill
credit courses and and higher
math the.
Sources in the at a college
projector you does this in any
way prevent me from doing that.
Madam speaker and gentleman no
now as I mentioned it's it's
very flexible and and and broad
enough to be able to capture
students no matter what their
ambitions is.
So madam speaker gentleman if I
wanted to go into the building
trades and I chose to seek a
pathway in high school that
prepared me to go into the
building trades what I have more
freedom after this bill to do
that than I do currently.
Madam speaker and gentlemen yes
I believe that within the
parameters of the bill you would
definitely have the more freedom
and flexibility to do that so
madam speaker gentleman if I
want to go in the two what are
the other trades
what I have more flexibility to
set a course that would make
believe graduate qualified to
work in that for a.
Madam speaker and gentlemen I
would say yes and certain to
come in on the districts to
really follow through with
making that a possibility but
this this bill certainly as
minimum requirements really
makes that more of a possibility
than it currently is.
a reality for a lot of our
students so madam speaker Mr
chairman I would put forth the
idea that if I were a.
For a high school student and I
had the ability to learn things
that I thought would be valuable
to me in seeking a job in the
trade that I had chosen I
believe I would be more likely
to stay in school and that might
possibly increase our graduation
rate.
Is that a possibility Madam.
Speaker Mr chairman.
Madam speaker and gentleman I
think I think that's more of a
possibility that with this belt
for sure I think that's
certainly one of the strengths
here is is that we're giving
students a lot more options and
a lot more buy in because I know
when I can create that slide in
with my students and they can
see themselves in the work that
they're doing and see it as
important that I can get the
very best out of them and if
they're going through and just
plugging away because it's a
requirement it's a requirement
requirement.
Madam speaker still one thank
you for bringing this bill
relinquishment and.
No further debate the gentleman
to close.
Right Madam speaker thank you
all for for the great debate on
this it's been a pleasure caring
this bill and really hearing
from all of you and that's why
we it we amended some of the
things and that committee
members were looking for in
house education that came out of
our robust discussion so thank
you body for the questions and
with that madam speaker I move
that house bill eighty three do
now as amended do now pass.
We are on final passage of house
bill eighty three as amended the
vote is now open.
Forty five seconds remaining.
The vote is about to close.
But remaining names.
Representative black.
Representative Roger.
Yes Representative Rod Montoya
level yes.
Vote of sixty six in the
affirmative and one in the.
Thank.
Representative Zamora.
By a vote of sixty six in the
affirmative and one in the
negative house bill eighty three
as amended has duly passed.
Is the gentleman from Dona ana
and Otero counties ready on item
number eleven.
Yes madam speaker Jim to that
point please.
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
House Bill one oh three as
amended on final passage has
been taken and that it is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution gentleman to
explain the bill.
Thank you madam speaker and to
the body.
This is our house bill
administrative is providing for
an having categories a
certification services to
utility operators certification
act providing late fees
providing definition and
establishing fees I would like
to yield to my co sponsor
Representative about Anderson to
expand on some of these points.
Thank you madam chair Madam
chair of today we've got house
bill one oh three it's HSD bill
that Representative Madrid and I
have both agreed to
bring forward as yet is a rural
friendly bill of in the course
of getting at H. B. one oh three
prepared for of the body we had
the opportunity to visit with
different organizations who are
of one looking at Fe pay E. a
the increased the or the
certification of drinking water
and wastewater utility operators
of the I organizations that have
signed on Indian doors the
legislation or The New Mexico
utility operators advisory board
The New Mexico rural water
association the New Mexico
association of counties in New
Mexico municipal league.
And the New Mexico water and
wastewater Association.
These are organizations
endorsement has has certainly
helped us move the bill on the
house side is that as you can
see we are increasing the fee to
for the certification of and
that's roughly doubling the fee.
Fees not been adjusted for
fifteen years.
so why is it rural friendly it
is rural friendly because this
provides.
Thanks testing centers of
throughout the state and
workforce solutions offices in
New Mexico prior to this of
these of latest of these men and
women have to travel to a
testing site in either Los
crucis Albuquerque or Santa Fe.
Of the certification of testing
is important to the New Mexico
consumers and it has to be
conducted on a regular basis of
once a year that.
Travel to those testing sites
often you saw communities rural
communities lose their certified
operator to go and take the
certification test away from
home spending the night mileage
meals travel.
hotel room.
That was the added expense in
Burton in those those yes states
were were sat in under this
program where the environment
department has agreed to offer
testing in the state of many
different sites it is user
friendly meeting in a wide in
New Mexico you can drive to the
workforce solutions yes so I am
on a pre arranged date time and
take the test and be home for
dinner so I think this is
important and what excites me
the most about this bill in
closing is set I believe this
kind of moral
friendly delivery.
Of these and other
requirements of by the state
regulatory authorities of are
going to open the door to other
agencies using.
A little fault for
A better friendlier easier
solution so madam chairman with
that
Representative Madrid nice stand
for questions.
German Kerr Representative
Crowder.
Of the Representative I could
just real quick jump back in I
did forget to introduce our
expert witnesses whose is
Rebecca Roose with the
environmental improvement
Division
and we're arrive Center title
card I don't know so that you
can have to forgive me as well
as
Joel.
S. Martinez thank you
Representative Madrid so that we
will be conferring with them as
we go into the good for debate
thank you and I apologize
Representative Crowder for.
Interrupting.
Judge gentleman everyone gets
nervous on their first bill.
Curry.
Thank you Mr speaker of the
General Fund Dona Ana Carol
please you.
Yes are we able to my friend
from.
Thank you kind John I had an
opportunity to hear about your
bill pretty early on.
And not contactable wastewater
treatment operator in the city
manager and several others and
found a to my surprise they were
they were very excited about
this bill encouragement is
supported and I look forward to
supporting it I think it's a
very good bill and I think it is
good for rural communities.
And
Wish you great success hope you
get it through the Senate really
quick thank you Mr speaker thank
you gentlemen for done in a
military.
The card.
From
Travis Representative Ezzell.
Thank you Mr speaker.
This is the primary.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Representative Madrid thank you
time to first and then as some
questions.
It was made whenever you you and
Representative Anderson.
We're starting this bill he said
that the city increased can you
tell us why the fees have
increased and I'm looking I'm
referencing paid seven of your
bills.
Because I'm seeing all sorts of
these there.
Thank you Mr speaker and and
finally the gentleman I lady
from Travis
but usually this is a program
like we said was only offered
three times a year or and
various locations now is going
to have a a bit of a start up
because fees is going to help us
recoup in as and that being said
we're going to modernize by
having workforce important
commission be able to run these
trainings throughout the state
at the close his convenience we
carriers around there so there
is no a bit of an initial start
up cost I'd like to say that
within those writing of this
bill Mr chair it also offers the
it can increase but it also has
the ability to decrease but I
think that's what makes it
really I DO and acid of the new
fees also support computer based
training and testing that'll be
provided as well so it's a
little bit of a start up costs
and it's it's to be expected I
would tell you but the the
future shows that it can be
matters even with the potential
to be decreased.
Thank you.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
guardian as I thank you for that
explanation
also reading that this is the
increase would generate around
hundred and eighty thousand
dollars annually.
All sophisticated with this
program.
And so all of those fees will go
to the enemy PED is that correct
Mr speaker and gentleman from
nine AM to.
madam chair and violated from
Travis give me a moment just to
verify that but I want to sleep
yes that is correct it's mostly
to to help on our operating cost
to make that availability of the
committees throughout the state
the cost does go right back into
the program okay.
And Mr speaker and gentleman
from the yeah the and
Representative Anderson.
I think this is a win win
situation for rural county you
know what to tell them that we
can help our rural counties
because sometimes they are
forgotten and we get the
especially down south eastern
New Mexico until they want our
money from the oil and gas and
agricultural sectors.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
I'm seeing that the
certification renewal renewal
review application is fifty
dollars certification testing
application review is twenty
five dollars for the purpose of
the application reviews fifty
examination review twenty five
late penalty twenty five
certification exam sixty.
All of these things that you
were talking about right here.
You say in your bills that they
cannot be increased more than
once per calendar year is that
correct Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Mr speaker for native John from
Travis are going to verify that
for you the second.
Yes correct.
Okay Mister speaker and
gentleman this is the department
show collect these fees so I'm
assuming you're still talking
about the NMED.
That gives them the right thing
I think they're going to
institute the space marks the
first of two thousand twenty two
does that mean.
March second two thousand twenty
three they can raise these
right.
These basic.
Mr speaker finally from Travis
give me a moment to verify that
okay.
Hello.
Know the rates will be raised
only by
low water compiler control.
Through rulemaking.
Mr speaker and gentleman other
uses thank the the space can
only be increased through rural
more rural.
Rule making enough role role
making.
Is there any oversight from.
Anybody else such as the
legislative body since you are
hearing this bill.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
This year thank you the state
for a the certification renewal
right now in your bill with
states for fifty dollars is
there any cap on this because
what the UNM the the have come
up with the phrase say okay this
year is going to be the fifty
dollars for going to make it
three hundred and fifty dollars
is there anything from
preventing them from doing that.
Mr speaker and I lady from
Travis to go back to reiterate a
little bit no the range will not
reduce only by the W. choose the
same through rulemaking all
there is a not for public
comment New Mexico P. New Mexico
environmental development to not
be unilaterally raise fees is it
has to be by public comment to
be imported make hearing.
Okay Mr speaker that's what I
needed to hear they can't just.
Up inside this is what we're
going to be I needed to make
sure that Mr speaker.
Gentleman of.
More often than not if this bill
is fast enough certainly hope
that it is.
We'll.
The.
Order directors of the mutual
domestic water association will
by pay these fees for that
because thank is this
resemblance to the individual.
Mr speaker matter of Madam the.
Bye lady from Travis in a
moment.
It depends a lot on the water
for more it depends on the test
of those of those what the thank
you.
Okay.
Mr speaker and gentleman I would
see this as a win win for rural
areas of our state I think it is
one way that we can get things
done in a more reasonable
fashion said wait months and
months and months for some of
these people to be able to take
the thing saying I do appreciate
your answers to my questions and
Mister speaker I yield.
Thanks for the gentleman from
Bernalillo Representative
Garcia.
Long before and will be
The bill's sponsor from the
Chavez the and Roosevelt yield.
Mr speaker yes I would be happy
to yield.
As the most bigger surprise
surprise surprise.
Well.
Of the gentleman from Chavis the
Roosevelt.
And I researched from the house
historian and our guards.
That the gentleman had not yet
introduced the first bill on the
floor in this first term.
So we're in we're in the in the
right in going after you on your
no all.
Not just one.
Kansi on.
But
Concealment.
And let me explain as the more
speaker why this gentleman has
to seeing.
Our currency on its.
Some years back.
The first year of his term Roky.
Freshman.
Representative Chatfield.
Was putting on his first bill.
And actually Representative
Chatfield we are in a fairly
good job of saying Rancho
Grande.
What is the most beaker we'll
call them the bill has for some
if that wasn't Representative
Anderson not the song director.
Representative Anderson that's
why you have to do goals and see
on this.
Today.
One won't do.
Because it is part of the role
of the first bill some director
that's a mortal sin.
It's the most bigger.
So I Representative Anderson.
Let me kind of go over the menu
of songs that are colleagues of
fate and we program today
Representative Serrato did that
hip hop we hadn't had a hip hop.
But we've got rock and roll we
got hard rock one member did a
case some obstructed been is not
just a couple of lines.
The whole song.
We've got a a children's song on
country Spanish court you'll
spend budget on sports them.
a beautiful up from.
And now hold all of our.
So representative of Anderson I
kind of warn you ahead of time.
Practice over the weekend so you
could get both of those songs in
a timely manner and in a more
professional way so.
I want to.
It job.
Thank you thank you
Representative Garcia and I do
remember jumping ahead of you in
the invitation to one of our
members on his first song
Mr speaker today I want to of
start with the song it's a very
close to all New Mexicans
written by a woman who came from
Roswell New Mexico father of was
quite a legendary lawman in in
eighteen eighty one one hundred
forty years ago shot Billy the
kid and peak Maxwell's house in
fort Sumner New Mexico name is
Elizabeth Garrett and Elizabeth
Garrett wrote our state's saw
which was adopted the year my
father was born.
So let us let me go forward with
all fair New Mexico.
Under a sky high zoom or where
balmy breezes blow.
And sunshine in waiver may keep
Cole I'm of the mind too soon
well with fiery heart so glow
state of the gains historic is
nowhere Mexico
spare New Mexico we love we love
you so our hearts with pride or
flow no matter where we go all
fair New Mexico we love we love
you so.
Randa's state to know New
Mexico.
Thank you.
Is.
Representative.
Going
yes thank you okay we.
We're going to.
Is that comes here on the is
wound up on a favorite of New
Mexico State University.
November that I am aware of it
but there's this service and
numeral November.
As.
I just want to go.
They all showed nobody this year
and take one down and pass it
around and that should do it
because eighties are often.
Of I have a song on the.
Surveys consumption what I spent
a year to since I used to build
that out and and my all modern
so I hope Representative Garcia
of this but built by obligations
today with great anticipation
that this house may passed H. B.
one oh three on over to the
Senate thank you very much is
the most Baker and gentleman
from Travis Lee and rose about
that not that last song also
thank you both very passed by a
hair.
Hey that's better than I usually
do
House committee representative
Ely for thumbs up or thumbs down
on the qualifications of the
second song the second some
qualify.
Yes I symptoms of involuntary
and therefore by the power
vested in this house by the
constitution and laws of the
state of New Mexico.
The gentleman from Chavis has
met his obligations with does
concern us and some director is
satisfied.
San.
Eight.
To close.
Mr speaker house bill one oh
three one time amended now do
pass.
The vote is now open.
Because.
Those.
The.
Member center I have a recorded
vote.
Representative Baldonado.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Representative Powdrell Culbert
both yes.
Senator sixty seven from zero to
negative house transmitted has
passed the house.
Sen
Ron item fifteen house bill one
twenty are you ready and I.
Mr speaker I is for the other
regions funds.
For the motion necessary
replacing house bill one twenty
as amended on final passage has
been taken the gentleman to
expand on.
Thank you Mr speaker and members
of the House thousand meal one
two in the is a follow up of
house bill thirty of which we
thanks to this house last year
and this year's mailed us find
for waivers.
The licensing and certification
for certain occupations and
professions school personnel
structure industry licenses do
certificates of qualification
for military service members and
spouses dependent children under
returns with that Mr speaker I
stand for questions.
Close.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
members of the house I now move
that house bill one twenty
passes house.
It has been one twenty as
amended the vote is now open.
Thirty seconds to close.
The critical members who do not
have a recorded vote.
Representative Baldonado.
Representative.
Yes Representative votes yes.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Representative Stansbury.
Yes Representative Stansbury
both yes.
Sixty six informative zero
negative house bill one twenty
as amended has duly passed the
house whatever one.
The gentle lady from Valencia
Representative Fajardo of are
you ready on item eighteen.
yes Mr speaker that point three
Frank ocean necessary for prison
hospital one fifty eight on
final passage is been taken the
generated to explain it all.
Thank you Mr speaker I thank you
members of the body
this is basically so the
legislature we make task force
with something that we've done
through memorials and other
other meetings there is some
task force that have chosen to
follow the open meetings acts
have not and there's been some
confusion and all this bill does
is to clear up that confusion so
that all legislative task force
created the the body are subject
to the open meetings act.
And with that Mr speaker I stand
for questions.
C..
Eight the gentle lady to close.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
house bill one fifty eight in
their past.
It has.
The vote is now open.
When it's a close.
Thirty cents to close.
Members without a recorded vote.
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Madrid.
Yes.
Both yes.
Representative sixty seven from
zero to negative house bill one
five eight has duly passed the
house.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
This
next business announcements and
miscellaneous business.
Education is so ordered.
members house bill twenty seven
this is a Representative
Williams Stapleton house bill
twenty seven
if you can find with the
chairperson of the
appropriations and finance
committee they do not need to
see this bill will drop the
probation referral on house bill
twenty seven has with twenty
seven remove the referral to the
appropriations and finance
committee.
Hi there it's.
Mr speaker which the lady from
Bernalillo.
Representative Chasey.
Thank you Mr speaker I wanted to
announce that house Judiciary
will meet after the democratic
caucus.
We do have to bills.
That Sanchez and asked them to
be heard.
On Wednesday night is house bill
eighty eight and has for one
another and our first item is
actually not on the agenda but
we will deal with the Committee
substitute for House joint
resolution nine first and then
go down our agenda and not I
will give the committee at the
order of the bills when we get
there.
And this and that.
Representative Johnson.
Thank you Mr speaker democratic
caucus we will have a meeting at
three thirty today and Joseph
has emailed the additional link
information thank you Mr
speaker.
Members that generated for
granted are going this year
Representative Dow.
Thank you thank you Mr speaker
the Republicans will have a
caucus meeting immediately after
the floor session.
Members.
After the floor session.
Look at your doctor.
Representative Estes.
Thank you Mr speaker honourable
members house commerce committee
will be meeting about five
minutes after the slowest caucus
meeting I will be hearing a
Senate bill to house bill one
ten and hopefully get to house
bill two seventy four thank you
Mr speaker.
Working.
The slowest car because then you
after that after the last one
okay good.
I was just confused thank you Mr
speaker thank you we will maybe
five minutes after the both
caucuses finish.
Thank you John I.
Representative
surrebuttal slow the general
manager Representative.
Thank you Mr speaker we have
health transportation public
works tomorrow at eight thirty.
Senator Representative Lente.
Thank you Mr speaker good
afternoon folks your health
agriculture water resources
committee will meet tomorrow at
eight thirty to take up a couple
bills thank you all members
announcements.
Most people are.
Representative Garcia.
Speaker the tall dark and
handsome and lovely.
Local government land grants and
cultural affairs committee will
be meeting probably.
At nine AM.
tomorrow morning.
All members and presenters.
Be there or be sponge Bob square
pants.
Other announcements.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
I stand in recess until.
Tomorrow morning in general as a
technician for good morning and
afternoon of third reading for
those watching at home plans to
and for communities expect those
to start up at about four
fifteen well that I can live in
tomorrow have a good night.
