Representative Terrazas.
Madam vice chair Roybal
Caballero Senator.
Mr chair Alcon.
He ill.
And we have a quorum Sir lower
rates should do we have a
Senator development in the area.
Let here sorry I'm having
trouble with my computer.
Representative Terrazas is here.
Have Representative a Senator
tall men who has been promoted
to panelist.
He has three expert witnesses.
This.
Representative you can't hi this
is Tom and I'm here.
Is is.
What.
Alcon.
One my name's Senator I don't
want to embarrass myself my
Spanish is terrible my English
isn't much better.
at this way okay so let's see we
are.
I really.
Jump around okay I'm glad to
hear okay Senator Dalem you dont
see juniors for witnesses would
you.
I am promoting them right now
Sir.
So you're ready yes
Representative.
The hostages years whenever
you're ready okay thank you
thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee of.
This bill.
Senate Bill one twenty nine and
then Senator Wirth say that
which was enacted last year to
address a.
A crisis in New Mexico where by
folks are that's saving a
sufficient amount of money in
order to live a dignified and
safe retirement and in New
Mexico we have the highest
percentage of people that.
Have a retirement plan.
And incidentally thirty percent
of retirees in New Mexico are
living on social security only
in the average payment is
approximately fourteen thousand
dollars.
the bill up last year's bills.
Establish a two track system
whereby citizens could choose a
marketplace plan or Hey roadie
direction I R. a plan similar to
the New Mexico by sixteen
college savings plan.
So the bill before you today Mr
chair and members is a.
Then the Wirth say that coach I
just went through the enacted
last year.
The.
This.
These are reasonable amendments
which when it.
Passed by it would which have.
Yes both the yes thanks a
business committee as well as
the Senate finance committee
there is no fiscal impact to
this bill bill does not ask for
an appropriation has no fiscal
impact bill simply extends the
timetable.
From this year to July two
thousand twenty four for the
implementation of the two
programs that I mentioned
earlier the retirement market
place program and then roff I R.
a program.
The bill Mr.
Chair clarifies that the board
will not be directly or even
indirectly managing program
participant funds.
The employee the bill also those
states seven ploys are not
responsible for any losses that
are employed might have to the
to the poor performance of the
employees investment selection.
And.
Thirdly the the bill clarifies
that the state of Mexico and the
poor are not guaranteeing
investment performance results
to bill.
Mr chair places the requirement
that the board purchase a
blanket surely Fund by allowing
the board to determine and then
purchase the appropriate
coverage products.
What will the bill not to the
bill does not change the
voluntary status of the programs
both the employer and employees
participate but.
Both the employer and the
employees participation.
Remains voluntary.
The bill does not change the.
The legislature's original
mandate that the board will
design and implement.
The two types of plans to market
place on the payroll deduction
Roth IRA.
That concludes my remarks Mister
chair I have with me three
expert witnesses Kristina Fisher
from in the thank New Mexico as
well as representatives of from
the state treasurer's office Sam
Collins and I Claudia male who
is executive director of the
work and save board thank you Mr
chair.
So.
Expert witnesses can either make
a comments our answer questions
it's up to well given that
option whatever they want to do.
You wanna you wanna add a
comment or two before I go to
the audience.
Richard Fisher associate
director New Mexico I'm
primarily here to just answer
questions but just wanted to
reiterate so we work closely
with the senator and with A. R.
P. New Mexico to design this law
last year and as the board was
appointed and and started the
implementation process they
identified some key pieces of
the acts that could be
strengthened and so this is a
cleanup bill to do that as a
senator mentioned the main piece
that substantive us to push out
that implementation timeline we
had a pretty ambitious timeline
pre comment and I think that
given the pandemic it just was
not gonna be feasible so
in complete agreement with
pushing that out a little bit
but happy to answer any
questions the committee may have
about the technical changes made
in this act.
Okay everybody else okay at this
time line to do the work to go
to the audience.
Is the only one day in the body
wants to speak on behalf for his
the real.
Approximately one minute to
your comments so if you will
raise your hand I will call on
you.
And we will go from there.
We'll start with the Mr Greer
Roger Greer.
Good.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and members of the committee my
name is Raju Greer I'm here to
assist as the volunteer state
president with a a RP New Mexico
A. R. P. New Mexico is a strong
supporter Senate bill one twenty
nine this bill is one of a a RP
New Mexico's priority bills for
twenty twenty one.
Because Senate bill one twenty
nine with this flexibility in
the timeline implementation
requirements will ensure that
the working shape boards ability
to carry this legislative
mandate is properly aligned with
St Wall we would like to thank
senator Clemente bringing this
much needed bill forward thank
you.
I will go to allow us to cross
for faster than.
Sh Representative Akan this is a
Dion's ability actually I don't
know why it keeps coming up with
the wrong my apologies I am the
vice chair of the board of work
in state of New Mexico and just
asking the board on behalf of
the board to work in state that
we strongly support Senate bill
one twenty nine would like to
thank the sponsor for bringing
it we believe that these
amendments will only make the
program stronger to help New
Mexico's private sector workers
save for retirement thank you.
Thank you.
Just does it does it causes for
that side okay I will go to the
committee at this guy many
members of the committee and
then the.
Questions or comments.
Here anybody raising their hand.
What is the pressure of the
committee.
Well but
what I do.
A second.
From promotion from a
Representative Sheryl Williams
Stapleton from per second for
Representative do you bash.
This study secretary would you
call the roll yes Sir
Representative bash.
Yes Representative black.
Representative Garcia yes
Representative Hernandez yes
Representative Rubio yes
Representative Stapleton.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Terrazas.
Madam vice chair Roybal
Caballero yes.
Representative black.
Representative Terrazas.
Mr chairman Alcon.
Yes.
Representative black your muted
listen to me I'm sorry.
Yes.
Thank you.
It.
It would do the yes are you are
you have Representative oz's
you're also muted.
I'm having trouble with my
connection keeps going in out in
out I'm sorry Sir your vote I
didn't hear the bills so I'm.
Okay no.
Sir we have eight in the
affirmative.
And one in the negative.
Senator you're on your way thank
you Mr I thank you members of
the committee have a wonderful
day new to.
OK Representative Trujillo are
you around.
Yes I am Mr chairman good after
good morning still and the I
hope you're all doing well.
But I start Mr chairman of the
house is yours Representative
whenever you're ready thank you.
I bring to you house bill two
hundred and eighty nine which
is.
The next relating to higher ed
setting a minimum wage for non
tenured tech track faculty at
colleges and universities
extending eligibility for
unemployment unemployment
benefits to non tenure track
faculty at colleges and
universities and Mr chairman I
submitted I submitted an
amendment to and I'm not sure if
you all received that you did so
is it okay to go to move
forward.
With the amendment.
Your muted Sir.
Go ahead.
Does a budget I will move the
amendment for discussion
purposes
the amendment to us in that way
you can that we before we go to
COVID done.
The booking comment on the
amended bill instead of
On the first bill okay thank you
Mr chairman on page one line
eleven.
A please try.
I'm sorry.
Page one line in the eleven
after the semi colon strike the
remainder of the line.
And strike up twelve through the
semi colon.
This.
Number two one pages on page
one.
And to strike section one in its
entirety.
Remember this read number number
three we number the succeeding
section accordingly.
A. J. eight line twenty strike
and.
On page five I'm sorry number
five on page nine line one
strict the period and insert Lou
there of.
And.
As a call semi colon I'm sorry
quotation marks.
Number six page nine between
lines wanted to insert the
following new sub paragraph.
If based on the totality of the
circumstances it is highly
probable that there is a judge
there is a job available for the
claimant in the following
academic year or term.
If a job offer contains a
contingency.
Hi Mary weight should be given
to the contingent nature of the
offer of employment and the
totality of the circumstances
must show that must show that it
is highly probable that the
contingencies of that employment
will be satisfied that is all Mr
chairman and before we continue
I wanted to make sure that
my tool expert witnesses
Rochelle and Gianna were
included as as well.
There are there on here
Okay Committee miss anybody have
any questions on the amendment.
May interrupt Sir Representative
Trujillo is that.
Collect colors that the last
name okay thank you.
Okay back to the original
question any members of the
committee.
Do I have a motion to adopt the
amendment to.
The amendment.
I move that we adopt the
amendment.
Who knows second that the land
any opposition to that motion.
I see none here.
We have doctors words.
Okay I'm having trouble to Sir.
BMO will be Monday on a Tuesday
ha.
Is this what I'll do is I will
go to the audience into there's
anyone here who would like to
speak in support or opposition
of the of this bill okay Mister
chairman may I brace myself.
This will go ahead if you do
raise your hand and I will call
on you when you approximately
one minute.
I don't see any hands race this
doesn't really I do I do I do I
am Mr marks a manner
If you would go ahead you got a
minute tell us what you're
thinking more thank you good
morning Mr chairman members the
committee at this.
That is the Senate opposition of
the bill Mr chairman members
committee fact the cop wants to
make it really clear that we
support increasing compensation
for all of our acting staff that
includes non ten year I'm the
only thing I want to mention is
I want to thank sponsors for
meeting with me I think the
public we had a good meeting I
want to point out that the
legislation doesn't have an
appropriation for the setting
the minimum wage and with that
said
District the council just wanted
again Representative that will
work with the sponsoring we we
do want everything we can
increase compensation for acting
staff thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee.
Thank you John John rice.
Thank you Mr chair member of the
committees my name's John urchin
with the American federation of
teachers New Mexico and we're
here to stand in support of
house bill two eight nine as
amended by this committee this
morning we certainly have been
branching out into how we can
best serve college and
university educators and that
does include our contingency
faculty which you'll hear more
from during the presentation of
the bill what we did want to
note our support for the bill as
it's been amended today thank
you.
Okay let me ask you a question.
Name again.
Last.
We would do a.
Your show okay was.
Okay Scott scale.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee good
morning my name is Scott Scanlon
registered lobbyists for San
Juan college and I too had a a
visit with the sponsor we had a
very nice text to back and forth
but anyway we respectfully stand
in opposition to this
legislation for the same reason
we we we think there's a.
No appropriation to to help fund
these this bill and as a result
we respectfully propose thank
you Mr chairman and members of
the committee.
Thank you so that's the last I
have there.
Okay I will go to the committee
at this time and I have a.
In two bags so.
For.
Just one question does this bill
applies only to public
universities or does it also
apply to private institutions.
Madam chair Mr chair and of
Representative bash
public institutions.
Thank you do I have a anybody
else by chair Republican leader
would you like to.
Thank you Mr chair thank you I
just wanted to
The the sponsor and the
committee and the chair of no
that and you all know that I am
currently on a UNM faculty and I
just needed to make sure that
everybody understood that on
this on this bill I'm fully
supportive my involved with the
effort to bring this bill
forward and and all transparency
my felt it important to our
state that I am in complete
support and and encourage of the
members to support this bill and
in again in complete
transparency I am part of the U.
N. M. family and
I'm happy that they were able to
get have the sponsor present
this bill it's time just strong
proponent as always on across
the board of
increasing minimum wages to be
livable wages living wages with
all full benefits so I will
never stand away from giving
that support no matter
the employee is so I continue to
be steadfast in supporting
living wages across the board
and benefits that serve the best
interests of the employees at
all times thank you Mr chairman
and thank you sponsor and thank
you members of the committee and
the public.
Thank you madam vice chair at
this time I don't have any other
hands raised so I will ask for a
motion.
Okay.
The proper motion that manages
the motion would be for the do
that side of the house bill.
Hello two eighty nine as
amended.
And do I have a second second.
J. O. that the.
Madam the secretary would you
call the roll sure
Representative fast.
Yes Representative black.
Now.
Representative Garcia yes
Representative Hernandez.
No Representative Rubio yes
Representative Stapleton yes
Representative laws.
No I'd like to explain if this
internet will work.
Two minutes.
Madam vice chair Roybal
Caballero yes.
Mr chair Alcon yes.
So you have six in the
affirmative and.
Representative does need to
speak.
Yes Sir Mr chair sorry about
that I just having trouble
adjusting my my
And today.
wanted for I was just concerned
and I didn't hear enough of the
bill and I wanted to have some
questions but
basically I voted no because I'm
afraid of it raising tuition on
the on the students and that
research might my position at
this point thank you Mr chair.
Thank you.
Okay.
So the low and slow S. R. we
have six in the affirmative and
three in the negative.
Or do you pass.
So there would services for
today state.
Stay tuned for a.
Banking is the two letters are
mostly yes but the.
We should be good.
Thank you everybody have a nice
lunch.
CO one floor.
The third one thirty or two
thirty Mr chair those early
hello.
Two thirty.
Thank you.
All.
That's why you have a vice chair
Mister chair thank you in two
years so you later.
