We know that I can take care of
fire. Can Mr Chairman with this
bill does is this bill is a
recruitment fund for
Even in my area where
volunteering justice something
that's not happening as much as
it used to. Now, with this bill
will do Mr Chairman as it will
appropriate fund appropriate
funds, and it's going to help
for paid firefighters and E M T
s in our areas where it's needed
so departments can ensure that
we get more firefighters and
that next generation in
What will happen with this bill?
Mr Chairman is if it passes the
recruitment of firefighters also
means that engine ensures that
departments maintain or improve
their is so, which is the
insurance service office
ratings. And with that, I'm
gonna yield to representative
Borrego, who has been my co
sponsor and this bill before we
take any questions.
I'm good afternoon, members of
the committee. Mr Chairman, um,
delighted to be here with my co
sponsor, Senator Leo had a meal.
We just happened to be from the
same town And this is our first
bill together, So I'm really
excited about that. Um, as you
know, um, our house bill.
Companion Bill to this did pass
the House and the Senate.
And so this is the Senate Bill.
Uh, which actually does
Include the appropriation and
the appropriation that we were
asking for us $35 million. There
were some changes, I think at
the Senate level and at the
house level, but so the bill
actually has been amended and
you should have that version in
front of you.
At the end of the at the end of
our tunnel. We hope the
governor's sciences and puts it
into law. This is this
recruitment fund is very
desperately needed in the whole
state of New Mexico, and what it
does is it really creates a
career ladder for volunteer
firefighters to look at, Um
The opportunity of becoming full
time firefighters and as you
know, our public servants are
always there. 24 7, and I think
this is a great need to support
them. Thank you. Thank you, Mr
Chairman and just one last
comment. I wanted everyone to
know that this bill by no means
pushes out or excludes are
volunteers.
This is to help supplement a
response to our communities, and
I just want to introduce three
expert witnesses who won't make
a comment But who are here today
in case we need them to step in
Randy Valetta, the state fire
marshal. Map probe Valencia
County Fire chief and Miguel
Timon the A F F local to 44
president, And with that, Mr
Chairman, we stand for question.
This time I will go out to the
Out there. Anybody want to speak
in favor of this legislature?
Anybody who's opposed to this
More firefighters, so all those
That's what we're trying to do
right now. Okay? There was
nobody in opposition, right?
Okay with that I will go to the
committee.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I only have
initially Senate Bill 21
contained a $35 million
appropriation.
That was struck in the Senate
finances have been reinstated,
or where is the money going to
come from? Mr Chairman,
Representative. Great question.
So what happens with any
appropriation Bill? Is it
stripped every time? So that's
always the amendment. So what
we're going to be doing with the
Senate bill is 25 million, will
be placed into the bill to cover
the
Thank you, Mr Chair Senator, so
it has been reinstated 25
million of the 35. Mr. Chairman,
Representative. It will go back
home and thank you, Senator and
representative. Thank you, Mr
Chair and
It was really good to work with.
and everybody knows I'm a little
biased when it comes to you
guys, So I just want to make a
couple of statements. One is
Madam Chair, Mr Chair and and
representative.
How many volunteers do we have
in New Mexico?
Percentage wise.
Mr Chairman, members of the
committee representative. Our
last count that we did, and we
used to have a 7000 volunteers
There was a couple of years ago
Our last data that we received
about a year ago we had 3000
volunteers.
So we are seeing a drop.
Thank you, Mr Chair, and thank
you, representative. So
We've we've
Mr Chair members of the
committee. That's correct
representative
Thank you, Mr Chair. And what?
What I want the audience to know
is
We run on? Can you explain what
the s chair members of the
committee representative years
Insurance there is office is a
company private company that
comes in and reach our
departments from a class launch
with Pakistan one being the best
10 being the worst right now we
have one class 10 in the state
of New Mexico. But what we're
seeing is if this trend
continues, or we're losing
volunteers.
We could see departments retro
in throughout the state, which
is really going to affect
insurance reads for our
customers out there, so I think
it's very important that we
started hiring Pete firefighters
out there to support our
volunteers increased combination
departments in order to maintain
this. Thank you, Mr Chair and
representatives. So what I heard
you say is
If we don't have those stations
full
And we don't have our isso
ratings down.
Then our insurance rates
premiums that we're paying. Mr
Chairman, members of the
Committee representative. Yes,
that's correct. And also what
you're going to see is you're
gonna see Fire department's
losing funds. They go to the
department. Thank you. Thank
you, Mr Chair.
Mr Chairman, members of the
committee representative. That's
a great question. So one thing
we wanted to do this year was
make sure that we got out into
the state and met with chiefs
across the state.
We had multiple meetings
statewide. Your counties were
represented very well in those
meetings, and the intent is to
get the money. The department's
here speaking of our
Pretty much exactly what we're
looking volunteer departments
that are going to have to start
to make a transition into
getting some career folks or
combination departments that are
going to need to
Increase their staffing levels
to keep up with call volume. No,
we're gonna make sure the money
is getting to the appropriate
statewide, um, but again were
well represented in those
meetings.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I have a
couple of questions or
Um, So you talked about, um,
volunteer losing a number of
volunteers volunteer in. Do you
have an idea of why we're losing
volunteers? Mr. Chair members of
the committee representatives.
There's probably a handful of
reasons that that we've come up
with, but I'll give you the few
that we hear kind of
reoccurring.
First and foremost is people are
taking on to stay afloat. Um,
they don't have the opportunity
to volunteer like they used to.
They saw the heart to do a
second to that training
requirements are pretty
extensive and
That's not something that's set
by us. Um, that's a standard
that is is setting our
certification process.
And those processes are defined
by previous injuries. Deaths so
But the training requirements
reflect
Ah!
You know, past events, so to
give you an example, um, an
entry level firefighter.
It could be as much as six weeks
of training to get certified.
That's not including any Mt
license. So when you ask
somebody who's working two jobs
already to commit to six weeks
of training
Uh huh.
It's almost impossible these
days and between the State Fire
Academy and the agencies. You
know, we look at opportunities
to do
Evening trainings weekend
trainings to accommodate our
volunteers. But, um, the one
reoccurring theme that I have to
prioritize my family over. Uh
You know, it's disheartening,
but we understand it again. It
doesn't speak to their heart.
They want to do it. Um, Mr
Chair, Senator.
So does this bill and you may
have I may have missed it in
your presentation. But does this
bill provide Mr Chairman members
of the committee representative?
So the end really the way that
the bill is is set up is to say
we want to bring those
volunteers in on a career basis,
so give them the opportunity to
now take this as their job.
But the great thing with that is
we've heard time and time again
when we've gone throughout the
state that
You know our younger generation
is going to go where the
opportunity is, Um, A lot of
people are interested in being
firefighters.
But if you're in a rural area,
and there's no career position,
they're gonna leave. Going to go
to the This is going to allow us
to keep those youth in the
community in a career that
Hopefully we'll
Ground them in their their local
area, for you know, our hope
would be 25 years that they're
going to commit to this, but
Again. The intent is to give
those volunteers the
opportunity. Mr. Chair, Senator,
So are there. My next question
is in terms of Are there any
counties that you're
prioritizing for this?
Mr Chairman, members of the
committee representative.
It really it would be a
statewide initiative. I think
what we're all in agreement of
and that's
One thing that I'm very proud of
what this bill is the
collaboration between the
smallest departments all the way
up to the biggest departments to
say.
We want to get this. So you
know, you've we've heard, um
representatives from Albuquerque
Fire burning Leo County.
Who have said Hey, we're not the
ones that are coming After this
money. We want to see it go to
to the rural areas or the areas
that have the most needs so
Um there will be a process for
the to receive those funds, but
the priority is really need to
to grow. Um, Mr Chair, Senator,
So my last question is
Why has it been administered out
of D F a
Recruiting firefighters.
So when we worked with the
governor's office, G F A is
where we were going to do this,
and there's a there's a similar
kind of bill that's going to
work with land force, mint
probation and parole and
detention officers, and the
decision was made when we worked
with the executive that this is
where we would fund the funding
through funnel it through
familiar with
Good stuff. Mr. Chair.
Representative. What you got to
remember is in the recruitment
happens, It will be up to each
department and how they will
strategize a recruitment and
where they will recruit.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr Chair,
And thank you, Bill. Um, Mr
Chair. We have talked in this
community creative ways to
recruit and some of my
questions. Um, we keep talking
about, uh,
Personal and fight fighters. You
have an idea with salaries, you
think in a specific programs,
I'm just thinking.
If we can replicate itself.
So, Mr Chairman, representative,
Let me give you an example of a
tapping ending in Rio Arriba
County. So if you look at the
town of Dixon Dixon is starting
to target middle school students
that they bring into the
department so that they can get
familiar with what happens in
there, Not that they're being
trained, but that it doesn't
seem like a foreign place. It's
a place in the community that's
here to help their then offering
training to high school students
who come in and want to do a CPR
training or basic training. They
can come in.
That then gets them excited to
volunteer. They then if if
interested, and with the correct
age, then take that.
Firefighter. One training with
this bill would do is that it
takes those of who are the one
the basic training in our
volunteers who could then move
into a paid position through the
county of re Arriba. So that's
one way of how a pipeline of
getting the younger generation
into the department so that they
can see what happens and get
them engaged and hopefully get
that as a career path for them.
Thank you. I love that growing
your own.
Beautiful. Thank you so much,
Um, adult Where? My my question.
I was also concerned about that.
the FAA in that one. I'm using
the fan. I guess I wasn't real.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chair.
Thank you.
I will make a motion for a do
pass chair and
I'll just leave it.
Thank you, Mr Chairman and thank
you estimate them for bringing
this forward. I have a couple of
questions. You may have already
addressed it, and I apologize if
you have
Um, first question. Is this
going to be recurring, or is it
a one time appropriation?
So, Mr Chairman representatives,
so it does have an end date ends
after the fourth year and so
reoccurring for 40 years and
then thank you, Mr Chair and
thank you estimate. Oh, the
Concern I have with all of these
appropriations just
Um
We need to start working these
into the budgets of
administrative budgets on a
regular basis.
So that
Um, first step for many reasons.
One we can ascertain.
Um, we create data improvement
practices administratively, but
also it gives us a chance to
look at whether we need to
increase decrease, but it needs
to be part of
Everyone's administrative budget
from here on end, Otherwise we
become dependent. Um, Mr Chair.
Um, which we've had for
generations. Dependency on the
state.
Um, coming back and having to
fill the gaps, and it's good
because then we don't know what
to do when there's not money,
and so, um, being very creative
about the
Um, recruitment practices that
we put in place as you just
described the pipeline process
recruitment at middle school
starting earlier, not just high
school, but starting middle
school.
And then apprenticeships.
I don't know how much to
emphasize apprenticeships are
effective, very effective and it
gives hands on experience. But
you're also training the next
pool.
Of
Of firefighters in this case,
and, um by doing that it's a
good way for us to measure
Um every time departments come
before us
In appropriations or through the
finance or whatever processes
that we have budget wise it
gives and then hold the account,
So I'm I just wanted to ask that
question I had was
I lost it.
That's been happening today.
Very often. Today. Um I lost it
at this. Um, thank you for
bringing this forward. Thank
you, Mr
I am just curious. This is
pretty basically.
Establishing a fund for paid
fire departments paid or we
establishing the fund where we
are recruiting involved. Mr
Chairman, representatives both
recruiting the next generation,
and then we can also in the
approach, pay those
firefighters, But then it eases
up where the city or the county
or the department then takes on
the fall. FTE.
That full time employee they
It's more of a recruit, okay,
but but so the pardoning like I
am. The question that I asked
was, simply is Are we
recruiting? Just the people are
really using this money to
recruit people that are going to
paid or recruiting volunteers to
Now I understand Mr Chairman
paid firefighters.
Thank you, Mr
Made me think about something
else. Mr. Chair, representative,
Senator
So do you have a sense of
statewide had a different fire
Departments. Mr. Chair
Representative. That's a very
good question. Ask your
question. We don't have an exact
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr
Representative Travis
Representative Garcia.
Representative Corolla.
Representative Johnson.
Represented Martinez. Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative rib.
Representative
to explain
Representative Vincent Yes.
Madam vice chair.
Yes.
Mr Chair.
Yes.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I just
wanted to, you know, shout out.
This helps us so much, Mr.
Chair, Senator Representative.
I've got
Century of El Centenario
Volunteer.
Tyrone Volunteer Whiskey Creek
Volunteers. Sapio Creek
Volunteer Santa Clara, Um Silver
City. Hurley, Fila Glenwood
Burden.
Baird.
Uh huh.
All in my district.
And they are, you know they're
getting older and they don't
have the recruitment isn't there
to replace those people So
without? Thank you, Mr Chair?
God bless you, and I look
forward to seeing this on the
floor. Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Members of the Committee. Thank
you so much.
Okay, Senator Maria. Thank you
Bill. Wonderful. 38 seat is
yours Whenever you are ready.
Thank you, Mr Chairman, Madam
Vice chair and the members of
the Committee and Senator
Michael Padilla. I think I met
everybody here.
58 times, Um reason I'm coming
before you today I'm joined by
our state Fire Marshal Hana
Williams, the deputy director
over at Pere and Anthony Anthony
Montoya, the chief counsel. We
have been moving through the
Legislature on a bill that
creates a new definition for
someone called a fire state fire
member and it renames the public
safety. Um
One plan and it calls it will
not be called the state Public
Safety Plan one today we have a
state police officers in this
fund corrections officers,
probation and parole officers,
and now we're going to move the
state fire marshal's state fire
members into this definition. Um
today there under the General
fund, Mr Chair and members of
the committee and this would
simply streamline everything for
them. The fund is actually
currently funded at 124.9%.
So I can easily absorb the
additional 60 to 90 members that
will occur or there will be
added to it on an annual basis
in a revolving basis, with
retirements falling off
retirements or folks coming into
it. We did have to amend in the
Senate Health and Public Affairs
Committee. Mr Chairman. I don't
know how this happened, but you
know, we all get kind of tired
when we're doing this work, but
we didn't have this thing moving
going into place until or
interaction until 2025.
And so we did need to make this
actionable this year in 2024 and
to, um
Let's see here. Oh, and then the
other piece to this is that the
legislation increases by 20% the
service credit accrued by state
fire members who were members of
the plan on or before June 30th
of 2013, which was the last
major change to this particular
type of pere account, So that's
essentially the legislation. I
think I've got most of it on the
table for you. I'm not going to
ask the experts to say a whole
lot because I know you guys
probably want to keep
Do that again. This is our state
Fire Marshal Randy Varela. Hana
Williams, the deputy director
over at Pere and Anthony
Montoya, who we are all very
familiar with. Most of us have
worked with him in Legislative
Chair members of the committee.
McCarthy, Baby, Wild Land,
Firefighters who will now it's
incredibly important to us
because
We have to compete with the
federal land management agencies
who employ
Wildean firefighters in far
greater numbers, and they offer
a much more competitive
retirement plan.
So, um, this bill will make the
absolute difference for Mexico
Wild land firefighters who have
jurisdictional responsibility of
43 million acres of state and
private plan, So thank you so
much to the sponsor for bringing
profit and the fire chief from
Valencia County.
We stand in support of the state
Fire Marshal's office. I think
there's a misconception.
Sometimes there's a fire
Marshal's office. I think
there's a misconception,
sometimes the CFR marshal's
offices just but really, they're
integral to how we work in the
field. NASCAR support
Miguel took them.
Mr Chair Committee members,
Professional firefighters rise
in support of this especially
want to thank our marches,
office and anything we can do
now collaborative.
Nobody else Nobody wants to.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um and I
have, um, some questions like
Why the Why Originally? They
weren't included in this
retirement.
Mr Chair, Representative. Um,
I not know why they were never
included in the plan. I do
believe that we did not have
crews there, including everybody
into that to be the equal with
Mr Varela, the State Department
asshole's
Yes, Just going back. We moved
as you all are aware we moved
over to homeland PRC. So once we
know where to Homeland security
we've had just in reviewing and
looking at the retention and
recruitment for her office.
These who really support the
Stephen and Mardi to keep this
positions throughout and chair
And so these are the hot shots
that you might be familiar with
that term just be parachuted in
at any moment.
Has it.
Increased danger of the fire
should ask the professional on
that one. I don't want to, but
it seems to me like they have
Mr Chair, Members of Committee
representative years as you guys
are aware, we just had the
hermit speak fire and the
biggest fire in the state of New
Mexico And as you see wildland
fire attorney wildland fire, So
we are seeing
And yet worse as Mr Chair, and,
um, uh, do you expect that over
the next couple of years, the
fires will become more and more
dangerous. If anybody I mean not
being climatologists, just just
going, Mr Chair and
representative on how things is
a good move for the purpose of
this land, nature and again. I
want to remind the committee
this isn't it at 124.9, Senator.
This to me is all just how much,
um and got to see it from far
away and how jarring instruction
and um and so I'm really
grateful that this bill will
increase our ability to fight
these fires and protect. Thank
you, Mr Chair, Senator. I have a
couple of questions. One of them
is something that's contained in
our next to
The forestry division. Um
Basically estimating that the
cost of adding adding state wild
land, firefighters can be
absorbed into vacancies. My
question is, um
I'm gonna make an assumption. Um
That that possibly means that
you won't be filling vacancies.
Is that correct?
Mr Chair and representing them
and ask the individual
Mr Chair and we are in the
hiring process right now, but we
are also midway through the
fiscal year, so that's where the
vacancy savings came from. We
had to first work with the state
personnel office to create the
wild land Firefighter Jobs
series and I will complement of
the SPO for
Getting that done in record
time. But all of that is a
process. So that's where the
vacancy savings come from, and
the expense that I'm talking
about in that F I. R. Is our
agency portion that we pay in in
the plan and Mr Chair, Senator,
Can you tell me how many for the
state forestry division qualify
under this plan, Okay.
Uh um.
Mr Chair and representative up
40 of those were created just
By the State personnel office in
November. And so we have two
hired. We have interviews taking
place today and we are doing a
statewide recruitment to fill
the squad leaders, crew boss and
crew member positions and we
hope to have them all filled.
By April 1st. Perfect. Thank
you. And I just have just have
one last question and that has
to do with, um, reporting back
to the Legislature in terms of
success of the program. I don't
know if it's in the bill. Um,
but it would be great for us to
receive a report back in terms
of
How this is working. Um, is it
attracting? Um, you know
additional fire. Thank you.
Chair and representative. You're
absolutely right. I feel the
same way about many of the
things that we do here, So I
will say that, um every state
agency is to report Finance
Committee and so they're
annualized report will come in.
It will be looked at in the
interim and then as well, So
there's probably representative
3 to 4 reports back to the
Legislature on pretty much
everything that we do. Thank
you, Mr Chair.
Good everybody who brought it?
Um, a couple of questions.
This personally. Firefighters
Do they have a retirement right
now? They don't at all they
actually do. And the general
response Mr Chair to put folks
essentially in their swim lane
with public safety, and then
there's other ones for other
areas of state government. But
up in the same
Retirement plan that does this
similar type of work. They will
be moving from whatever they
have to chair and represented.
That's correct. Anybody who is
You say, Eddie, You have 4080
people personal right now,
right?
Approximately chair and
represented approximately 40.
40 to 80% remind the committee
that the fund right now just
under 125% so easily for several
years, and then, of course, they
would come back to the
Legislature for us. Thank you.
Thank you, mr share, So I'm just
trying to picture it. There's
somebody is in this plan is
moving.
And they are about to retire
time.
They had to start over with this
plan. How will they match the
plan that they have chair and
represent? I'm gonna ask the
deputy director, Mr Chair
representative.
Bill is adopted, and there was
last few years than they would
have new public safety so they
would have like a from the
public safety chair and
represent they don't start over
at all. They moved there.
Current existing what? They've
even longer, maybe to keep to
acquire more points on think it
would be chair and represented.
I think you're absolutely right.
You hit the nail regiment. Thank
you. Thank you, Mr share.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you, Senator. How many how
many state firefighters?
Mhm.
Mr Chair members of the
Committee representative from
our state farmers is of as you
would have 30 that would be
moving into this plan.
Just a statement, Mr Chair and
Senator.
So
When you have
That's very light.
That's very light. That's not a
whole lot of personnel.
And when we have, um type one,
you're talking 800 personnel.
And when you strip
You can't feel 800 personnel. I
mean, you have to states in
order to provide services. So,
um, I think that, um to go back
on something that was said well
ago about these fires getting
more intense. They're getting
more intense, Mr Chair and
senator because we're not taking
care of our forest and I wish
colors on you right now.
So you go out there and start
showing, you know, making our
forest look model because we're
either going to pay for them on
the front side, or we're gonna
lose them and pay for them on
the back statement.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you,
Mr Chair. Thank you.
Senator for this, I think, uh,
My friend.
Represented Vincent hit the nail
on the head.
We're
So I want to pick up where he
left off. I think we're we're
hurting ourselves as new
Mexicans not only
Um, by not investing on good
force management spending and
working with logging and
etcetera.
We're definitely hurting
ourselves through
Extreme environmental policy.
Or lawsuits or whatever that's
restraining that
Where
What we could have invested in
thinning and cleaning.
Because I've seen it. I've seen
it in my own hometown.
Where we and had a fire.
And there where they
participated with other groups
of fire came and stopped, right.
I'm not a fireman, but I have
common sense to see where that
work was done. It stopped and we
not have that.
We may not have you know
Suharto's with us today we may
be suffering what other areas
are doing, and so the cost of
fighting a fire.
And the
And the
Is is tremendous in in in
comparison to investing on in
management.
Beyond that, the environment the
excuse me the economic
The impact that it has when we
don't have good fire management
is much, much greater. Those
communities
And so you see.
Whether it's their insurance
rates going through the roof.
To the loss of of
Um
Having, um, people come in and
enjoy, uh, recreationally
Enjoying those areas is lost. So
you have all that economic lost,
which is ripples through the
whole deal.
So anyway, Um, I was gonna ask
you to represent, uh, excuse me,
Senator.
How many years of service before
they can ask for return.
35 years.
So, Mr Chair, Senator, what
you're telling me and I want to
make sure I understand this
right?
So I heard the question earlier.
So is this red record Because I
saw that date.
It's just almost 20 years.
Exactly. So are you telling me
Mr Chair? Uh,
Center that
If I served as a tier one
firefighter for 20 years
If I if this passes
Retroactively. They get one or
20% more going forward. I just
want to make sure that so from
here from there forward and they
can play that's important and
and for retention, and that's
why I'm asking that question in
that way, So I think I just part
of the reason I was going to
down that path.
Mr Chair was because we just
passed something to read too.
Get more firefighters. And if
this is the opposite, and we're
gonna be trying to fill in holes
that that that we don't want
this whole that's all I have.
Mr. Chair. Thank you. Thank you,
Mr Chair, and thank you, senator
and
Panel for being here. I have
several, um questions and they
relate more to, um well, you'll
you'll hear so first question.
It is.
From a management
administrations standpoint.
And this is a question for Pere.
Putting everyone under. Um but
as it states here under state
public safety coverage plan
Um
How How does that is that fairly
common?
Is this going to try to will
this help? Streamline? Um or how
is this going to assist in the
parable?
Chair. Um Mr When we're going
out and presenting it. We don't
have Mr Chair and Madam vice
chair. The plan already the way
the plan is actually good, great
question, but it's not gonna
happen.
And thank you, Mr Chair. That's
what I was getting at. And then
So it's been raised that um
124.9
What was referred to, um as a
funding currency chairman, vice
chair 124 100 is currently
funded right now where it's at,
So we're in good shape. So thank
you, Mr Chair, and thank you,
Senator.
So on page 14.
Ah under beginning online 10,
which is the state contribution
rate.
So the state currently
contributes 25.
And a half percent of the salary
shall contribute. Sorry, 25.5%.
How does this contribution
compare?
With, um the other centers.
Chair, Mr Chair and
representative. Are you saving
all the other members that are
under the public safety plan,
like they're all be exactly the
same.
They will. Thank you, Mr Chair
and thank you. I just wanted to
make sure that we're not
creating any
Unforeseen problems. And then I
have, um So the other part of
that you've mentioned several
times that we have ever
My question now is again to
Pere. How long will these
sufficient quote Unquote assets
cover?
Okay. What in the recent and
many hours of what's the word of
stress, trying to figure out
How we would make the funds.
Viable.
And, um, it was a very difficult
time.
And so every decision that we
make concerning
The funds moving forward now
that we have this we have to be
formulas, which I'm
Seeing that you have in place,
but we also have to have the
right. Um
Plans in place to not only meet
who we have in place, but who we
plan to recruit, which was what
the previous
Bill was about partly about so
it worries me, Um
To a great extent that that we
don't want to return to those
days as long as
We have at the helm. Peiris
watching this very carefully the
oversight.
Process that we have in place is
watching this very carefully and
asking the right questions
because the last thing we want
to do Tyree's either those that
are already in
In the pipeline. Um and those
that were recruiting. So, Mr
Chair. Thank you. Thank you for
your promotion. Mr. I'd like to
make a motion for a do pass.
Second. That
Proper motion proper,
representative Travis
Representative Garcia.
Yes.
Representing Google, Ola Yes.
Representative Johnson.
Represented Martinez. Yes.
Represented Powderhorn.
Representative Riebe.
Present at the rest to see
Yes.
Representative Vincent Yes.
Madam vice chair.
Yes.
Mr Chair.
11 to 0. You have a do pass.
Thank you, Mr Chair and Madam
vice chair. Members of the
committee and I aspire to be a
stylish as representative Miguel
Garcia. Someday I think he looks
He looks terrific. Thank you.
Thank you.
