Here can you make.
Mr chair and merry go back to
Representative black she just
walked in.
Representative Cook as well.
Representative Black.
President.
Representative Cook.
No now me merry.
Mr chair sent that.
Members of the well we have a
quorum.
And we're going to see that all
the members are present
just one that one no be for a I
call on the
The bill prisoner is that the
and for some reason you are you
cannot make the meeting are
running late.
Please let Mary no.
and she will mark you as an
excuse
on the roll call rostrum.
And if we don't hear from you we
have to put you down as absent.
So kind of these
at her to to that policy.
and
on top of the morning we had a
very lively organizational
meeting on Tuesday in terms of
our introductions and and we
have a really good team
The end of the rookies and you
members in terms of that are
members of the legislature
I'm glad to see Representative
Cook on board
I've been with them on different
committees throughout my tenure
here in his tenure
and we'll go into our first
bill.
House Bill.
Twenty six before I do want to
let the members know that you
know this session is kind of a
learn as we go.
And and that applies to our a or
C. R. staff.
And our secretaries so they're
still trying to get done in the
group in terms of getting out
those emails
that are specific to our meeting
link I'm getting out those
emails in terms of our files for
our bills analysis etcetera.
And
and then might be a kind of a
bumpy
I'm a bumpy start at times but
eventually will we'll get the
information to you I think what
I'm gonna have a very do in
terms of the the zoom link to
you all to be able to kind of
link to the meeting is
identified as member zoom link.
and then local government for
local government land grants
Cultural affairs committee I
think that kind of separates
approved from some of the other
things that are going out or
some of the other emails so
Rep harder you have your.
Finger up.
Why I just want to say thank the
staff I know this is been crazy
and day one I don't have any
links I don't have anything I
and so today I have a kind of
links and I just want to thank
you guys so much not only for
providing them and going above
and above and beyond and so just
want to thank you guys for that
you are very responsive and just
one echo that chairman's words
but just thank you guys you know
I'm forgetting those out today
and I appreciate it thank you.
Thank you for that also in terms
of
Many notices
And that.
You know on the on the web on
the NM Legislative
on the standard committee list
if you have local government
it'll take you to to us and it
has a start up time of eight
thirty I don't know how to
correct that I don't merry has
access to that I need to kind of
get with with the Legislative
Council in changing that to to
the time that we're really
starting.
But if you do go to what's
happening.
On the web page you go to what's
happening.
And then you get a two columns
one is the house what is the
Senate and you go to committee
hearings.
And there's two of them there's
the PDF file and there's the HM
H. and T. L. file.
And also take you to the link
and they'll take you also to our
agenda
with the with the correct time
start up time.
I think that's that's a better
the.
The better thing to use than
going to the and and and then
that just and then pulling down
committee our committee from the
whole committee a standing
committee section so with that
the.
We have a.
House Bill twenty six
Representative Andr√©s Romero and
Representative Romero
just some advice
We have a many new members on
this committee.
A freshman.
And
I'd like to kind of recommend
that in your presentation.
That you kind of our
be practical in in in your
presentation instead of of may
be overly technical.
and also if you could kind of
applying the principle of our
that we use in learning in terms
of of the episodio I processes
approach to cognition.
In terms of presenting your bill
and the importance of that kind
of in that story line format.
a beginning a middle and an end.
And also
the majority of us in this
committee probably are not aware
of the tax increments districts.
So
not necessarily going into
detail in terms of what they are
but at least kind of identifying
what we mean by that what
briefly what it does and
etcetera etcetera so just to
kind of
be that have have your
presentation be more at ease in
terms of the understanding that
will of our committee with some
of the concepts that you'll be
present so Representative Romero
it's all yours.
Great thank you Mr chairman
thank you members of the
committee good morning
So this is house bill twenty six
and it deals with tax increment
districts so tax increment
districts are all created within
the boundaries of a tax paying
area
and basically a baseline for
taxes is set in the incremental
a small amount that is
Out of that that tax on the
we'll go toward funding whatever
the project may be so in some
cases and we can kind of
differentiate things later but
it may be like a grocery store
it may be a shopping mall you
may be a shopping center within
the community but basically
carving out the a foundry in
order to
Carve off our or take in
increments of of the taxes
generated in that area to fund
said project so we can go into
that a little bit more as we get
deeper I should mention as well
as that I have Carter Bundy with
me as an expert as well
So I think that this bill and
house bill twenty six is really
for us to be good stewards of
taxpayer dollars I think we have
that responsibility as
legislators
elected officials in and we hear
that in a lot of rhetoric on
political when we all run for
office we hear that as as as a
big part of of what we do and I
think this bill really seeks to
do just that is really be good
stewards of public dollars on
and in some of the a brief
history of that is that kids
these tax increment districts
were designed
to be created within execs
existing tax tax bases so tax
areas where commerce's going on
C. get G. R. T. or property
taxes but they were really
intended to help a particular
area of that tax being tax
paying base right a place with
in a community to help part of
the existing community where
this bill stands to
differentiate from that is is
with the issue of greenfield so
the bill itself seeks to outline
and and defined defined what a
greenfield is and that's an area
that is basically lacking
infrastructure that is Aaron
lands perhaps outside of a local
government or municipality but
that lacks basic infrastructure.
And and the issue is is that
with a tax increment district in
a green field area is that it
really lacks a tax base right so
there's nobody in there that you
can necessarily tax on there may
be a little bit but not much so
when we talk about that you
Madam that you permit can be
pretty substantial and that's
going to be important moving
forward
So so that interment in the
cases of these kids we'll go to
the developers and the
developers might front the money
for said development
infrastructure
shopping malls residential areas
things like that but then
through the taxes generated in
this area the the the developers
will be paid a percentage in
its.
Pretty substantial fifty percent
sixty seventy eighty percent of
all of this money going into
thank the developers so the
problem with that is that if you
have a green field area and
you're expanding a local
government or municipality your.
Increasing the
the recurring governmental costs
so water or sewage police fire
all these different things
you're cutting into that tax
base right by paying the
developers eight percentage of
so you're growing the
municipality however your sh
your you're not growing the
amount of money that can be
offset help off with these
recurring costs because you're
busy paying off for this
development in terms of that
increments for the
infrastructure costs and these
things can last twenty thirty
years so I'm a pretty good
amount of time on so I think
that the big problems right is
that you may grow the
municipality but the taxes in
order to fund it are not going
to be sis sufficient to offset
the growing costs of keeping and
maintaining
governmental functions in these
areas so I think that's super
super important on the other
problem with it is is.
Is this issue of
cannibalization
even if you have something like
mixed use developments or
residential area being created
and and made all four or
shopping areas all within
walking distance of one another
This residential and business
tax base is partially generated
by moving people from.
Area to area so for example if
you have Bernalillo county right
there's an existing tax base but
if you grow Bernalillo county to
be larger have businesses since
things like this will use the
example of a shopping mall
perhaps an additional shopping
mall in the T. district well
that money that had been going
to Coronado mall for example and
the taxes generated by people
shopping there by people working
there.
That.
The business had been going
there if they do their shopping
in the to District that
incriminate gets taken off right
so then that little bit of taxes
now going to the developers so
it's a lose lose the local
municipality where that money
had been going loses out on that
tax revenue but then in the new
kid it's going off to offset and
reimburse the developers for for
their initial investment and in
that circle back to the problem
of your losing tax revenue to
sustain and maintain
governmental function with in
that local government or
municipality I think it's it's
super super important.
And and I think it's also
something that that's not
sustainable right it's if you're
continually taking this
increment out of this area and
moving people and their business
from the initial tax base in the
initial municipality or local
government then.
Into the tip district well there
goes all that money with that
and this is particularly the
case I think with residential
development having you houses
and it's not necessarily
equating to new occupants right
so not having to people from out
of state out of the country that
may be living in these homes yes
yes.
When people from existing
neighborhoods.
To the to District and again you
have that issue of their
existing tax base and tax
dollars going from.
Going to the local government
total to going to into the
ticket and then being divided
out to again offset those costs
of of developers and and
something like this I'm afraid
eight two things like our our
existing neighborhoods becoming
vacant and I have a they can
housing and neighborhood drives
down the property value of our
existing communities and I think
that's very much to the
detriment of all all parties
involved so
I hope I hope I did you proud Mr
chairman as a a young teacher
speaking with an experienced one
in laying out the bill by
I I will stand for questions I
think the the number one thing
again is that we are trying to
be good stewards with taxpayer
dollars and I don't think that
the greenfield kids necessarily
addresses that and I think it's
largely to the detriment of our
existing communities and and and
it's not sound Development.
Areas that Mr chairman I'll
stand for question thank you
very much Representative Romero
you do have a witness and Carter
Bundy did you wish for him to
also of speak to the
the significance of the
legislation not have to your
presentation.
Thank you Mr chairman if if
Mister Bundy wishes if there
were gaps I left out
Or any additional details Mister
Bundy I'll leave it to your
discretion thank you Mr.
Mr chairman members of the
committee Carter money with us I
I think Representative Romero
covered all the main points
eight I I just wanna be clear
we're absolutely supportive of
economic growth our major
problem with this bill and
there's no way around it is that
you create massive new
liabilities for government in
fire please judicial corrections
roads parks water wastewater
solid waste and education but
you can take out fifty to
seventy five percent of the tax
base that was supposed to
support those things so we we
just don't see how you can
possibly find government at
twenty five or fifty cents on
the dollar so we hope that you
will support this bill.
Thank you Mister Bundy and thank
you representative
We'll go to the audience
You know a technical people I do
show Representative sentiment
twenty minus those as the
panelists and I think you should
really be moved over to
attendees of I'm not.
mistaken.
I'm sorry who's not
going to annoy us behind the
virtual diets thank you Mr.
If you can move Representative
minus the there you go.
Okay
okay committee I will go to
The audience in terms of those
in opposition and goes in
support okay I will I will go to
those are not position first if
you could at this point raise
your hands.
Those in opposition.
I see
I see just one hand.
I see one hand in opposition.
two hands in opposition.
is that pretty much at on the
opposition.
okay those that have your hands
raised in opposition.
With the
Keep your hand up if you wish to
speak and remove your hand if
you do not wish to speak.
Okay we have a two individuals
in opposition the first will
call on but S. R. about eight.
Finisar go free to address the
committee with your concerns.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is the nationality and I'm the
registered lobbyist for Garrett
development which is a
development that owns fifty four
thousand acres on Albuquerque's
west side and for when rock
development which is in
Albuquerque as well and that is
when rock shopping center and as
well I am permitted but I'm not
a registered lobbyist to speak
on behalf of Gallup land
development which is a twenty
six thousand acre development in
McKinley county.
The state of New Mexico kids
statute is very different from
any other kids statute in the
country we have tighter ten
statute to economic development
other states have tied their
statute statutes to blighted
Development brownfields are in
jail.
All economic development should
be considered on their merits
this bill is a blanket denial of
all non redevelopment ten
applications it's not necessary
we already have the ability to
deny applications based on their
individual application at the
local level.
Kids are no risk proposition for
the city county or state if it's
a total failure and it will not
work then the developer built
infrastructure and they will not
be reimbursed the government
gets free infrastructure
development has all the risk
with tens.
The proposed changes would
eliminate the cities and
counties ability to
independently former Ted and
make dedication to attend
without receiving state in
current dedication and bonding
approval their kids for this way
today.
We're not sure why anyone would
want to prevent the cities and
counties from forming Ted's and
dedicating their income and at
no cost to the state we have
faith in the local policy makers
and do not think that state
legislators need to have strong
local policy makers from taking
actions that benefit their
communities.
New material on section two line
sixteen to twenty five
effectively prohibit all kids
are not already approved by the
state board of finance even if
they are approved by the local
government there's a timing
issue with scheduling what state
were to finance for Ted's as
they only meet twice a year and
only accept applications six
months in advance for tents
alternates formed under the
current statute need to remain
intact it's bad policy to pull
the rug out from under tents
that local government agencies
have already formed under the
current day Ted statute New
Mexico should keep its promise
each and every economic
development opportunity needs to
be heard and quickly decided on
by its merits.
And this is a development tool
in the toolbox for economic
development.
Kids have already had a positive
impact on New Mexico because of
the statute it was a primary
reason for the two hundred and
fifteen million dollar
investment of western
development corporation.
I'm it is also the primary
reason that Amazon distribution
center has located in Bernalillo
county.
But for the kid they would not
have been looking at that
structure and we're investing
almost a billion dollars in
construction and they're going
to be hiring at least a thousand
employees three shifts a day
with minimum on salaries and the
forty thousand.
On page four of the bill lines
eleven to fourteen that house
Ted would be excluded it would
only be allowed to replace
existing infrastructure not
build new infrastructure like
chair less for examples and only
be able to replace them it
cannot add or build new anything
I'm anything that is new the
development is included in the
greenfield.
I will also say that the statute
for the state of New Mexico was
entirely written for greenfield
and with all due respect to the
sponsor I actually sat in those
negotiations in two thousand six
listen to the enabling
legislation and saw the
implementation with mesa del
sole it was entirely written for
refills and for economic
development.
Now if you if you will Sir Mr
chair if you look at the FIR and
turn to page two of the F. I. R.
R. A. refers to existing
projects I would like to record
correct some of the question
marks on FIR Stonegate village
and Rio Rancho as were both
green fields the definition on
which is addressed on page two
of the FY are in the first
paragraph so please recognize
that as well additionally as
expressed in FY are first
paragraph on page two this
definition also negatively
impacts when rock and they're
raising of old buildings and
building new structures it could
be that all the projects
approved to date would be
excluded because of this new
definition it's retroactive
which is something we just don't
see where we have negotiations
with the state of New Mexico I
dash additionally on FIR and has
addressed by the chairman excuse
me by the sponsor cannibalism in
fact this is reversed
cannibalism and I'll use the
west side of Albuquerque as an
example the west siders drive to
the east side to go shopping to
go to restaurants and things of
that sort so right now the
website is actually kind of what
kind of lights on by east side.
Activity.
Also none of the anchor stores
will invest in new communities
unless they're getting that new
sales they do not invest in
another store less are getting
net new customers and sells so
the reverse cannibalism is
causing great strains on the
roadways infrastructures and
River crossings people do not.
I'm go people on the west side
did not deserve to have their
commercial services far away
from them they should be close
to them and their communities.
Page three of the FIR continues
to to discuss successful kids it
also acknowledge the development
I represent I think we again as
I said earlier we wrecked
recently landed the Amazon
distribution center they have
publicly stated they'll be
hiring one thousand employees
I'm told you will be having
three ships you can do the math
on that one I'm on the FY are at
the bottom of the financial risk
contained in this bill is that
without his approval and support
wall and similarly situated
development companies might
choose to invest in other
projects in other states I can
tell you with representing kids
that is and development that is
one hundred percent accurate
I've sat in at least twenty site
selector meetings and every
single conversation talks about
what is the proper public
private relationship with the
community and that is exactly
what kids are their public
private relationships so I ask
one question is why is this bill
being presented I'm it's quite
curious because the language of
this bill would halt many kids
that are already in existence
and the future tens are coming
online and they wouldn't come
online but for the fact of this
public private partnership.
so are we willing to kill all
kids and economic development
opportunities in Farmington
Silvercity Gallup four oh Clovis
for telus X. Sentara.
I'm this bill and absolutely a
hundred percent would destroy
the data that's coming online
and McKinley County they they
one hundred percent need to have
public private partnerships and
it is a green field and it is
going to bring economic based
jobs.
And with that I'm Mr chairman
and members I stand for
questions.
Thank you up Representative of a
I'm.
First personal heading because.
Because the closing was one of
what you being a member of the
company.
As of up
opening up yourself for
questions but
I think so to more people with
their hands up up to speak.
In opposition and that please
limit your comments to two
minutes we do have a larger list
also wishing to address the
committee.
So next we have
Representative sentiment on you
Maestas.
Thank you Mr chairman thanks for
having me I I we noticed respect
Mr chairman honorable members I
I don't think I've ever spoken a
committee.
As a member of the legislature
but I miss you guys and haven't
got a chance to visit with you
all and I want to thank the
sponsor for it for his diligence
and his and his perspective it's
a perspective that I shared for
many many years and and don't
necessarily disagree what the
law.
I do disagree with the the
economic analysis.
Apple appoints is with regards
to cannibalization.
That's assuming that we cannot
grow our economic pie.
That's assuming that New Mexico
is a finite economic reality and
and and I think that stems from
just a a poverty mentality of
lack of economic growth for for
generations we can grow this
economy we can create new
businesses new commerce new jobs
and an increase our population
with economic growth regardless
of where it is in a particular
city number two the the there is
no tax pay out to like the
gentleman said my brother up
Carter Bundy fellow resisters
tax pay out the taxpayers don't
write that check for this
development they simply offset
the cost of the development
being built and and that brings
up my my last point or one of my
last point is but for the kid
this infrastructure would not be
built the government cannot get
any tax revenue from a vacant
lot from a huge swath of land
that is we know filled with
coyotes and rabbits
it and with regards to
residential development doesn't
doesn't is detrimental to
existing communities one of the
concerns of of my.
Members the north valley was
gentrification growth on the
west side of Albuquerque does
not tribute but in fact may even
leave the eight gentrification
in the south valley and so I I
think that it's unfortunate if
we return Mr chair up to the tax
policies of the fifties and
sixties where state and local
governments have money to build
infrastructure that would not be
a need for this tool in the
toolbox but governments have no
money we have a raise the gas
tax since nineteen ninety two.
And so without these mechanisms
of the the growth on the west
side may not occur as as it
didn't occur after the bank's
question which I appreciate the
conversation and look forward to
the debate I just simply have a
different economic analysis then
the sponsor and and the expert
thank you Mr chairman thank you
of Representative Maestas
We have a another individual
that wishes to speak in
opposition that's the then that
guy and goes appropriate address
the committee Linda.
Then the
You're free to go and share your
concerns.
Then there are you might want to
mute yourself.
On mute.
I need your cell.
Merry Andrew a.
Are we having difficulties
getting not Linda on board she's
already on you do it just seems
like we can't see we can't seem
to hear she's saying anything.
Mr chair there is a chat and
she's saying that she's having
technical difficulties in the
chat.
Okay
will we'll go to those in the in
support and and when she comes.
When she comes on board
will recognize
When she's when she's able to
kind of connect will recognize
her.
those in support of the
legislation.
Please raise your hands.
Okay we've got one two three
four five six.
Seven eight nine.
Those in support
Raise your hands.
Okay those in support that wish
to address the committee.
I would like to address the
committee.
Keep your hands up.
And those that do not wish to
address the committee lower your
hand.
Mr chairman I have a question
can we as as the committee C..
The people in support and
against.
I'm not sure.
Mr chair yes if he goes to
participants at the bottom of
your screen your you'll see
participants okay let me let me
kind of explain that then if if
if you all of the members
yeah and you are pretty you do
have the same this that I do so
Representative but quest'anno.
Click on the participant button
at the bottom.
Is gonna tenants now I can see
thank you yeah and and go back
and forth you can get that
attendees and all the attendees
show up and then you can hit
panelists and and the committee
and and our staff shows up thank
you Mr chairman thank you very
hard we've got the
We've got the wishing to speak
in support and please submit
yourself to
Up to two minutes at the most
we're still trying to get down
to the floor by eleven but we'll
take all input and will kind of
entertain discussion from the
committee and if for some reason
we're being called and we go
past the eleven we'll just kind
of sees the hearing and continue
it on Tuesday and will probably
come in early on Tuesday to do
that so first of all we have a
John
the chance.
feel free to address the
committee John
Limit of these two minutes no
more.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee John
Lipschutz with The New Mexico
federation of labor AFL-CIO I'll
be very brief I just
are representing an organization
that represents tens of
thousands of working New
Mexicans across the state are we
stand in strong support of this
effort and thank the sponsor
very much for bringing that up
and we just believe that I while
offsetting costs is is the
intention of kids we believe in
fairness as well and we do not
believe that this measure will
at all impact development in the
state so thank you again for our
for listening to this measure
and for hopefully supporting at.
Thank you Sir next we have a
Paul guessing.
We address the committee.
There we go thank you my name's
Paul guessing and president of
the Rio Grande foundation were
free market oriented public
policy research organization
based in Albuquerque New Mexico
dealing with New Mexico public
policies nobody supports
economic development more than
we do at the Rio Grande
foundation but we also
understand that when development
happens it does impose certain
basic costs on.
Folks who pay taxes and
typically those taxes are paid
by the residents of the new area
that is being developed up
schools fire police and myriad
other services.
Are required.
This tax increments Development
districts on the other hand
allow a significant portion of
the revenue that would be
generated to pay for those
services in that new area that
special district to be diverted
and are captured by the
developer ultimately Ted's wind
up forcing existing communities
to subsidize developers and
their new developments HB twenty
six would stop the use of that
process and shop that
subsidization for new
developments and we stand in
strong support of this
legislation thank you for your
time.
Thank you.
Mr guessing the next we have a
Jason Thompson.
Yes yes thank you Mr chairman
can you hear me yes two minutes
please no more thank you Sir Mr
chairman members of the
committee my name is Jason
Thompson I'm here on behalf of
conservation voters New Mexico
on the register of this for them
and I'm here to speak in support
of the bill and simply have CVM
appreciate sponsoring the bill
forward and that we stand in
support of the bill.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr Thompson next we
have a Elaine ever.
Good morning chairman and and
everybody my name is Elaine
Herbert I'm a citizen in New
Mexico in Albuquerque New I just
want to be in support of Andres
Romero is bill I believe that
the kids are to a tool in the
toolbox for redevelopment of
blighted areas are brownfields
it's expensive to redevelop
those areas and that's why it is
needed.
It enables the developer to
recoup expenses major public
infrastructure.
So it it does on the downside is
that it reduces the taxes that
would normally flow to the
state's coffers.
And that's to the city and
county awarding a ten limiting
the tax revenue should be done
in accordance with the affected
communities wishes for example
if extensive renovation in
downtown Berlin it was necessary
to redevelopment straight to the
twenty first century working
space creating acted might make
sense.
It would provide incentives to
develop where the community has
agreed that it needs to be done
the problem is that green fields
are also eligible for kids in
New Mexico allowing kids to be
used for sprawl development not
only reduces the amount of taxes
available to the region it
reduces the pot of funds
available for actual needed
redevelopment plus it does not
reflect necessarily with the
public wants please yes on H. B.
twenty six.
Thank you Mr ever done next I
will go to a Virginia.
A quick chance she slashed her
that's what this is about your
name Darlene.
Virginia go ahead yes me yes
you're coming and nice and clear
excellent good morning chairman
Garcia the committee when was
yes this is doctor regained and
equity area and today I'm here
speaking as a member of the
south valley regional
association of a sick yes and
I'm here to express my full
support of house bill twenty six
it should be noted to the
committee that kids
Representative tool that we it
was meant to re develop round
field areas as has been
mentioned using tapes for
development in a green field
friend Jerry up rather than for
what they were originally
intended for which is
revitalization of previously
developed areas really
diminishes resources and diverts
tax revenue to developers
instead of flowing to local or
state governments so continuing
the diversion of revenue deprive
cities of resources they need to
revitalize older areas which
clearly undermines a smart
planned growth strategy for me
it's unfortunate to see a
mechanism for funding
neighborhood revitalization
coopted by developers at the
expense of neighborhoods and
projects that really need it the
most appropriate action the
legislature can take in this
committee is to focus on the
original policy intent of
tickets for urban revitalization
instead of allowing its misuse
that allows public dollars to
subsidize private development of
green field areas so with that I
urge the members of this
committee to please vote yes on
house bill twenty six and I
think Representative role metal
for introducing this important
bill thank you very much thank
you doctor next we have Douglas
Mikel John.
Go ahead Sir two minutes no
more.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Douglas Michael John I'm a
lawyer with the New Mexico
environmental law center we
spend a lot of our time dealing
with development issues for.
I merrily trying to prevent
sprawl development
the as the previous speakers
have noted.
The use of kids is much better
focused on redevelopment of
blighted areas and brown fields
it's inappropriate to expand
that used to green fields and
particularly because of the
reasons stated by the sponsor
and by Mister Bundy we urge you
to support this bill thank you.
Thank you.
Douglas a next will go to a Josh
Anderson mistranslated two
minutes no more please.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Josh Anderson with
asked me Council eighteen I just
want to think chairman Romero
for bringing this bill forward
echo of the you know the
comments from the other
supporters and of course defer
to Representative Romero and
Mister Bundy to answer any
questions from the committee and
spend more time doing that but
just want to
urged support for this committee
so we can can you continue to
have this discussion thank you
Mr chairman.
Thank you Mr.
And lastly in terms of what
wanting to speak and support is
a sun devil on my asked us.
Thank you Mr chairman Sunday my
S. tasa.
I'm a resident of the south
valley and a president of the
south valley regional
association of us thank you.
We support to Representative
role metal so ill.
In fact I submitted an analysis
by Dr a Kelly o'donnell
regarding the micellar it's.
Client.
Albuquerque western or western
Albuquerque land holdings.
But that they looked up the pain
from the county.
Regarding the essentially not
development.
analysis shows that due to the
students of the county in effect
would.
And career.
Net expenses to.
To this development as noted
earlier of providing services
such as fire and schools and as
well as our roads and other
maintenance that would have to
be maintained.
And so so those are so there's
you know that's that's a
violation in fact of the
comprehensive plan that requires
no net policy no new
developments but yet.
You know these these tax
deferrals or to the developer
for example one example that she
used was the new.
Lant that the Amazon is putting
for distribution on the less
well that's a to district as as
she noted however near the city
nor the county will receive a
hundred percent of the tax.
Revenue from that to that
development in fact up to
seventy five percent will go to
the developer so so it's not
really that much of a benefit on
the tax issue of course jobs
will be provided.
But that can also increase the
traffic from the east side west
side in order to to.
Populate that plant so so those
those are the reasons that that
we propose.
The.
Continuation of the Greenville
it's.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Mr minus this.
I show
Linda going it goes.
I think I stated that we would
get back to her.
I show over again with their
hand up then that if you can
hear me feel free to express
your concerns and opposition to
the bill.
Andrew Mr chair she had
mentioned in the chat that she
had called in so I'm just
wondering if she might be one of
the two call it phone call in
listeners that might be why.
Working.
Do we know what what number
she's on.
Me let me click does make like
that first number does allow to
talk.
Phone number five oh five six
zero four eight four four zero
is that you Linda.
Is now on the chat.
Okay.
Mr this other one.
Five seven five four five four
four five two three one four is
that you Linda.
The answer.
Okay.
Then mute yourself.
Unmute yourself Linda.
And you can can we get our.
To.
Unfortunately I can only request
for heard on you I can't like
forcibly on mute her myself.
Mr chair is the ways in your own
phones Star six that right.
This is the right one.
I'm not sure.
hit star six on your phone see
if that'll mute you.
Yes she's doing that.
and we still can't get her.
Members are going to have to
kind of move on
Yeah Miller without on mute the
phone call.
Yeah.
Then to hang in there we're
gonna go to questions from the
committee and then I'll come
back to you after questions from
the committee and see if we can
still get you in.
Members.
questions discussion.
Yeah we're aware of questions
and discussion Representative
You're the first time that went
up.
Questions discussion.
Representative one thank you Mr
chair thank you committee and
thank you Representative chair
Romero for president Bill this
today.
I just have a couple questions
here
Have.
Local governments have a have
the.
Our local governments waiting on
this so we should have spoken
with the.
Assessors affiliate.
Or or are counties are cities on
this and how how they feel about
this.
Mr chair.
Representative sure sure Mr
chair and representative ha no I
have not I've talked to to some
local treasures but that's been
the extent of my conversation.
Mr chair representative would
that would tell you.
They were asking questions it
wasn't necessarily a
conversation where it was
support or not but asking about
motivation
and what may happen as far as
their local government is
concerned but mainly mainly
answering questions it was not a
conversation where it was you
know support or or not support.
In those conversations with so
do you think the amendment not
wanting in on this or they were
satisfied with your with your
answers and and not move or not
or they just weren't asked to
weigh in.
Mr chair.
Mr chair and representative I
mean that's that's really hard
to discern and I'm not really up
to speculate about their mind
set in and I mean I think the
fact that none of them are here
in in support or in opposition
may lead to that.
Mr chair
Representative thank you for F.
for internet but so I don't I'm
not hearing from our
Are cessation or minister
municipalities I have asked
questions to them about this
I have asked to.
Questions to Bernalillo county
haven't heard anything back to
them I have asked from City of
Albuquerque and they said.
They have not even reviewed this
bill yet.
And so that to me is that that
to me is the.
A bit of a concern I'd like to
know what how they feel about
this the seems that you know
that the the the testimonies
we're hearing today seem to be
specific to to that area to
that.
That.
The concerns there
have you ever heard Mr chair Mr
representative from our rural
communities on on their position
on this and how this would
affect them and their local
governments.
Not matter Mr chair and
representative no we have in
other than
the fact that in the end it's
the broader good governance
policy of of whether we really
want to subsidize development
off of our existing tax base and
whether or not that that should
be a tool that's right that's
really used and pursued by
either the local governments are
us is the state I think is is is
really the crux of the issue and
I don't know if Mister Bundy
you'd want to weigh in on that.
Right Mr chair Representative lu
Han
this is something that has a
huge impact intensely on on
local governments and frankly
the rural areas would be hit
even harder than others if they
signed on to tents because they
don't have the same size of city
like Albuquerque does to sort of
spread the cost of all this it
would still be incredibly
painful to Albuquerque but if it
were you know Las Vegas or Santa
Fe or a smaller town the effects
would be devastating because the
crux of this is you can't take
fifty to seventy five percent of
your new tax based out of your
revenue stream and then expect
to fully fund government it
really isn't any more
complicated than that I don't
think.
Thank you Mr chair Mr chairman
and thank you
Representative for those those
answers.
And I appreciate it thank you.
Thank you representative what
next we have a Representative
Black.
Thank you Mr chairman
thank you Representative for
bringing this out I I will have
to share some of the
Representative lu Han concerns
and that doesn't sound like this
bill is kind of really been
through the mail and properly
vetted through local government
I for one am the proponent for
leaving decisions at the local
level so let me just throw that
out there
I do have a couple of questions
and and they referred to and.
Representative Mr chairman G.
what are the information come
from do we know from the F. I.
R. because when you gave your
description of the the bill
Earlier Representative it didn't
it didn't really talked about
the bill in my mind so we do do
we know where this information
from the FIR it sounds like.
LFC isn't.
Quite on board either so I guess
that's my question.
Mr chair representative black so
the FIR I believe is is from you
indicated legislative finance
and it is this the same bill
that I had sponsored in in two
thousand seventeen and and an
exact copy of and and the the
LFC analysis then was honestly
seemingly a bit more favorable
saying that it aligned with the
LFC is current policy is of of
good tax structure and
accountability so that I can
speak to the individual who who
who grow the FIR.
Thank you for that Mr chair
representative.
So.
The current projects that are
that are currently going on
if they get an extension because
it looks like.
This would actually be stopping
what current ones are doing
right now.
So I I guess is that address I'm
not seen.
Mister Bundy I believe you had a
conversation about this earlier
to have the the language Mr
chairman Mister Bundy for freed
up.
Address the question.
Mr chair representative black I
couldn't tell you exactly where
some of these said applicants
are in their process I do
believe that if they have not
completed the process by July
first they would not be eligible
for the Ted I I would just note
that there are plenty of
policies that we put in place
where people who had been making
plans potentially but didn't
have something finalized there
plenty of times that happens in
government all the time so I
don't see this as when the rug
out from anyone but rather are
starting giving people all the
way till July first to finish
their to application
centreline and this case which
is the client is for mostly
talked about here has been
working on this for at least
thirteen years to my knowledge
first is son Callum them sent
limits so I I'm not terribly
worried about unfairness and
putting the implementation of
the spill off until July first
and also just like to say that I
think it's important to
acknowledge because doesn't
happen often
that when the Rio Grande
foundation and The New Mexico
federation labor next year on
the same side of something
it's a rare day and so I just
want to thank representation for
that and hope that matter sure
something.
Percent of black still have the.
Thank you Mr chairman I'm
Representative so an expert
witness I guess my question
would be so how many jobs would.
Alleviate be lost if this
actually happens do we have a
number for that how many people
are we putting out of work right
now in a pandemic that are we
are able to work.
To implement this Mr chairman
Representative.
Mr chair representative that I
don't know on.
It be hard to say if if but
since I've gone through the
process and and what they've
already accomplished it's hard
to say into the future what may
or may not happen.
Our.
Yes thank you Mr Mr chair
representative so the FIR saying
that there's actually data
collection so that's where I'm
curious as is where is that
information I'm I I just think
it's important that we keep in
mind if this bill passes were
taking away local authority
we're we're we're damaging
counties in this counties
possibly I'm we're costing
people jobs is this now the time
to do this.
Or is now the time to table this
and look at can we get everybody
on the same page can we get with
the the Asian counties and so
forth.
So Mr chairman I'm.
I will have to I would say that
I cannot support this bill at
this time I think it needs more
work so thank you so much.
Thank you resented black next
will go to Representative
Castellano.
Thank you Mr chair Mr Merrill
what is the history of the staff
and income and development
district in New Mexico when was
it formed in you know give me
some.
I guess some kind of.
When it started how it started I
guess.
So I'm Mr chair and
representative I think the the
the current law as it is was was
re worked in two thousand six
in to include greenfield now
Mister Bundy effort finding
correct please please correct me
but in its current form data was
it was expanded in two thousand
six to include something like
that a green field tents.
Okay in two thousand six use of.
Mr chair representative.
Okay and and I'm you know I I
Representative rural communities
and I think we've had this
discussion I think it you know
it might propose.
Some kind of detrimental loss to
our rural communities and in all
I'm with
Representative black you know
maybe you have the association
counties reach out to county
commissions you know the cities
in rural communities because I
think from what I'm hearing in
this discussion it it's all
about.
development that's going on in
Albuquerque New I don't know if
it's a if we're trying to target
a certain.
Our second place in Albuquerque
like is is this like on the west
side is it a certain development
is it all of Albuquerque.
Or can you answer that for me
please.
Mr chairman and and
Representative I would say that
that question goes to
questioning the motives of the
sponsor which is not allowed in
our roles
so it's not specifically
targeted at anybody but at the
state so so I Mr men and
Representative fight I would
refer you to to the house rules
on.
I apologize Representative
general I'm just thinking like
us and Representative stand out
go through the chair so when I
Mr chair whatever you ask a
question I would say Mr chair
Representative Romero.
Go ahead.
Thank you Mr chair so I think we
know in the rural communities we
need a lot of economic
development rural communities
are.
All right now with the pandemic
struggling and I know Mister
Bundy also said that eventually
they would be struggling more if
a kid project would have been in
rural New Mexico
I just don't feel that way I
think economic development
really Mexico's gonna help.
Economy in those areas so like I
said I'm prone rural New Mexico
so I just want to let that be
known and I thank you Mr
chairman and Representative
Romero.
Thank you Senator Stefanics we
have Representative up are not.
In a workaholic I thank you Mr
chairman and thank you
representative
I'm.
Understand what's the purpose
and what it what's the goal that
you're trying to get from this
legislation.
Mr chair and Representative
Fajardo as I stated in the
opening in the real intent is to
get for us to be good on fiscal
arbiters of of state and local
task tax dollars so really to be
responsible and good stewards of
that I do not believe that that
that any that this state funding
should be used to subsidize
Development in in a way that is
putting at risk our our existing
communities and and placing the
burden on our existing
communities without fully
funding at in full.
So Mr chair and representative
to use the support with the
funds and the state.
I voted Mr chair and
representative I have voted for
lead of funds and I think that's
one of the tools that developers
and and businesses also have.
Thank you Mr chairman and
representative I'm so I mean I'm
trying to understand what the
difference in New.
I'm.
I Representative role community
like others and I'm going I'm
kind of looking at some of the
list of of the kids that that
are not only existing but
pending in and out of the
Albuquerque area has a huge
number of ten and the rest the
state is now coming on board.
And starting to apply for them.
And this bill what it does is it
puts the rest of the state a
disadvantage it's kind of like
saying Hey Albuquerque you get
to have the economic development
Albuquerque you started the
process you get all of the
this makes it also as a perfect
example in other areas where
it's like Hey you have business
and corporations who are
investing in the community
their money is in their
investment.
And they're receiving the
benefit but now what we've done
is now we're going to repeal the
law and anybody that is pending
in the rural communities are now
locked out and it's almost I
mean there seems to be a bias
and I'm not accusing you of
anything Representative but it's
like what you're doing you're
stomping economic development
but the rest of the state you're
saying that's good for one
community but it's not good for
the root for the other and you
know when it comes to the tax
structure and things like that.
I'm yes that'd they have to go
through our process.
And it has to be the rule is the
the local municipalities and
local governments that decide
this.
And so your representative
you're telling me that my to my
local representatives might
caught my commissioners my mares
don't have the understanding.
And the knowledge to make rules
that benefit my community.
That's what concerning that's
what's concerning to me I'm.
In and I do understand if
there's things in in certain
areas like I don't know the
premise of this I don't know how
this got started
I don't know if this is a bill
to appease a certain area or
this problem this area but when
you take a when you take
legislation that that.
Maybe to to do that with one
issue but you apply it to the
rest of the state.
That that is what it that's when
you have a problem because
you're you're cutting out
economic develop for the others
rest of the state I'll give you
a perfect example so in my
community in my backyard in my
district we have forty seven
percent of back taxes property
taxes in the state of Mexico is
in my district forty seven
percent of all New Mexico back
taxes on land is in my district
that is because in the nineteen
sixties over the land deal that
happened and it's it's and there
is quarter acre lot there were
there were set up and they were
distributed every.
Sold four hundred two hundred
dollars they're even given away
as prizes at the world's fair.
And so I have an entire area
hundreds of acres of land that I
can't use.
So we created legislation to
deal with that and we are very
very specific that we want to
capture that area we knew that
this problem existed around the
state.
But we want to impose the
problems that we had in our
community or the issues it
around the state so I I don't
know the purpose of this bill
and how it got started.
But it just seems like you're
preventing the rest of the
state.
Economic development I don't
think that's fair I don't think
that's right if there's an area
that we're trying to address or
specific kid that we're trying
to address I have no problem
working on that.
And addressing not because I
know exactly what that's like we
have to address the certain
specific example led to do it
but I don't think you change an
entire state law and take away
the rest of the state's ability
for economic development
and I know that was just a
speech it wasn't a question
Representative and I apologize
but I guess that's my angst with
yes if this was specific to an
area a region of Pacific with
Ted.
You know let's have that
conversation
but I just don't see taking away
and committees right for
economic development
so thank you thank you Mr
chairman and thank you
representative.
Thank you Representative next we
have
Representative Serrato.
You know they're they're up
they're starting the session
they're calling us down but they
haven't yet told us to kind of
discontinue our hearing so will
continue
and we also do have a then the
that includes the the
the person that was in
opposition then we'll call under
right after the committee
finishes with a question Senator
said applet you're next thank
you so much Mr chairman and
madam chair I I have a couple
questions one is that do we
anticipate you know changing at
that passing this this bill
will result in higher property
costs for folks then it in the
area as well where developers
are so for example this you know
this is I guess a delayed costs
for them
it would do we anticipate that
that would increase the cost for
for home buyers in the long run.
For all.
Mr chair and representative of
Mr Bundy's kind of waving at me
did you have an answer to run.
Yes Mister chairman
Representative strada thank you
so one of the significant
problems with greenfield kids is
that it is hundred and
artificial stimulus for
developers to build thousands
more homes and when you do that
and they essentially are
guaranteed to not make any to
not have any loss
what happens is you have a lot
of houses on the market so I
think very natural tendency here
is that when this gets built
there will be significant
housing cannibalization where
people on the near west side in
the south valley just using this
one as an example and throughout
the metro maybe throughout the
state will be moving to
since Linda but then they're
leaving them to the house
somewhere else so one of the
problems of this is a it
artificially create housing what
which lowers property values I
used to live in that area and he
absolutely can promise you and I
give credit to western
Albuquerque land holdings to
rific designs we I think
everyone admires some of the
work that they're doing the
problem is that it's essentially
they're being guaranteed all of
their up front costs by the
taxpayer and as a result there's
going to be an artificial over
supply of housing so I do think
that will hurt property values
certainly in the rest of the of
the metro and possibly around
the rest of the state.
I am here is Mr chairman also on
you know I I I believe that the
Sanchez mentioned he's brought
before how the hell needs or or
baseball has been consulted in
those previous conversations.
That's a good question Mr chair
and representative that was
something that when I first
districts of billing it was
something that winds last minute
and and there wasn't time for
and certainly it was it was
silence and as its silence now.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you to the sponsored everyone
who came out and spoke and I
look forty hearing from Linda
when when we do you know what my
concern is that when we I'm I'm
not seeing from the F. I. R.
that this is a big economic
development boom and that we're
seeing a ton of new jobs come in
because what they keep
mentioning and here's the term
cannibalistic which is a very
visual term all say you know and
and how it's moving around folks
instead of building new
industries building new pieces
and this is my fundamental
concern because I with all due
respect to chairman my Estes who
I have great admiration for I
agree we cannot return to
policies that been problematic
for the both of New Mexico we've
done in the past but when I see
that this what what what what
I'm concerned about here is that
this incentive that done is in
the short term cost cities and
our taxpayers my concern is that
in the short term being thirty
years so you know a significant
generation to generation to
redefine that you know it's it's
it's a significant cost and I'm
not seeing in the if I or any of
that the materials are received
from anyone really that it is
actually producing that economic
drive that I want to be seeing
for one for offering those kinds
of benefits and so you know to a
certain three what we're we're
propping up or altering the
basic supply and demand
calculation that we put into it
and unfortunately what's not
included in there is it is it up
evaluation of consideration all
of you know our wildlife of our
of our natural beauty that makes
New Mexico attractive to so many
different industries and so many
different places so are we
actually pulling out one of the
things that makes our our
community wonderful in the last
thing I'll say is is to a couple
of contract had mentioned you
know I I do think there is an
incentive to do need incentives
to reinvest in brown feels we
don't want to have chunks of our
our cities or communities
blighted we don't want to see
that happen and what my concern
is when were falsely stimulating
the economy it or falsely
stimulating an area of the.
Element and then that doesn't
pan out the way we wanted to or
doesn't go exactly then did we
just create a new round for the
future brownfield I mean I I
think that that's anticipating
something I can't predict but
that is a concern and when you
talk about rural development
we're talking about developing
anywhere you know that's a
consideration as well so you
know and that's that's kind of
my thoughts on it and I don't
know if there's anything Mr
chair or or sponsor the one to
say that I may have said
incorrectly that but that's kind
of what my readers from there
thank you.
Thank you Representative Serrato
on next we have Representative
that we get Garcia.
Also known as.
Representative Montoya.
That's what that's what they're
screen is showing is showing my
name.
It was changed earlier and it's
and it's back but I'm happy and
I'm honored to share that that
box with you Sir.
Mr chair and representative and
members of this committee and
the audience is listening
I make a motion that we we table
this bill I think it is not
ready to be.
For prime time for these reasons
I think in the to the notion of
transparency good stewardship
and the fact that I represent
local municipalities nine of
them and a tribal community that
have not fully vetted this the
implications for New Mexico are
enormous at this time when we're
trying to recover from the Covid
pandemic the downturn in oil and
gas.
My heart says.
That we table it and we bring it
back when it's fully baked.
Thank you and I yield back.
Reporter Representative Montoya
I will not entertain that motion
at this juncture because I still
wish to address some questions.
And we never
We never make a motion to table
to
suppress debate.
So we allow for the big to occur
and happen before any tabling
motion occurs and plus we still
have been the guy it goes who
wanted to speak in opposition I
have a phone.
Do you have any other questions
right
hi to you you mentioned on that
point
point of order just because
Representative tries a freshman
just so you know also when you
do a Tableindicate you cannot
speak or debate you just have to
make the motion you can't it's
just just the motion and and
there's no debate just as a just
so you know so just wanted to
clarify that as well thank you
chair and representative thank
you Representative Fajardo
Representative place to have the
floor.
Mr chairman Representative
Fajardo and and all others thank
you for that to Torio I am a
freshman and duly noted are you
back to the chair.
Okay thank you.
I do have some questions
but I want to recognize.
The.
Then the.
I'm recognizing you right now in
terms of your concerns that you
had in opposition right.
Okay.
Identify yourself in and feel
free to express your concerns
two minute limit.
Thank you.
Representative.
The eagles and I am yes.
Our.
Back to.
Those tables as of this bill.
We do have service.
And that is that
Regarding this.
This would be limited to they
can only and the second economic
zones although they put a
different name on it and any
improvements in these green
field areas are not subject to
valuations what would be.
Valuation County.
The services that may need to be
provided after that are placed
as a burden on the other tax
payers for example if I'm
building was built to this
economic Sonya would not be able
to be assessed
and so therefore we have that
shift tax.
And that's what we're concerned
about continue fair and
equitable assessment.
We feel like this of budget
private developers we're not
thank you.
First we certainly like to see a
valuation on us also spread
across the board I'm not just
going to to our taxpayers.
Mentioned earlier
in the larger parties such as we
are I see with this issue also
we are also afraid of the
unintended consequences to the
smaller counties who do not fit
in the same category
we don't.
legislation has been properly
better than we would entertain
a seat at the table with the
sponsor anyone else would.
Like to hear from from us at the
local level thank you for.
In the
name of the game into a
committee we try to do
everything possible that are a
way to ensure that people that
have something to say over
against listen to thank you
Linda.
And.
And and representative of the
American kind of maybe address
some of the comments on.
In a position I and is closing.
But.
And and and before I call for
the the wish of the committee.
And I do want to say that they
don't I'm very much in support
of this legislation.
this issue is not a new issue
for those of us in the metro
area.
It's been around for a long
time.
And the concern that we have.
In my district and a lot of
those west side districts
Is the potential of a tend going
up on the comments of the
elementary school Land Grant.
Fifty thousand acres.
And we lost that land grants to
local croak.
And unfortunately
it fell out of the hands of the
heirs and now sits with them
western landholdings.
And
somebody and was the first
person speak in opposition.
Kind of a lab right at the
position of that on that
corporation.
And that to us that Israel is a
real detriment.
To doing to create a tent on the
common lands of the at the
school and grant fifty thousand
acres and create a new community
one hundred twenty five thousand
people.
And they need the kid to do
that.
That is going to put extremely
difficult pressure.
On the water right issue because
the only way that that
development can secure water
rights for potable water and
sewer is by buying out water
rights of farmers and growers in
the middle Rio Grande Valley.
From Cochiti to support.
And so it and and because of the
COVID scenario we understand
that by people you can even
offered to the farmer.
These oldest Spanish farmers in
the valley for over four hundred
years and you are from five
hundred dollars for one acre
feet of water.
We're gonna jump on that.
You know so there's consequences
in terms of what can happen.
By developing kids on green
fields.
And it just gonna put extremely
extreme pressure on the
traditional communities in the
south valley at the school.
Hi most by the US economy is
planning communities that have
been there for generations.
You know hundreds of years.
And
and the thing is members of the
committee that that development
corporation that development
have come to legislature to
create a ticket.
On the comments of the preschool
and grant.
And we defeated that.
Because we see.
The negative impact that it's
going to have.
Down the road.
And
You know and I just wanted to
reflect on that because I've
been in the forefront of this
trouble.
From the very get go.
You know and
and I want to reflect on that
history in terms of why I
support this legislation.
And the need to move forward.
and kind of put this chapter of
the tri cities.
And
and be little meant.
You know and
Incorrectness.
in terms of how.
The native people of the land
grant lost control of their
comments.
And.
By allowing the development of
that caliber to exist on our
common former common.
Is sticking up silver dagger in
our back.
You know because we still raise
claims to that those comments.
You know even though their last
but we haven't given up the
fight to win them back.
And
so with that
members of the committee I'll
allow Representative Romero to
close and they will entertain a
motion.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you members of the committee I
certainly appreciate the
discussion around this bill I
know a lot of you have been
getting calls from everyone and
everywhere about this bill
I mean one thing I would say is
that if there are concerns as
well I'm happy to work with
whomever
to work on this I mean it still
has a long way to go through the
process and sixty days can be
quite a bit of time to have
these discussions and this is
why and when we do have that
voice in order to to to reach
those those consensus on what I
will say that however is the is
the addressing some of the
concerns is that this is a
broader on state government
philosophical question about
what we're going to be and how
we're going to be stewards of
people's tax dollars I I still
maintain that kids in greenfield
areas are putting our local
municipalities at great risk
when we expand them and transfer
the costs
all of the expanded area to to
our local communities I think as
this was brought up in the
discussion is that local
governments do have a lot of
tools in the tool boxes as we
like to use in the legislature
will hear that a lot this coming
session already to address those
concerns however I think that
kids in greenfield kids and
particularly in should not be
part of that whole box I think
it's it's really to the
detriment of our of our local
communities whether rural urban
and I mean to to another point
was you know it's difficult we
can't go back things have have
been done and we're seeing some
of the effects of and despite
future of this bill I mean that
is certainly something that I
think needs to also come out of
this is is what is the return on
that and.
If any at all for the ones that
have already been approved of
in the FIR I'll point out that
there isn't much in terms of
reporting to the legislature's
one of the last things to really
come out of of of the FIR and
and I think this opens up a very
good discussion and discussion
to be having but I still
maintain that us as stewards of
the tax dollar are are really
putting our existing communities
see in peril and and financial
straits and we're talking about
tough economic times are local
governments are also having a
tough time in terms of their
local coffers so I think in
order to protect
What we already have is that
this would be an important way
to go and like I said Mr
chairman and members is that I'm
happy to work with member local
governments it still has a ways
to go and if there are changes
that need to be made I'd be
happy to do so.
Thank you Mr chairman thank
Representative and with that the
members of what is the wish of
the committee.
Mr.
Mr chair were I think but I'm
not real sure excuse me I'm so
what did.
Representative.
Want to make a table in motion
or was that I met Matt and.
I did not accept that motion
in order to allow for full
debate.
So we finish the bay and we're
at that point in terms of a
motion.
Okay thank you Mr chairman I'm
in the table.
Can we have a motion to table.
Is there a second I can't.
A second by Representative
Fajardo.
The table emotions are not
debatable so go straight to the
vote.
a motion to table basically
two of the motion to table.
If it passes basically halts the
progress of this legislation and
this bill stays in our
committee.
If we vote not to table we're
back on the bait and will
entertain another motion.
So now secretary these call the
vote on a table the motion.
Representative Black.
Yes.
Representative Castellano.
Representative Castellano.
Unmute yourself by
Representative Constanta.
About that Mr chairman.
Past.
Yes yes.
Representative Cook yes.
Representative Fajardo yes the
table.
Representative lu Han.
Representative.
Yes to table.
Representative Serrato no table.
Mr chairman.
Go to Representative Castellano
Representative Castellano.
Yes.
Mr chairman no by a vote of five
in the affirmative three in the
negative.
They do but the the tabling
motion passes.
Representative Romero thank you
very much for your presentation.
Members of the committee they're
calling is down to the floor I
would we have a couple of bills
for Tuesday and we might be
earlier if there is a conflict
with the start up time of the
session thank you god bless you
the.
As part of this that at the
office.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members.
We're done members thank you get
down to the floor ASAP before
the.
Representative as brief does go.
The the regular.
That being the regular the the
tune if we were in full session.
