people in staffing.
I'm getting it all mixed up Mr
chair but
none the less the department of
environmental Department is got
one third less people in their
department under this
certification program there were
operating on one half the money
and they have three times three
times the operators thirteen
hundred today of who are seeking
to continue their training and
education and certification.
so with that Mr chairman I'd
like to introduce.
That code roost.
Rebecca Bruce is in the
environment department and her
she's water protection division
director and if she could pick
up and carry it a bit on the
introduction in in the guts of
the bill I think it will be a
quicker process miss Russo are
you there.
Yes good morning Mr chair
members of the committee
Representative Anderson thank
you so in addition to what
Representative of Anderson and
sat this bill really as an
adjustment of fees for our
authority program for the first
time in fifteen years to adjust
for inflation and also enable us
to bring that operator
certification and testing
program into the twenty first
century.
We have the ability now to offer
computer based testing as
opposed to the way we've been
conducting testing having a few
sessions throughout the year in
large classroom settings that
are not off it available as
often for operators they have to
travel longer distances to those
classroom testing sessions wait
longer to get there and then
wait longer to get their test
results though direction that
we're going now and that this
bill will enable us to continue
on is to offer computer based
testing through a partnership
with the department of workforce
solutions where we utilize their
twenty two workforce connection
centers around the state and
operators that are able to
schedule their test much more
quickly whenever they're ready
to take their exam get to their
nearest workforce connection
center take their test in order
for us to make all of that
happen on an ongoing basis we
must adjust the fees so that we
can afford the computer based
testing opportunity.
This bill allows us to do that
and would enable the water
quality control commission to
continue to have a rulemaking
role which is already in the
bill today are in the statute
today I did water quality
control commission over time
would be able to adjust fees
further if needed up or down I
in order in order to keep the
program solvent and that would
any religion any fee changes
going forward what happened
through notice and comment
rulemaking.
Those are the key provisions of
the bill and we welcome any and
all questions and and input from
the public.
Mr chair if I could I'd S.
Representative Madrid if he
would care to comment before we
proceed on the bill.
Thank you.
Mr chairman thank you for
reading I thank you real simple
terms legislation without ****
up something's gonna go down to
the side is this that we're
growing all through the state in
our well we are one of the
budget have to be taken care of
on some the convenience of
bringing people closer to the
availability of certification is
business it's good for this
values that are very effective
helps them as well but more the
rural people like myself and
Representative Anderson you have
iterations of so it's a good
sense of us trying to make
something better for the future
with the return of the obviously
a little bit of pressure with
the ability of it still program
back down the price over some
time if it lends itself it's a
it's an investment it's a good
investment that helps our whole
state overall thank you.
Mr chairman that concludes our
presentation.
Thank you
sentence and and Mr is associate
and Senator will come back to
House Energy continue to.
Of we will now go to the
audience.
if anyone in the attendees would
like to speak on this bill this
is rule out of order house bill
one of three please raise your
hand if you're on the phone you
can press star nine and that
will raise your hand.
and then the.
Our committee system will admit
you so first up we have Kathy.
Good morning Mr chair and.
Everybody I'm that is.
Chair of the utility operator
certification program.
And I just wanted to give our
unanimous support for this it
will clearly it was to bring
more people and.
To the industry and enable them
to test more smoothly and safely
them on we currently can.
Thank you for that next bill
Connor.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name's bill
Connor and executive director of
New Mexico rural water
association.
We stand in the in support of
this bill.
For numerous reasons it's been a
struggle for many operators
Eckley rural operators the far
corners of our state.
To be able to attend.
And test.
Over the years historically the
tests have been have been done
nine or ten tests a year is all
up and down the main corridor I.
twenty five corridor pretty much
and and it's long distances for
them travel expenses for them to
go well the cost of this bill.
The cost of testing under this
bill.
Does increase we believe a big
chunk of that increase will be
offset by by savings and and
travel time mileage.
hotels that type of thing it
will also open up the ability
for them to test pretty much on
demand rather than having to
wait for one of the one of the
nine or ten monthly tests during
the year and hope that they can
get registered get into it so.
We support this bill.
Thank you for your time.
Thank you for that and as far as
I can tell that's it for the
public.
Us so we'll go to the committee
and for separate person
thousand.
Thank you Mr chairman
mistress just a couple of
questions relate
along with the computer based
testing will there also be or is
there currently come Peter based
training for these authority
figures.
Thank you Mr chair
representative Thompson at the
committee that training
component is at combination the
opportunities for training right
now are combination of computer
based online and classroom
training a lot of the training
that's offered in the state I is
provided by the New Mexico
overwater Association bill
Connor and his team who we just
heard from another partner group
of ours that does a lot of
training classroom based
training as the New Mexico water
wastewater Association those
opportunities are still going to
continue to be available to
operators they're very popular
for for the learning process to
get in a classroom with others
and we're continuing over time
to offer more online computer
based training opportunities to
make it as easy as possible for
operators to get the training
they need and the way they'd
like to get.
Thank you I think that will be
the.
Certainly beneficial to all the
operators that I talked to
and and especially the role
operators if they have that
ability to continually train
and use that those training
modules
As of compliance tools six.
Pretty beneficial to
thank you for that and Mr
chair and representative.
and our son or Madrid the rates
Where where these rights just
the rates that came out of the
agency and then is there any
basis or.
Those new rates.
I will take a swing at that if I
could Mr chairman.
Of the rates are as you can see
as you see are rising.
dramatically.
Two times.
A two.
Of to act thank you Sir thank
you.
That increases been long overdue
it gets sent to the inability
to.
The increase as this agency has
had reduced funding for federal
sources on this certification
program and of the.
And of course the the time right
should not been addressed for
fifteen years so this is going
to provide the agency with
the ability to.
Raised for lower the rates as
needed for this necessary
program I would ask Miss rusu
she could.
Add anything to that briefly
thank you.
Yes thank you Mr chair
Representative Townsend and the
at the fee in particular that.
That testing application fee
going up to sixty dollars that's
informed directly by the cost of
the computer based testing
service we have partnered with a
third party at that called that
ABCD American and board of
certifications they actually
provide computer based testing
services the base level for that
is within the range of that the
exam fees that we're proposing
so that we can afford it least
of the most basic level of those
computer based test and and make
that service available to
operators on going so that's I
largely how we informed at feed
development some of the other
fees are based on the amount of
time it takes staff to process
applications review material and
determine whether an operator is
eligible to take the test that
they're applying to take those
types of things at the amount of
time staff time goes into it
acted into the calculation of
the fees.
I appreciate that.
Thank you mistruths
Representative Townsend.
I hope that answers your
question.
It does not chairman
Representative mistress thank
you very much.
Thank you Representative
Townsend.
Can I see raised is one of the
Tony Duffy.
Next.
This story okay Representative
Strickler.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Sanchez.
I think this.
This is a good idea
especially online services and
in the the fee increase
Seems to be reasonable now this
is just a one time fee increase
and so if technology improves
and and
immunity you need to come back
for another adjustment to you'll
do so at that particular time
it's just this is a simple.
One time fee increase to digest
things up is is that is that
right.
Representative Strickler the it
is correct that this is all one
time up.
Creek however the agency will
have the.
Ability going forward to raise
or lower the fees if there is a
cap on the upside of the
increased relative to the agency
that actually I think I do
better if I let of miss Reuss
deal deal with a bit more detail
on that please explain that to
me is to sound like it's a price
adjustment which we rarely say.
impacts of never seen in fact
but but explain this a price
adjustment component.
It is I certainly will have
agency requests that and but it
is misleading to think about it
in a one time one of them out of
there is permissive language
going forward mysteries will
we'll visit with us about
mistruths.
Thank you thank you Mr chair
Representative Strickler
Representative Anderson the at
the bill set changes the fees
that are are currently
established in statute for
various types of activities
related to the operator
certifications and then it
provides for the water quality
control commission through a
rulemaking process to adjust
fees in the future that would
play out in in a regulatory
siding with notice and comment
where any and adjusted fees up
or down would be put out for
public comment go through a
hearing process before the
commission before any changes
would be adopted into rural us
so this at continues the the
current at landscape of how
these fees work set out in
statute modified through
rulemaking through the water
quality control commission as
needed.
Thank you thank you Mr rose.
And thank you for explained that
you know normally I think this
bill is referred to
I'm not sure of the
Collections and Indian Affairs.
Normally the increase with an
adjustment would go to tax.
and that's been my experience
and so
I appreciate that you have to go
through
the process notice.
To to judge these rights and
it's not automatic that as slow
concerning to me.
In a.
I don't have to think about this
one I like a discount of a a new
trend setter.
and thank you tax should be
looking at this but that's all I
have Mr chair and in sponsors.
Thank you.
Next up we have Representative
Ferrary.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Representative Anderson and
Madrid for bringing this forward
and I think the state agency
first
this makes perfect sense to be
able to
Cover the cost between the fees
in with the department has to
expand to run this program I was
speaking to a gentleman over the
course of the summer about
certifications running out for
certain utility operators and I
hope that's been remedied so
that you know they are still
able to certify the different
things within their jurisdiction
but also he emphasized that we
needed to be sure and have
I.
In class training and not just
going to all network internet
training because he felt like
that was something that was so
important for people to be able
to have the hands on and talk to
each other so is even though
we're going to be raising the
fees where are you going to be
moving more to computer oriented
in internet training.
This rose.
Thank you Mr chair and
Representative Ferrary.
We've we've heard the same thing
a lot of operators really do
appreciate and for for classroom
testing
different people learn in
different ways and a lot of
people prefer that that type of
a setting I we fully support on
going classroom training are
there are these at partner.
Agencies partner organizations
of ours rural water association
water wastewater Association
provided excellent training
courses in the classroom for
operators we support that
continuing I'm over time the
Environment Department ourselves
haven't done as much of that
classroom training ourselves we
haven't offered it as much
because of limited staff and
resources so it really is these
external organizations that are
the experts in providing that
classroom training and that will
continue and I think as long as
the operators at say that that's
the kind of training that they
want to have access to I expect
that to continue in New Mexico
okay thank you very much thank
you Mr chair that's all.
Thank you present for an
accepted president Ouattara.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative Anderson and
Representative Madrid
I'm I have similar questions but
but let me start this I and I
might have missed this at the
beginning but in the title says
providing and adding categories
of certification what what
categories of certification
being at it.
This risk.
Thank you Mr chair
Representative Montoya I mean
asked or other expert my
colleague Joe Martinez he's the
chief of the drinking water
bureau at NMED and an expert on
the types of fees to answer your
question.
Thank you Mr chair and
Representative Montoya so it
we're we're proposing to
additional fees one of them is
going to be an application fee
for for examinations and the
second fee is going to be
what we're calling
an exam review fee and what that
is is that if of operators
having a hard time passing the
tests that they can come to our
utility operator certification
program request an exam review
to to help them through some of
the questions that they may be
having a problem with so what
we're just proposing a fee for
those two things.
Thank you for that
I'm Mr chair and Representative
Anderson I don't know how you
want to direct this one as well
too but currently that the
training that's taking place.
that is taking place in state is
that not an adequate facilities
or what locations provides this
training currently.
Thank you Representative Montoya
I think we'll get a clearer
answer from of the this Roose or
whoever she deems appropriate
for that answer.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Representative Montoya so under
normal circumstances most of the
training would be offered by our
utility authority Sir
certification partners like New
Mexico rural water association
and it New Mexico water
wastewater Association in in
class training sessions or in
person training sessions like
director Bruce mentioned
previously over the past year
that has had to shift a little
bit to online training sessions
that they've been providing so
the New Mexico water and
wastewater Association and New
Mexico rural water association
have been doing some online
trainings with operators over
the past year.
Thank you for that answer and Mr
chairman
I'm wondering if that was this
More online will will the folks
who provide the training and
imagine they charge a fee for
the training itself besides the.
The cost now for applying to to
test and then now.
Potentially review of the if
they had a spell test and and
going back and getting some help
with that
will the the current.
A New Mexico
organizations continue to do
this training
with this be opened up to a
broader maybe folks out of state
could also apply to become the
trainer for this I'm I'm just
wondering if the money will stay
in state.
Thank you for that question
before
I ask Miss Roose to continue I
just simply say one of the
advantages of house bill one oh
three is it is the next step
towards New Mexico
certification of elevating
itself to a national standard
that allows us to see of trained
operators come to New Mexico in
the certified in a more
efficient and timely way this
Roose.
Thank you Mr chair
representative until at the
there's nothing about the
adjustments in fees for that
testing part of the program in
this bill that would.
In the directly or indirectly
shift the opportunities for
training in the state
In in a way it us being able to
at the department and the our
management of the certification
and examination part of the
program being more efficient and
streamlined and modernized which
this bill would allow us to do
would help us have more time and
resources to work more with the
authority community and our
partner organizations to to
DAP's training as needed but I
don't see anything here that
would
in in this bill that would
change who's offering the
training
bringing in outside parties
outside of the state to train
our operators and that's not
something that that I understand
as at it and implicated at all
by the adjustments that we're
making to offer the computer
based testing.
Thank you for that answer that's
that's really all I'm looking
for I've seen during
COVID I've seen during even
outside of that just in in in.
A local governments and and the
streamlining effort it has
disadvantaged at times local
entities
happens in rural Canadian
communities across the state
where things get then
centralized and then
we had a blazing
those dollars that would come
into a rural community and up
flowing to the larger community
you can provide the service
maybe more streamlined maybe
aimed at any less at less
expensively but it in and what
what what happens is the local
communities lose out on on those
gross receipt tax dollars and
potentially whoever's providing
that it is apartment that
whoever providing whatever
service or or good ends up being
harms the local level that was
just my concern I want to make
sure that.
That to some degree the
streamlined efforts actually
make it to where other out of
state entities become the
provider just because of.
their ability to compete.
At a at a lesser cost I just
want to just want to make sure
that we're not somehow during
this time harming.
Those local entities so thank
you for that Mr chairman.
Thank you Representative Montoya
resenting understand intersect
Madrid I had one question for
you on page eight of the bill
Militate starting at one eight
it says the fee for
certification examination shall
not be greater than the features
by the association of boards of
certification or other
examination provider free by the
the department thank they really
understand what that meant.
This proved.
Thank you Mr chair that is
essentially is saying that and
any future adjustments through
the water quality control
commission to the exam see that.
The commission nor the
department and proposing
anything it just means to the
commission we can't go above the
cost of the tasks that were.
procuring so we're relying right
now on the association of course
a certification for the computer
based testing module and the
delivery of that type of a test
and they have they charge us for
that we're saying we can't make
money off of the feats we can't
if if the board certifications
as charging sixty dollars for
test we can't charge a hundred
dollars for that test so that's
that's setting a parameter a
limit on how the feet the
structure would be modified
potentially going forward.
Percent interest in Mr is is is
the board certification is that
a public entity or private and.
This work is.
This risk thank you Mr chair and
then I turned to a job Martinez
bureau chief.
Thank you Representative.
Mr chair the association of
boards of certifications is is a
nonprofit national organization
that basically works with our
state partners across the
country to to provide these
testing and certification
services for their utility
authority programs as well as
other as well as other
certification programs.
Okay and
Representatives and experts.
So the so it's just me it's
almost like a pastor in you're
not you're not collecting any
additional to cover staff time
or this the state's cost of
administering the program.
You're you're just covering the
cost of the test.
We should get then get it out
you different organizations that
correct.
Mr chair the
That's essentially true for the
exam fee yes for the other fees
that are chief Martinez
described earlier there are some
other ways in which we are
managing through the season this
bill to cover more of the costs
of our administration of the
program but for the exam see
itself with this provision in
the bill we will it will hold on
to the cost of the testing
provider for whatever test is is
being applied for an offered
yes.
Okay.
Thank you for that
Representative Strickler did you
want to be recognized for a
second time.
Yes Sir.
Representative Strickler for
second time briefly and I'll be
very brief so what this bill
does in Afghanistan right
increase I think it's regional
rate increase I think the
overall objective is is very
good streamlines things I'm kind
of in in in in person learners
so I like it flexibility at this
online stuff I'm not real happy
then just that work well for me
I like the interaction like to
ask questions okay.
What does bother me though just
a little bit and I just give me
a little heartburn is that we
take out of the we we put we
delegate the legislature will
delegate future increases
through the through the agency
and and that's that's not normal
I mean usually when you have a
rate increase the increase and
I've been involved in some of
those those issues with County
court faced in the past.
You come back to the legislature
in a revisit this ticket gives
us some oversight and if it's a
reasonable rate and creation of
the legislature is happy to to
oblige so that bothers me and
are you kind of deal gate that
authority away from us so just
in just wanted to point that out
to the committee and two of them
but thank you Sanchez and thank
you chairman for one mistake.
Briefly second time.
Thank you Representative
Strickler what is the will of
the committee.
I knew for the past on a house
bill
sorry if I missed that lost my
place.
One oh three one oh three thank
you thank you.
For the past we've second.
Is there.
The chain to the motion.
Okay so work at Shelby can you
call the vote please.
Representative Chandler yes.
Representative Dixon yes.
Representative Ferrary or
anything Representative Montoya.
The house thank our topic.
Representative Ortez yes like.
Representative Sariñana yes
we'll be off Representative
Scott.
Chance.
Representative Strickler no.
Representative Townsend.
Okay Representative yes thank
you.
Representative Montoya.
Yes.
Vice chair Stansbury yes.
Chair McQueen.
Yes and I'm going to explain
what the.
And that is a do pass with a
vote of ten to one.
Thank you shortly so there's one
to explain my vote was just want
to touch on.
Representative Strickler said
regarding the rate increases and
I actually I think we're getting
a bunch of bills that not only
ask for rate increases.
But that's for the thirty two
rate increases in future in I
personally think that's
appropriate
because you know we're we're
talking about like of three
dollars to sixty dollars it's
difficult to come back to
legislature and get that kind of
approval as long as the the
rates and fees you know say
resemble I I I think that's
inappropriate delegation to our
state agencies so I in fact I
think we have another one of
those bills on the agenda today
so we can we can revisit it if
need be thank you Representative
Anderson and metric you have a
you had a to pass.
Thank you chairman members of
the committee.
Thank you Mr chairman.
So before we proceed I am in
that and now spent
and they are attendees you'll
listen to this if you're here
for house bill one of five
electric generation project
requirements which deals with
the help payment in lieu of
taxes payments to school
districts for I. R. the lecture
transmission projects there are
some technical issues with that
bill and there was also a time
in conflict in the sponsor of
that bill has asked to roll it
over so if you're here for that
bill house bill one of five
we'll likely hear that on
Tuesday in any event we will not
here today.
So that leaves us with
Two bills on the agenda and it's
the Representative Chandler show
from here on out our first we're
gonna go back to the beginning
of the agenda just as it was
first house bill seventy six
yeah I'd be permits not offer
poor compliance Representative
Chandler whenever you're ready.
Thank you thank you so much Mr
chair and thank you for your
patience I I very much
appreciate it I do have expert
witnesses I don't know if
they've been let in yet Sandra
alley environmental protection
division director and Elisabeth
is be keen on air quality bureau
chief on.
So I don't see them yet I see I
see Division director Ellie.
And.
Anyone else.
Okay well I will start and again
thank you for your patience I am
introducing in a request that
committee's consideration of
house bill seventy six house
bill seventy six grants
authority to the New Mexico
environment department.
And local air permitting
agencies to maintain a level
playing field among New Mexico
businesses by giving the option
of denying permits are revoking
existing permits issued under
the state air quality control
act.
Under current law even if the
person applying for an air
permit has a history of clear
disregard for state and federal
regulations the environment
department and local agency must
issue them an air permit.
H. B. seventy six rewards
businesses who invest in
protecting air quality by
ensuring those who do not are
held accountable the result will
be more responsible corporate
citizens in the state which
means cleaner air and better
health for New Mexicans.
House bill seventy six will
allow New Mexico to address that
operators in the same way that
is currently allowed in other
states such as Texas South
Dakota and Kansas.
HB seventy six also brings
greater consistency and
predictability to the air
permitting process in the
environment department by
aligning permit revocation and
the Nile provisions with the air
quality control act with those
already in New Mexico's solid
waste hazardous waste in and
water quality acts and with that
Mr chair I I'm I'm concluded my
introductory marks I do not know
if
Division director Ellie would
like to supplement my comments.
Thank you.
Trailer.
The queen and members of the
committee my name is Sandra Ely
on the environmental protection
division director within the New
Mexico environment department HB
seventy six provide certain
minimal standards for obtaining
and keeping an air quality
permit under current law the
environment department must
issue an air permit even if an
applicant is a convicted of our
mental Fallon has has lied on
their permit application has had
an environmental permit revoked
or suspended other state or
reviews refused to disclose
required information to the
department or has operated
without a permit resulting in
significant emissions what was
current law Rick does not allow
us to revoke a permit for those
same circumstances under HB
seventy six the applicant is
required to submit a disclosure
statement with information to
allow the department and local
agencies to determine if any of
the previously mentioned
conditions are not.
Seventy six insurance protection
of New Mexico businesses as much
as it protects New Mexico
communities businesses that do
not intend to comply with air
quality permits and rules and
rules undermine the economic
investment of the vast majority
of New Mexico businesses that do
further it puts communities at
risk for illness or death from
breeding harmful contaminants
thank you.
Thank you Ely and I'm taking the
gavel for just a few moments
while chair McQueen has stepped
away Representative Chandler do
you have any further comments
before we go to the public thank
you madam chair now I do not
okay wonderful and for members
of the public who would like to
speak on this bill please raise
your hand and our I. T. support
will let you in in the order
that you do so so and we will
now go to the public for public
comment at let's go ahead and
hear from our first person
please.
What is this me it yes.
These.
Thank you risen sure thank you
madam chair and members of the
committee my name is Mary
Feldblum and I represent the oil
and gas accountability project
which is a program of earthworks
and I just want to commend
Representative Chandler and the
department for introducing this
critical bill it is just makes
such common sense to be able to
hold a and entity accountable
all if they are bad actors as
described in this legislation
I'll just give you a very quick
example from Santa Fe County
which several years ago there
was a company Sandridge that
wanted to drill are doing X.
engaging school exploration for
oil and gas well near Rio Rancho
and I can tell you that people
many of both parties came out
and and more concerned and one
of the issues that came up is
that people didn't know the
background of the company and
citizens did research and found
that Sandridge was in trouble in
Oklahoma we're not they being
the Oklahoma law ordinate or
were actually and they were
supposed to close down certain
wells because the earthquake
threats and in addition they
eventually came out that they
were.
They were filing for bankruptcy
and if the company is in bad
situation is ultimately the
taxpayer that will have to pay
for the problems so with we
fully support this and
congratulate Representative and
the department for putting this
incredibly important bill all
forward for your approval thank
you.
Thank you for that we have you
need more the.
Good morning Mr chairman madam
vice chair any bear being
registered lobbyists for their
Mexico oil and gas association
in its current form is presented
to the committee today are nomo
that opposes this bill as we
have started conversations with
director the lady and look
forward to visiting with the
sponsor before because the next
committee thank you.
Thank you for that except your
chance.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Eric
chance.
Staff attorney at the New Mexico
environmental law center on
behalf of the Law Center we
stand in support of house bill
seventy six this is a critical
accountability bill hi it's
critical for communities to
point out bad actors to
regulators when the regulators
don't have the authority or at
resources to to do that
background investigation it's
also critical for regulator
regulatory agencies to limit the
ability that bad actors to get
permits in fact you know this is
such an important issue that the
water quality act itself
requires doesn't just permit
that requires denial of permits
into the water quality at yes
there's a bad actor right and
then finally this
this bill would ensure that
pollution permits which
represent a huge responsibility
to
communities and the environment
and a.
A tremendous public trust are
given only to those with that
clean environmental records
thank you so much.
Thank you for that we have.
Ashley.
Right here.
Okay.
Can you hear me.
Thank you so much Mr chairman
and members of the committee I'm
Ashley Wagner director of public
policy with the New Mexico
chamber of commerce and we
respectfully ask that you oppose
house bill seventy six in its
current form we are concerned
that this legislation may be
used to substantially delay air
pair air permit applications and
further increase costs to
businesses that are seeking to
obtain air permits in New Mexico
our understanding is that the
air quality bureau already has
inherent authority to deny or
revoke an air quality permit
application if the agency finds
an applicant has knowingly
misrepresented or withheld
information from the agency
additionally section PE
subsection three of the new
material in the bill place of
the ten year limitation on past
convictions yet the other
portions of section P. including
subsections one two four and I
said no time limits on
applicability this will
potentially give the agency and
unlimited amount of US forty in
reviewing an applicant's past
even if the applicant has taken
substantial steps to correct
past violations and demonstrate
rehabilitation this creates an
unstable business environment
that the chamber is concerned
will determine new business from
coming to New Mexico or existing
business to say including we're
very concerned that house bill
seventy six will create a
significant new barrier to doing
business in New Mexico and make
the state less attractive to new
business or to prove or to
retaining or expanding existing
businesses therefore we
respectfully ask that you oppose
house bill seventy six in its
current form thank you.
Thank you we have the best
Carrero.
Yes hi sorry to get a second for
me good morning chairman members
of the committee.
my name is going to get it on
the legislative and political
organizer with the Sierra Club
Rio Grande and chapter I would
represent over thirty five
thousand members of the
supporters throughout New Mexico
we stand in support of HB
seventy six to me this is common
sense legislation sizes shown is
that people living with bad air
quality experience.
The most serious consequences of
COVID we also know the current
state regulations can be no more
stringent federal there really
regulations limiting state
action to protect our air this
on top is the fact that seven
New Mexico counties home to over
five hundred eighty eighty
thousand people are near or
exceeding federal air quality
levels makes this legislation
all more urgent NMED should have
the ability to revoke or deny
air permits for bad actors and
repeat offenders we'd be in good
company with Texas Oklahoma and
Arizona and other states have
similar laws in place thank you
so much.
Thank you next we have Jim
Winchester.
Mr chair thank you Jim
Winchester with the independent
petroleum association of New
Mexico I PAM stands opposed to
HB seventy six for several
reasons we do strongly
appreciate the need for
compliance and we're always
working with our members to
ensure that they're up to speed
on all operating procedures and
the protection of human health
and fresh water and the
environment are paramount to all
of our operators but are
concerns juice around the broad
nature of the new power that
would be given to the E. I. B.
and the discretionary authority
without specificity on what
grounds that the board could die
permits there is no limitation
on how far back they could reach
in no time frame to return to
compliance in get back to good
standing in Furthermore in
unintentional mistake under this
new H. B. seventy six could lead
the company to not be able to do
any new business in New Mexico
and that leads to several
questions what if you have an
employee that makes an
unintentional error on a
required permit the entire
company therefore is penalized
what if management changes hands
company with an outstanding
record requires wells that were
not otherwise permitted are they
now placed in the penalty box in
finally the way that the permit
reads the way that the H. B.
seventy six reads is that once
you are in the penalty box
you're always in the penalty box
so for these reasons we do stand
opposed to HB seventy six thank
you.
Thank you for your Carla
Sonntag's.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee on
Carla Sonntag's president of the
New Mexico business coalition we
represent hundreds of businesses
of thousands of New Mexicans
throughout the state we
respectfully oppose this
legislation as it is currently
written we do not see this as
beneficial to our state or the
community in which the authority
works instead we see this as a
deterrent operators.
Who will spend resources of both
time and finances in defending
their right to safely operate
and bring in revenue to the
state as well as much needed
jobs so we respectfully ask that
you oppose this legislation as
written thank you.
Thank you and that concludes the
the public testimony I'd like to
go back to the sponsor we do you
have any additional comments
before we get to the committee.
Not at this time Mr chair thank
you thank you Representative
Chandler first up we have
Representative Townsend.
Thank you Mr chairman and
representative
and director of a few questions.
First the.
No one in.
In the industry.
Wants to support or.
The so let's take bad actors
then that's that's not good
training.
But as I read this.
I had several thought.
Number one.
There's no provision that I see.
for what has been read.
Referred to as a corrective
action plan.
Is there a reason for that.
Chair members of the committee
Representative Townsend the H.
P. seventy six provides
mitigating and aggravating
factors that could be considered
when revoking or denying a
permit corrective action plan
would certainly be a mitigating
factor that would allow the
permitir permit holders to.
Pandemic retain that permanent.
So should that not be listed Mr
chairman and
And director Representative as
A.
That and outlined in specifics
that in in curing in the
Grievances within the regulatory
agency.
Chair Representative Townsend
and members of the committee one
of the goals of this bill is to
align with other environmental
statutes already in New Mexico
such as the solid waste
hazardous waste water quality
control act in the mining act
and you know would be happy to
work in any provisions that need
to be in in those access might
be helpful but I don't see them
explicitly at this time that
provides mitigating factors we
want to provide consistency and
predictability in the permitting
process and by aligning those
acts we do that.
Well the other thing that Mr
chair and representative.
Directory that bothered me is
you could have.
permits issued to.
Small companies with very
limited operations and you're
going to have multiple permits
issued to large operators with
very complex operations whether
there.
gas plants power plants
refineries cement thank you
introduce.
And as you all know Mr chairman
and representative director.
The complications of those this
is very different how is eight
large authority going to be
treated fairly
best more risk exposure more
risk and exposure to bigger
operations.
Chamber chairman members of of
the committee the threshold for
revoking nerd and I was pretty
high you have to be
environmental felon you have to
have intentionally lied on your
permanent you have to have
constructed without a permit and
be exceedingly over your permit
let limits I I believe the large
operators to actually be in
pretty good shape here because
they have the technology the
technical staff to help them
with this you know to be in
compliance muscle larger
operators I know that I have
worked with are good actors and
won't have any problems staying
out of the penalty box that
or having a permit denied or
revoked.
Mr chairman and director I agree
with you most of the big
operators that I've worked with
our of.
Similar stature but I can tell
you there's many of them sending
me comments and concerns but
because.
This proposal seems to be too
open ended.
In many ways for example.
yes.
Proposal has a knowingly.
Clause.
But I don't see who makes that
determination and are there
recourses of for that and would
it be through the courts is
that.
exactly how does that happen Mr
chairman and director
Representative.
Chair members of the committee
yes it has to be intent to rely
on an application not just in
the state that they have to
knowingly lied on their
application in order to be
considered for to for denial the
department would make that
decision we will there is
certainly recourse if an permit
holder applicant is unhappy with
the department's decision all
Department decisions are
appealable to the environmental
improvement port.
And
Mr chairman
Representative director in the
implant that and application is
denied.
would operations have to
immediately cease or would there
be a cure time available for
that.
Under the air quality control
lacked a permit applicant cannot
start construction until the
permit is in place and so you if
the application is denied the
permit data they would be denied
a permit construction cannot
start until
the situation was medicated.
My point director.
Mr chair representative is
Indian beyond that the facility
has been constructed.
And and is operating and then
there is an allegation of
misrepresentation.
With that allegation with that
operation have to immediately
cease operating or would there
be a current time provided for
that authority for take to
continue to operate and to
approve
Or to go through the process of
securing that.
That the eight different.
If there are mitigating factors
we could look at it at a your
time but you know if it involves
a permit that has already been
issued and the facility that is
already operating.
they could work at the core you
know they could go to the courts
or the I. B. immediately to get
it to get it addressed.
And they could seek a stay of
the department's decision.
You but.
But during that time what I'm
trying to figure out is if they
go to court.
Mr chair and representative and
they start the process.
Would they be and compliance or
non compliant status with the
department while they seek to
hear.
Chair members of the committee
if they they would perhaps have
to have the permit revoked if
the courts didn't stay at the
building compliance of their
permit if their meeting all the
conditions of the permit like
their initial limits where they
should be and other conditions
of the permanent work on being
maintained.
Mr chairman and director
Representative
in the year opening statements
if I understood you correctly.
You alluded to the fact that an
operator had been deemed.
a bad actor in.
Another state.
That would be
Reasons to deny a permit in New
Mexico is that correct.
If
can have their permanent in line
in another state or suspended we
can consider that in our actions
to deny or revoke it makes sense
that if this permit application
is to turn is that considered a
bad actor in Oklahoma should we
really be permitting them in New
Mexico if they can't permit it
permitted in another state does
it make sense that we permit
them here.
Mr chair representative director
what if that company had changed
management had been bought and
sold
these how how are you gonna make
that clarification.
Each of the applicants will be
submitting a disclosure
statement so we would evaluate
that disclosure statement and
who is the operator pursuant to
that disclosure statement I also
must say again that there is
some leeway here unlike other
environmental acts within the
New Mexico and that Environment
Department the department may
revoke or deny it it's not that
the department shall revoke or
deny based on the items listed
in H. B. seventy six.
And I appreciate that Mr
chair representative and
director of.
May is is much better than shell
The.
Companies that are our own.
In in in especially large
companies that have a footprint
of operation over many states.
It's very likely that some place
in that operation in the last T.
M. or more years that they have.
had.
Senator.
Issues with the regulatory
agency and it doesn't mean that
I mean I might maybe you had
Tina maybe you had fifteen
different occurrences but.
It seems like to me there needs
to be a standard.
That allows
Those larger operators.
Clarity because I'm afraid.
What will happen.
will be what happens today in
New Mexico if you go down to the
Orla Texas area because of our
regulatory process.
Many companies have deployed
capital just across the line
into Texas because in those in
in that state today they
deployed capital at basically at
risk to permit thank the.
They put their.
J. complete your permit
applications limits being
complete in taxes you can start
construction in New Mexico they
have to wait and tell that.
It is approved before they begin
construction so that about
eighteen months behind in
capturing a return on their
investment and you know it's
it's just Dr businesses out in
New Mexico and I'm afraid that
this is going to do exactly the
same thing it's just going to
put another risk out there where
companies will look at it and
say you know.
I think I can build across the
line in the levy eight that risk
and what in happens in the
Mexico
Mr chair representative director
is that we lose the tax base
that we do we dearly need so I
have a many reservations about
this proposal I I completely
agree that we don't want bad
actors in New Mexico.
Completely agree.
But this process right here is
is in my opinion weaponizing
that director or that
that person and in that
permitting stage where they have
a lever.
That is and chest and so I will
propose based on that but I will
continue to listen and be open
to
Amendments that you may accept
thank you very much Mr chairman
and representative director.
Thank you Representative
Townsend next we have
Representative Dixon.
Thank you Mr chairman
thank you Representative
Chandler and director Eli
I have really appreciated your
presentation and I also
appreciated the backgrounds that
you've been able to provide and
the data that has you know
really allowed me to sort of
assess the bill and and better
understand it I do have a couple
of comments and to questions
first off I wanted to just
comment that with regard to the
bad actor provision in the water
quality act which you referred
to I noticed that it's only been
used a handful of times and so I
appreciate that historical
context.
I also wanted to say that I
think it's encouraging
and we can see in this
legislation that it's narrowly
focused too actors with a
demonstrated history of poor
performance or the intent to lie
and so I really appreciate that
as well that it's narrowly
defined.
I did want to say that you know
for the vast majority of actors
you know I think we recognize
that they're responsible and
good actors and that this
legislation really affirms their
commitment to quality I'm in
meeting it their obligations and
that work knowledge in that by
not giving bad actors a free
pass and so this legislation on
hold bad actors accountable
which I think budget the vast
you know all of the good actors
that we know are out there.
I noted that both Oklahoma and
Texas allow permits to be denied
for unsatisfactory compliance
history and so I was wondering
if you could talk a little bit
about if there any limitations
on how far back
you would look in this that sort
of determination process
For instance if an actor who is
applying for a permit and you
know ten years ago you you know
there were some issues
I understand that we are we're
giving the department or the
board flexibility and so we're
saying shall and allow as
opposed to must but I'm just
wondering about that statute of
limitations and sort of how
We would consider more recent
events as well so that's my
first question thank you for.
Chair members of the committee
unlike some other states and the
other acts we don't necessarily
look at their environmental
compliance history in the state
meaning unlike the water quality
control act that says it's
exhibited a history of willful
disregard for environmental laws
in any state we're not looking
at whether they've had multiple
permit
violations and going back over
time to look at those we're
looking at very narrowly focused
items and for the bribery and
fraud piece we do go back about
ten years there are we go back
ten years under the statute
there are not limitations on the
other provisions in paragraph P.
and that there are mitigating
factors that we can consider so
the longer it further you go
back the less likely we would
consider those to be grounds or
costs for denial or revocation.
I'm if thank you Mr chairman
Representative Chandler and a
director I did have another
question
And that is given that the other
states that to have in fact
Morse stringent requirement.
And and maybe I should have said
that but the other states in our
surrounding area that do have
you know that are have similar
laws Arizona Oklahoma Nevada
Texas and Utah.
Would it in acting HB seventy
six would that put us at a
disadvantage or an uneven
playing field with the states
around us.
What it would do is a facility
wanted to start operating but
the operator wasn't convicted
environmental fell on the may
not be able to operate in
Oklahoma or Texas but they could
come to New Mexico to operate so
we we we we we want to attract
best we want the best actors in
New Mexico the responsible.
The needs that really are
meeting their obligations to.
Operate well we don't want the
folks that are rejects from
other jurisdictions.
Thank you very much and just to
conclude with with my questions
I do think that there have been
a couple of points that have
been brought up and I look
forward to if there are further
discussions with some of the
industry stakeholders to just
fine tune some of the questions
that have been raised but I
think that this is a good piece
of legislation and I really
appreciate the thought and all
of the information and data that
you really provided me with to
make a decision so thank you.
Thank you Representative Dixon
except we've Representative
Strickler.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Chandler and
and and secretary in the Madam
Alie.
one of.
I want to go back a little bit
there is one that members of the
audience merry mentioned the
situation and and Sandoval
County were Sandridge which
proposing an exploratory well
in the northern part of Santa
northern part of Rio Rancho I'm
very familiar with that project
and Sandridge Sandridge was not
a bad actor they say Oklahoma
has a strict to
only gas lost and from time to
time we're at companies like
Sandridge direction on Google
for that matter they're out of
compliance and and and then they
right they quickly get back into
compliance I mean when you have
ten thousand when you have an
interest in a thousand wells in
a lot of these wells are
marginal you're going to have
some some compliance issues and
and that's why you have a.
Lease operators that visit these
wells on a daily basis so that
really one very good example of
the prospect I'm very familiar
with it to make use of the oil
play.
Highly Exploratorium cat and yes
Centers did go bankrupt but the
reason that that that the
project was canceled was because
of economics and so
I just want to kind of set the
record straight that
lot of this a lot of the all
companies to
Are in compliance and out of
compliance is just the nature of
the base because of the high
flying well so we manage so I
just want to kind of clarify
that are project to was canceled
due to poor economic twenty
better on gas prices bank
officially that that well will
be drilled
yes hopefully in the future
but getting back to.
I like to visit with
Salih
Where you see this coming and
apply and why you said the do we
have all can you list a lot of
good count on a lot of bad
actors now that you're worried
about you don't have to list
their names for confidentiality
but I'm a what's what's driving
this
Chair Representative Strickler
members of the committee we
don't have any bad actors in
mind right now we do have
ongoing compliance issues and if
we were able to ask the type of
information that is in the H. B.
seventy six to determine if they
have had a history of
significant noncompliance we
might be able to identify them
we don't regularly asked for
that information or ever asked
for that information so we have
nobody in mind at this time we
do know that this provision has
been helpful in other acts
environmental acts for New
Mexico and we think it's
appropriate that the air quality
act similar provisions for that
reason.
Okay thank you.
For the uninsured
In that how this would affect
how with this bill effective
a existing permit eighties with
this give give you an additional
tools to
Hello situation it is that this
twenty five percent non
compliance rule.
It is.
See if you can answer that are I
can restatement wishin.
Chair members of the committee
that twenty five percent that
you're referring to in the bill
is in reference to somebody who
constructs disability without a
permit and greatly exceeds what
would be the permit threshold
limit it's not popping up over
the limit just a little bit it's
greatly exceeding that so if
they're already operating
Most likely they have a permit
to to operate.
Okay.
Well I think you know I really
like it the comments made of our
surrounding states that have
similar statutes when I think
that's very good points and I
want to go to Texas Texas is our
biggest competitor in many Weiss
you know I'm from Texas I'm from
the Austin area
they're burning you know they
bring in businesses right left
and we're trying to track
businesses so we're in a
competitive situation with
Texas.
Oklahoma you Colorado Utah and
Arizona.
I believe from what industry is
saying businesses industry
opposes this bill because it's
too broad.
And my question to you is is is
is this bill similar to Texas I
think I mean it's real important
we want to kind of a.
a similar.
Can you help me on that I don't
have the Texas bill in front of
me I know it's just a broad
statement that Texas has a
similar statute I don't believe
it's described and Texas is a
business from the state and we
need to be as well.
About the Texas statute chair
members of the committee the
language that I see in the Texas
statute allows the committee
Texas commission to that to deny
it or amounts not shell but they
may deny or amend a permit for
unsatisfactory compliance
history.
Which is fairly broad right they
don't directly talk about tried
internal Fallon that sort of
thing it's for unsatisfactory
compliance history.
A little bit but.
According to my question because
of the broad nature of this bill
is is there any wine you can
Tyler it.
To the Texas model that appears
you know they they have broad
discretion and and this year
bill has broad discretion.
Are there any safeguards that
you can
Okay from a Texas look statute
that would make this bill
better.
Mr chair tonight enter interject
a comment on that question to me
unsatisfactory Mr chair
unsatisfactory compliance
history is broader than a list
of delineated items upon which
the agency has to make its
determination and issue a
presumably implementing
regulations so
I think our provision Mr chair
and representative is more
specific and puts the company's
more on notice as to what they
could be held accountable for
thank you Mr chairman I
deferred.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Chandler.
Well again I guess I'm I'm I'm a
little at a disadvantage because
I don't have the the detailed
particulars of the Texas statute
yes the Texas state you may be
more broader in some respects
but they're they they tighten up
the the ten year time frame
prior offense time trying there
may be a lot of good good points
in that bill that we should
consider and I'm just not
prepared to talk about and
currently you are either
that's all that's all I have
right now I I just want to make
sure that we can compete I don't
want this to have some of the
unintended consequences.
And make it a little little to
to top on our our local
businesses
that are currently operating and
then animated to our new
basically coming into our state
I thank you Representative
Townsend made a real good point
in southeastern Mexico a lot of
our natural law the natural gas
producing law the natural gas
processing plants located right
across the state line.
So taxes must be doing something
right for them to move that
direction and so we do have to
compete and
I'm glad that there's no.
Pending bad actors that's that
seems like it I mean that's a
good thing
looks like the company said
under your purview of the
environment department's purview
or done a decent job and and
trying to comply
you know.
At all times and that's hard to
do sometimes but thank you Mr
chairman and thank you
Representative Chandler and
thank you Missy.
Thank you Representative
Strickler and accept we have
Representative Scott.
Thank you Mr chair
representative director revival.
This.
Legislation also has.
A about how broad the provision
your.
One question is how can.
Previous question.
Yeah maybe pull your mouth she's
just away from your mouth you
might not blow of it so much for
getting a lot of stress is
better under thank you all right
you to this technology is a bit
I think I'm still used to it.
What part.
Full compliance.
Could be revoked based on the
requirements for information
should Domingo that are included
in this bill.
chair members of the committee
I'm gonna referred this question
to our air quality bureau chief
Elizabeth Liz speaking.
Good morning chairman members of
the committee.
Representative Scott thank you
for the question.
In that circumstance that
example that you just provided.
Facility could potentially be
denied the permit under house
bill seventy six however it's
unlikely that the department
would deny but that type of
permit if they were operating in
New Mexico and currently in full
compliance with their their
permit to operate.
Mr chairman.
Presenters that gives me pause.
Someone completely operating in
accordance with the law could be
subject to.
Revocation because of some
issues.
Completely.
Related to operations in our
state.
This.
This is just not give anyone
else heartburn.
Mr chair if if I may answer that
question since I think it's a
kind of a broad policy question
Representative Scott committee
members Mr chair.
It does not give me heartburn if
we know one authority has
engaged in misconduct
misrepresentation fraud criminal
activities in another state why
would we want to give them a
pass simply because at the
particular moment that we're
looking at them they may be in
compliance somehow that does
not.
Make me feel any better that at
a particular time one or
evaluating them they're in
compliance but we know they have
a track record of bad acting in
another state.
Mr chair representative.
So.
Once you're in jail.
You can you can ever risk for
you can have for.
Home you can work.
Change your stripes if you will.
If you are operating in this
state in full compliance with
all the loss.
It doesn't look like it should
be appropriate that are your
your permit.
Could or should be revoked she
just.
Hurry to the concept of justice
service to our.
Let me move on I have a couple
of other I have a couple of
other questions here.
The the purpose for the
definition.
Willingly
Thanks determination is are not
already professionals in
existing statute whereby a
misrepresentation of
application would be grounds for
denial of that application.
Mr chair representatives of the
committee and representative
Scott thank you for that
question.
The.
Basis or the the authorization
for the department to deny an
air quality permit are very
limited.
And the under the current air
quality control act the
department is required to to
issue an air permit if they part
if they meant.
The the fifth fill the
requirements of set of
submitting a complete
application that has met the
requirements
Of the of the permitting
regulation.
Which.
Mr chair.
President.
Reasonable.
Yes yes this Representative more
information on.
On that application the permit
would be to not.
If the information is correct
and complete it would be it
would be approved as.
That's the current chest are
present.
Mr chairman members of the
committee representative Scott
yes the department does
currently issue is required to
issue permits.
Find the requirements of the
regulation so the question is
can.
The refusal to disclose the
information required by the
department would also be grounds
for denial of that permit under.
Existing statutes is that
correct.
Mr chairman members of the
committee Representative Scott.
The
Department it is it is still
required to issue of a permit if
it has met the the requirements
of the regulation.
If if information was failed to
be submitted that the
application would be ruled
administratively incomplete.
So the department would not have
the authority to deny their
coming on that basis but would
would keep that application
administratively incomplete
until there are required
information was submitted to the
department.
District is if no approval has
been issued it's is the the
assumption is more there is no
part.
Madam chair Mr chair.
It is that correct.
Mr chair representative so.
There there would not be a
permit issued that is correct
and therefore the the permit you
could not construct and operate
that source.
Okay.
Sharks or in the.
The bill I see one Richard which
is constructed and operated a
facility for which appropriate
assault without a permit.
Required by the air quality
control lacked.
Language is is very confusing to
me what will one of the
presenters or expert witnesses
tried to clarify.
Representative Scott chairman
representatives
We.
In in re reading the language we
may we may need to provide to
not if it is not clear to the to
the representatives.
Chair members of the committee
if I may constructed or operated
with a facility for which a
permanent.
That is required and did not
obtain a permanent is
you know constructs are operated
is I think fairly clear if
they're operating this facility
that they've already constructed
and they don't have a permit
that's bad if they constructed
and they all don't have a permit
that's also not okay it's a
clear violation of the air
quality.
Trial lacked.
Mr chair C. lot but isn't that
already doesn't already run
afoul of existing statutes.
What does but it's a compliance
issue right now it doesn't allow
us to revoke or deny Department
so we can take enforcement
action and we have but we would
not allow us to deny or revoke a
permit in this case I'm I must
note that compliance is
different than revocation or
denial for permanent we've got
plenty of operators that have
not been able to comply with
their permits and they're still
operating this would not this
would not affect them because
most of those have operated with
a permanent.
Okay so.
Mr chair.
A lot of the work what you're
telling me is these operators
have permits but.
Our.
Rating in accordance with the
provisions is that is that what
I.
In those situations they would
not be affected by HB seventy
six that's a compliance matter
it's not a matter of whether
permit should be denied or
revoked.
Okay.
One one.
Question.
Mr chair Missy lie is.
Is the compliance with.
The air quality act.
Exact sciences
that is we're not what
application for permit is
developed.
Yes is the science with respect
to those issues hello.
Very strongly grounded or or is
there a substantial modeling
assumptions component that goes
you got that goes into these
calculations.
Members of the committee I like
this the bureau chief who's
closer to this issue to answer
that question.
Chair representatives.
The the emission factors that
underlie the the emission
estimates and permit
applications are very well
grounded in science and are
based on actual facility
testing.
And so there there is not a
great deal of.
Of.
yes work built into those
emission factors on those
occasions.
There were there well
grounded in science there will
understood
you can you can break those
emission factors part and
understand the underlying the
questions that were built into
those emission factors that go
into the emission estimates.
Work permit applications.
Mr chair which can so.
So of.
for example a of a.
Well let me use of rock crushing
operation is example.
If the material that is being
processed.
Has to the characteristics of
that material changes over the
top with the operation is in
effect that would change the
issue which.
Perhaps substantially depending
on the depending on the
composition of the material that
was being processed with that
would not be an accurate
statement.
Mr chair representative so.
That would be an accurate
statement for within the
construction industry there are
mission factors developed for
each type of aggregate that's
processed by.
material crushing operations in
addition those safety for those
emission factors have have
conservative safety factors
built in and so there's some
level of of safety factor
already included in the emission
factor to account for
variability and there are
different emission factors
developed for specific types of
material and so.
Sand and gravel is different
from limestone which is
different from
recycled asphalt project each
one of those types of materials
has a different mission factor
developed that is representative
of the material.
So.
Mr chair I submitted an
application.
For air quality permit to
process what type of material
and it turned out.
That what we were actually
dealing with something different
to one run around on HB seventy
six circumstance.
Mr chairman members of the
committee no not example
provided that would not be
grounds for permit revocation.
Okay thank you Mr chairman thank
you Mr percenters that was all
the questions.
Thank you Scott
Representative Chandler any
final thoughts.
It yes just very briefly thank
you all for your attention and
your very good questions I think
there is general consensus here
that allowing bad actors to
operate in the state without
consequences is unacceptable I
think we all know that this bill
provides for due process and the
ability of operators to
challenge the basis for a denial
so on on those grounds I think
it's a very very fair and
reasonable provision that we're
adding to the statute and I
would request the committees to
pass thank you.
Thank you president Taylor
what's the will of the
committee.
I move it to pass.
We've if you passed from last
year stand for to have a second
all second thank you for.
Representative Ferrary.
Shelly could you take the.
Representative Chandler yes.
Representative Dixon yes.
Representative Ferrary yes.
Representative Montoya.
No.
Representative Ortez yes.
Representative Sariñana.
Yes.
Representative Scott.
Representative Strickler.
Representative Townsend.
No.
Thanks chair Stansbury.
Yes.
Chair the queen yes.
Thank you passed with a vote of
seven to four.
Thank you Shelby
We have a fortunately just one
more bill on the agenda I was
wrong about the prior building
simple
well this one is our next goes
out so when we saw the waste
management the schedule still
with Representative Chandler.
Thank you very much Mr chair I
do have to experts that I hope
will be introduced admitted into
the panelists section they are
Stephanie stringer resource
protection division director and
John Snyder solid waste bureau
chief both with NMED.
Okay thank you.
For your attention I am
introducing H. B. want to wait
H. B. one await creates the non
reverting solid waste permit
fund for revenues from solid
waste permitting activities.
It removes the current permit
fee cap of ten thousand dollars
that is paid only once for the
twenty year life of a permit the
bill allows for annual
adjustment to.
Two fees to allow for inflation
based on the consumer price
index but does not directly
increase fees this bill
clarifies the activities that
the permit fees cover to include
program administration cost
application processing cost and
the regulatory oversight
activities throughout the life
of the.
Passage of this bill will enable
the New Mexico environment
department to petition the
environmental improvement board
to adopt a new fee structure
that properly funds and secures
essential we services for the
benefit of New Mexicans on.
With that Mr chair it's at your
pleasure I believe Stephanie
stringer may have some comments
to share as well.
The stringer do you like to add
anything to the presentation.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee I would just like
to add that the permitting
services that we provide through
this program are extremely
important to local communities
it keeps people living close to
solid waste facilities such as
landfills from being exposed to
noxious fumes and flying debris
it protects our groundwater it
prevents human exposure to
infectious waste such as COVID
way so this is an extremely
important program that we must
choose to fund thank you.
Thank you for that so we will go
to the public
if any members of the public and
attendees are dwindling as a as
we work our way to the agenda.
If you would like to speak
please raise your hand if you're
on the phone my understanding is
if you press star line that has
the effect of raising your hand
so first up is Marla Schultz.
Mr chairman yes.
Thank you very much my name is
Molly shows on the register this
for south central solid waste
authority.
Is the city of Los crucis and
dynamic county agency
responsible for managing waste
disposal and recycling
throughout the county parts of
Otero and Sierra County.
South central solid waste
authority feels it is our
obligation to express our
concerns with Senate bill one L.
eight on behalf of our customers
who would ultimately see
increased rates for this
essential service however we
appreciate the constraints the
solid waste bureau and NMED are
experiencing due to a lack of
trying.
Well we remain concerned that
any fee increases that may be
passed on to our consumers our
customers
we appreciate the secretaries
efforts to keep the solid waste
bureau robust in the permitting
process and compliance of
municipal solid waste as well as
working with south central solid
waste authority and one of our
leading initiatives which is
promoting recycling efforts
within our communities.
So we really feel like we would
like to be participating more in
conjunction with NMED and the
solid waste bureau at this
legislation is enacted as
stakeholders this is a very
important essential service to
our consumers and to the
citizens of New Mexico thank
you.
Thank you.
Did not see any other public
comment.
so and trying to make it a
practice to do after public
comment to back to the sponsor
of Representative Chandler
anything that before we get to
the committee I'm not at this
time Mr chair unless then some
stringer has anything she'd like
at at your indulgence.
Mr chair I think that before we
go to the committee.
Thank you Mr chair
representative so nothing to add
at this point but I stand for
questions.
Thank you.
Members of the committee.
Representative Strickler.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you Representative
Chandler
We've got your set up a
mechanism to just a face
and you have to go through you
go go through the notice process
and all that you know what are
you looking at and maybe maybe
that the director can help us
yeah this flat rate.
Is going to be adjusted someone.
You know what what do you think
is gonna shake out or what do
gonna recommend.
To raise the space to cover most
your caution I realize that
The shooter face are important.
The general fund dollars always
comes into play you never cover
all your costs so can you give
me some ideas.
How much these rates will go up.
We had a good good right
adjustment in the prior bill new
issue now is it was dollars and
sense what do you think in in
this case.
Mr chair members of the kit
committee representative you
know certainly again it has to
go through the public process
through the environmental
improvement forward but we would
seek to just cover our program
costs and when we do an analysis
that equates to a significant
increase since it hasn't been
increased in such a long period
of time so we would like to go
from a ten thousand dollar
twenty year permit fee to an
annual fee of five thousand
dollars which equates to just
Nichols per person per year in
order to cover just the program
cost for this particular program
and the services that we provide
to our review groundwater
monitoring reports leachate
Reports look at financial
assurance all of the activities
that go into the permitting
process we just want to be able
to cover those costs thank you.
If my math is correct that's a
hundred thousand dollar so you
want to increase the ten
thousand dollars currently two
hundred thousand dollars over
twenty year period.
Mr chair representative yes that
is what we think it would be
sufficient to cover the costs
however when you compare it to
other states this is this is
just minimal other states they
charge two hundred thousand
dollars for permit application
fee for similar facilities such
as the Cerro Colorado landfill
excuse me so when you compare us
to other states we are operating
on pennies and it's a struggle
so it would be really nice to be
able to thoroughly analyze all
of the permitting reviews that
we conduct but but it is
significant for New Mexico we do
acknowledge that thank you.
Thank you stringer
well that that's that's good
information you know it's good
to get have some dollar figures
that you're you're looking at
and
and I appreciate the other
states to have a different you
know on the system and
Sure they use general fund
dollars to you know temp to kind
of manage these things as well
we all face that are set up
generally don't cover under
present your costs main.
And that's usually the case but
hundred that you know it so
that's a big increase ten time
increase and
I guess me low cost.
Do you have any idea
how quickly this would come
before the idea at bay and how
long the processes that take to
go through the.
Go through that regulatory.
The
regime.
Mr chair representative
certainly once this legislation
is passed we would want to move
forward as quickly as possible
but we would also want to do our
due diligence and work with
stakeholders to understand all
of the concerns and when we
choose to petition the
environmental improvement board
it would be thoroughly vetted
with an understanding of what
our regulated communities thinks
about the proposal and how it
would impact them
you know if considering things
like because it's such an
increase to cover our program
costs something like a phased
approach to get to that point
could be an idea that we are
propose so at you know I think
we would wait to see how long
that outreach takes to get us to
a point where we feel confident
that we've done our due
diligence to present a good
solid proposal to the
environmental improvement board
and if I may add that you know
right now the permit fees
they're not you they it's not
sufficient to cover any staff in
the program so the the existing
or the current permit fees
really equate to probably less
than ten percent of our program
costs so we're relying on other
funding to really pretty much
fun the entire program thank
you.
Mr just and I'm sorry Mr
Strickler Representative
Strickler fee I'm not sure if
this came out has not the cap on
has not been changed since
nineteen ninety so just for
context that's thirty five forty
years.
So I think we just need to keep
in mind that the fee structure
that we're presenting here is
antiquated and does need to be
adjusted
to meet current needs of the
state thank you.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you Representative
Chandler yeah I think the last
bill was fifteen years old and
you know these things the space
state they need to be adjusted I
have an opportunity to talk to
waste management they there are
service provider in San Juan
County.
we use our services quite often
maybe is very very important our
community and I know.
You know it's important they're
in compliance and and all the
areas that stringer pointed out
I mean.
That's a that's a good thing so
anyway I.
Hello thank concludes my
questions a little bit concerned
about the
the big jump up ten times in a.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and Representative Chandler and
in a Mr stringer.
Thank you Representative
Strickler nextstep we have
Representative Scott.
Representative Scott you're
gonna need leave your microphone
for a fix.
Okay we're gonna get there
sooner or later how we doing.
Okay.
Representative stronger
mentally what this bill is due.
Is shifting the burden of paying
for.
Regulatory compliance from
Environment Department.
The.
To the people to regulate.
To the provider of the services.
And ultimately to the customers
of these.
Various facilities would that be
an accurate statement.
Mr chair.
And representative I guess I
would disagree with that
characterization my
characterization would be that
those who present an
environmental hazard to the
state a potential buyer
environmental hazard in the
state who want to do business in
the state are helping support
the regulatory agency charged
with discharging that
responsibility.
But the state general fund
Representative Mistry's.
Is the source of the revenues
that support those regulatory
compliance activities is that
not.
Accurate statement.
Excuse me that's an accurate
statement and I challenge the
premise behind it I believe that
those who are being regulated
should helps support the
regulatory body and I can tell
you Mr chair and representative
that happens at Los Alamos the
department of energy pays for an
office that ensures that
of facility that has potential
risk is regulated by the state
and I I I don't think this is
much different in terms of the
situation.
Mr chair representative.
I would have.
A few problems with that
statement because.
The federal government Los
Alamos.
Is I think significantly removed
from a single mom with two kids.
Applying the.
Waste control.
Management services.
In Los crucis so is there any.
On what.
The all fees.
That could be charged to the
scariest facilities over the
life of that is.
Completely at the discretion.
Of what the environment
department wants to spend
monitoring compliance.
Mr chair I'll defer to miss
during our on that point.
Mr chair representative the
environment department has to
petition the environmental
improvement board so the limit
would lie in that board to set
the fees again it would go
through a public hearing process
with stakeholder input and
proper notification and that
sort of stand so it's it's a
process that the environment
department doesn't control we
just set forth the proposal and
let the process take its course
with the decision finally being
made by the environmental
improvement board.
Thank you Mr chairman structures
of as a matter of principle I
think.
That we sh door down it surely
slippery slope here.
With a regulated.
Charged.
The.
Expenses incurred by the
regulate tors.
If the environment department
makes more money to perform
these activities it was very
appropriate for those funds to
compete with the other.
Funding needs of the state.
In the.
The general fund or general
appropriations process so.
I have to listen to the.
To the left to the rest of the.
Questions on this but but I am.
Okay.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
strong Representative free
ranchers such alliance.
Thank you Representative Scott
it looks like we have a leader
Townsend next on the board
these.
Thank you chair form and the.
Representative a couple of.
Questions director since how
many entities how many operating
entities.
In New Mexico.
Would have been increased fees
under this proposed regulations.
I'll defer to mainstream madam
chair.
Madam chair representative we
have forty five act permitted
facilities seventy two closed
facilities that continue to be
monitored and are provided the
permitting services and
approximately three hundred and
forty five registered
facilities.
Thank you for that
Madam chair and and director
have you done a pro bono a pro
forma analysis of the impact.
To your departments income
stream of this.
Proposed increase is.
Ultimately passed.
Mr chair I deferred
administering.
Madam chair representative can
you clarify your question.
You know what specific analysis
you're referring to.
yeah I can I apologize for that
chair secretary.
Specifically.
What would be the increased
income.
That would flow into your
department because of this
regulation on an annual basis.
Thank you madam chair
representative for that
clarification are so we have
done those types of analyses and
again we would put forth a
proposal to increase the fees in
order to cover the program costs
but we can't predict what that
amount will finally be until a
decision is rendered by the
environmental improvement board
but we're seeking to increase
revenues by approximately four
hundred fifty thousand or five
hundred thousand dollars per
year.
And.
Madam chair and director what is
the budget of your department
currently.
Madam chair representative right
now the overall budget for the
solid waste crews programs that
is broader than the permitting
services is around two million
dollars the required budget for
the permitting services that we
provide is approximately five
hundred thousand dollars per
year.
So you're madam chair and and
director you're looking for in
this particular.
Portion of your.
I'm here at the beach you're
looking for about a twenty five
percent increase is that
correct.
Madam chair representative to
the overall budgets you know
again it's a ten fold increase
to the existing fees and
But yes ring essentially looking
to increase that budget.
Actually by more than twenty
five percent are current
revenues for this program
average approximately forty four
thousand dollars per year so
we're seeking to increase that
by about four hundred and fifty
thousand dollars per year to
cover those costs.
What.
So
Madam chair and director have to
do need presented for.
The LFC or House Appropriations
have you reduce your overall
budget a request from the state
and then according fashion.
Madam chair representative we
have not because we've been cut
so deeply at the environment
department we would like to use
that general fund that we
normally request to provide
other essential services within
the solid waste bureau program
like certifying the operators
that run all of these
facilities like infectious waste
generators and landfills and we
want to expand our outreach
programs to educate people of
the importance of managing waste
and we want to continue to be
able to administer grants to
local communities for solid
waste initiatives recycling
initiatives illegal dumping and
we would like to be able to
respond more quickly to the
illegal dumping complaints that
we receive across the state so
we would like to shift those
funds to those important
programs that don't currently
have a revenue source to fund
them but they're vital to
keeping New Mexico clean and
attracting tourists and keeping
our land and air and water
protected.
Madam chair and director do you
of.
So what this is doing is not
only covering the cost.
That you talked about of your.
Permitting.
you're actually growing the size
of your.
Department considerably in the
process is that correct.
Madam chair representative we're
actually just rebuilding the
program from the cuts that we've
seen over numerous years so that
we can provide these important
services to New Mexicans.
Madam chair and director.
Should those services.
Those other services that you
describe should not come out of
the general fund and not out of
these operators these individual
operators because the impact of
what you are you're asking
and what that money's going to
be spent on is more than what it
costs to maintain their.
Representative permitting
compliance of on the backs of
those employers you're taxing
them basically for efforts
outside of their operation or
did I misunderstand that.
Madam chair representative I.
I want to clarify the the fees
that we are seeking to raise
through this program would only
go towards the reviews and the
permitting activities that we
conduct in that program that
would then save the general fund
that the bureau currently gets
to provide those other services
so we are definitely not us the
facilities that would be
impacted by this feat to fund
other programs and services that
we provide through the solid
waste bureau like responding to
illegal dumping and community
grants and those sorts of things
I just described.
Well madam chair and
representative I
Having the permit fees that are.
State adequate for Amanda.
Should maintain and operate is
one thing I don't at I don't
have a problem with that.
proposal like I.
We have.
We have certainly been through
many
for several years.
in recent history of of well.
Cuts.
Down to the point that remain
three swept.
Cash balances from school
systems in order to provide.
And coming back in increasing.
This the by a factor of.
Plus.
seems to be.
The.
Too much to me yes that it just
I think.
Are you do an increase no doubt.
Are you do an increase of ten
folks I don't think so.
And I don't think it's fair to
those operators to increase
their cost of operation that
much that quick.
I think when you are going to
generate such significant income
it would be could you as.
did you tell
when you vote for a.
LESC did you tell them that you
had a provision or did you ask
for and operate did you ask for
an increase.
Bear with.
Up on top of your your
historical operations means.
I'm trying to.
Ascertain where they aware when
they approve your budget that
will be and in the and one of
our bill thanks to.
Did you were they aware that
we're gonna have this huge
influx of cash to your operating
accounts.
Madam chair representative I do
not believe they are where you
know I can't speak for them to
to know but
Certainly our budget request it
remained flat for this program
with the hopes that we would be
able to pass this bill and
expand the services as described
previously so I I think it's
unlikely that the LFC got into
that level of detail with our
budget request so you know we
didn't create that request
increases in general fund for
the environment department
across the board within my
division we're really focusing
those efforts on hazardous waste
expansions but we developed a
flat budget for the solid waste
bureau program with the
knowledge that we would pursue
this bill this legislative
session.
Well and and that
I guess madam chair and director
is this but so because some
media some concern is it was
flat as far as historical but
with this bill there's a
significant.
Our increase so
I
I appreciate
The conversation this morning
Representative that looks like
it is.
to me.
It looks like that the burden
for many thanks as being more
burdens are being put.
On the back of employers in New
Mexico.
That have already been
struggling.
a lot this year.
And I would the.
I would ask that you
Look at this and be prepared for
some pretty stiff debate going
forward because I don't believe
It will provide bipartisan
support thank you ma'am.
Mr chair if I may one
supplemental comment it's my
understanding and speaking of
the secretary that LFC has been
encouraging the department to
look for revenue streams such as
these so I just wanted to
clarify that point Mr chair and
leader Townsend and.
If you're.
except waivers I must tell you.
Thank you Mr chair
if I may we are a little
contrived just keep that in
mind.
Yes Sir
so Mr chairman and
Madam secretary question I have
here is.
Eight.
I know that that we know this
but by governments been working
but a large portion of the
public sector or the private
sector a large portion of
private sector is not working.
our budget this last year has it
was a bit surprised all of us
when the LFC report came in as
to what the
What are revenues were to say.
And I and and in reality we know
because of the federal dollars
that have been the hands of
folks who were unemployed that
the that purchase power out of
dollars continue to be.
Later than usual actually and.
What we're.
Hopefully gonna try to start
focusing on recovery on the
private sector.
we've been told that that of the
hundred thousand plus jobs that.
Disappeared for a long while and
still a lot of them are still
not you know people are not
working.
but that twenty thousand plus
this I believe those are the
numbers that we heard from LFC
that the first year maybe two
that those jobs will not be
we'll come back readily.
And and I see.
Now you know the we're looking
at fees and other things and I
and and during revenue
stabilization tax policy this
summer as well there was a large
discussion as to where we could
enhance revenue that just means
taxes and fees revenue.
To the state is taxes and fees.
And I am just having a hard time
with us looking right now at
doing that when hopefully I mean
these businesses a lot of these
businesses
are going to have a much higher.
Unemployment insurance rates
that are gonna that are going to
hit them later on this year as
well
it's as I'm hearing from
employers.
it is going to be very hard for
them yeah they're gonna have to
put a real good sharp point on
their pencil to determine
whether or not they can stay in
business and it just seems to me
that this is the wrong time to
increase the fees especially ten
times ten ten fold
I mean that's just a general
statement I'm concerned about
what we're doing here but
I'm not exactly sure why we're
not looking to us to stagger
this a little bit more instead
of a you know a ten fold
increased.
The question is.
Yes that is a question I'm not
sure that why would we not look
to staff to staff this instead
of a such a large one time
increased.
Could you address the question I
know you have considered many
options yes thank you madam
chair representatives.
Absolutely we're looking at
every option we want to you know
if this bill passes that's the
first step in us being able to
proceed with working with our
stakeholders for what will be
the best option to petition the
environmental improvement board
with and we do recognize that a
phased approach towards getting
us to full program costs being
covered is something that we
should consider we don't want to
place too heavy of a burden but
at the same time we also don't
want to slow down facilities
from.
Coming and doing business in New
Mexico we want to make sure the
permits can be issued in a
timely manner we want to attract
businesses to New Mexico and
with you know an expansion in
our economy that produces more
waste and we must make sure that
that waste is managed
appropriately and so I think you
know all options are on the
table for what the best proposal
will be in collaboration with
our stakeholders understanding
the impacts to our economy and
our environment at the same
time.
Thank you Mr chair
representative a Chandler
I I'm I'm having a hard time
with this I really am and also
looking at it is not going to
the tax committee as the as was
stated earlier the previous bill
and that is that is a place for
taxes and fees should be
discussed they should be
discussed in total there in part
because we've been told that
they're gonna be tax increases
that we need to consider as well
and quite frankly if that
committee doesn't get the full
breadth of fees and taxes and
increase costs to business in
the state
at only getting a partial
picture I I think that's a
disservice to the people that
we're going to be increasing
these fees and taxes on so
I I agree with the leader
Townsend and there is a I I
believe you guys are doing
increased.
but this seems a very high.
And and it should be going to
that other committee so that all
of our taxes and fees can be
judged together and state of the
avoiding that committee so thank
you.
Representative Jennifer for
bringing this bill forward.
Thank you Representative Montoya
I have a couple questions before
to give the.
first a lot you know I I it's
been an interesting discussion I
personally think this is a
appropriate nexus that we're.
Asking for fees from the
regulated activity I mean this
is one of the I think one of the
principles of taxes and fees
what I learned from work
Representative Harper you know
it's kind of like gas taxes
going for broke I mean there's
the nexus there and make sense
and I I appreciate that you took
the budget flat obviously you
wouldn't want to reduce your
budget.
If you don't know if this bill
passed and you know it does pass
it's okay take effect for a
while so I think that's
completely reasonable.
Question on the feed itself.
Reading the bill it was unclear
to me whether in the language of
the bill it was in the annual
fee or one time T. my
understanding is that the
current ten thousand fee is a
one time fee for twenty year
period but I didn't really see
that in the language of the bill
and I didn't really see a change
in the language of the bill to
address in becoming annual.
Could you explain that.
Mr chair representatives the
current fee structure is
established in the environmental
improvement board regulations
and that's where those things
are set and not in the statue
statute and if I make clarify
that if this bill doesn't pass
we're not able to get any
increase so we're at our maximum
levels right now so I appreciate
the understanding that some
level of increases do but it has
to we have to remove that cap in
order to make that happen so
whatever you know petition goes
to the environmental improvement
board we can increase our fees
one single penny without passage
of this bill to set the stage
for that so I just I felt that
was an important point to make
but again the C. structures are
established in the environmental
improvement board rules.
Okay so thanks for that and so
the the annual nature that the
would also be addressed in that
role.
Mr chair yes the fee structure
for revisions would be
incorporated into that rule to
you know create stable income
and change it from a one time
fee for the entire life of the
permit to be provided to the
environment department on an
annual basis so that we know
what our income is going to be
on any given year.
And then the we allow for annual
CPR is just meant if you ever
want to adjust the basic
structure you would have to go
back to the rulemaking process
to get the ability to do that is
that accurate.
Mr chair to.
Representative is this bill
would make that automatic I and
so passage of this bill would
enable the environment
department to update the fees
are based on the inflation costs
each year.
However that's again not
possible at this point unless we
pass this bill because we're at
the maximum levels established
right now because of the cat so
my question is there's a basic
structure that is Senator then
at the agency level there's an
automatic CPI test yes agency
one of the Arribo provides the
basic structure it would have to
go back to the rule making
process where is the CPI
adjustment is automatic on
annual basis is that correct.
Mr chair yes that is correct.
Thank you for that one technical
issue I would note on the.
On the first page of the bill
alliance sure the one twenty two
these are no longer the initial
regulations and that the line is
no longer in nineteen ninety one
usually Legislative Council
Service is pretty good about
cleaning stuff like that up I
know some page for the call that
type both the fix that going
forward I would consider making
that change.
and that's the end of my
questions and comments what's
the will of the committee.
And move it to pass Mr chairman
would you pass motion for vice
chair stands for is their second
I'll second second for
Representative Ferrary I shall
be to take a vote.
Representative Chandler yes.
Representative Dixon.
Yes.
Representative Ferrary yes.
Representative Montoya.
No.
Representative Ortez.
Yes.
Representative serenata.
Yes.
Representative Scott.
Representative Strickler no.
Representative Townsend.
I share Stansbury yes and I'd
like to briefly explain my
doctor.
Remember queen.
Yes.
That's a do passed with a vote
of seven to four.
Thank you for the past place
your sensory would you would
like to explain your vote yes
thank you Mr chairman I know we
have to get to the floor but I
just want to say I really
appreciate the department
bringing not only this bill but
the other bills that they
brought today and I just want to
say that the cost of cleaning up
the groundwater contamination
from a solid waste facility or
other operations are so much
higher than any fee that we
would level on any authority so
ensuring that we have proper
permitting and do not
irrevocably pollute the water of
our communities is critical so I
appreciate that apartment
bringing this forward and I
appreciate that the department's
continuing to ask for the
resources in the budget that it
means so that I can protect our
communities and environment so
thank you.
Thank you everyone that that's
it for today we're Jr intensive
floor.
