Present.
Representative
Representative.
Lujan.
I see here on what she done
units of.
Representative.
Very
a call on Representative
Fajardo.
Representative Fajardo here
sorry internet problems.
Mr Chairman.
try a Representative Lujan one
more time Representative Lujan.
President.
Mr chairman and chairman percent
that.
Our members are we have a quorum
and
Before I go to our first
presenter Representative
quest'anno did you have a
question.
Thank you Mr chairman house and
muted.
Sorry but that's not.
Okay.
okay members only one of the
other questions you know for day
in the neighborhood.
Very.
Can can we will open up the role
and
and and called on Representative
black.
Okay Representative black.
Representative black.
I'm here can you hear me.
Act okay thank you
Representative black.
We wanted to get her on the roll
Thank you members
one of the other let us and.
And the we have Representative
Lara.
And I if Representative
Representative merry if you
could kind of upbringing
Representative Lara in.
And also if you could bring in
as experts on the house bill two
to four.
The community action board
changes and once we once we
bring Representative Lara on
board you'll tell us who those
experts are.
So over ringa Representative
areas.
Representative Lara.
And you yourself and kind of
share with us we are experts are
on house bill two to four.
Good morning Mr chair of thank
you and to my experts for
hospital to twenty four aren't
on Hummer.
And Caroline Vander decent.
That was Caroline.
Yes Caroline yes yes Mr.
Okay merry can you bring those
people in.
Okay land.
And there's Dawn.
Okay
before I recognize our
Representative Lara and his
house bill two to four I would
like to recognize them in terms
of giving us an update on house
bill two to five the public
notice and Spanish legislation
that are.
That
he introduced on Tuesday and of
which we are I have instructed
him to our work with all the
concerned parties and putting
together us some form of of
substantive legislation for this
committee so already
Representative Lara can you give
us an update on on a house bill
two to five.
Yes Sir Mr chairman thank you
thank you for that I do have an
update the
Tuesday afternoon I went over to
call service and and also with
the tractor and it seems that
given the questions and some of
the concerns that were brought
up specifically the ones that
Representative Fajardo had
mentioned.
It's rather complicated the bill
somewhat and the director said
to a recruitment services the
this is from and and and that
they're they're still working on
those because they we want to
make sure Mr chair that
everything is is is in there
that was passed
so you can by doing that once
again it's kind of complicated
the limited little bit more
complicated so those so
Legislative Council Service
still working on that okay thank
you for that update the.
And yeah and now Representative
if you could
What on your house bill two to
four community action board
changes.
Thank you Mr chair hospital to
twenty four you will impact or
change in the board structure of
the six community action
agencies in the state
this update will bring New
Mexico in alignment with the
federal community services block
grant requirements so this is
this is basically aligning us
with the with the federal
requirements
There are six community action
agencies in the state of New
Mexico spread all around the
state you know they they
provided many isn't essential
services to the communities and
all of my experts going to give
you a a details on that but this
bill.
Is really asking for the
reduction of the board members
from fifteen to a more
manageable number that they can
use it will also remove the
it will be removed the the ten
year review of limiting will
also be removed and the point of
this is to allow more local
control for these community
action agencies in order for
them to get the best qualified
for members of the can and over
just a little disclaimer I am a
board member of the community
action agency of Southern New
Mexico I've been on there for
quite awhile now even before my
political here career started so
I know firsthand the the the.
The struggle that these that my
particular agency that goes
through and and the others in
and obtaining or in keeping
fifteen members on that board
maintaining keeping fifteen
quality members on that board I
should say and so I feel that
this is really important because
many of the the the community
action agencies have to put a
lot of time and resources into
recruiting quality members and
by reducing the amount of
members that will give them a
more of a better ability to to
seek out and to recruit better
but I board members and with
that Mr chair I would like for
my expert witnesses to give
their own statements.
Okay Representative Lara and in
what order do you want to call
on your experts on Mr chair
let's go with dawned on her
first done
I feel free to to reflect on the
on the legislation before us and
And and identify yourself as
well.
Good morning and thank you
chairman Garcia and members of
the committee we really
appreciate your time today I'm
done Hummer with the community
action agency of Southern New
Mexico and I'm also the chair of
the New Mexico association of
community partners all of the
sixty eighth in the state are
anti poverty organizations we
had a we've had a incredible
focus on emergency assistance
right now you know especially
during this this very difficult
time over the past year helping
on the people of New Mexico
speaking on behalf of the CAA's
we've discussed these changes
for a very long time however
they've actually become more
important over the last year
partially due to the pandemic we
believe that a point size in
terms should be an organization
decision that works best for
each CA boards size in terms our
address and our by laws they are
approved by our respective
boards reviewed by the state C.
S. B. G. office and reviewed by
an attorney at least once a year
so there's significant oversight
over our by laws in in our
operations in general we will
not be asking any board members
to leave as a result of this
change they will simply just
cycle off naturally one thing I
do want to make crystal clear is
that our request is not a
criticism of our current board
members we have amazing board
members but managing a large
fifteen member board is
extremely difficult and time
consuming trying to coordinate
schedules for meetings as hard
even the letter of support just
for this bill that was a thirty
second request from all of our
board members took significant
follow up time to see everybody
down just to try to get them to
sign on I'm another concern that
we have is that the minute
someone leaves.
Our board especially
unexpectedly we're technically
out of compliance until a new
person can be voted in the HSD
is spent a significant amount of
time and resources on on
boarding and recruiting new
members and lastly those
additional costs for training
and other expenses is it's just
unnecessary I'm so we're asking
that you please support H. B.
two to four and we thank you so
much for all your work during
this legislative session and and
throughout the year but also for
your consideration of this bill
and I look forward to your
questions.
Thank you don Representative
Lara you wish to go to a Carolyn
now.
Yes Mr chair please.
Caroline appropriate address the
committee with the yours
concerns in support of
legislation and and identify
yourself as well thank you chair
Garcia and thank you to the
board for allowing me to have
this time this morning I am
Carolyn Vander decent and I am
the executive director of the
New Mexico association of
community partners the
association service the six C.
AZ that are located throughout
the state that don just spoke
about I'm going to give you just
a little bit of overview of
those organizations but I want
to emphasize that during this
period of COVID we have
increased our services and
increase our emergency services
to serve all the low income
individuals and all the counties
of New Mexico so as don just
said.
She is one of our agencies and
she is located in southern New
Mexico herself Services
southwest and her agency if the
community action agency of
Southern New Mexico as many of
you serve different counties we
also have.
The southeast New Mexico
community action corporation
which is then Carlsbad but again
serve multiple counties in that
area then we come up to two can
carry and we have eastern plains
community action agency that
serves the northern and eastern
counties in the state and then
as you come into the central
area we have Midwest New Mexico
community action programs which
is located in Los Lunas and
serves the Lancia and goes west
and serves counties in that
central to the western part of
the state and then help New
Mexico is located in
Albuquerque but they serve a ten
county area I and they go up
north into Santa Fe more us so
they're more located in the
central to the northern but they
also go to the southern part
with a huge head start program
and that part of the of New
Mexico and they also have a farm
workers program which covers all
thirty three counties in New
Mexico and then we have to echo
which serves San Juan County as
and as we all have heard on the
news they have been
instrumental in getting food and
services to the Navajo Nation so
we are extremely proud of our
work we've been around for over
fifty years we were part of that
president Johnson's war on
poverty so you've probably heard
hopefully about many of these
agencies we served over a
hundred thousand and
individuals low income but
during the COVID sadly so many
people that have had jobs.
have also sought our services
especially when it comes to rent
mortgages of food they've been
impacted not only by comment
that job loss because of small
business closures.
So we I think have been vital in
this COVID environment that we
serve and we serve approximately
a hundred thousand and of course
with the COVID environment that
certainly may increase up to
speak to the bill some of our
agencies about there are
actually four that have huge
head start programs within the
state and so they also have
advisory boards that and the and
they must fill those vacancies
as well and I have been with
this
network for over ten years and
it has been a challenge from the
get go to be in compliance with
the fan fifteen member board and
this Dawn pointed out
this because compliance issues
when a board member leaves and
it could be that it that it's
just a matter of time or
distance that keeps them from
being totally engaged in the
process so this morning I would
like to ask you to support the
changes in the bill there is
federal law I I do want to speak
to that for just a second the
coach that does cover boards but
is silent on the number of
boards because they want this to
be a local decision I've also
had discussions with the state
C. S. B. G. office this is a
block grants that come through
the state and they too are
supportive of this change
because they have seen that this
is a challenge for the agencies
and the time that is that as we
all know our staff is
overwhelmed and the time that is
spent with would be well served
with our clients we appreciate
your time this morning and we
ask for your support and health
bill.
Two twenty four and we thank you
for your service to the state of
New Mexico thank you thank you
Carolyn and thank you for that
snapshot of kind of
the impacted programs throughout
the state and the regions that
they Representative that was
very helpful.
Representative Lara does that do
it on your presentation yes Mr
chair we stand for questions
thank you Representative Lara.
members are will go to the
audience now
we have a little poll that
you're going to see on your
screen and the poor basically
ask for whether you are in
support or in opposition to the
legislation so we could take
like fifteen seconds to respond
to the ball and kind of mark
your appropriate the.
Concern with their support or
not position.
Okay
we show that those in the
audience that are here on this
legislation a hundred percent of
you are in support of
legislation.
We'll go now to the incident.
That we should be
kind of rough recognize those in
opposition even though we didn't
see anybody show up on the phone
opposition but I will kind of
still recognize
maybe those individuals that
kind of connect on the Paul if
you are in a position now is the
time to speak raise your hand.
I don't see any hands we'll go
to those and in the audience and
support those of you could kind
of a it the raise and icon at
the bottom of your screen if you
wish to speak.
Okay we got the.
A couple of you will start off
with the Roger Gonzalez right
merry can you bring Roger over.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Roger
Gonzalez I'm the president of
help New Mexico and on behalf of
the over seventy five thousand
low income families that we
provide services to we find a
lot of assistance across the
state we stand in full support
of this bill.
Thank you Mr grandson is next we
have a Marcus Crawford.
Marcus if you could also address
the committee
Merry can you we bring Marcus
over.
Marcus if you could you yourself
and feel free to.
As the committee within terms of
support for legislation.
Yes Sir good morning chairman
Garcia and to the rest of the
members of the community I'll be
brief you know I've worked at a
community action agency for
about eight years in my role as
administrative assistant is a
required working really closely
with the board setting up
training scored needing events
lodging things of that nature
and I can personally attest to
the administrative burden that
having a fifteen member board
puts on the organization it
really does limit our abilities
to we don't have training in
range that
thanks for board members just
because this year costs
associated with that because
you're basically working with
fifteen people which means
fifteen sets of lodging this is
the fifteen travel
reimbursements things of that
nature and also you're working
around fifteen different
schedules for people
that has been especially hard
during the minutes of the
pandemic is oftentimes you're
dealing with a lot of personal
tragedies and you know there's
nothing harder than trying to
contact board member for
paperwork need to remain in
compliance with the just locked
that lost a loved one and so I
feel that this bill is really
going to allow us more
flexibility and it's going to
allow us to
Retain board members easier and
to your really develop the board
members that we already have to
our in the excellent and just
help the community overall so
thank you for your time please
vote yes on house bill two
twenty four and thank you for
your service to our communities
thank you Marcus and lastly in
terms of
individuals that support I wish
to speak is Eric Martinez merry
at bring every call we're.
Erica
I need yourself and feel free to
address the committee.
Good morning
Mr chairman members of the
committee my my name's Eric
Martinez I'm the a lobbyist for
a help New Mexico and I stand in
support of this legislation just
echoing what the what the
sponsor and the expert said as
well to help New Mexico is New
Mexico's largest Committee
actually action agency and even
then being the largest defeat on
fifteen seats are still very
hard to fill for a for the for
the state's largest community
action agency so I think this
law this piece of legislation
makes makes a whole lot of sense
to help law help things a it
improved a lot more and things
become more efficient with MCA's
so with that I'd licensed for
this legislation thank you thank
you.
That doesn't on the comments
from the audience
will go down to the committee
members and we have a first of
all Representative Lujan.
Question discussions.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
for bringing this to be the
legislation for I think that.
I'm getting bored is is quite
important thing to do.
In fact I just have.
The couple questions maybe here
so while creating this piece of
legislation will you also may be
looking at how you could
Include to build diverse city on
board.
gender.
People of color.
With different ethnic ethnic
is something that maybe you
thought about while doing this
piece of legislation Mr chair.
Mr chair a Representative Lujan
I would like to defer to one of
my experts to answer that for
you.
Thank you for that question
Representative Lujan we that's
actually something that that we
work towards and have been
working towards forty years and
so that is certainly speaking
for my own organization we we've
been.
Yes and and and with some of our
funders that actually asked that
question even before they'd be
willing to provide us and we're
very proud that we do have
diverse point that we do have
women that serve in leadership
roles and people of color and so
that is something that we're
very proud of and as we continue
to improve I know means are we
perfect we definitely continue
to improve in that area so thank
you for that.
Senator thank you thank you.
Thank you thank you Mr chair and
thank you for that answer it's
just it's a it's the issue that
is a problem because we have
statistically did women.
And people of color are not
equally represented on a lot of
the board actually something
that
I do looking at myself so
Ford and and looking at how four
door.
Constructed and I think that
moving into further along the
line and look at the sort of
things is something that I would
encourage you all you I guess
the thing about and your
addressing this issue on the way
that you are and I appreciate
that feedback
and maybe we can work on
something down the road to
address this issue and I I
appreciate the time thank you
Mr chair and thank you doctors
thank you reserve the high and
Mr Gonzalez they do wish to
reflect on on that up question
that Representative on half I
yes Mr chairman for the
committee yeah I guess Mr chair
Representative Lujan as a matter
of fact one of the best
practices and what we do to help
New Mexico is we actually have a
within our by laws the inclusion
diversity and at top New Mexico
are actually very proud to say
that ninety percent of our board
members are female and all of
them were of minority and so I
we believe it's coming after
agencies at that's a local
decision that should be
reflected on bylaws and that
gives us more latitude to
address as senator come up so
most of us have been dealing
with issues of poverty and
injustice first fifty or fifty
years so that's one of the the
foundations and and benchmarks
of all of our by last.
Thank you Mr Gonzalez for record
any of we go now to
Representative a.
Castellano.
Thank you Mr chairman at eight
more a comedy of being a former
board member and help New Mexico
the C. H. provide critical
support for most vulnerable
amongst our communities I know
during the pandemic on I was out
there with help New Mexico
distributing food to people that
were in need of food so I I I am
in support of this bill Mr
chairman and I do support the C.
H. thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you resent us then our
that does that for comments from
the committee questions from the
committee
Representative Montoya.
Mr chairman and Representative
Lara as a rural Representative I
don't want to take too much time
to repeat what Representative
Castellano said and others I
just want to say that.
As we emerged in this pandemic
and even beyond it is absolutely
essential that organizations
like help New Mexico exist.
The array of services that they
provide is astonishing and the
effectiveness I I have lived did
have been a community organizer
for thirty years and with the
emergence of their support in
the array of services
unbelievably important.
To the point of the composition
of the board and the reduction
as a non profit driver for three
decades finding competent board
members.
That have the array of skills
needed and then being able to
bring them into a harmonious
work is a barrier and so I
applaud that change I also love
the the notion of the
composition reflecting the
community itself that local
representation is essential who
knows the community better than
the people that run in drive and
care and love it so I yield my
time back and I look forward to
voting for this important piece
of legislation thank you thank
you are some of the we have
Representative Serrato.
Mr chairman if it's the right
time I move that you pass it we
do have a due pass
recommendation.
I don't think.
We have a second by.
Representative.
yes.
Thank
further questions discussion.
Representative Montoya I don't
think it's a thirty year history
acting.
The gap.
Program goes back to the sixties
and seventies so they've been
around for maybe not going on
sixty years now in on and
they're still going strong so
really applaud their efforts
Representative Lara you wish to
close before I called for the
loan.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you to the members of the
committee this is a very
important part of streamlining
the the work of that these
community action agencies do
around the state you know the
the the the the involvement and
and the level of of of of
leadership that they provide to
the community is that is is
really commendable you know I I
in in in some cases and I can so
I can speak for the CA in my
area is I I appreciate that the
taken the leadership role to
come to a new level and they
become a backbone organization
that supports many smaller
nonprofits in their goals to to
to to better the community and
to help in individuals and so
this is a very important piece
of legislation thank you for
your consideration and I look
forward to the to the debate on
the floor thank you.
Thank you Representative Lara
members we're on a do pass
recommendation
is there opposition to a do pass
recommendation.
See none that the record reflect
that all those present what in.
And members that does that for
today
we're still trying to line up
some bills for a Tuesday's
hearing so kind of enjoy here.
Capital outlay day at the same.
At the legislature we're just
starting out with that.
Chairman yes yes Representative
well quite I was fixing my.
might win at Lara it into fifty
five is being rolled over he
still working on that is that
correct yes correct that was a.
That was kind of the state that
Representative right first thing
on on the agenda.
Hello my mic I'm trying to use
headphones now some.
Thank you Mr chairman.
You remembers god bless you all
by simply one of the identitas.
Thank you Mr chairman Douglas
you.
