Mr speaker.
For the privacy the legislative
staff please don't bring that up
again.
In order.
microwave malfunction and
there's going to be one hungry
member the print shop staff
unless folks can send a bike for
him to eat.
So that would be helpful
introduction then we'll do some
amounts and so upcoming
committee meetings and we'll
have an announcement from the
rules committee chair let's
finish up new reports and the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Miguel P. Garcia
chair.
You must be a part of the report
the comment that his dad was in
Report they just thought of the
other.
Mr speaker your local government
land grants and cultural affairs
committee to is been referred
respectfully submitted Miguel P.
Garcia chair.
The most because I'm will
provide a report the COVID.
Mr speaker you're state
government elections Indian
Affairs Committee to move has
committee reports read together
acted upon the single vote and
reflected in the journal so
they're acted upon individually
no objection it is so ordered
the clerk to read house bill
House bill eighty two as amended
to pass as amended.
House bill fifty two as amended
House Bill two oh eight to pass
and then referred to the
appropriations and finance
committee.
House Bill to zero nine.
then threw for two Judiciary
Committee.
House bill two thirty one two
passed as amended and that's
referred to the Judiciary
committee reports on house bills
I was amended twenty one thirty
five eighty two as amended fifty
His name committee reports are
adopted.
Mr speaker state government
elections Indian Affairs
Committee to Mr referred house
Mr speaker enrollment option one
and option favorable commute for
House Bill fifty one is amended
all those in favor please
signify by saying aye.
Nine.
Mr speaker you're commerce and
economic development committee
to Mr for house bill one ninety
nine has had under consideration
forcing with recommendation that
do not pass that house commerce
master's chair.
Right up.
Adoption of an unfavorable
committee report on hospital one
eight nine one eight nine eight
nine but a favorable committee
report on commerce and economic
The last thing representatives
L. then the my day the committee
report is adopted.
that it do not pass that that
but that house taxation revenue
Committee substitute for House
Bill eleven do passed
respectfully submitted have yet
Martinez chair unanimous consent
House bill eighty nine to pass
house bill ninety two passed as
amended respectfully submitted
have yet Martinez chair.
committee substitute for House
Bills eleven.
House bill eighty nine and house
bill ninety as amended all those
in favor please signify by
saying aye.
one as amended has had it under
consideration for the same has
been duly enrolled in a gross
preparatory to funding by the
offices of the House
is omitted all those in favor
please signify by saying aye.
Hi.
On the suppose me.
Committee report is adopted.
has been signed by the officers
of the house in open session
including a.
Very beautiful signature of the
chairman just less pension.
Maria.
House bill nineteen introduced
by Representative cerrado an act
House bill nineteen having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
lever veterans and military
affairs committee then to
taxation and revenue.
Use population data provided by
the university of New Mexico
bureau of business and economic
research House Bill to sixty
one.
and Indian Affairs.
House Bill to sixty two
introduced by representatives
Representative sardana and
Senator Stewart acts Mimi
Stewart.
requiring the energy minerals
and natural resources department
to provide an annual report
House Bill two sixty two of us
to sixty two having been read
introduced by Representative
Roybal Caballero.
And act relating to criminal
procedure providing and
reporting providing a reporting
mechanism and an assignment of a
Two sixty three having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
consumer Public Affairs
committee that's Judiciary.
counties from requirements
applicable to local public
bodies for the sale or other
disposal of public property
maintaining the ability of
counties to receive donations of
the local governments land
grants and cultural affairs
committee that's the state
government elections and Indian
Affairs.
House Bill to sixty five
introduced by Representative
state to acquire land for
conservation and protection
purposes without a corporate
partner providing additional
factors for the prior
prioritization of projects under
natural lands and heritage
constant heritage conservation
fund to be used for purposes of
the natural lands protection act
revising powers and duties
the Indian Affairs.
House Bill to sixty six
introduced by Representative
Figueroa and potentially leading
to school personnel changing the
requirements for an alternative
Two sixty six having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Education Committee then state
government elections and Indian
Affairs.
and act making appropriations to
the tourism department to
provide destination marketing
services and support to certain
business improvement districts
to provide technical assistance
House Bill to sixty seven.
introduced by Representative
Hochman Vigil an act relating to
workers compensation creating a
presumption that Corona virus
disease twenty nineteen is an
For having workers compensation
insurers from using Corona virus
disease twenty nineteen claims
and developing reading plans
declaring an emergency House
House Bill to sixty nine
introduced by Representative
Cook and potentially leading to
medical records allowing
Two six nine having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
health and Human Services
Committee that's Judiciary.
motor vehicles adding
definitions to the motor vehicle
code providing for on anonymous
motor vehicles.
Requiring permits.
House Bill to seventy one
introduced by Representative
Harper and act relating to
transportation providing that
seventy one.
Two seventy one having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
transportation public works and
capital improvements committee
Thomson and potentially leading
to health providing for the
establishment and implementation
of the easy enrollment program
identifying uninsured
individuals and providing
referred to the health and Human
Services Committee thence
taxation and revenue.
House joint memorial three.
Senators Baca brand in Moores a
Joint Memorial requesting the
administration of the president
of the United States to waive
the suspension of new oil and
gas leasing and drilling permits
to the Energy Environment and
natural resources committee.
Hearing no objection it is so
ordered the clerk to read.
Has had it under consideration
report thing with recommendation
that it do passed as amended and
then referred to the state
government elections in in fares
Committee respectfully submitted
the tune number from the local
meeting and house bill one and
sixteen is Amanda.
Total for the S. C. state.
into consideration and report
same with out recommendation and
thence referred to the Education
Committee respectfully submitted
Miguel P. Garcia chair.
The internal for these styles
without all.
Generally from Bernalillo.
I move that we go to the next
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous business no
objection it is so ordered the
we are after I hear an echo of
we are asking.
All members to get their
proposed legislation requests.
the
the for the Republican caucus
has to agree with this and I
would be Mister speaker on this
issue Representative.
service.
By the close of business on
February eleven that is two days
Thank you Mr chairman I don't
think I have my hand up but.
Good day to you.
Mr speaker need gentlelady Romeo
Representative Thomson thank you
Mr speaker I just want to
announce that how are health
consumer and public affairs
committee will meet at one
civil and McKinley
Representative I'll call.
Thank you Mr speaker labor of
the.
Sir members are there for their
own sense.
Most Baker generally
Representative Garcia.
Local government land grants and
cultural affairs committee.
The meeting Saturday February
thirteenth at one PM.
promptly.
Invesco I at all.
Two twenty nine Este ano into
sixteen and then this so members
See I think we need to announce
the Representative Barreras
laughs every time.
Thank you very there is a
further announcements the
is on the calendar and we will
also be meeting on Saturday at
ten thirty two here house bill
twelve and seventeen these are
the two
Is the starting to the Concord
for twenty.
I'll be there for those the
gentleman for early
Representative Mart√≠nez.
Are there for the nonsense the
young for someone to answer.
Mister speaker the house
Republicans will be having a
can hopefully be prepared for
Thursday's for session.
If you need help please let us
know waiting different are
available to help any of your
members.
announcements we will be off
today we will come back nine AM
Thursday morning to start third
meeting.
We also have a and ninety am
meeting session gentlelady from
early on.
Mr speaker I move that the house
from home please a know that we
have committee meetings this
afternoon and all day tomorrow
so please tune in the house is
