Yeah.
Chairwoman Royal Caballero.
We have Quorum. Thank you.
OK, um,
So the only bill we have this
evening.
Is um
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 59, and I understand, um,
vice chair Chavez will be
presenting and um you may begin
at any time.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, uh, Senate
Bill 59 aims to amend the Public
Works Minimum Wage Act by
including off-site rubber
craters within it within its
scope.
This inclusion mandates that
individuals who fabricate
components off site for rates
and fridge benefits aligning
their compensation with that of
on-site laborers and mechanics.
Uh, and with that, uh, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
I'd like to witness or ask him
to introduce himself and um
provide um
members of the committee. My
name is Isaiah Zeke. I am the
business manager, sheet metal
workers, local Union 49, um,
what this measure aims to do is
require prevailing wages and
fabrication shops uh for
contractors bidding public works
projects.
For questions,
thank you. OK.
Thank you. So, um.
We're gonna go to um.
The Zoom?
And see if anybody is on to an
opposite raise your hand if you
are in opposition.
To committee substitute for
Senate Bill 59. All right,
Carla.
Yes,
yes, good afternoon. Oh.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Carla Kubler
Associated Builders and
Contractors, uh, we do stand in
opposition of this legislation,
um, mostly because, uh,
prefabrication is really falls
under manufacturing. There,
these are manufacturers. They,
uh, while they do have skilled
labor, no doubt. The
manufacturing process does not
really translate over into
construction. Most of them
actually do not have
contractor's licenses, they,
they, they manufacture that work
according to the specifications
for the building. So,
So, um, so for those reasons,
we, we stay in opposition. Thank
you.
That
And uh in opposition we have
Kelly Fajardo.
Kelly Fajardo.
OK, we'll move on, um, any
others in opposition?
Anybody else in opposition in
Zoom on Zoom, please raise your
hand.
Miss Kelly Fajardo, can you
unmute yourself, please?
Can you guys hear me?
Sorry, I'm sorry about that. um,
Kelly for
I'm here, I'm on, um, speak on
behalf of the Associated general
contractors, AC represents union
and non-union contractors
employing over 54,000 New
Mexicans. The bill expands the
definition of sight of the
project include off.
setting a precedent for broader
interpretations and future
legislative.
There is concern that future
bills could have further extend
these definitions, creating
regulatory uncertainty and
impacting operations. This
bill's written could
unintentionally incentivize
contractors to source materials
and fabrication services from
outside of the save New Mexico,
affecting the local supply chain
and economic competitiveness for
this reason, we we stand in
opposition of the bill. Thank
you.
OK, seeing no others in
opposition those that are on
Zoom in favor. Would you please
raise your hand?
All right, we have Ashley Long
in favor. You may go ahead.
Good afternoon, uh, Madam Chair.
Uh, I just wanna first of all
thank the, thank both of the
bill sponsors, Senator Padilla
and Vice George Travis, um,
their, their recognition and
hard work for really good labor
legislation does not go
unrecognized. With that, my name
is Ashley Long, uh, president
directing business
representative of the
International Association of
Machinists and Aerospace
Workers.
And for us, we know that when
New Mexico, hardworking New
Mexicans do better all of New
Mexico does better. So with
that, we urge the committee
supported the bill. Uh, thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you.
We have Robert Aubert.
Next
In favor?
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
committee members. My name is
Robert Ori and I'm uh president
of Painters and Alli Trades
Local Union 823, and we stand in
full support of this bill.
Next, we have Stephanie Mays.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Stephanie Mayez and I'm
a registered lobbyist. Today I'm
representing the New Mexico
Building and Construction Trades
Council, or an alliance of 15
craft unions with 15,000
members.
Across the state. I'm also
representing the International
Brotherhood of Electrical
Workers, local 611. We'd also
like to thank the sponsors of
this important labor legislation
allowing off-site custom
fabrication to bypass prevailing
wage requirements, encourages
developers to relo relocate
substantial portions of a
project outside the local area
or state, relying on a low paid,
low skilled workers who lack the
protections granted to those
performing the same tasks as on
site. This
practice results in significant
profits for developers at the
expense of local workers in the
regional economy.
This bill addresses that
specific loophole and prevailing
wage requirements and by
enacting this legislation, we
will ensure prevailing wage
protections extend to workers
with union and non-union engaged
in off-site fabrication of
custom sheet metal products for
public works projects.
We strongly support Senate Bill
59 and ask that you vote yes.
Thank you.
Right, that completes the uh
those on Zoom now in the
audience, can you raise your
hand on those that are here to
speak in opposition.
Anybody in opposition?
All right, one hand, you may.
Proceed and then we will take
you to the mic and we will hold
the mic for you, and you will
have 2 minutes.
Good afternoon, chair members of
the committee. My name is Alison
Riley, Public Policy director
with the New Mexico Chamber of
Commerce. The chamber is opposed
to this bill because fabrication
is a manufacturing process, not
on site construction and forcing
manufacturers to comply with
prevailing wage laws would
create administrative
difficulties for businesses.
Mexico is already really
expensive state for construction
and prevailing wage will
increase costs by up to 25%.
This bill would drive up costs
for critical projects like
schools and hospitals being even
more expensive. Senate Bill 59
on the original intent of
prevailing wage laws and places
an unnecessary administrative
burden on manufacturers and
therefore we respectfully oppose
the bill. Thank you.
Thank you. Are there any others
in opposition?
Then, all right, anyone in the
audience that wishes to speak in
favor, please wait.
All right, you may line up.
And we will hold the mic and you
will have 2 minutes.
to speak.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Rhonda Gelliland Lopez,
and I am the executive director
of the mechanical and Sheet
Metal Contractors Association of
New Mexico.
We ask that you please support
Senate Bill 59, as this bill
promotes an equal playing field
on off-site fabrication,
allowing consistency in the
construction processes. Thank
you.
When I started this senora
members the committee.
My name is Eric Corona. I am a
licensed sheet metal fabricator
and installer.
It is an honor to stand before
you today to speak about this.
About the hardworking men and
women in the HVAC on sheet metal
trades. These skilled
professionals are the backbone
of our buildings, keeping our
schools and workplace with safe
indoor quality air quality.
Too often, the work goes
unnoticed until something goes
wrong. But today, I want to
recognize their expertise,
dedication, and the critical
roles they play in our daily
lives from installing complex
ventilation systems to ensuring
air quality, energy efficient,
they contributions are essential
to public health and safety.
Fair wages and proper
recognitions aren't just about
fairness.
They're about substantially.
A skilled
Workforce that are committees
rely on out of state contractors
have an advantage on local
contractors when it comes to
fabrication of HBHC ductwork and
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
honorable committee members. My
name is Charles Lees and I'm a
certified test and balance
technician with over 30 years in
the HVAC industry. Over the
years, I have witnessed
firsthand the decline in
craftsmanship and quality of the
work in the trade.
A major factor in this is the
decline in the outsourcing of
off-site fabrication to the low
wage low skill facilities
outside our state where quality
standards do not match what we
uphold here in the state of New
Mexico, excuse me. Senate Bill
59 is a necessary step towards
protecting the integrity of our
industry by ensuring that
off-site fabricators receive the
same prevailing wage protections
as on-site workers.
This bill will help retain
skilled labor, uphold quality
standards and prevent out of
state contractors from
undercutting our local
workforce.
By passing Senate Bill 59, we
are investing in the future of
our industry, strengthening our
economy and ensuring that New
Mexico's workers are treated
fairly.
I strongly urge you to pass this
bill and support the skilled
tradespeople who build our
communities. Thank you.
Good afternoon, Madam chair and
members of the committee.
My name is My Way and I work for
a non-union sheet metal
fabrication shop. Thompson,
Heaty and Cooley.
I'm here today to express my
Strong support for Senate Bill
59, because passing this bill
would definitely benefit me, my
family, and countless other
hardworking tradespeople in our
shop.
As a sheet metal worker, I take
great pride in the work I do.
However, fair wages and strong
labor standards have not been a
part of this process in the shop
I work in.
If this bill passes, I will be
able to provide more for my
family and community.
By passing bills, then it
By passing Senate Bill 59, you
are standing up for workers like
me.
Ensuring that our families can
thrive in helping to maintain a
strong skilled workforce in our
state.
I urge you to support to support
this bill and
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, John Lipschitz
with the New Mexico Federation
of Labor. Uh, I truly have
nothing else to add. I think
every to say on behalf of our
35,000 plus members across the
state and with the public and
private sector, we stand in
strong solidarity with our sheet
metal workers and thank the
sponsors for bringing this up.
Thank you very much.
Right, this that um conclude the
audience, no others? All right,
thank you. Back to, uh, I
noticed that uh the senator came
in. Senator, would you, do you
wish to address uh the body?
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the Madam Vice Chair.
Thank you, Madam Vice Chair, and
ranking member and members of
the committee. I'm Senator
Michael Padilla, um, very happy
to sponsor this legislation. I
apologize sincerely understood.
I called the committee room and
they said it was starting in 50
anyway, I'm here now and I'm
sure that my co-sponsor here did
a fabulous job of introducing
this. I will tell you that this
was brought to me, uh, sometime
last year. Many of us had uh
sit-down meetings and to really
understand what was going on in
this field, and it just
immediately struck me as
something that we needed to, to
do something about.
Um, I will say that in some of
the public comment, uh, Madam
Chair, uh, in terms of uh
regulatory paperwork, blah blah
blah, uh, you know, at the end
of the day, a certified payroll
is really all you need to submit
in appropriately for you. So
there isn't a, a, a large
administrative burden there.
What the legislation does do for
us is these are public projects
that we want to have stood up
for any number of years, fitting
in at the end of the day, we
want the highest quality
craftsmanship to go into these,
a, a wage that is commensurate
with what else is going on in
the prevailing wage Act, and
wherever the work is done,
whether it's inside of New
Mexico, outside of New Mexico,
all they really need to do is is
submit their certified payroll,
and they are, are, are nice and
qualified for that bless you,
whoever that was. And I will
say, Madam Chair, that um in the
file that I provided to to my
co-sponsor here and we do
several pieces of legislation
together every year now. I have
3 letters from 3 very uh
important uh contractors in New
Mexico, uh Miller bonded.
EB and I.
And JB Henderson, and they are
all madam Chair, fully in
support of what we're attempting
to accomplish with this
legislation. So I just wanted to
make sure that that was
available to you if anyone
wanted to look at those, we'll
leave them right here. And
they're very well written
letters in support here. I know
the committee's going to
probably have some questions and
I'm want to thank our expert
witness. Thank you.
You stand for questions?
Yeah it's time for questions.
Thank you.
I have to.
We have on the list uh
representative Terazas.
Thank you Madam Chair. Thank
you, uh.
Representative, thank you,
Senator.
You know, I just, my question on
this.
is
I'll, I'll start out with
saying, um, I, I think this
could get complicated. I would
just say first of all, Madam
Chair, um,
My question is, what other
things do, what other?
Um
Things are prefabricated by
metal workers.
Ask our expert. He's fully
trained in this area, Madam
Chair and representative, but I
will tell you that uh it's
clearly defined him ransom.
Madam Chair Representative
Tarasa, so this measure only
includes uh ductwork, HVAC duct
work that goes into the
building. Every building is
specialized, so these aren't
pre-manufactured items that an
engineer gets for every
building, every building is
specialized ductwork systems. So
this only pertains to those
systems.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
I come from a background of, of
construction.
So I know that.
And I think this is what kind of
what's kind of sets me back a
little bit is there's a lot of
things that are prefabbed.
Metal buildings, not, not by
sheet metal workers, but.
We have prefab, uh, metal
buildings.
We have prefab.
Uh, sheet metal or uh gutters.
And for valleys on on roofs.
Um, for fascia.
Or uh um.
So it
Sometimes have uh uh.
Um
Maybe let's, let's, and let's
just say we start going down the
slope and next we have trusses.
Those trusses are made by
different companies all over the
place.
Um
Cabinets
And I was just listening to
this. I mean, I'm gonna be
honest with you, I didn't read
it. I've been busier
and listening, um, Madam Chair,
Representative.
But there's a lot of things
where we can start pretty soon,
we find ourselves, uh,
requiring, um,
Every, every place that refabs.
Off site, and there's a reason
that it's on site, it's to keep
control and to point out a
project.
That that project is supposed to
follow these
These measures
And I support that. That's,
that's, that's OK. But when we
start expecting another entity
that doesn't.
Isn't on site, and I understand
what you're trying to do. I, I,
I really do.
Um, I think you can get
dangerous, and let me explain
why.
In the, you know, in the Donana
area, in the Las Cruces area.
We have, we have a lot of
contractors.
That do a lot of business in El
Paso.
And as a matter of fact, uh,
Um
Madam Chair, represent a lot of
stuff gets done as soon as you
get right outside of, outside of
uh Las Cruces into in the El
Paso area. It's full of, of
construction industries type
fabrications.
Um, and materials and uh and and
equipment that is purchased
there.
And so what, what, what I think
We lack in our state is a lot of
pre prefabricators, and there's
a lot of times you go out, I
mean, I've done it. I had to buy
a door the other day, could not
find it anywhere, and I ended up
right there in that corridor, as
there was nowhere I could get
that fat.
And so that that's why I, I
worry about this. This is not
gonna be a very eas easy thing
to
Um
To enforce
In my opinion, now.
You know, I'm sure maybe you
guys have uh you know, a, a
different difference of opinion
there. The other thing is how
would we enforce it if I, I, you
know, I'm in Las Cruces. My, you
know, how, you know how we have
uh, uh, timelines of finishing
projects. Sometimes you, Madam
Chair Representative, you have
timelines that that you get
punished if you don't finish it
on the timeline.
There's also a a a charge back
to the contractor. And so this
could cause
Inadvertently
Uh, delays because you, you, we
don't have those fabricators.
Just in New Mexico, and these
people have uh um relationships,
a lot of relationships, I, I'll
be honest with you, with places
are, uh, you know, offsite, or
excuse me, outside of New
Mexico. A lot of that happens in
in that little area that I'm
talking about Donana in El Paso.
Uh, you, you're welcome to.
Respond to that.
All right, thank you, madam.
Yeah, this, this, this, uh,
these couple of questions have
come up along the way and in, in
putting this legislation
together, it's real important
that everybody on the committee,
Madam Chair, understand these
are public projects. It's a
public project. There is an RFP,
uh, request for proposal. There
are responses. If you're the,
the end of the company that uh
that wins this contract, you are
very well aware of what those
delivery requirements are with
those supply requirements are
the wage requirements, the
requirements of how to justify.
that you did this the way you
did or didn't do it or whatever.
So, so, uh, and, uh, I, you
know, you and I are both
business folk, uh, uh,
representative, and I respond to
RFPs periodically, I would say
maybe, you know, 15 to 20 a
year. And, and we know this well
ahead of time when we have to
reply to that. So, and we know
what those requirements are.
Secondarily, Madam Chair, if I
go out and I select a
subcontractor or a sub to a sub,
I'm not going to select them
unless they understand what my
requirements are to adequately
satisfy the.
requirements of that. So that's
how these will be managed uh
properly. You, you would be very
difficult for you to get into uh
trouble with this kind of work
because you know all this ahead
of time and you do have to also
demonstrate that you can, you
can respond appropriately to
whatever those requirements are
for the contract,
um, my friend, my good friend.
but yeah, I think uh the problem
is we don't have
But a large
Um
In my opinion, because I
A lot of construction make life
time, um.
We, we tend to find ourselves
going to Phoenix.
Tucson
El Paso
And sometimes outside of uh
outside of that, and I, and I
know how
Uh, what you're talking about
with the duct work I, I totally
understand what you're talking
about. And uh but I can see us.
When we have a limited amount
of.
Fabricators here in New Mexico.
That if we're forcing everyone
to use them.
Imagine all the projects that
we've got.
That could possibly uh be
stifled. So,
I'll let you respond to that.
Thank you, Madam Chair and and
Representative, my our expert
here has told us that we have uh
north of 250 fabricators that
can do this kind of work. And I,
I once again, Madam Chair, I
want to draw the committee's
attention to these three letters
that I'm holding up right now.
These are 3 fabricators that are
Decided to go ahead when they
learned about what we're doing,
to send in letters of support,
but there are north of 250. Now,
let's just say, Madam Chair,
that you had to go down to Home
Depot.
OK. Well, I think if you're in a
contractual relationship with
the state of New Mexico to work
on a project or this or that or
the other. Again, these are
public projects with public
dollars. You're gonna make sure
that you're going to the vendor.
And if you're, you know, have
been in business for any period
of time, you're gonna know
exactly which one satisfies
those requirements in which And
Madam Chair, uh, Senator and,
and representative expert, you
know, again,
This to me opens up a door also
in in addition to that.
Um, to where.
Uh, the next thing is gonna be,
um,
The uh
Um
Carpenter's Union.
needs to be all cabinets, they
have to be bought in New Mexico.
I mean, I want to buy here in
New Mexico as much as possible.
When we start stifling, and we
start forcing.
It doesn't matter whether it's
public, uh, I, I know they're
all public deals, but when we
start doing that, it does
stifle, it does cause problems
to stifle somebody that way and
tie their hands in their ability
to, to, to do business.
Um
Can be, again, like I said, uh,
trusses.
It could then be um the metal
buildings, uh, there's not, you
know, that, that are mostly a
lot of them are, are made in,
in, in Texas and other in other
states.
I think we start going down that
thing and pretty soon we're
doing this and this and this.
So, you know, I, I, I, I, I
appreciate and I respect what
you're trying to do. So that's
just, that's my, my, my concerns
with it.
Um, and, and that's all I've got
to say. Thank you, madam.
Um
Is there a.
Is there any opposition?
All right, all right, so hold
on, we'll, we'll.
We'll go ahead and take a.
Representative Anaya, yes.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Hall? No.
Representative Johnson.
Representative Mejia.
No.
Representative Ortiz.
Representative Reed.
Representative Trazas.
Representative Torres Velasquez?
Yes.
Vice Chair Chavez, yes.
