Your sorry.
Representative this and this was
already here.
Is an important part she's
excuse us.
Representative.
But can do little to.
Chair of the goal is to.
Okay of the the Representative
do you Martinez you have asked
us to roll over a house bill one
eighty six and my correct
growth
the legislative body here that
for house bill one eighty six.
the disabled veteran property
tax that proof.
Of the vote over kill
That is rolled over until we can
get it together.
Okay because that makes it so
that we the house bill one
Representative Lara.
The food will a.
The person that up the hot seat
issues with your ready thank you
Mr chairman thank you members of
the committee.
Of.
HB what is this right to the
point.
Just let me.
The two wanted to will provide
affordable high quality
healthcare benefits for all the
computers and eliminate the need
to stress from committee caters
wide by allowing them to focus
on the classrooms by providing
high quality care for the health
care benefits you will also act
as an important tool to improve
recruitment and retention as
well as addressing the educators
our crisis.
Mr chair with that I would like
for my of expert witnesses to
this and sells and with that
simple question.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Simon
Miller and I'm an analyst with
the department of finance and
administration and I was just
going to provide a brief summary
of House Bill wanted to so the
purpose of house bill wanted to
is to make health insurance
cheaper for educators by
shifting more of the cost from
employees to the employer.
Currently for most educational
person they get insurance to the
public school insurance
authority the employer covers
sixty percent of the premium all
the employees covers forty
percent.
Under house bill one oh two the
employer would cover the first
ten thousand dollars in premium
expenses and then sixty percent
of premium expenses beyond ten
thousand dollars so what would
this mean for a typical teacher
with family coverage currently
family coverage through the
public school insurance
authority costs twenty five
thousand dollars in total both
the fully employer combine.
The employer pays fifteen
thousand of that total well the
employee pays ten thousand of
that total.
It HB wanted to were enacted the
employees will cost for the same
family coverage policy which
dropped by four thousand dollars
so they would go from paying ten
thousand dollars annually down
to six thousand conversely the
employer cost would increase by
that same amount so go from
fifteen thousand to nineteen
thousand.
You'll notice that there isn't
an appropriation.
Attached to this bill however
the executive recommendation the
executive budget recommendation
includes one hundred million
dollars to fund the increased
employer share of that one
hundred million about seven
million is intended for PSI a
participating higher education
institutions and the other
ninety three ninety three
million would be added to the
state realization guaranteed as
the SCG is the current funding
mechanism for district insurance
expenses.
The Albuquerque public school
district is the only public
school district that does not
receive insurance through the
SIA.
APS manages its own insurance
fund House Bill wanted to does
not affect APS's current
employer or employee sorry
current employer employee
contribution arrangement however
APS would receive a portion of
the ninety three million based
on the SCG funding formula to
reduce the cost of insurance for
their employees as well.
So with that Mr chair
answer to our expert witness
after Santa.
Thank you Mr Simon hello Mister
chair members of the committee
after Santa executive director
for the.
We have been very involved in
health analyzed this bill
utilizing the data of our
current membership.
So with that I guess we stand
for any questions with regard
to at this time of the hundred
years does anybody here in
support of the state.
Is there anybody in opposition
to this legislation.
It.
Buddy in support of the
legislation that the speaker
raise your hand.
Yeah stand at this in a in the
back.
From here you're waiting
be the first.
Actually it's the.
You may.
I just wanted to questions we
have is
whether or not this could be
expanded I work for the state
supported for public school
teachers are.
I'm in the office today.
Just wondering if there is a
group then it is that you're
yes and
That that that.
Thank you I am a professor at
the university of New Mexico on
by president.
Our.
For the.
And so yeah I support
and and and also Representative
we are only fifteen hundred
employees so this is an
opportunity to catch off because
now we are losing our over the
last with respect to other
institutions and that will be a
great opportunity to
get the.
Thank you.
That but hi Mr chair members of
the committee my name's Lisa
read I'm project manager for
primary care agencies and I just
have in support of the bill I'm
more mad Division who leads that
by creasing employer
contribution to that.
Benefits the state needs to rise
individuals opting into employer
sponsored plan resulting in
broader health insurance
coverage agency believes this
will ultimately result in a
decrease uninsured individuals
and supports the recommendations
this thank you.
Good.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Joe here executive
director of the New Mexico
school boards association stand
and support thank sponsor for
bringing this forward we believe
this will help us with our
efforts to educate attractive
and.
Employees of members of teachers
and all workers and public
schools are four hundred
eighty nine school districts
voted in favor of this at our
convention in December in Santa
support.
Okay good.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee John that was used
Mexico federation of labor
AFL-CIO we believe that
healthcare is a benefit that all
workers should be four this only
happens R. thirty four thousand.
Statewide what the sponsor
raises up and researchers thank
you very much for.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is words
executive director of any Mexico
is expanding so if you wanted to
the thousands of New Mexico
educators who cannot currently
afford quality healthcare in the
state I'm standing for the
thousands of New Mexico
educators currently have to work
two three jobs to afford the
premiums for they have to write
a check at the end of the month
to cover the premiums because
the costs are so high.
Where is that anything of
forty eight point
of us supporting the work
here because one hundred percent
recruitment and retention issues
in a state where we have more
teacher vacancies and ever had
one of the following for
students in New Mexico
stop the revolving educators
need to make sure healthcare is
accessible to all from the
transfer station for two drivers
students to food service workers
to do that cancers teachers para
professional you must make
health care affordable to
recruit and retain educators in
New Mexico I thank you for
supporting us okay I see and the
middle back there.
Thank you Mr chairman of the
the job search with the American
federation of teachers right
three point one we appreciate
the Sanchez all work to ensure
that educational forties PS are
populations in the to the extent
that equitable
educators this thing
will be to this bill really
would go a long way for
classified educators are among
the lowest paid our educational
system and so those healthcare
costs are disproportionately
impacted those types of workers
and the third thing I want to
bring up is that this panel
which longstanding goal of a few
factual enough to remove the
special cap that's currently in
statute.
Health care coverage only the
fact we believe that
Other people that this is a
mental and retention so by
removing artificial cap allows
the district to incentivize if
they so choose to offer better
benefits than what the state is
setting up the minimum wage to
attract and retain educational
place we would urgent gas.
Anybody else.
The.
Video here.
View the okay go ahead.
Thank you chairman of COVID
members of the committee my name
is Merriam R. Sanchez.
Of the national education
association in New Mexico and I
represent thousands of educators
across the state but currently
there are eighteen more than
eighteen thousand students that
do not have a highly qualified
licensed educator instructing
them and we know as many others
have staff testified today that
this is a recruitment and
retention strategy educators
have for years Hey
Significantly higher than other
state employees for their health
benefits in LFC and Alice's New
Mexico is the only state in our
region that provides health
insurance contributions for
educators based on income so the
only stated our region that that
uses income as a basis for what
percent you should pay for your
health care coverage house bill
one oh two would change this
because a hundred percent of the
premium before the educator
would be a.
By the employer want to thank
Representative Lara off for
bringing this bill forward and
we would encourage you support
of this bill.
What is this
Mr chair members of the
committee on CCI's any eight
Mexico government relations
director
and we stand support only half
our members I just want to add
one more thing to to overstate
here as a group and and and and
I the message this bill if you
wanted to is a yes.
And yes the study it is part of
the handouts that you have any
shows the investments it's going
to have and the impact it had on
our economy especially our
rural.
Meetings and families so it's
very important to look at this
bill not as a spending bill
rather as an investment and.
Time to get to work.
Our model.
We stand to gain fifty one
thousand six hundred fifty one
jobs
from implementing HB wheelchair
and all page three.
Look at that you'll see there's
here is shows a specific sectors
that would benefit from a speech
to in the closing.
This bill since.
I.
It from just the like to point
out the research is clear that
this is the long term state
investment growth economy as a
compares us to reductions in
investment at this I would some
maybe I may believe tax cuts
have never been shown to produce
a number of state invest on the
other hand is economic drivers
and create jobs it's one of the
best investments a statement for
the general economic growth of
the state thank you very much
for your support.
This.
Mr chair and members of the
committee my name my yes yes I'm
the interim cabinet secretary
for the public education
department.
That I think the last speaker
this funding for this afternoon
I will not restate all of the
incredible things that were
shared I have folks in the in
the audience here I just would
like to remind you all that
Mexico currently has
approximately six hundred
educator vacancies across the
state if we're really going to
address student learning
provisions in the state we must
ensure that we have well
qualified educators and
classrooms this bill will allow
us to address those vacancies
and to support not only our
educators but all school
personnel who are really
critical in caring and there's.
Thank you for your time today
and will also just add that this
is a governor's priority
legislation thank you.
I am the right.
On the screen here.
The okay first of all of the
rest there was anybody in
opposition.
On the video so I don't do there
was so that it is not a in
support and I see a hand up
doctor Garcia.
Hello my name is Joseph Garcia
I'm a current adjunct professor
of Chicana Chicano studies at
the university of New Mexico and
a member of United academics for
University of New Mexico I'm a
foreigner former senior policy
analyst with the legislative
education study committee I will
hardly support this bill but I
also want to know that as my
colleague with you a U. N. M.
I would like that we'd be added
to this I am an advocate
professor I do not have health
care benefits right now because
they're too expensive to buy I
am on unemployment I also
support H. B. one fifty one
which is the address
unemployment bill.
And I ask you please please
consider I. will help you read
write or add to this bill to add
add like myself who are going to
work collecting unemployment
getting rental assistance and I
you know I'm fortunate I have my
daughter who is on Medicare
Medicaid so I I implore you to
expand this to those of us at
college other colleges and
universities in the state of New
Mexico that do not have health
care benefits please thank you
very much
Thank you bye bye.
Okay with that they will lose it
do you have anything to that.
Mister chairman Senator
questions.
The committee Representative you
read.
Care workers.
I.
We understand as what you're
trying to do here and I think I
agree that we need to fill these
vacancies.
We need to get these positions
filled help our teachers but I
guess the issue I'm having is
you know I was a state employee
there's cops are status please
there's all kinds of government
employees corrections just so
many people that are in the same
situation I guess it's I can you
can you Mr chair representative
explained.
You know how do we pick and
choose who gets the benefit of
this it I guess it's to me it's
not to be fair cross the board
for all the different employees
state employees that are in the
same situation because we are in
a situation where that's in
crisis horrible right now in
their vacancies every DA's
office every public defenders
and our law enforcement and the
insurance is just Spencer for
you know everybody in those
lines of work so I understand
focusing on education I guess.
The the issue of how does how do
we pick and choose what's more
important than the other that
makes sense Mr chair
representative Mr chair
representative I'm gonna give
you a very generalized report I
believe and then after that I'll
talk to one of my.
Experts so
In the larger picture Mr chair
representative I I would like to
see that and I and I believe
that this is the first step to
doing that so it is that said Mr
chair representative yeah we're
learning through this process
we're going through this process
or learning how to fix the other
who the stakeholders are
bringing all these things
together because I believe
personally that this is just the
first step to getting towards
for we want to go with a small
state employees I envision this
this is just my personal opinion
once again Mister chair that I
miss and this is just the
beginning of a much larger of
look at bringing all state
employees and all school
district employees under one
umbrella eventually.
Mr chair representative of you
are right and that this would
create an inequity between state
employees and educational
employees
but that inequity that it would
create is actually smaller than
the current equity between state
employees and educational person
right now on average of state
employees in their insurance.
Hey.
Thousand dollars less per year
on average there's different
plans that that serve you know
so but on average it out three
thousand less and if this bill
were enacted then
educators through the public
school insurance authority with
pay on average about a thousand
less than state employees
So yes in equity but smaller
than the current equity and.
Chair and representative so I'm
on education but so you know an
average teacher salary I think
now is it maybe you can answer
that one sixty thousand seven
thousand approximately Mr chair
representative but that's
alright that the minimum for
level two teachers sixty
thousand all right and so.
and it and Representative I just
I just it's hard because I I
feel like why am I did I not get
this wire all my colleagues to a
reading dust offices with five
prosecutors and ten open spaces
you know and not getting the
same equity that you guys are
getting I think that's that's my
problem this is how do we how do
our early to place pick and
choose who should get this and
you should and why why could
there not be in a bill that
addresses all of us you know all
state employees corrections just
in state employee so that it's
equitable and I'm not saying per
second the teachers are
important and that with this
pandemic that we did get behind
you need to fill these vacancies
this is a statewide problem and
so many agencies and so
That that Mr chair and and
Representative those are my
concerns and what I'm struggling
with in my mind right now so I
appreciate your answers and I
would hope that if this does
pass it it is extended to other
agencies because I think that's
going to be that the criticism
of it is that it's not fair to
everybody else so with that
thank you Mr chair.
Representative.
Mr chair representative and just
to expound on what's.
Representative read was talking
about.
So in the in a basic
municipality.
Would you say that your
treatment plant operators are in
a dangerous atmosphere.
Mr chair representative hi I
would assume that they will be
trained in that and and that
that would be part of the
receptacle taken or talk yes and
they in Mr chair representative
they do and they also take a
series of of shots but not to
Asians so that they're protected
by a bunch of different diseases
that they can encounter
Then what just comes to my mind
is when we're talking about
equity and I and I tried on this
very softly because I'm gonna
budget educators back homes
probably watching this right now
and I we do of our educators
but.
As far as equity goes.
We have our people that drive
our trash trucks they go through
the same thing we have our
firefighters and police officers
that have to go through the same
occupations are usually in
really dangerous atmospheres and
usually after they retire you
know they they say five to ten
years you know firefighters
start cancer and all the you
know that things that come along
with that and I just.
I want to support this bill but
I think that you know super just
making it to where it's just.
Teacher inclusive I would have
to say then I I wish your bill
had some more like public
employees and I I'd be more apt
to look at that but
Mr chair representative that's
all I have thank you.
Representative market is.
Mr chair representative thank
you
I have to say that when I walk
in this room.
You absolutely have my vote.
Until some of the testimony.
started.
Why were university professors
left out.
Mr chair representative.
I I just want I want to answer
your question in general but I
would also defer to my one of my
experts so.
All universities are being left
out so universities and
institutions of higher education
that pay into them so you are
included in this as well Mr
chair and without a lecture for
two Mr some long.
Yes thank you Mr Lara Mr chair
Representative Martinez so what
this statute does is it changes
the contributions specials for
the public school insurance
authority.
So those schedules have been in
place since the nineteen
eighties and right now those
schedules anyone who makes over
twenty five thousand control
sixty percent so they are we we
passed you already and we do
have some institutions that
actually participate in the
authority and they can request
to join the authority some of
the institutions we have are
like the college in Espanola we
have to eastern import talus and
we have eastern New Mexico
university Rossa and we have
more higher rated higher it's
actually participate in New
Mexico and this would be open to
the higher ends but also within
the bill
we are also leaving it open
under statute ten seven four to
where the higher ed institutions
can contribute their current
contributions or.
Mr Chairman representative could
you could.
Reference that ten seventy four
for those that.
Representative it's.
Under house bill one two and
it's under section one ten
seventy four.
Section one.
And it's on page two.
And it's item item.
It still leaves intact of the
current season schedules and if
the group insurance costs.
State of New York our attention
in institutions of higher
education shopping maintenance.
Mr chair representative soul all
why the splintering.
I always assumed that all which
caters were under the same
thing.
I didn't realize how splintered
everything is.
Could you tell me why that is.
Mr chair representative it's
because those those specific
institutions choose to.
Thinking there and under what
for off they can either choose
to go under the umbrella of them
to or they can choose to go
there and to the wrong so job
the reason I believe splintering
that's concerts choice out there
and they they believe that they
can get a better deal somewhere
else or go with another option
and that's why I believe that
their splintering I'm not sure
if I can get the money if my
experts would like to try and
then but that's that's how why
that's how I perceive this Mr
chair for.
You experts sure it's point
other than the the.
Mr chair representative yes
that's that's exactly right of
some of these other institutions
have their own insurance pool
and.
I hate to speculate but I'm
guessing that their insurance is
quite cheaper than public school
insurance authority at this
moment.
Mr chair representative then why
isn't everybody else.
In this other insurance pool if
it's cheaper.
Mr chair representative so
that's the.
You would have we are feeding on
school districts in the state.
So if I understand what you're
saying your review would you
know we would have penalized for
school districts working their
own insurance for our employees.
And we'll put those school
districts that are bad
disadvantage that's why we have
Mexico and everybody's under
their belt because the house
expertise they have four they
have the negotiating power.
So called collectively it gives
a school districts and charter
schools and those partners is it
at institutions that pay into
Mexico.
The the the muscle to to to get
better deals Mr chair Mr chair
representative you would think
so but the representative said
that these other groups I would
chief Richard.
So I would think with if they
come under the umbrella of New
C. up.
There's they have more muscle
why are they paying more than
the people chose not to be under
the umbrella.
Mr chair representative if you
look at AP just as an example
they have their own insurance
pool
their costs are a lot cheaper
because all of their members are
in urban area and health care
costs are a lot cheaper there so
they decide it's a better deal
for themselves to ensure them
selves rather than be part of
the broader public school
insurance authority
you know because the Insurance
Authority has many schools that
are in rural areas and that
because there are costs to be
more expensive and so it's just
it's more cost effective for APS
to go off on their own have
their own insurance plans.
So Mr chair representative is
ultra keen on this bill.
Mr chair representative yes they
are they are covered under
section one to Mr chair
representative why weren't what
was the one in.
That's a good question
Representative Mr chair yeah we
which is what we're discovering
public school employees and
those higher situated
institutions up into Mexico so
the whole objective of this is
is to.
Focus on and bring up to parity
or public school employees.
Mr chair representative thank
you
Give a lot to think about before
we actually cast your vote like
I said.
I told people all will be on out
of the committee because
everybody's gone before this
bill.
But the people of stood up in
support of this bill kind of
gave me false.
As to is this the right thing to
do.
should be reworked.
Should it cover more people
should cover all state organs I
also was a state employee Mr
chair.
The it would have been nice when
I was raising my three sons to
have a much more affordable.
But I did what I had.
To make sure thank you to Dr.
Mr chair representative all all
go ahead and.
Listen to the rest of the
testimony and hopefully.
Swing back into the.
The positive.
I just.
Of just been given a lot to
think about what we show the
support we.
Register thank you I think you
are I got a question I'm gonna
clarified because everybody's
looking at this like we're
taking care just the schools.
And
Let me see if I understand this
quick.
At this time.
People that are working as
government employees that are
not teachers and do not fall
under your program are paid X.
amount of dollars in insurance
and they are getting a better
deal than what two days teachers
actually my correct can you
repeat that number for that
everybody can understand I think
you put it out there but I think
the movie is here.
Yes Mr chair
Right now C. please do you rate
significantly less than
educators for insurance
on average state employees pay
about three thousand less per
year than educators so there
there's the current inequity.
Last four hours you've got fresh
plugs that because so therefore
this would be the teachers.
Just a little bit actually what
two thousand dollars above what
the state employee is it depends
sorry Mr chair it depends on.
The plan but on average of
public school insurance
authority employee would be
paying one thousand dollars less
per year than the state employee
if this bill were enacted
okay so that's okay so that's
what I hope that people
understand exactly what's going
on right now is you state
employee you are getting a
better deal than if you are key
to.
And this brings to teachers.
They do.
Little better equity so it is an
idea is what you re corrected
use up okay I got.
With the make sure how through
the reviews Mr chair and both of
you had your hand up to help me
what to do my phone froze Mr
Chairman was my school district
decided to freeze up on me so I
can turn on off thing so this
way on the ask about I can wait.
All right I can see what.
Thank you Mr chair question
thank you Mr chair
my good friend Lara thank you
for bringing this forward
I just as I said I was I have
been communicating with my
school districts as as as you
know Mr chair are you know we
all have different districts and
and we want to make sure this
affect our schools in our area
right is going to help it not
help at.
I'm worried about my.
So high school over schools
what's for medical university
worried about hello all the
Leopold is going to.
This is gonna effect on one side
of the coin it's always we
always absolutely want to
support teachers my question is
a real question was for me that
is contemplating here is still
so much of the price for the
price of health care goes down
it's more that.
The shift of the expenses we
shipped it to to the employer.
With this Mr chair reserves.
So.
Association is yes if this chair
representative yes that's
correct so Mr chair
representative so that being
said that shifting the
responsibility of who's going to
carry the total bill tool the
tool line of this expense is why
positive you will get because in
my area Mr chair representative
so my schools are struggling
very very hard the really
struggling as I wonder how that
**** is going to really affect
my my my my schools right
is this something that they also
get this into.
Responsibility and.
And there's no.
Other funding of it because I'm
going FIR on this Mr chair
representative so worry what
happens if they don't get the
money else on the responsible.
How would my school district be
able to sustain that.
Mr Mr chair representative
alleged to for twenty million.
Mr chair representative of your
correct there is a there is an
appropriation this bill of the
executive budget recommendations
has one hundred million to fund
this bill so if this were to
pass thank
Probably wise for the
appropriation committee to
consider
that one hundred million in the
executive budget recommendations
to fund this bill that way
districts receive additional
funds to cover the additional
employer contribution creamy as.
Your.
Make sure.
There is an appropriations
Representative up right.
In this bill you're saying that
there's money there that could
be some.
At that point forward because
that's what I thought was my
question for the last day and a
half Representative how how can
my school district do this
although it's a absolutely.
amazing gesture I like it
problem is.
In high school for the if that
doesn't happen.
So.
What what happened Mr chair
representative if that wasn't
I'm here to worse.
What if it's not what the what
the well with that disease the
consequences of a Mr chair
representative.
Mr chair representative like to
defer to my experts.
Mr chair.
If bills were passed in the one
hundred not included in the
general appropriations act then
I yes I believe this would be an
unfunded mandate
but but but but like I said the
executive budget recommendations
built in one hundred million for
this purpose
So.
The Legislature to consider as
this bill if this bill that for
Representative I mean I I just
which was written that way I I
would be I would be more
comfortable with it this.
That would be put in this
possible unfunded mandate and
and and and I think this is a
great any time we can support
teachers Mr chair representative
firefighters and police officers
any of our state employees I
mean I've always said there on
underpaid the personal Mr chair
representative the problem that
I have with this particular bill
isn't that it's not tied
together there two different
pieces there are some other
things that are are are are
worried me a little bit you know
the.
How who's who's died okay I get
that we're trying to make
strides toward that.
Problem Mr chair representative
these are not connected to make
sure that the money is there and
so for me for my district
knowing my district and I've got
schools Mr chair representative
that we are track is falling
apart you have any money to do
that we've had problems with
What is it called
Yes No on.
All the stuff inside to the
classrooms I have some very old
schools in my district Sarah
Representative they're very old
and we need updating and Mr
chair representative of some of
the additional where we still
don't have ruler conditions
someone building so I know that
if they can't afford some of
those things.
If this happens to be an
unfunded mandate it just so
happens.
I don't know what what of voted
to to her my screen and that's
mostly what I'm worried about
and so I hope that maybe this
can get reworked somehow but I
I'm gonna stand in.
of.
Only for those reasons
that because I didn't.
Where this thing I got some sort
of Chinese writing on my what
with the with the with the bars
of the hacker yes so it's going
on there was told to turn off
and turned back on from Verizon
and then that happened so.
but I was it was the of rises
sorted thought but anyway I just
wanna make sure with so
So that's really my only problem
is I'm really worried about that
from my screen and and with him
saying he still trying to figure
it out in a half which is which
you sit back a little bit the
boss.
I really appreciate your efforts
and and I hope that I can see
maybe some change and.
Recession that I feel
comfortable
somehow time that thank you Mr.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative from.
Full.
In the middle of the session
Representative I know that thank
you for bringing these or I'm a
teacher for about forty years of
working the baseline and get in
the race
that just came of tonight to the
prepositions all I think you we
right to to what is good right
now I think this is just fair we
are behind with education we are
having with their teachers I
thank you for the longest and
worst I feel like what causes
that because he think of
Levels one point even though our
our qualifications would show up
differently so I think we need
to start moving forward and he
can do well how high we are and
is there for you to make make it
up for all that of the past so
thank you and that's my comment
thank you Mr chair.
Limited in but the last year
okay thank you for thank you Mr
chair and thank you
Representative for bringing this
forward as a representative just
said
I think the key point here is
that has been that for years
we've been having discussions
about the inequities and a lack
of parity between salaries and
the costs of insurance the costs
of.
Because living period and not
being.
Impaired.
Had teachers educational
assistants and everyone who
works in the educator world
seriously underpaid.
And seriously of what fracking.
The ability to pay.
For basic
insurance and other
Other very important
Supplements.
Supplements they're necessary
and so us is representative
Martinez asked about
Why there's different costs.
Different plans I think you
raise those questions
When we get reports of the
investments and pensions and
oversight committee we get
reports for the health retiree
health and from the health care
component of.
E. R. B. and other the public
employees and so on.
And we're told over and over and
over again and we're given
sharks Mr chair and
representative showing.
The salaries over here.
All costs over here.
And so we have families young
families that are entering into
the field of education the
matter what role there and
Freeman and when given the
choice of their low salaries.
and the choice to sign up for
benefits.
Of I'm sure they take those
benefit packages known and
literally look at and think
there's no way in the world and
I'm going to be able to pay for
all make my contribution to this
insurance policy because times
and my salary isn't even
sufficient enough Mr chair to be
able to cover two bedroom.
For my for family of four of two
children and families for.
So that.
Is removed from the conversation
because it's not even an option
for that so Mr chair and and
Representative.
The other the other point that
that is brought up to us over
and over again we ask the same
question Representative Figueroa
sits on that committee as well
during the interim we asked over
and over whether we're we're
we're buying the right plans are
the the most affordable to the
match our employees across the
board whether it's in education
or you know whatever public
employees are our law
enforcement and the answer is we
can't keep up with the it's a
highly competitive market the
prices are escalating on a
regular basis and we do our best
we pro Q. R..
The best and most affordable.
That we can on behalf of our.
They do the best they can and
you're absolutely correct we
have a splintered of system.
And our systems are acting
sometimes what appears to us is
being
Well in this field another on
that field but each one I can
assure you.
Is procuring the system that
best fits and is the most
affordable to the secretary but
they represent it's not they're
not abusing it no wonder handed
under the table pay off as what
happened in the old days there's
a lot of monitoring there's a
lot of reviews is a lot of check
marks Mr chair and when we get
these reports we ask those hard
questions because we are very
aware that our public in these
as a whole are struggling and
our educators are probably the
ones that I would say have the
of the least four eight the
budget and the F. B. F. and or
parity their salaries just
haven't ever match the ability
to pay for a premium of me that
basic much less a premium
insurance package so even if
they do accept that lists the
state I want to get this
insurance it's probably the one
that's the most anymore most
basic policy.
And so you're absolutely correct
we have a lot of work to do and
all of our representatives and
administrators are well aware of
the work that we have to do and
how we can still find them but
because we as a representative
Mr chair mention because we give
choices to local communities
choices to the various entities
representing are all the
different sectors then
That and that's because they
have to representative Katrin
grant you that'll services
earlier.
Right across the costs for their
Leo I probably
much less than the costs in
catching ground.
Because why we have more medical
facilities and competition for
you as you all know the basic
economies of scale the more
competition the more people
buying in the more volume there
is a possible down when you have
a small rural communities it's
the opposite so I say all this
To acknowledge and recognize
that we're we're taking those
small steps but this is a huge
one because it has to at some
point we have to hold in our
decisions we have to take a huge
step from time to be able to
close those huge gaps and I
think I'm really glad the
governor has written in the
hundred million and dedicated in
her line item for this shows
commitment it shows that we're
gonna move
some legislation in a very
positive manner and more than
anything Mr Chairman
representative I think it's a
very strong message for
educators within the least
attended.
Attended to in our systems that
we care and that we're doing
something to help value.
The positions they bring to the
classroom or in whatever role
they play and that was another
question I just wanted to ask
because they came in a little
bit right.
This bill Representative comers
educational system every
everybody in the spectrum of of
being qualified as an educator
in the field right Mr chairman
vice chair that's correct okay
so that's even more important Mr
chair and representative because
I want to go unsafe were
maintenance workers and.
For education assistance of them
in this relationship as an
educator so Mr chair
representative just thank you
for bringing this forward of.
I spent five years trying to
bring equity to educational
systems eight so I don't want to
spend another five years in
doing and acting what we really
need to do right now we need to
take steps to make the change
and I did want to just say thank
you
to our to our the governor and
cabinet cabinet secretaries
spoke because they recognize
that we have a long way to go
but we have to.
Have been right now as much as
we can and and hopefully the
legislature we'll see fit as a
whole two of COVID trucks thank
you Mr chair.
Come before the motion the
members of the body.
Representative into.
Other shot at thank you Mr.
I just want to ask another
question because I keep hearing
about equity and I like if we
really do and I want to help as
many people as I possibly can
but if I voted for this bill
what are the public workers in
the same they were left out.
Mr chair representative
Representative Mr chair I want
to also because they're
something already in the works.
So how to construct memorial
this one and Senate Joint
Memorial to our already for
their they're looking to study
the classification compensation
and benefits for state employees
so there's already something in
the works so
What I would till the state
employees in my district as you
we value what you do.
And we understand that the the
work that we understand what you
put into your daily life of
service point of state.
And what I would tell them is
you know we're in the process of
studying this we want to make
this equitable for everyone and
all of that work around what
we're it's it's a very key work
because like I mentioned before
Mr chair representative you know
be personally I would really
love to see everyone under that
umbrella but we have to take
steps to that and by a dollar
gene those drug memorials that
are moving forward they're going
to study that I believe that's
going to bring that equity that
we want to for all New Mexicans
that work with state to all our
educators Mr chair
representative Mr chair
representative of I know this is
kind of a spitball question but
how many public employees do you
think we're leaving the this
roughly.
Mr chair representative I don't
know how many I can be fifty
thousand sixty thousand would be
the same amount that we have as
far as educators Mr chair
representative I would want to
speculate on that account
cancel.
Mr chair representative I I'm
just trying to get more after
round how how we put educators
first.
And why not somebody else now on
I am all for educators but why
not somebody else and Mr chair
representative.
Is there a way for us to take
this particular bill.
And I'm just gonna say this if
we made a motion to table with
and we can work.
Everybody else and maybe bring
it down just a little bit so we
can afford to bring everybody in
at the right we're talking about
Mr chair representative this
representative what I would well
my answer would be as you to the
model that we have here and
introduce legislation that would
cover so please based on the
model that we have here you know
it's it's not you know I've Mr
chair representative I don't I
don't want to see there were
limited only to a certain.
Our population our service
sector you know I believe that
everyone should be covered but
you would what I would suggest
is maybe consider young looking
into that and and possibly using
the studies on to destroy the
mortals to get legislation
rolling on that as well so you
know this is this is just one
aspect of it you know I believe
Mr chair representative that we
also have the opportunity for
the state employees and we
should seriously consider doing
up but to add that to this is a
totally different aspect it's a
totally different of entities
that we're gonna have to do with
resources our insurance is
concerned so I don't think that
we can marry the two they would
have to do this in my opinion Mr
chair representative very two
separate bills.
Mr chair representative less
thing I have is because I'm a
freshman I'm a for his later I
see the emails coming in right
now we've been talking about is
fairness and equity and we leave
public employees out and then we
we rise some other public
employees over and then we wait
another year to get this going I
don't see the equity in that.
Mr chair representative for the
primary Mr chair if you an
example so often.
I have I have a of a young woman
single month for service use my
budget special support.
She works full time.
She has Medicaid.
We have four district insurance.
So these are the type of people
that I work with these are the
type of people that come to me
and asking about these things
because I'm I'm just assuming
you're Mr chair representative
that that's not the case of
state employees.
You know you are you you know
you're a state employee that
doesn't carry the state health
insurance but it's a very common
thing that happens with our
educators and school staff we
have educators and school staff
who can't afford the insurance
and they have to go to on to the
state and they have to get it I
other means to to up to to get
help so and that's does when
when I when I was looking at
this Mr chair representative as
to what we can do to help these
people to help these people full
time who can't afford health
insurance this is just one of
those steps are representative
of Mr chair because we we need
to work towards.
Once again I I think you need to
keep all has to the sport is
towards that equity and so I I
would be very curious to see
oversight if there are new state
employees who are caring there
sure because they can't afford
it.
If there are you know that looks
so talk to me if you consider
that hash it out with on with
another bill but I know for sure
I know for a fact Mr chair
representative there are school
district employees that do not
carry the insurance because they
can't afford.
And if you work full time you
can't afford healthcare service
in my opinion Representative Mr
chairman that's that's with
that's retract that's a tragedy
and those are people who are
getting left behind in New
Mexico.
Thank you Mr chair
representative on the the
for rural we want to add to
this.
Thank you for reading money
money.
We would come back to where that
would be employing up to
something in the bill this
inequity was created and you can
see it on page three sections.
What was was not.
This process.
Maybe Mr chair we're in the
legislature when this was.
But in section B. it has the
outline insurance of page two
sections we got wind of
insurance percent pay by
the employees and then sections
do is two thousand four east two
thousand five.
Two thousand five we set these
goals is what other public
employees.
The non teacher types.
So if you look on page four
the cost of insurance of an
employee manual salaries less
than fifty money making less
than.
Eighty percent of their
insurance.
By the deployment.
The state.
Eighty.
The educators section G. on.
The employer the state school
the the the the the.
One seven page two.
The store is.
So there's no way there's no
income level at which the state
pays eighty percent but then
pay seventy five for anybody who
makes less.
Fifteen what.
That is considerably different
than fifty and that inequity has
existed since two thousand five
that is the underlying impetus
at the bill we're looking to
bring those two things more.
And it's it's not as easy as you
would think because the New
Mexico public school health
insurance authority.
Is a thing that exists that we
can build this legislation
And public employee insurance is
much more complicated.
So bring those things into exact
line would be really really I
but the conversation around the
next twenty you look at these
two pieces statutes and receive
an opening that has existed for
a long time it's also pointed
out if you're at the usual
person is also point out page
two.
Analysis.
Their charts there for state
agencies versus NMPSIA and share
health insurance premiums that
are paid by the state and also
simply been.
Thank you very much.
Mr chair.
You.
So with that in mind okay.
I just yeah and see how we can
move forward with this bill I
mean this the the missing would
be missing the boat on this for
at least twenty of us would be
at least a for fifteen years and
up here we have been doing
anything like this for.
And the I have a real state in
this state I have real faith in
my screen.
That is that money well first of
all I have proof that that are
appropriations committees that
the that money is going to get
funded that's the number one
thing is I know that is one of
their priority is to make sure
this is taking care of that is
what my fate.
Number two is I have real faith
in my old school board and if it
doesn't get funded they're going
to take care with their teachers
because their teachers are point
to them their teachers are
important to those school boards
just like they are important to
me.
I have grandchildren great
grandchildren and school it
would be for teachers I mean I
don't know what I'd do this is
no way to and granted out of
graduating seconded and passed
with a four point two seven the
things he's doing that Rep Paul.
Season those because you have
really awesome teachers that
worked with.
So I I think we need to reward
our teachers I think he but and
I understand Representative you
receive because I don't think
there's any quality so underpaid
S. eighty days and public
defenders honestly in my book I
do not understand how you can go
all the way to get a lot of work
for the salaries the work and
then we go to our teachers and
we have been working with a
master's degree and was still in
the New Mexico more dollars but
and I can understand that need
half of that and I have thought
about it over New.
But with that in mind I will go
for most.
The new facets in seventeen
that.
Representative Johnson.
to table.
Okay Representative Travis yes.
Representative hero yes.
Representative Garcia yes.
Representative will left yes.
Representative Johnson yes
Representative Martinez.
Yes.
Representative right.
Yes.
Representative says I like to
explain my vote Representative
Vincent yes and I'd like to
explain my vote for vice chair
what local yes.
Chair.
Yes and I'm already spayed my.
The to the I'm sorry go ahead.
The vote of eleven to zero you
have a new yes Representative
the losses were limited to
explain thank you Mr chair you
know I just I I I my phone
turned back on.
Wait for the answers from my
school district which is very
very important one I have to
have that your goal that I'm
serving my my family took for my
family my district and all it is
definitely not because our
shared has a really so we're
talking voices may be changed by
what.
It was district supports itself
with that that's why thank you
of those shares in New Mexico
thank you Mr chair and I want to
explain my vote.
And I was very important.
And I feel like I'm leaving
public employees behind.
Leave nobody behind a one I want
the equity there but.
When the representative told me
that we could run some more
provided.
And I can team up.
And they will run it together
and then we'll take in to
consideration the rest of the
public employees and then.
Hopefully we can pass that.
Thank you.
This is a good luck thank you Mr
chairman of one other thing
before we before we live chair
if I may I like to a village
the center focus our our sponsor
on the Senate side.
Thank you Mr thank you
committed.
Then.
The.
Steinhardt.
The.
After.
Yes.
The technician will not accept.
What
is the.
Spiegel.
Is the.
It is.
But maybe I can get.
We change them for
you with the.
Districts that is what happens
with.
Right I.
The.
Yeah.
Part is to.
Or.
That are.
Jobs have.
Actually it's not well those two
cases are.
Who would
David how do you want yours.
Thank you Mr chair.
And first time in the hot seat.
This is normally sleep last
night because of the legislation
I am run today because it makes
my heart all warm and fuzzy.
And I know my colleagues will
like this.
So yes this is legislation that
we trying to introduce it's an
appropriation of six hundred
thousand dollars and it's gonna
be from the general fund and
it's for the of that you know
it'll be put into the Veterans
Services Department.
Chair in fiscal year twenty
twenty four.
To contract with veteran police
and fire first responders.
Now.
In fort Stanton.
I'd like to introduce my my
expert witnesses to my right is
Dennis Carter to my left is
Eddie crane.
And they they run healing
America's heroes.
And healing America's heroes is
this since I've been a freshman
of the year on again to see
budgets and how much is put into
Veterans Services and I'm
shocked.
That that's all that's put in
that convention services point
zero zero zero one percent of
our budget which is.
Maybe a highway or something
like that in our veterans are
are way more important meeting
then that.
I've been to healing America's
heroes in fort stand several
times.
And they have Rep resurrected
this facility.
And it was it was a it was a
CYFD prison.
And they have taken this
facility and they cleaned it up.
And I was shocked whenever I got
there because they got a mess
hall they've got places where
you know the the PTSD veterans
firefighters and.
Everybody can go and stay they
have activities that my expert
witnesses are going to talk
about but what I want to tell
you what really.
Grab the whole to me is the
second time I went out there
they were hosting.
Some veterans and I and I got to
witness what they call a
meltdown.
Those straight of PTS the
meltdown.
And the way they handled it.
Whenever I was asked to run this
bill I was honored to run the
bill.
So with that being said I'd like
to start off to my ride with
Dennis Carter.
And.
He can talk about human
emergency rules.
Thank you Mr chairman thank your
representatives on the
committee.
Forty eight thousand the number
of disabled veterans in the
state of New Mexico.
Some percentage of those M.
retail PDF day some percentage
of the remaining ones the other
arm in arm ten thousand also if
you do have state.
We're addressing a very minor
fraction of these numbers in our
plans.
Certainly with this
appropriation misappropriation
representative first time.
Asian information department of
veterans services for net
operating program one PP if you.
many of you have graciously co
sponsored and supported bill I
think each one of you that for a
few slides.
we have a.
Current.
Calendar twenty three budget
intends to address a hundred
thirty he gets the bill and for
purpose we have two very will
program the five year and three
dare to just people who were
from the state I'm not working
weekenders from ones were
working we're trying to be
flexible.
We know that we have a facility
capacity as a we did a pass
handout for you if you put with
through the state.
With the picture looks like
conserving with numbers look
like on the cover sheet our
facilities.
Currently fifty four.
The that maybe twice that at a
time.
Our numbers of historically been
very low the seven years that
we've existed prior fort Stanton
we process the five people
through the program as well that
over ten year now we're looking
at a hundred thirty people and
and calendar twenty three.
Am going to R. twenty five over
four five year business plan
period this appropriations gonna
love the department of Veterans
Services to make direct
referrals of their clientele to
us which we've never received
before our client killed to date
has come out of the internet
interested.
Word of mouth.
We have a substantial capacity
is used and I think we're going
to provide a service to the
department of Veterans Services
which can be the first in the
nation on the state level.
Department of Veterans Affairs
federal level Justin all right
new for recreational therapist
in New Mexico being held I
station job fifty.
Then there's the new qualifier
very very limited nationally
much less here so we'll see what
it does is sanctions overdue on
recreational therapy as a
ballots science to if someone
medical problems is.
Our dresses by the VA.
Requests for comment to about a
program.
Thank you Mr chair Mr Chairman
representative thank you very
much for your time and your
attention to the veteran issues
this is a this cause of action
is very I'm basically is very
dear dear to my heart of this is
that this is something that they
need we are a recreational
therapy program okay with the do
now with our facilities down for
expanding to include our
counselors and therapists we're
also going to be including a
couples the retreat that could
Google that to to treat as well
as as a doing the job I but
I appreciate your attention.
Thank you for.
We figure speak formal down.
We currently have five people
this year and twenty twenty
three with this funding we're
gonna go to eleven full time
people in house there were plans
to go to the same group counties
numbers of of clientele.
So if you need to act on climate
New Mexico certainly issues the
directors of Lincoln County
captains rounding up cities.
Thank thank you Mr chair was
stand for questions okay I'll go
to the audience and everybody
here to support this
legislation.
Anybody in opposition.
By the those.
For this legislation.
Okay I'll go to those to you in
support anybody want to speak
with your hand go head start
using yeah that.
All Mr chairman.
The public.
Of the my name is Ryan trust
for.
The state of New Mexico
our to
analyze them support this bill.
Going facility in our times
resident Lea County it is a good
opportunity to
make life of the facility of the
loss of life and then also what
they're doing is giving life to
veterans as well to the local
community.
So with that of thank you.
The frontier.
Zero four pleasure or wall year
old members of the committee I
don't have to testify to how
much more you know the story you
see the retired army veteran I
give my time now as a retiree
Jareth advocacy committee for
the veterans and military
families office three four fifty
members statewide gaining some
yesterday and more morally
Health.
and I want you all to know that
this kind of facility.
Helps my brother and sister
Veterans.
The whole year.
Experience phase in our service
as you firefighters and first
responders that are unspeakably
dramatic.
The the stars.
But hopefully not for life if we
can get some treatment for that.
So I appreciate support this
bill not only for the veterans
but for their families who live
with them and experience their
from off with them.
And for the other first
responders firefighters
similarly impacted but thank you
Mr chairman today movie that we.
Will Michael's and Services
federal small business and this
this project is very the once I
heard about it jumped on.
Advocate for.
You can disable nine ex can.
I have a lot of friends of the
previous.
That should of I was working for
the company did well I think
that the parents are Mexico and
I just experience a lot of.
That's that were segregated from
second mineral.
And they're off of previous to
having something like this would
be a great actually to Mexico
the model for the rest of the
country we can spread often got
start of the month for dropping
that that'll.
Water Street at.
Nobody else everybody on the.
That would make the right hand.
K. C..
The committee.
With the.
That are the one for school not
to represent a market going from
thank you Mr chair and
representative I'm I have heard
your your.
What is committee chair.
He's gonna start.
As.
A tech support I'm sorry I don't
understand that we're just going
to go over what's going on.
No new downloads or whatever
okay so as an account
representative Martinez is came
up out of.
They look Mr Mr chair thank you
very much we we enjoy this
committee and so we're joined
with what you did and what
you're bringing I think this
great program to help veterans I
heard it on the there's a
motorist.
The party presentation several
times in the last few years and
I'm so glad that my good friend
here's one's going to care if
you will our Karen's and the HSD
co sponsor so obviously be
supported thank you Mr chair.
There was.
Chair.
Very familiar with with this
program.
Was produce to the support of
when I was with the department
of Veterans Services.
I'm proud to pass.
Go back to you could do but just
a Representative we were a.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative it's an
incredible program doing great
work Mr chairman my only
question is a little bit that
language to make sure it moves
through smoothly.
line eighteen this money
appropriated to the Veterans
Services Department for
expenditure to contract with
better education first respond
or.
Just a sort of therapy program
does the veterans service
department have you forward to.
