Representative Garcia percent.
Representative Rubio.
Here.
Representative.
Representative.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Chairman chairman here on I'm
here madam chair.
The process.
Thank you.
Cherish here.
Okay yes Representative Baca.
Representative.
Image professionally sure we
don't have somebody on the wrong
side.
Representative black.
Okay all right.
Okay ready okay just to be sure
I don't know if anybody heard me
on the floor my house bill one
day in and House memorial
twenty two at the request of the
sponsors have been rolled over.
So we will not be here really
either of those bills today and
we will start with the.
House bill ninety four.
Representative Hochman Vigil and
madam chair the seat is yours on
this bill.
You're ready Mr chair.
Mr chair I just wanted to let
you know that Representative
black and black are struggling
to find their link just like I
did I I can find it I to go
through the other link so
they're trying to get on but
they can't find it can that be
reset Mr chair.
Yes.
Yep Mr chair I had the same
issue where we weren't sent I
wasn't sent a panel of panelists
link so we're having to go
through the that's provided in
the committee.
On the golden wrong so just for
future reference I think what I
did is I wouldn't I guess the
the way I found it was the.
Wish it was under a from
Secretary Representative not.
Yes donors and then I.
I wouldn't do that one and the
link was there they go to an
email of Secretary.
On the building there.
Do you want me to proceed Mr
chair do you want to take a
couple more minutes let's go
ahead and get started go ahead
and get going thank you Mr chair
members of the committee we're
here to discuss house bill
ninety four at this time Mister
chair before I get into what the
bill does can we please promote
justice Shannon Bacon to
panelists issues my expert on
this bill.
And while you're doing that Mr
chair
We house bill ninety four does
two things it makes a direct
appropriation of thirty minutes
thirty five million dollars from
the general fund to the judicial
retirement fund and also
increases the surface credit
multiplier for judges and their
first ten years of service from
three point five percent per
year to four percent per year
and if justice of bacon is
available I'd like to defer to
her to make a few words and then
to my co sponsor Representative
Roybal Caballero thank you Mr
chair.
Yes.
This is are you there.
Yes go ahead.
Good afternoon and thank you Mr
chair and thank you to both of
the Sanchez put a.
Ninety four I appreciate you
taking the time to hear from
from us today.
First I want to highlight
something important about this
bill it's endorsed by he VRA.
My I. pod and courts and
corrections and as a package
with these changes to the that
are being proposed to judicial
salaries we can timely achieve
solvency for the judicial
retirement fund.
This bill is designed to do two
things as Representative Hochman
Vigil pointed out one the is to
change the terms of service and
I'll talk a little bit about why
that's important and the second
is to achieve solvency and I
know you all have heard
endlessly about a cheating
solvency for pension funds in
New Mexico I'm gonna start with
the change in the term of
service this change it is
crucial to the judiciary's
ability to recruit judges.
The judiciary needs more lawyers
in mid to late heard later in
their careers to apply to become
judges right now the vast
majority of applicants are
individuals who are fairly
fairly early on in their careers
their public defenders and
district attorneys and they're
applying to be judges and
they're being appointed to seats
where they're being asked to
make decisions about business
disputes corporate dissolution
some really complex matters and
we think it's important to
recruit some indigent
individuals to the judiciary
level little bit more experience
for a little longer in the the
two so to speak.
And that is really stymied or
stall by the current term of
service that judges have to
serve so right now for judges
appointed on or after twenty
fourteen they must serve twenty
three years to achieve a seventy
five percent pension.
So our goal is to bring lawyers
to the judiciary in mid career
state at fifty years old.
That new judge has to serve as a
judge and tell their seventy
three years old you Mr chairman.
I'm sorry to interrupt this
Representative black we're
having technical difficulties we
have members that are not able
to access the server.
I'm actually using
Representative trough system
here at the moment because I
cannot access the server I just
want to make you aware of that
Sir okay I explained in the
other way I found it was very
good I would do my provided an
email where and the the excuse
me a just as welcome and excuse
Representative the black for
interrupting.
But that out.
But anyway I went to the email
and found so yes that email from
to yes Barnes yes.
Every if you open that email the
link is there.
To get out and
Up into the committee meeting
thank you Mr I understand that
the server my email is not
reaching the server.
It can't contact the server at
the point so the link won't
work.
So I'm trying to work through
that so I ran over to to
Representative trusses office to
make you aware of that I believe
Representative box having the
same problem so.
Your chair I find may offer a
suggestion especially for those
that are at the state capitol
have the I. T. number readily
available next to you so that
when you're confronted with
something like this you can
column immediately and they're
right there on the fourth floor
and they can handle I. T.
connections and server
connections and all that kind of
issue we can't as a committee
but you can be served by them
readily on site that's the
that's a good thing about being
on site thank you Mr chair.
Mr chair I'm sorry interrupted
I'm so sorry just as I just
wanted to make you aware of that
the difficulties were having
here in the out house.
I used to be there a long time
ago.
Okay so this in and there's
nothing I can do I'm sorry
thank.
I don't have that that deep.
But just as we will continue
sorry for your interruption Mr
chair and don't worry about the
inter interruption at technology
has been challenging on list on
a daily basis I think for all of
us for two years so I under I
understand
so we're one of where I left off
was if we want to recruit judges
say at fifty right now under the
Service credits they have to
serve twenty three years to
achieve
a seventy five percent pension
which means they're seventy
three years old and what's
important to remember in all of
this is the judges that are in
the J. R. A. can't even apply to
be judges and Tyler thirty five
so it's a different kind of
kettle of fish then a lot of
other state employees in terms
of that age restriction.
Another note in it's kind of an
aside but I think it's something
that's important to keep in mind
the judiciary also pays in the
Hyatt at the height one of the
highest percentages of their
salary to the pension nationally
and of those.
That bundle of quartz or states
where judges pay and a high
percentage we're the lowest rate
of that group.
but so with our goal is to bring
that lawyers into the judiciary
around fifty years old the
current term services very
unattractive and we're starting
to see younger and younger and
younger applicants at all levels
in the judiciary.
So to assist with this problem
house bill ninety four proposes
a modification in service
credit.
The change that set forth for
you an in house bill ninety four
it's found in sections to do and
see.
is that we front load service
credit for the first ten years
at four percent.
And then after ten years ago is
down to three point five percent
this allows for a seventy five
percent pension for judges in
the J. R. A. at twenty years of
service as opposed to twenty
three years but it also allows
for somebody who comes to the
judiciary later in their career
to achieve a forty five of forty
percent pension after ten years
of service.
So the judges or justice what
earn a real benefit under the J.
R. A. at a forty percent pension
if they come into the judiciary
later one of the questions that
we often get asked about this is
what is the students solvency.
And in with the combination of
the judicial salaries on the
tape that are currently on the
table and the service credit and
the solvency money I'm gonna
talk to you about in a minute
just a minute we achieve
solvency with in the twenty five
year window that set forth by
the actuaries as the definition
of what makes a pensions
solvent.
We believe that this change and
and just walking back the term
of service a little bit it's
only three years but that three
years is important will assist
us with the recruiting problems
that were happening currently.
The next topic that is covered
by my house bill ninety four is
this move to solvency and I know
over the course of the last
several years many of the
members of heard a lot about
solvency in particular with that
Mr B. and P. E. R. A..
So that currently that generate
the judicial judicial retirement
Tension is currently not on
track to be solvent in my
lifetime it's not on track to be
solvent even in fifty years
the solvency of the J. R. rate
continues to move backwards over
the course of time and so we're
getting further and further away
from the definition of solvency.
House bill ninety ninety four
section three provides for an
appropriation to fix this
problem.
And again this is but the
attraction here is this is one
time on this is not recurring
money it's an appropriation just
this year and that one time
money that we're seeking is
thirty five million dollars.
With that infusion of cash into
the J. R. A. we will district
chief solvency in just under
twenty five years which meets
the actuarial definition of
solvency.
So those are the two key pieces
of the modifications found in
house bill ninety four I am
happy to answer any and all
questions I can are you happen
is also working out there in the
virtual land who can answer
really detailed and very
technical questions about these
modifications I'm currently
house bill two provides for
twenty million dollars for the
kind of retirement solvency for
the judiciary that includes the
magistrates and the the
magistrate tension and the
judicial pension so to achieve
the goal of solvency for both of
those we need twenty five
million more this bill would
provide for solvency for for for
both there's a parallel bill for
the magistrates I know that
chairman I'll call heard about
that the in house judiciary but
we ended up having these built
in in two different committees
so and these two girls also
mirror what's happening on on
the Senate side as well and send
it to.
I'm so with that I'm happy to
answer any questions that I can
and if there beyond my pay grade
which means they would be more
appropriate for Mr happen to
answer I think you would be able
to assist us in that regard
thank you Mr chairman again
thank you to you sponsors
Representative Hochman Vigil and
Representative Roybal copy Act.
Thank thank you Mr chair thank
you just to speak and and and I
think it also moved Mr Poppin up
to panelists as well we would
appreciate it and at this time I
want to defer to my co sponsor
Mr chair Representative Roybal
Caballero issuance said he
works.
Thank you is it okay Mister
chair.
Yes okay is yours ma'am okay
thank you thank you Mr chairman
and thank you Representative
Hochman the here and it's very
nice to see you justice bacon
again I wanted to step up and
explain how important this bill
one as when we heard it in
investments and pensions
oversight committee over the
summer we vetted the bill
properly entertained many
questions concerning
solvency and I just wanted to
highlight what was very
important in the line of
questions in which Justice bacon
just confirmed and that is that
the idea is for us to reach
solvency and a much faster pace
than what we're experiencing
currently which were averaging
up to fifty years which is just
really unacceptable when it
comes to invention in
investments and pensions
oversight and the discussions
we've had over the past few
years so anything that we can do
to Mr chair to reduce on that
level of solvency that is why it
is important and I happen to
have had the pleasure of Cherry
the investments and pensions
over the summer and this year so
I wanted to stand in full
support on that main point and
then of course much discussion
was held concerning all of the
the protocol complicated
detailed questions about service
credits and how we get to all of
that and I wanted to just let
the my colleagues on this
committee know that it was
thoroughly that it in that
committee and all of our
questions and concerns were
raised and answered and I'm
happy that it needed to this
point and thank you
Representative Hochman Vigil for
bringing this bill forward
that's it Mr chairman thank you.
Mr chair will stand for
questions.
Okay I am going to go ahead and
go to the attendee list.
And she is there is there anyone
who would like to speak for or
against this bill if you will
raise your hand and I will call
on you and give you a
approximately two minutes to
give you're not reach keep at
the.
Sure if possible then please do
not great not to be repetitive
okay well heard one
the statement kind of makes it
more and keep on hearing three
or four people say the same
thing but that's life sometimes
so with that the.
Well good to the attendees and I
see that the Mr Carter Bundy as
the first one of this hand up
Mister Bundy.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee R. Carter bonding
with us we would like to thank
the sponsors Representative
Hochman Vigil and Representative
Roybal Caballero bringing this
forward we have not taken a
position on the benefit side of
this but we certainly are
supportive of anything that
improves the solvency of any
piece of our yeah we talk about
these funds as if they're
totally separate the reality is
that money all goes into the
same large pool it's all
invested the same way so
anything that helps our personal
been see overall we do have a
strong opinion about we support
it so we want to thank the
sponsors of course Justice bacon
for being supportive of better
pension solvency II and then the
the last one I I would like to
bring is that there's another
bill that essentially does I
believe the same thing on the
judicial retirement plan but
also has what we would consider
a poison pill of significant
reporter for match each P. one
ten the got rolled over so if
you are looking for a vehicle
for judicial retirement reform
are we certainly hope that you
would support house bill ninety
four in lieu of that one thank
you so much for time Mr chairman
members of the committee.
Thank you Sir I will go next to
Mister John looks at.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I did have a very
nice little speech with very
poignant talking points ready to
go but Mister Bundy took all of
them so I will just say I'm here
on behalf of the New Mexico
federation of labor AFL-CIO and
we I stand in support of this
bill for the same reasons Mister
Bundy said thank you.
Okay thank you Sir and next to
go to Mr Greg Trujillo.
Thank you Mr chairman members
Gregory executive director with
the P. R. A. of the pera board
supports this bill whole
heartedly of puts the judicial
retirement fund on the path to
solvency and the motorcade
anything but of very strong
support and I'll be on the line
to answer any questions Mr chair
thank you right.
We'll go to the judges and and
Pfleiderer judge.
Mr chair members of the
committee thank you very much
and I am in support of the bill
for all of the reasons outlined
by justice Bacon and I just want
to thank the the sponsor as as
well for bringing this bill
forward thank you Mr chair.
Okay.
At this time is there anyone in
opposition to that bill of this
relationship this legislation.
I see the hands race there I do
not.
Okay so that the state will go
to the analysts and
I see I have a Representative
Rubio your hand this race
Go ahead thank you Mr chair and
thank you Sanchez for bringing
this forward I whole heartedly
supported and when appropriate
I'm happy to move for two passed
I did want to just say that I I
know that we've we've had some
challenges when it comes to our
recruitment and I know that down
in Los crucis this past year
we've had some some issues in in
finding and attracting
experienced
folks to be part of our judicial
system and so I feel like this
is a tool this is an opportunity
to really address that I also
think it's a really important
piece to the much bigger picture
of making these types of
judicial investments when we're
trying to tackle this issue
around crime I think that this
is something that we should be
elevating moving forward that
that these are this is the this
is the kind of legislation that
we should be working on to make
sure that if our concerns of of
crime are are are to be a
priority then we need to make
those investments within the
judicial system and so I
appreciate you all for your
presentation and for your your
efforts on this and and I look
for to loading for it thank you.
And thank you Representative I
will go to Representative give
us us.
Mr chair
by the way of Representative
Baca just walked in and he also.
Again repeat struggling to get
on the builder the is gonna
re-attempt it right now
Representative blacks a computer
will not connect with the
internet is she's having
problems for some reason but
Mr chair representative thank
you for bringing this bill.
I I was kind of just.
Trying to.
Understand and and and.
Because we have that break down
I wasn't able to hear everything
but my understanding is that
this there's going to be a tier
of retirement.
In this in this bill to allow
judges to retire.
In short periods of time more
based on age rather than than
Well aging time I guess so that
gives explain to me a little bit
better I was kind of just try to
read my my points.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative pedigree of your
question I'm sorry you guys are
having on technology issues
right now all right this meet
that also so.
Can you hear me OK is that us us
you Representative trusses I'm
sorry it's hard to see on these
new windows so I will give you
the high level answer to your
question Representative and that
what this bill does is it
increases the service credit to
four years for those judges and
their first ten years of of
being on the bench and then it
goes down to three point five
and the reason for that is to
allow them to retire a little
bit earlier because the current
formula is pushing these folks
into very high age ranges until
they can you know retire
comfortably and I will defer to
justice Bacon who can give you
more granular explanation.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative Hochman Vigil and
thank you for the credit
question Representative todos OS
That's lease it out pretty well
what it does is it front loads
service credit for the first ten
years.
Which would allow somebody who's
a little as I use that phrase
longer in the tooth when they
come in as a judge they could
then retire after ten years but
at a forty percent pension so
it's a much smaller percentage
and then for those who come in
at a younger age and are going
to serve kind of the the whole
bit they can they will be able
to retire at twenty years at
seventy five percent rather than
the current requirement of
twenty three years of service so
it's focusing on that speed at
which the service credit accrues
incentivizing people who are a
little bit older and have more
experience to apply still get
something from the Santo the
system but not at that seventy
five percent range.
So Madam chair representative
I'm looking here at the FIR my
understand is three hundred
fifty thousand dollars for
excuse me million our.
It is that what I'm
understanding.
Mr chair representative yes yes
if the requested appropriation
amount is thirty five million as
justice Bacon already spoke
there is an appropriation I
believe of twenty million that's
already been included in house
bill two in its current form for
both judicial and magistrate
retirement so the thirty five
million dollars appropriation
wasn't ask but we're happy to
report that we have appropriated
in allocated a specific amount
for this issue it even though
it's not the full thirty five
million dollars at this time but
as as you know Representative
stresses Mr chair once that
house bill two goes over to the
Senate further changes can be
made as well.
Thank you madam chair
representative or excuse me Mr
chair representative as I just
because I'm behind because I was
unable to get that that's why
I'm asking price reduction
questions
I don't know but my question to
that was basically the solvency
that does that mean that will be
solved for this Mr chair
representative.
Representative Mr chair
representative office I it will
not take is the full solvency
solvency now in its current form
but it will take a nice large
chunk out of it.
All right well it I I I think
you and I and I'm sorry that I
wasn't able to hear all of the
presentation in its entirety Mr
chair representative but it
sounds it's it's sounds like a
good bill I just my only concern
that I would have is to make
sure that that what we are
taking out we've got enough
there to sustain our judges on a
long term and I appreciate your
legislation because we do get
away with it with all due
respect it's it's like a fuel
rector that's ninety years old
we just they they quite artist
is keen and so you know what
we're out of respect to him I
think you're doing good thank
you Mr chair representative
thank you for the bill.
Thank you do I have anybody
else.
I will if not I have just one
question in today's world.
how many years you have to work
to get to a seventy five percent
retirement.
Mr chairman it deferred to the
justice Bacon who can speak to
that as in terms of the you know
judicial point of view.
Mr chair under the current
system anybody appointed after
two thousand and fourteen has to
serve twenty three years to get
to seventy five percent.
So I guess but seventy five
percent were pretty much the.
We might need will your your
take home paycheck.
If you retire just the way I'm
looking at it because once you
retire you don't have to pay
that P. R. A. or that the
judicial at J. R. A. or social
security and all those other
expenses so.
The a pretty decent eight six it
almost makes it worthwhile to be
a judge.
Well you I know that my
retirement is pretty nice it's
not as nice as I wish it would
be that that it does help.
So up with that I'm going to
Representative Rubio for a
motion.
Thank you Mr chair I move for do
passed.
Okay so I heard two seconds was
the first one.
This first.
There's a lady.
Representative bash okay so I
have a proper of motion for
Representative Rubio and no
proper second from
Representative bags this does
not I would just simply ask is
there any opposition to this
bill.
There's opposition at all
Representative yes ma'am I have
a question is since the other
two could not get on and do what
I want to go to Representative
dot last us that to say yes I
guess we should call the roll
okay so go ahead Representative
madam secretary thank you
Representative BOBACK.
Well yes.
Representative that.
Yes.
The black.
Yes.
Yes yes.
Representative okay.
Yes.
Garcia.
Yes Representative Rubio.
Yes sorry.
Representative office.
Yes Representative vice chair
representative for Bob Ryan.
Yes.
Chairman.
Yes.
Okay the vote is on line.
There are.
With the hill and vice chair you
have a due less money zero good
luck in New Mexico many.
Good luck finding more money
that's the biggest thing what
will keep we'll keep trying all
those stones over we'll get
there thank you
good luck thank you.
Mr Chairman yes Sir.
This is representative Garcia Mr
chairman
I would like to make a motion.
Our state you will hear me say
Mr chairman the house bill forty
eight the the so security income
exemption bill in our committee
ended up last week and that on a
four four tie vote.
And Mr chairman I would like to
make a motion to reconsider the
vote that we made on house bill
forty eight and make it the next
order of business.
Second that Mr chair.
Okay so let me ask this question
and I'm just curious because I
did a little.
I'm not.
What is it that we would have to
make it the next order of
business.
You explain that to.
Mr chair that is part of the
motion
I mean if you wish to consider
at years later on in the agenda
that's fine.
But the motion is to our
reconsider the vote and make it
the next order of business.
Okay.
I I don't have a problem with
that that you not that hard
headed.
I do have a just a point of I
guess question point of order I
don't know how to call it right
now but I do have
you have your kid last year
thank you.
Thank you so you know many of
you know that I where they have
a parliamentarian so I often
look at these kinds of things
from that perspective so I just
have a question from the two
most seniors on this committee I
don't mean in terms most tenured
I should say not seniors but
Representative chair and whoever
else can answer this
Representative that Sierra is
according to the rules of order
and I understand I don't I don't
have my copy right in front of
me both masons and.
well masons but I don't remember
my handbook our house rules is a
motion to reconsider
appropriate.
At this time or had it was it
supposed to be made
at the at the same time that the
motion was tabled because
according to the rules of order
which
are generally reference cross
references Roberts and masons a
motion to reconsider has to be
made by the
the proper side which is what
Representative C. as
representing but it also has to
be made at before the end of the
the meeting whereby in the
motion was tabled that's why I
wanted to ask that question
because you will have previous
experience from my handbook.
Okay number one in my research
is that of course this bill was
not tabled.
It didn't add up
going to rest on a four four tie
vote.
So there's no table all the
proper motion for representative
Garcia is for us to be
considerate today I'm remaking
the next order of business
another would you bring it to a
vote again.
That's all we're going to do is
bring it to a vote today and
that's completely all that it is
it is a proper motion whether I
like it or not it is proper and
we need to continue forward with
it thank you clarification
because I didn't know how
often times people have said
that a tie is the same as a as a
table and so I just wanted to
make sure that the general
everybody all of us understand
that and that it doesn't need to
be clouded with that issue thank
you right W. that it wasn't able
we can proceed with this
this time I'm not going to let
the ones that get get on the on
the computer vote okay
Representative black.
Representative black.
Okay so what we're going to do
this at this time madam chair.
Is we are going to bring up
house bill.
My correct okay that's correct
Mr chair okay we can bring it up
for a vote at this time House
Bill forty eight again just to
make sure that your membership
with us what do rest on this
committee on a four four tie
vote so we are going to vote on
the bill.
And pretty basically that's how
we're going to do so madam
secretary.
Mr chair.
Sure I I would like to formally
make a motion what do pass
recommendation on house bill
forty eight.
Mr chair levels already being
properly made and seconded and
prior is at any previous time so
the only thing we have at this
time is the basically that you
have made the motion to
reconsider it and bring it back
to a low.
Thank you Mr chair that's the
way I understand it so madam
secretary are you know the bit
the vote that house bill forty
eight.
Are we would appreciate it.
seconded that motion.
I Representative the last US.
Right.
I don't remember what happened
five minutes ago yes.
Okay.
So Representative it is a dual.
Representative.
Well there's a new path right.
That's correct okay
Representative Baca.
yes.
Representative bash.
Yes Representative black.
Representative the black.
Yes yes.
Representative longer.
Now.
Representative Garcia.
Yes.
Representative Rubio no.
Representative character.
Yes.
Representative director of the
act.
Yes.
vice chair representative Ralph
Representative off by.
No.
Malcolm.
I can hear you.
You know.
One two three four five four.
Or against.
Thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Representative and
that the state law we can go
forward thank you best is bill
forward so that I think I read
the newspaper that the somebody
said that if we pass this bill
that people can.
By recreational vehicles and
boats in the avid adult that
would be.
So we can continue going forward
with light.
So with that madam chair we will
go to the next bill and our
regular order of business
who is next on the agenda who is
next in the hot seat.
I think it's.
Twenty six I believe Mr chair
yes one house bill one twenty
six.
And that is Representative Lujan
and Representative Herndon.
Are they here in the in the
queue are they in the queue.
Representative Lujan
Representative Hernandez
Representative Hernandez that
are hand raised.
Representative Lujan I do not
see.
Representative.
The Lopers of.
Receive your hand raised.
We would bring in.
Do you Representative Hernandez
you know and but represent the
real one C. had a family
emergency Representative of and
so she won't be here so well
okay he has given us permission
to move forward okay
Representative heard and so then
the hot seat is yours a.
I think that you did bring
Senator Lopez didn't with you as
a back up is that correct yes
that is correct.
Thank you all right so how do
this year's you can proceed as
a representative of the Mr chair
representative we have two
expert witnesses would you
please bring them up what is the
Mr Ricky Serna he's down there
in the.
In the audience would you also
bring a possible in this thank
you she Michelle Lujan and Rick
raise your hand.
Okay.
Thank you both bring bring those
benefits will be ready to go I
correct that's it that's it Mr
speaker I'm I'm sorry Mr chair
please don't do what we.
Okay we are ready that and
Representative Fajardo in the
hot here is yours go ahead thank
you very much Mr chairman I'm
going to make a brief statement
that I'm gonna turn it over to
Senator Lopez to make a
statement and then we have to
statements by our work our
expert witnesses so today Mr
chair members of the committee
we are bringing before you house
bill one twenty six and it
stinks to an act the burst of
the act it and the diversity act
it's the position of chief
diversity officer within the
state personnel office as a
classified position and that
position will help to create
diversity and inclusion within
the state agencies throughout
the state of New Mexico it will
outline their duties they create
a workforce diversity and
inclusion council is also going
to be a part of this bill and
that town so we'll gather data
and provide reports annually
showing how the state is meeting
its responsibility with respect
to of diverse diversity and
inclusion in terms of it's hard
with that I'm going to turn this
over to Senator Lopez.
Thank you very much
Representative heard them and
and Mr chairman and members of
the committee I was going to be
here with you
first of all I say I apologize
I'm gonna have to leave because
after a presentation no
disrespect to the committee but
I have mom duties that need to
take you back home to
Albuquerque but I'm I'm honored
to be co sponsored with
the representatives and Mr
Chairman we have been trying to
get a piece of legislation out
of both the Senate and the house
for a number of years this is
your number twelfth.
And I think the creativity and
the establishment of the day
office of diversity in our CPO
state personnel office is a
perfect placement a perfect
opportunity for us to move
forward as we talk as
Representative heard it
mentioned about inclusion you'll
equity and moving forward in the
state of New Mexico it's the
right thing for us to do and I
am here offering support and
asking for the support of the
committee thank you.
This I would like to inform you
that you brought over the wrong
the sale we love Michelle modest
but it's Michelle Lynn this will
be the expert witness.
Mr chair I see that she is now
here thank you.
Okay so who's going to start.
Mr chair Michelle Lynn this with
the City of Albuquerque will
speak first.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Senator Lopez and Representative
Herndon my name is Michelle
Melendez I am the director of
the inaugural director of the
City of Albuquerque office of
equity and inclusion this was an
office established by mayor Tim
Keller four years ago when he
first took office and it's very
similar to what's being
described in house bill one
twenty six and.
When we first started four years
ago one of our focuses was on
who we have here as a city and
recognizing the importance of
having a city workforce that is
reflective of our very very
diverse population in the City
of Albuquerque and so our office
began examining the city's
hiring practices recruitment
practices and how well we were
doing with hiring a diverse pool
of applicants and we believe
that this is a key to providing
great service to our residents
in the city as well as.
Providing a great source of
stable well paying jobs with
benefits for those members of
our community who are from
diverse populations themselves.
And with more than five thousand
five hundred employees and City
of Albuquerque we know that
we're a source of good paying
jobs and great service to our
community one of the very first
things we did was to analyze the
data and overall the city's
workforce is made up of sixty
four percent of people of color
and thirty six percent of white
identifying employees so we're
slightly more diverse than the
city's population as a whole
with Hispanics accounting for a
large proportion of that
workforce all other groups are
under represented in city
workforce and so since two
thousand eighteen we have taken
a number of actions as a city to
increase our diversity.
First of all our office was
given one hundred percent access
to all of the HR data which is a
key and we were able to analyze
that and share it with me
analysis to all department
directors and their HR
coordinators along with the list
of strategies that they could
take to diversify the work force
and the strategies range from
everything from pipe laying work
recruiting young people to have
their very first work experience
with the City of Albuquerque and
get that great work experience
under their belts through use
hiring summer hires and that
sort of thing and also brought
new recruitment and sending out
weekly every single new job
that's posted with the City of
Albuquerque to a growing list of
community members and
organizations that serve very
diverse populations.
As well we have been doing
hiring shares which were unheard
of in the City of Albuquerque
for a number of years and
workshops on how to apply
successfully for a job with the
City of Albuquerque as well as
working on career advancement so
those people who are already
City of Albuquerque employees
how can may move up the career
ladder and become managers
managers supervisors and
executive leadership within the
city just last fall we started a
mobile hiring them knowing that
the pandemic has made it very
challenging we had a hiring
freeze for a number of months
and so really trying to get out
to the neighborhoods and recruit
directly from the neighborhoods
from which we want to fill jobs.
And since two thousand eighteen
we've made some progress hiring
from under represented
populations but the progress is
not yet kept pace with the
changing demographics so we have
more work to do and we fully
support the state's efforts to
do the same and believe that by
working together we can make a
difference to have a stronger
workforce one that is more
reflective of our city and our
state.
So with that I will and my
comments and ask and answer any
questions you may have thank
you.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee now I would like
to have regained Cerner with the
state personnel office of the
state.
To speak.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Ricky
Serna the acting director of the
state personnel office I want to
thank representatives Herndon
due on Senators Lopez others
Senator Pinto I've worked in the
past to really bring this bill
forward once more I just want to
constitution on on a component
of this bill it's important that
showman distant and that's the
inclusion piece I think are
common saying among diversity
inclusion is person is getting
the invitation to the dance but
inclusion is that once you're
there everybody gets invited to
dance I think it's important for
us to understand that we've got
to have a workforce that
resembles the populations that
we serve population of the state
of New Mexico but we need to
understand how the the identify
with the opinions and unique
experiences that they bring and
how and how we leverage that
Senator Mexicans and told
reporters agencies and so so we
really appreciate this bill
because it establishes sorry Mr
here we're getting a really bad
echo Mr chair really bad it
could either of there's two
people but I'm having a hard
time hearing them Mr chair.
The person speaking good mute I
think would be in good shape.
Thank you Sir about that Mr
chair Senator.
Okay.
And so what we're excited the
state personal office to
increase responsibility to
establish in the office of
diversity equity inclusion for
state government and again this
isn't just a measure that says
we're going to hire certain
individuals as much as it is we
are going to diversify the
workforce we're gonna work to be
sure that their experiences help
us become stronger as a employer
and and it's important to also
note that this isn't necessarily
always focused on race and
ethnicity we have to focus
groups that really do help us
strengthen our organization an
example also is when you look at
an inclusive work should look
involved in yield your hiring
young adults member for state
government and there's been a
lot of studies done about how we
really are making for our
environment because of what they
bring to the table for example
studies have been done to show
that young workers in your
workplace are often times are
you know are discouraged from
remaining at organization but
the roof as you know younger
adults young men young women and
infants.
in some cases they bring ideas
right that could help with
address appurtenant station in
the metric things like we've
already tried that we've already
done that and and those are some
of the institutional racism
the things that we need to
overcome and on the other end of
the spectrum I think it's
important that there there are
there is the justification
presently in this session and
and like you to come property
back those who have retired from
state government back into the
workforce and I think it's
important on that note also
there's this big government
review wonders and what it is
the inclusive understand how
their experiences.
Our organization is really just
being short and making our
membership includes part of the
coverage and everything.
Thank you Mr chairman also urged
the difficult questions.
Okay Representative a are you.
Are you ready to go to the
audience.
Yes Mr chair members of the
committee we are ready to go to
the audience thank you I will at
this time we go to the attendee.
And.
Madam vice chair trying to get
in to see and to see back when
one of my bills would you take
over please.
Okay and I probably yes we'll be
switching seats also thank you I
will.
Good luck.
Okay so
We're looking at the list of
attendees and
we will go ahead and raise your
hand if you are here to speak in
opposition.
So.
Just those in opposition we need
to gauge the opposition first.
Okay.
Miss
Hannah renal are you in
opposition.
Your hand is up.
If it's okay.
Me.
Yes okay yes I.
I'm sorry you are in a position
okay just hold on one moment go
ahead and mute yourself are
there any others I'm here in
opposition.
Okay I see none then
Mr it I can't tell if it's just
go ahead Mr.
No.
No Hannah rejected I'm not sure
yes up hi this is required hand
as my daughter she's my all.
Okay okay the visor so we I
think you chair madam chair and
and committee members money was
required all representing the
coalition of conservatives
conservatives in action Los
crucis speaking in opposition to
HB one point six we have
extension extensive knowledge of
diversity equity and inclusion
issues came as a group proposed
culturally linguistically
linguistically responsive
education CLR which lost his
public schools adopted in may of
last year.
Respectfully this is our will is
unnecessary I was a supervisor
white says this land for fifteen
years and they're the equal
opportunity office the office
cover legal opportunity
professional.
Every state department has in
the U office already.
White sands there is near zero
discrimination of any kind that
I saw during all my years as a
federal supervisor the promotion
process was absolutely fair.
While we are group is about half
Hispanic my dad's white to one
one static.
We don't want any part of that
set for second class attention
studentship down here of Martin
Luther king is the world of
their words like and
Representative.
Underserved diverse and
inclusive are loaded and
offensive to us thank you.
Thank you.
I'm at this time we're going to
go to the attendees and if you
would raise your hand if you
want wish to speak in support of
house bill one twenty six.
I'll ask one more time if you're
here to speak in support of
house bill one twenty six.
In your in the attendees please
raise your hand.
Okay very good we have
Berlin Berlin followed by I'm
Neal Rucker go ahead Mister
Lang.
Good afternoon Madam chairman
members of the committee I'm
Hannah Burling I'm the president
of the league of women voters of
New Mexico the league stands in
strong support of this bill we
believe that all levels of
government are responsible for
providing equality of
opportunity for employment for
all persons in New Mexico thank
you.
Thank you very much so next on
we have dnia rocker.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is near record of the policy
council and regional manager of
the ACLU of New Mexico and I'm
located in Los crucis we want to
thank the sponsors for bringing
this very important and long
overdue bill.
I'm here today on behalf of the
ACLU of New Mexico in strong
support of H. B. one twenty six
and to do past thank you.
Thank you so I will ask once
again if there's a new anyone
else in the attendees who wishes
to speak in favor of house bill
one twenty six please raise your
hand.
All right seeing no other
speakers I will now turn to the
committee and
I don't see any okay let me get.
My schooling.
Okay.
All right
we're going to the committee for
questions Representative black.
Thank you madam chair I'm glad
to finally get on to see you.
I'm I just I have some issues I
think with this with this
legislation I guess I just can't
get my head around so the bill
identifies that the the chief
diversity officer as a
classified position this
service.
At the pleasure of the state
personnel director.
But that's not consistent with.
Usually at the pleasure means
that position.
So I am having a hard time
figuring out how that would be
required with that can you give
me some insight on that please.
Mr chair Representative black.
Thank you very much for raising
that I would consider that a
friendly amendment to change
that to move that might serve as
that at the pleasure of the.
Of the.
Of the direct.
Okay.
And I appreciate that
Representative input I'm chair
I.
The wording needs to be to to be
worked out correctly
In order for that to if you were
You know I I look at.
The the expense of hiring.
Another person because this
isn't just position already
being built by the state person
this are the easiest.
Mr Mr chair Representative black
no it is not so there is no need
to reverse the officer on staff
with the state personnel office
no within the state of New
Mexico.
Thank you for that
Representative and and madam
chair.
I guess my my my question would
be.
Is that the is that job I guess
for better words is that
position not already being
handled by another person not
necessarily the direct yes but
isn't this already being handled
in the state personnel office.
So Mr chair members of the
committee representative of
black I'm going to ask my
experts Ricky Serna to previous
responsible.
Thank you Mr chair
representative lacked question
is is no currently when you look
at the duties and
responsibilities that are rated
in this bill that will be
covered the responsibilities of
the chief diversity officer
there are some components that
are are being addressed for
example training development as
necessary in collaboration with
other agencies we do have a
training division but the
overwhelming majority of duties
and responsibilities that will
belong to the diversity officer
are not presently being taking
care.
Thank you for that Mr chair and
representative.
Madam chair just you know I I
hate grow and Hey growing
government so I just I'm really
going to have to listen to some
more comments on this
I just look at that.
It's almost like creating more
red tape to me and that that's
what concerns me so I'll sit
back and listen to the more
discussion so thank you
Representative thank you madam
chair.
Thank you and next on the list
we have Representative local.
Thank you madam chair thank you
cheer expenses at this the
directors and then and mission
land that for coming in and
speaking and and others as well
I have this.
The wonderful to see this move
the way it has in the way that
it has involved as well
communities have worked towards
this very thing for it decades
now and to see this implemented
similar The New the City of
Albuquerque and knowing that the
work of the National Melinda's
and her team.
I I know that this is really a
step towards just as directors
Senate said that inclusion
component as we think about how
do we really make places more
equitable for people who haven't
been necessarily representing
the spaces that have a voice and
I think that's critically
important and it will soon as
our state government rates for
efficiency because as we know
data is powerful as we do
assessments across these
different state departments and
we see where that gaps in even
the simple agents seeing during
the hearing workers like what
perspective are we missing I
know that this not only enhances
just the the work that's being
done but also the quality of the
services that are being
instituted at the state level so
I am so excited to be supporting
this in its four AM and just the
again want to thank the sponsors
and the supporters for doing
this good work in continuing to
push at the state level thank
you Mr chair.
Thank you Representative next we
have on the list Representative
about that.
Thank you Mr chair
let me just correct Mr chairman
stepped out and I'm sitting in
right now.
So I I all of.
Thanks sorry madam chair okay
I'm looking I'm looking at Rep
Representative Alcon right now
and I so that just for fun.
Go ahead your
yeah I don't like computers so I
I apologize as well I'm having
issues with my computer
I do have some questions as well
as was brought up before all
public entities agencies they do
have a local P. E. O. C. officer
as part of the requirement right
for the for level
As far as as part of their
hiring practices we do have to
have those types with a B. the
city of Albuquerque or any of
the multiple school district
from the state they do have as
part of their safety safeguards
a local E. O. C. officers are
correct.
Mr chair representative I
imagine that a a number on state
agencies absolutely of
identifying the persons within
their HR office responsible for
compliance with the federal
discrimination laws that's
correct I'm gonna say that I I
believe that most public
agencies or state agencies are
federal agencies they do out
that certain
these types of of safeguards in
place right and and currently if
there is an issue at the local
level.
Then then it does get sent up to
the state levels are correct who
currently handles EEOC's at the
state level once it passes
through the district level or
the local level with the local
entities or agencies.
Mr chair representative I think
what we're referring to is is
state compliance with title
seven federal EEOC compliance
right so that if somebody is
going to alleged discrimination
right and it will confederal
Yossi so then that process will
been beef itself back in and say
okay we're going to go from your
seat to the state personnel
office or or somewhere else and
I think it's important to note
that that with this bill isn't
doing it simply is creating a
thank you for state employees to
essentially report
discrimination.
This is a proactive bill that
does a lot by way of ensuring
that our work force is
representative of our state the
communities that we serve the
population that we serve but
even more important how those
identities are incorporated into
the fabric of agencies and and
it results in a major investment
right so when you look at the
example I provided for you bring
in you know are you create a
pipeline and you bring a whole
bunch of million you'll see in a
young workers are gonna say okay
I want to go and work for the
department of information
technology as a programmer and
the fabric of the culture of the
department of information
technology isn't set up to
understand how do we for the
value of these workers into the
organization so that we're
gaining everything we can from
their experiences if they decide
I don't fit in you're right
every idea I talk about is you
know you're going to have a lot
to learn you've already tried
that and those workers decide
this isn't a good place for me
and I believe that's not
necessarily a need you'll see
discrimination complaint right
that's a I don't fit in here
this apartment isn't for me and
now we exhaust the resources
that we need to be personally
find workers that are able to
identify with whatever cultures
we need to.
Thank you madam chair thank you
well Mr Sarna.
But another question I have is
that you said that there's
currently nobody at the state
person office that is performing
this function do we have any
idea about how many people
actually work for the state
personnel office.
Mr chair we have right now we
have thirty six employees of the
state personal.
So so we have thirty six
employees and we're saying that
we have to have another person
outside of the thirty six
minutes thirty seven now to
handle what what you what that
was being requested in this
bill.
Mr I I I think it's important if
you want to amplify Mr chair
representative if you want to
amplify that this is an
important right topic that we
need to start turning into
actionable practices within
agencies we've got to dedicate
the resources to do that right I
think it's important to say
there's someone here whose
responsibility is to do this
along with ten or fifteen other
things but then it doesn't imply
the value but the.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Mr stern I I guess that's just
when we're talking about you
know when we're talking about
the the the the type of
investment that we're we're
looking at here that we already
have this you know pretty much a
large staff of thirty six
individuals working in the state
personnel office I just wonder
if are we replicating services
R. RT somebody important in this
job.
And there are we just you know
the for this other position I I
I agree with what we're saying
as far as you know as far as
with the discrimination and and
everything like that but what
we're but what what I'm I guess
my question is.
In my in my understanding of
this thing and having hired an
interview people for decades as
well I I'm I'm pretty sure that
we are to have these things that
are many of times address at the
local level and my question is
if we do have you know a large
staff the state person of are we
are we replicating Services but
with that I will in my comments
thank you madam chair thank you
Mr stern.
Thank you Representative and
next on the list we have
Representative the process.
Sure thank you Representative
you know
We're looking at things like
this so I I can tell you what
I've been a an employer and
worked in it.
I've heard a lot of people in my
career and I very rarely to fire
anybody and and so I I mean I've
dealt with a lot of people in my
in my in my career.
And I I struggle sometimes
we have to identify the special
right now I mean you can you can
turn somebody in for for
discrimination as as as as.
As it is right now
but I was kind of just go it
going through the let me but let
me of.
Of
Requirements this particular
Bill would require for for this.
This position to do and I was
just wondering like you can give
me a I'm an addict I guess an
example of some of this but I
know some of these things I mean
because it's a long list of
things that is covered and and.
Madam chair representative I'm
sorry I'm I'm kind of moving
around just trying to find lost
my page what I was gonna ask for
but.
Right now if if you found
discrimination today madam chair
representative.
What would you do if you were to
work at a state agency where do
you go what do you our our give
me the information of who you
should report this to and the
succession of that.
Currently in the state of New
Mexico what are we doing.
Mr chair members of the
committee Representative ros's
thank you for that question
there's this the purpose of this
position that you diversity
officer is not to look for
discrimination but just to make
sure that we have a very diverse
work for our working for the
state of New Mexico one of the
largest employers for the state
to make sure that the voices of
every single person in terms of
race culture ethnicity eight are
heard because that's the way our
state is made up let me go back
to a question just for a moment
that Representative Baca races
that how many employees do you
have at the state of New Mexico
at the state personnel office so
the response was there are
thirty six employees but let's
look at the broader picture of
what they are responsible for so
there are a total of sixteen
thousand employees with the
state of New Mexico and the
state personnel office is with
its responsible for hiring those
individuals that are working for
the state so thirty six
employees sixteen thousand
they're responsible for yes we
can and should have an
additional person who's looking
at that person the to make sure
that the diversity of those
individuals that we are hiring
is absolutely within our state
also we look at how many
agencies state personnel office
is responsible for sixty six
eight we have thirty six people
responsible for sixteen thousand
people and sixty six agencies so
what we're looking at us or
chief diversity officer to make
sure that the people that we are
hiring absolutely representative
of the state that we are
serving.
Representative my friend I I'm
gonna ask you a question so when
you say diversity do you mean
we're gonna have ratios of
certain colors races I read
protected classes.
Do you have established ratios
for this that what what you're
proposing.
So Representative I mean Mr
chair.
Members of the committee
representatives Ross's.
Establishing Graeser ratios
without.
Well by the Supreme Court so
that's not what we're looking at
what we're looking at is we're
looking at making sure that we
are reaching out throughout the
entire state to make sure that
every single person who can
apply for a job eligible to
apply for jobs knows about it
and that we have that those
steppers voices with in our
within our state and and making
the decisions about the
appropriations within those
sixty six agencies that we have
so I just want you to look at
the board of directors that's
making a decision about things
that are going to happen with
this race that they work in the
same thing happens here you want
to make sure that you have
diverse voices that you're
considering that perhaps what if
it's a low income person what if
it's a person that higher
incomes are we hearing those
voices and knowing that we're
making the decision that
absolutely brings all of those
and the plight so this is the
same principle the same concept
we want to make sure that we are
listening to the voices of New
Mexico and they are very of of
but right you want to have them
here you don't want to have
people segregated into positions
we also want to make sure that
people are having the
opportunity to advance within
those positions so I present
that to you Mr chair
Representative members of the
committee Representative trusts.
And I think thank you madam
chair Rep are Representative for
for that I think what I'm trying
to to get at is how we're going
to basically
Basically these these these
factors on and and there's a lot
of factors are on the make so
maybe like you said it could be
income it could be H. they can
be at this city it could be
their lifestyle it can be a
matter of things is it is it is
it sex is it I mean there's all
these different factors and and
you know that was one thing
madam chair representative that
I that I always stuck with when
I went to college and and they
gave us up as an accountant when
I went to school they gave us we
had to do an audit for IBM.
And one of the things that my
professor said is to keep things
K. I. S. S. and it is keep it
simple.
You know what and I remember
that and so I've always tried to
make my decisions based on that
and and and and so this seems.
Although you're right we should
include every.
Representative.
New York.
Although I'm sorry was I I I
just got I'm sorry okay so
although I agree with that that
we should always be open minded
Madam chair representative and
we should always try to include
everyone I I feel very strongly
that I have always felt that the
appropriate way to hire someone
is based on their performance
but they can actually do to
accomplish the job that they're
being hired for never in my
career if I ever hired someone
by the way
that by their age or their color
or their race I just I've always
you know that you know it and
you know how how things are you
know I've been in business for
many many years and and you know
I'm fifty I'm gonna be fifty
here a little bit so I started
my business when I was in in my
late twenties and you know you
when you're talking to the other
young guys Hey you get on that
it's just the way it is and and
I want to be appropriate about
it the state you know you can
hire young lady in in your you
have a pretty secretary well I
tell you know what I don't look
for it's not to me looks is not
what matters is in the eyes of
of of what we're what we're
thinking I'm looking for someone
that's going to take care of my
customers someone that's going
to be honest someone that's
going to be respectful and
someone is going to take care of
the job that we need to and you
know all although I I love what
you're trying to do and you're
my friend and I and I appreciate
you so much I I feel that it's
complicated for me and I don't
understand how we'd be able to
to make this happen but I I
always what will stick to what's
was simple for me and that's
funding the best person for the
job I worry Madam chair
representative that certain
areas of our state I was just
thinking however had a certain
there's certain colors and
certain people have not.
Ever applied at my place and
some people that have applied I
was I was actually one of the
first of more trees to.
Welcome women and and make a big
part of my of my staff when
things were a man has to do
everything so and I've done that
and other things that I don't
want to get into every little
thing but I I whole heartedly I
understand where you're coming
from I just I and I and I hope
you see where I'm coming from it
just I find it hard to support
it when it's it's complicated
for me to understand how that's
gonna work thank you for
listening to to me Madam chair
and representative and and thank
you for your hard work because
this is a lot of hard work this
isn't something that you just
dream up it's it's it's hard
work and I appreciate your
efforts.
Thank you Representative are
there on any other members of
the committee who have
questions.
I'm sure I'd like to make a
motion to table but it's.
Before we take that motion I
have a question.
So I'll I'll go ahead and
so thank you very much
Representative and I
I want to just add that I'm
happy to have joined you want on
the sponsorship with my esteemed
Senator will we've been trying
for very many years to do this
on in addressing institutional
racism but my question is this
so I heard a lot of of
a discussion about and I think
there's a misunderstanding about
what diversity is.
And
And.
Waiting at with.
What we obviously progress from
we've progressed from the the
scenarios that were presented to
us
you know we're not in in
io times were not in affirmative
action times were not in any of
those times were now in the
times of promoting
diversity and so if you would
just
for clarity sake.
Just give us a brief explanation
on what that means
Representative.
Madam chair members of the
committee representative comma
yellow you know one of the
things that happens all too
often I just want to
specifically address eight a
statement made by Representative
process if I may madam chair
members of the committee is that
the statement was made I want to
hire the best people for the job
I don't want to just hired based
on eight may be certain criteria
and I I just want to point out
that one of the biggest
fallacies that occurrence too
often is that yes in the there
is a focus on hiring and making
sure that there is a diversity
with and a particular area the
first thought that arises is
that all the people are not
qualified and we're gonna be
getting step standard people
that is not true I want to talk
about what this concept of
diversity looks like support
today for example in the
committee we talked about a a
particular community that needed
copper mining and taxes for
example they wanted the tax
system that that was focused on
something that was needed for
that particular community they
needed something special they
needed the diversity of those
funds to come in to help their
community grow I look at the
taxation and revenue department
we need to make sure that there
are people who are hired within
that department were both in the
urban areas and in the rural
areas so that we understand the
difference so that would not
just making decisions based upon
urban this element been do and
then I want to also look at the
regulation and licensing
department with the state of New
Mexico I mean where are we
missing the licensing people
within the areas where they are
professional licenses with their
voices that are missing so what
we can do with the staff person
the officer for example is make
sure that our we are training
our recruitment is is fully
covers in the areas in which we
are out but you know we're not
just focusing on Albuquerque
when I just spoke to.
Non Santa Fe so it's bigger it's
it's best to look at this big
diversity it's a New Mexico has
a state that has one of the best
aspects of cultures that are
here but they are not all
represented in the major
decisions that are being made
and affected by the people each
and every day this chief
diversity officer will help us
in that direction.
Chair I'd like to respond if I
can't my my dear friend.
Representative Herndon
at the end and I hope I didn't
mean to disrespect what I what I
was trying to hi I came across
because that wasn't my intent
intent was you know I guess.
I've always given people a
second chance and and always
have whether they have had
issues with law enforcement or I
help people that that couldn't
get a job anywhere always giving
people a second chance and and I
believe we should do that and
and I feel that people
I I I know a lot of people that
do that in the in in my.
What I see.
In our in our area where I live
of friends employee and and and
just in general.
Do that on a daily basis I
myself have prided myself in in
helping people that have have
had no future and Madam chair
representative and to date have
successful businesses have
successful marriages and
families and not just because
it's not all measured by money
is meant to me success is what
we as a person feel is is is is
prosperous that could be time
with your family that can be.
If I may I'm so sorry I had to
step out for just a minute I
believe I have the four I was
asking questions and madam chair
your I will I will do thank you
thank you and and when we do
this just as a matter of
protocol when the representative
is answering questions that
we've made it's not meant for
rebuttal by anybody else I just
wanted to make that clear so
Representative and thank you
Representative that assessed
Thank you for your
For your answer I think it was
very informative and to the
point that I was
referring to and and and you
brought it up to date so I
appreciate it and so we have a
Committee we have a motion to
table and that takes precedence
over everything at this point so
Where is the secretary Madam
tried like to make a second to
that motion.
The motion to table doesn't need
second you're you're it so we're
good where we're gonna go ahead
so Sophia Representative and
secretary will you please thank
Raul Representative call maybe
that motion.
It was made by Representative
black okay.
And that was the table
Representative yes it's a
tabling motion okay.
Representative Baca.
Hello yes.
Representative bash.
Representative black.
Yes.
Representative.
Now.
Representative Rubio no to
table.
Representative.
Yes to table.
Representative vice chair board
box are.
No to table.
I'd like to explain my will
please.
who's speaking I'm sorry.
Representative Russ is ma'am I
just want to explain Google
please.
Just a moment of you know let me
just make sure I understood the
votes go ahead Sophia how we
completed the vote no thank you
Representative at chair at all
costs.
I'm I believe chair Acland is
she's here okay no to table.
Thank you to table
able to take a look.
Right.
So.
Three.
Yes the table and the six not
to.
Thank you.
Thank you and I'm.
Representative says can you go
head briefly we have several
other items thank you very
difficult but for me I just
didn't understand how we could
make that a reality down at the
office make the struggling with
that I hope that I really hope
that we continue to move in the
direction of inclusion and
respect to all and all sides and
so I appreciate Representative
her name and her efforts thank
you madam chair.
Thank you
Sixty three the motion to table
fail still I see anyone else
from the committee all I see
Representative Rubio your hand
is a yes madam chair and Purdue
past please.
Thank you.
Yes.
All right we have a motion for
two passed by Representative
Rubio with the second from
Representative bash and madam
chair when every I mean
secretary whenever you're ready
please read the bill hello
Representative Baca L..
Representative bash.
Yes Representative the black.
By my vote.
Representative okay yes.
Representative Garcia yes.
Representative Rubio yes
Representative Terrazas.
Yes.
Repeat my my explanation.
Now.
Representative.
No.
Okay you're your vote is now yes
ma'am okay thank you.
Representative vice chair for
Representative Alcon yes.
Yes.
Chairman.
Chairman.
He is
I'm I'm actually presenting
right now in the other committee
okay the remote this.
I.
Thank you.
So on a vote of five to three
house bill one twenty six houses
and I have Representative
Terrazas who tried to explain as
well and Representative black
hole that we had Representative
black first.
Thank you madam chair
Representative night I see where
you're what you're trying to
achieve with this bill I'm I
just think it as many chairs of
I've had is I'm in the last
couple years it's just not ready
quite ready for prime time yet
so I hope I'm I wish you well
so mark so thank you.
Thank you and
So Representative.
Fund and you have a due pass
on house bill one twenty six.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee thank you.
Next we have of.
Of
house memorial three thank you.
And I'm the Sanchez.
Michael Spencer my all my
sponsors together with me are
here so we're going to let's see
yes Representative Chandler here
Representative Serrato I don't
see her.
Yes.
In the.
In the attendees so so can we go
ahead so yes and bring
Representative Chandler into it
as a panelist into the committee
is a panel with.
Madam chair can we also bring
over the witnesses whenever
you're ready yes just a moment
let let me know so feel when you
bring Representative Chandler
over.
Madam chair I am here okay I see
you thank you all right
Representative your witnesses.
Terrill NMSC and Donald with the
southwest Law Center.
Did you get that Sophia.
Oh yes I see Charlie non.
And.
Right here at I'm just calling
Where is.
I
your your your your unmuted
thank you.
So we're waiting on one witness.
I also see Tracy McDaniel of the
towards the bottom okay sure
just gotten to okay.
We have to lean on and we're
waiting for Tracy.
Tracy just raise your hand in
the and I handed some Sophia.
What.
Thank you.
So
Representative
so not to you maybe get started
at anytime.
Thank you madam chairwoman and
thank you to the members of the
committee today I'm presenting a
house memorial three to create a
task force that makes
recommendations on the paid
family and medical leave Paul
and an idea New Mexico has a
report to the legislative
interim committees and the
governor by October first and as
the chair would meant mentioned
Michael Sanchez are
Representative Chandler
Representative Roybal Caballero
to be clear this bill does not
create a paid family leave
system in New Mexico that bill
that will hopefully happen in
twenty twenty three but this
memorial this memorial sorry
this for you all will bring
together a balanced task force
to ensure we are creating
legislation for an appropriately
New Mexican paid family and
medical leave act including
representation from the
department of workforce
solutions our tribal governments
economists business groups small
business owners advocacy
organizations and labor unions.
it is never been clear that that
we need paid family medical
leave to insure economic
stability for New Mexico
businesses facing a worker
shortage New Mexican families
spacing care giving
responsibilities welcoming a
child into their home or facing
serious medical conditions our
employees will always have
family emergencies and their
economic security should not be
depended on on those and no
small businesses in Mexico can't
afford to provide these benefits
and they can't compete for
employees with big companies
that offer them it's not too
often they lose quality workers
and have to reinvest in the
buyers and I can speak from
experience my with my first
daughter I actually had to leave
my job because they did not
provide paid time off and I
actually joined now senator Ben
ray Lujan Steen who was very
welcoming to my family and my
hours and as a mentor the as I
wish and speedy recovery in many
ways
today I am you know in my second
pregnancy and my employer has
decided to give me time off for
you know everything that comes
with having a child maybe
expected or unexpected this is
incredibly generous this is a
tremendous cost him not only
losing you know the work hours
but also you know having to to
to do that amount of money and
no employee should have to be
depended on the generosity of an
employer to take care of their
families and no employer should
have to sacrifice quality
employees would have to pay
large sums of money to keep them
so for that we need to make sure
that we have an affordable and
uniquely new Mexican paid family
leave policy and this task force
will ensure that any proposal
that comes forward is thoughtful
about the impact to our state
our state agencies are employers
and workers across our state I
also want to mention that in the
FIR on the listed a cost about a
hundred sixty thousand dollars
and that that cost has been
included in the the supplemental
funds between all of the co
sponsors we often to that so.
That is taking care of and I
would like to turn it over to my
co sponsor Representative
Chandler she wants to add any
additional comments.
Thank you madam chair and really
good to see my.
Colleague and co sponsor both of
you online here one thing I want
to point out we have been
working on the paid family
medical leave act bill for a few
years now we've been fine tuning
in understanding it better but
there's been one piece that has
often been kind of a road block
when we start talking about the
act itself and that is the costs
associated with
Tooling up the department of
workforce solutions so that they
have the ability to implement
the program and a study that
will address those issues will
we'll be very very beneficial to
us as we move forward next year
on the paid family and medical
leave act bill which I'm sure
we're going to be champion again
and hopefully pushing over the
finish line for the benefit of
all New Mexicans thank you very
much madam chair.
Thank you madam chair again or
my at Lakewood Mr chair Terry
Lee Massey and Tracy McConnell
with the Daniel uncertain tenure
with the southwest Law Center
and they can also speak on this
legislation as well but I I
believe we are now open for
questions and discussion.
Thank you and.
I physicians later while on the
other side and now we're are my
vice chair is playing ball on
the other side so I am back to
work okay so I understand now.
And you are ready to go to the
audience on this legislation.
I
think you're not trying to look
ahead both ears open at the same
time I want you guys to know
that what I was talking and
listening to the same time it's
kind of tough.
The spread of that the old man
so thin but we're doing a pretty
good job of that.
Let's go to the audience at this
time and I will ask is do we
have I I I saw that I never do
this by like chairs a lot
smarter than I am she ran a poll
earlier we have the ability to
do so.
No problem
as the introduce at this time.
And anybody who wants to speak
in favor of the bill please
raise your hand and I will call
on you I'll give you
approximately two minutes a.
He put a short was responsible I
will cut you off if you go over
to win it so make me do that
okay.
So with that in mind
I will go to a handle on
burning.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee my name
is Hannah Burling and I'm
president of the league of women
voters of New Mexico the league
believes that every New Mexico
residents should have a
comprehensive level of health
care which includes seamless
coverage and continuity of care
to the extent possible
regardless of changes in life
circumstances one should be
forced into poverty because of
medical need we stand in such
strong support of this bill
thank you.
It.
We Hill.
good afternoon Mister chair
Members of the committee my
name's Jacob Vigil M. with New
Mexico voices for children we
stand in strong support of
additional we think that you
know knowing that a paid family
medical leave this is a proven
policy
In terms of check children's
health and other positive
outcomes for young kids and
family economic stability we've
long supported this and we
believe that this memorial and
the task force would be the
first.
Really important step in getting
this policy past New Mexico in
bringing us along with the rest
of the industrialized world in
twelve other states in having
this important worker and family
focused policy so New Mexico
voices for children standing
strong support thank you.
So I think that the.
Thank we there.
Very go finally.
Sure all committee members and
sponsors so be it thank
representing a UW New Mexico
members.
House memorial three forms the
task force that will gather
useful information for designing
paid family and medical leave
for New Mexico.
With input from small employers
and business groups unions and
advocates say organizations.
The data that the task force
gathers will establish a paid
family medical leave act all
state quarters holders can
endorse.
The task force report will
address concerns about paid
family and medical leave race
during last year's legislative
session.
Paid family and medical leave is
urgently needed for your
constituents I'm sure that we
all have resources necessary.
allow us to balance health care
giving and workplace
responsibilities.
As many others I have been
affected by I also pay interns
leave to attend to family member
needs I would have been relieved
emotionally as well as
economically if paid family and
medical leave had been
available.
Please support I do passed to
move New Mexico forward to paid
family and medical leave thank
you for your time.
Thank you my re
frugal.
Good afternoon Mister chair and
members of the committee my name
is Marie Pierre for gone with
the late I'm giving public
comment today on behalf of Ole
member G. Wilson J. Wilson who
was unable to testify this
afternoon.
J. has prepared the following
for public comment.
We asked the committee to vote
in accordance with the needs
facing many of our New Mexican
families and give a do passcode
we believe that this is smart
solid and caring policy that
provides the community
resilience and safety that many
of our friends families and
neighbors have historically
lacked we encourage the
committee to solidify our
state's commitment to public
safety and put our families
first thank you.
Ryan Martin.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Ryan
Martin number of the Navajo
Nation husband and father and
the twenty year retired navy
veteran.
I am an intern with the New
Mexico Public Health Association
a graduate student at UNM I want
to ask you to vote two passed
one house memorial three.
Tatum family medical leave is
important to me because it
pillars and sadly district and
school and knowing your workers
and looking out for their
welfare trade deeply valued by
the veteran community.
By providing parents would pay
time all your transition in
caring for their newborn or
allowed workers to care for
themselves and loved ones would
be your answer demonstrates a
sincere interest in the welfare.
This opportunity comes at a time
when workers are leaving their
positions in record numbers
retention starts with the
personal connection to employees
and a positive responses to the
challenges each individual
worker faces when not to clock
passing house memorial three
will not only assured New
Mexico's working families during
a time of need it will benefit
the state and worker retention
thank you for your time.
Jeannie Hambrick.
Genie Hamrick.
I think I got it thank you.
Mr chair members of the
committee I'm Jane hammered a
volunteer advocate with a a RP
New Mexico paid family and
medical leave continues to be a
top priority for us this year.
Ording to a twenty twenty one A.
A. R. P. study the average out
of pocket costs to a the family
caregivers is seven thousand two
hundred forty two dollars for
one person in ten thousand five
hundred twenty five dollars for
two such as a child and an aging
parent on average Hispanics
spend forty seven percent of
income on care giving this is on
top
any lost wages due to time off
the task force will gather data
to design a paid family and
medical leave program which will
help stabilize New Mexico's
works force and ensure a
stronger economy one way will be
to help keep working family
caregivers in the work force and
to allow those that have dropped
out to return we strongly urge
you to pass vote on HM three
thank you.
Thank you Vic.
It could go ahead and identify
yourself yes hello good
afternoon chair members of the
committee my name is become as
and I'm a community organizer I
don't play we stand in favor of
house memorial three and view it
as a racial justice issue no one
nobody in New Mexico should have
to choose between their job and
caring for themselves a new baby
or family member and yet that is
the choice that workers are
facing every day.
This disproportionately affects
black indigenous and people of
color we urged committee members
to vote in favor of house
memorial three so that a task
force can study the costs and
needs in order to ensure
families do not need to make
these difficult decisions thank
you very much.
Dressed in March.
Okay great.
Mr chairman members of the
committee as a supporter of
Planned Parenthood I stand in
support of this bill I am the
science teacher in the state of
New Mexico and I had my first
child at the age of thirty four
I was not expecting to ever have
children because my income as a
teacher is rather low and the
career is very demanding so I
consider just being able to
raise a family a luxury I love
teaching high school biology and
was happy to serve our students
in twenty nineteen I met my
husband he's a medical doctor
and our son was born classmate
but I was told that I could not
work if I can work full time at
the beginning of the semester
that there would be no job for
me and the baby would have been
eight weeks old at the time.
So
now I know that day cares have
very long wait lists and they
tribe's seven to nine hundred
dollars a month which would be
about thirty percent of my net
salary and I'm lucky to be able
to provide full time care for my
eight month old baby and I want
more families to health needs to
be present for their children I
advocate for one year of leave
with at least partial pay I felt
guilty for taking four weeks off
after having a baby and I worked
until the day before my due date
I used to leave I used to
believe that I humiliated over
three years and the maximum
amount of leave west each week's
so this has led many people in
my age group to never have
children and maybe rental leave
should be normalized my husband
was a lot to take five days off
for the birth of his child and
it would have been a number of
days if you had been the person
that was having a baby so I urge
you to please support HM three
thank you.
Rob black.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee my name
is rob black I am the president
and CEO of the New Mexico
chamber of commerce I'm here to
speak in support of a task force
that works collaboratively with
stakeholders to examine the
possibility of a paid family and
medical leave program that works
for employers and employees last
year the chamber adopted a set
of principles that includes
issues around preemption
recognition of existing
collective bargaining agreements
premiums we've category or use
coordination of benefits as well
as aligning enforcement and
penalties with existing federal
family and medical leave law
that we believe that the
included in the final proposal
could create a balanced
effective paid leave program.
We appreciate the bill's
sponsors for taking an interim
task force approach with the
issue or all stakeholders will
have equal access to the
actuarial information research
data being use.
Last year during a lockdown
legislative session New Mexico
passed one of more close
complicated and challenging paid
sick leave laws in the country
it was a difficult process for
all involved we hope and trust
that this process will create a
more collaborative effort and
one that takes all stakeholders
into consideration thank you for
your time.
Can't do you mostly.
Chairman and members of the
committee my name is captain
mostly it I'm a registered nurse
and member of the New Mexico
Public Health Association with
over five hundred members I am
speaking in support of paid
family medical leave task force
HM three.
I would like to just underline
what others have said about
contributing to positive health
outcomes and help equities and
in particularly illustrated with
one
on one situation breast feeding.
my daughter recently was able to
use paid family medical leave in
California and it's able to
successfully breastfeed.
We know that our goals for
breast feeding is our US six
months ending in New Mexico we
have quite a health disparity
when it comes to breast feeding
paid leave duration correlates
with breast feeding duration so
it could contribute both to
increase breast feeding and
decrease disparities it's also a
wonderful recruiting tool in my
daughter search for that we need
to look for a job.
Please vote do pass on this
moram thank you very much.
Sanford.
London Senator.
Thank you chair called and
members of the committee my name
is John with money and Sanford
I'm the director of the New
Mexico religious coalition for
reproductive choice and we fully
support the paid family and
medical leave task force
you know a nonprofit is in in a
way a small business and we want
to be able to attract and keep
the very best people so that we
can fulfill the mission and the
important work that we do and
being able to have paid family
and medical leave would go a
long way in making sure that we
can keep and retain the very
best
of employees on our staff.
On a personal side earlier this
month money mother requested
that I
Find out how to the.
Her placed in hospice care which
we did and my brother and sister
were able to travel to
Albuquerque and stay with her
and stay with me as she made the
transition from this world to
the next and they were able to
do that because they have paid
family and medical leave in the
state where they live and having
them here was a huge comfort not
only to me but to my mother and
so for so many reasons I urge
you to pass.
This important memorial thank
you very much.
The water.
Mr chair and members of the
committee my name is to quite a
Water sent and I'm a community
engagement specialist at the
ACLU of New Mexico I'm here
today in support of HM three New
Mexicans should not have to
choose between taking care of
their family or taking care of
work New Mexicans should be
allowed to take family medical
leave to bond with the child
care from themselves a family
member who is experiencing a
serious health condition they
still use New Mexico's in
support of this memorial ask
this committee to passed house
to pass house memorial three
paid family medical leave task
force thank you.
Stephanie Welch.
Mr chair members of the
committee I am Stephanie Welch
with the New Mexico Center on
Law and Poverty we thank the
sponsors for bringing this
legislation we strongly support
this memorial most of us will
experience a serious health
condition or extended care
giving responsibilities and will
face impossible choices between
our families well being in our
jobs Senator Lee guarantees do
not apply to most employers in
New Mexico and even to covered
workers they provide only on
rate the.
Ation of a state program would
help ensure that we all can take
the time we need to meet health
and family needs we ask you to
vote do pass on this memorial
thank you.
The field.
Yes hello Devin fields actually
I still my wife's account for
this
as I said my name is Devin
fields I'd like to thank the
chair and the committee today
for letting me speak
I am from Los crucis a father
and I represent myself as a
beneficiary of paid family leave
I was doing some prep for this
committee hearing today and I
saw that this was also a veteran
affairs committee I have to say
that I personally benefited when
my parents were able to take
advantage of family leave when
they were serving in the U. S.
military this is something that
isn't guaranteed to them or
other veterans when they leave
federal service if they come
back to the state New Mexico and
they provide employee to small
business it's no guarantee they
still have that same benefit we
have an opportunity to fix that
in New Mexico House memorial
three is going to give us the
tools we need to properly design
a family leave program that will
serve all New Mexicans all the
stakeholders that will allow us
to move forward together and
benefit all of us are our
parents our children ourselves
that's why did I support house
memorial three thank you.
Can't.
Are all gone and committee
members thank you for the
opportunity for public comment
my name is Cat Sanchez with gold
futures we're a statewide
organization led by and for
black indigenous women and
people of color chair as per
your kind request I'll keep it
short I won't repeat reasons
you've already heard this
evening and for the necessity of
this task force and its future
benefits to all New Mexicans I
will however voice our full
support of house memorial three
and urgent to pass thank you.
Thank you
Stephanie sprawl.
Yes good afternoon chairman and
committee members my name is
Stephanie Streatley and I am the
policy committee co chair for
the New Mexico Public Health
Association I am here to express
strong support for H. M. three
on behalf of an MPG paid family
and medical leave is critical to
health and racial equity New
Mexico most workers can't afford
to take unpaid leave even when
they are eligible unpaid leave
exacerbates longstanding
economic and health disparities
and this is why many programs
and other states that are paid
have demonstrated remarkable
outcomes and reducing infant
mortality child abuse injuries
and nursing home usage while
improving parental physical and
mental well being I'm investing
in the task force ensures that
we can build a system that
better supports a healthy and
resilient population which is
why an MPG strongly urges the
committee members to vote to
pass on this memorial thank you.
Q. Kerr Roger.
Mr Mr chairman and members of
the committee my name is Kirk
record of the director of the
transaction stripped Mexico we
speak also on behalf of the New
Mexico conference of churches
for all the reasons previously
stated we to support aged three
and the important work to be
done by the formations Task
Force we certainly urge your
support as well thank you for
this opportunity to speak to
today.
Thank you our Ricky Serna.
Mr chair R. thank you for the
opportunity to start ups which
have walls earlier it's the
record for state personnel
office I also be acting
secretary for the department of
workforce solutions I want to
thank the sponsors for preparing
oriel as a measure for ensuring
that we better understand not
only what the impact students
will be paid family medical
leave for an act but also what
the impact to the economy
lawyers will look like
understanding what best
practices nationwide have been
able to do it it's cheap it
relies for this program so we
certainly look forward to the
work we commit to a very step
study at process to ensure that
all stakeholders are aware of
the benefits that the tools
necessary to do this in a way
that really does make sense
thank you.
Charlotte you.
You Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is started by
the when you all and I'm
representing the newly revised
New Mexico commission on the
status of women.
As others before me have already
stated the countless reasons why
this will only be added and
added benefits your constituents
I'm here to reinforce the
importance of this legislation
and how it affects the Mexican
women historically with women
have been known as family
caregivers this is why they are
which is why they often put
their own medical needs on to
the side to tend to those of
their families first house
memorial three will move towards
creating a more equitable Reno
where our beloved family
caregivers have the much needed
support to tend to their
families as well as their own
medical needs.
This will positively impact the
lives of Mexican women which
will in turn positively impact
the lives of New Mexico families
Mr chairman members of the
committee I'm asking you to vote
in support of house memorial
three today thank you.
The Williams.
Hello can you hear me.
This is Janet Williams president
of Santa Fe now I wanted to let
you know that we at Senate they
now national organization for
women strongly support the paid
family leave memorial thank you.
Thank you everybody I heard
there was in favor was there
anybody in opposition that want
to be.
I see none I don't see the other
hands raised by miss anybody
okay here we go.
I have some I had three hands
here okay let's start with the.
With jasmine marsh.
I have not lowered my hand I'm
so sorry thank you for the
opportunity to speak no Hey how
are lost from day.
Good evening Mr chairman members
of the committee on Carlos
contact the president of the New
Mexico business coalition we
represent hundreds of businesses
of thousands of New Mexicans
with our focus being on making
New Mexico a better place to
live and work.
I want to say that we don't
object to having a paid family.
Leave and medical policy I think
that that is a good idea.
Our association already has that
we do paid sick leave in other
leave we support our employees
because we know that a healthy
workforce is really important so
we're not opposed to that I just
have some issues with or some
concerns with how this is put
together I appreciate the work
of the Sanchez.
But it seems that the focus is
more on how to implement it
rather than studying the impact
of that and I think that in the
financial concerns of what it's
going to cost to administer
needs to be our priority as the
task force works through this.
the other thing I would point
out the task force is heavily
weighted with people that don't
own businesses I do realize
there is some business
representation but it doesn't
seem to be equal and I think
that would be a good
consideration to have that
balanced on the task force.
You know this is coming on the
heels of the passage of the paid
sick leave and quite honestly
there was not enough input from
the business community that is
the most aggressive sick lost
sick leave laws in the nation
and it's really really difficult
for businesses with that hasn't
gone into force yet we're going
to see that this year
and that was really unfortunate
the way that it went through
without the feedback that we
needed from the business
community so again I am not
opposed to this moving forward
these are some observations that
I think could make this stronger
and make it work better for New
Mexico and our businesses and
our employees thank you for your
consideration.
It's
very cold.
Good afternoon Mister chair and
members of the committee my name
is Terry Colin I am the
president CEO for the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
we do stand in support of house
members of excuse me in
opposition to house memorial
three today many of New Mexico
small businesses simply did not
find this pandemic and for those
that have times continue to be
very challenging our small
businesses are dealing with
ongoing pandemic uncertainty
supply chain disruptions
persistent workforce shortages
and inflation the likes of which
we haven't seen in decades the
last thing we need to be
discussing is another regulatory
burden and another layer costs
onto the backs of our employers
this memorial does not establish
a fair or objective process it
considers it is a foregone
conclusion that we need to
impose new mandatory family
medical leave payments on
businesses there's no question
of if it would be prudent to do
so it's simply a matter of how
and there's no balance to the
task force are working group
it's lopsided in favor of
mandatory leave advocates and
even many of the so called
business representatives would
be selected by politicians who
are mandatory leave advocates I
think we need to take a step
back and remember that when our
local employers do well and grow
it benefits our entire community
we should not consider let alone
adopt policies that would make
it harder and costlier to do
business and create jobs in our
state thank you so much Mr
chairman.
Thank you Mr Charlie the market.
Yes Mr Chairman can you hear me.
I can hear you loud and clear
Sir thank you Sir Mr chairman
and members of the committee and
with all due respect to the
sponsor
I am also a registered lobbyist
for the New Mexico business
coalition and and several other
groups that are.
They are considered small
businesses we have we share some
of the same concerns that have
been generated by the
Albuquerque chamber and and also
with you know what Carla Sonntag
mentioned the and again the
concerns are or that that the
appearance of a lopsided Task
Force is is of grave concern and
also
Type solution is is going to be
generated.
And not all businesses are
fortunate enough to be able to
afford these kinds of and I want
to say a large business our
budget.
There's no doubt and and all the
businesses support some form of
Lee but it's not a single
approach to there have to be it
has to be multi faceted with
different levels of contribution
from
all parties in order to make it
work.
You'll find that all responsible
business owners or in favor of
this type of lead because we
understand what life throws at
us and some of the challenges or
parole but.
The challenges or or which
station the business in their
continued operation so the
concern is not the that the
offering of a rate
Family budget be offered it's
just that it has to be offered
in a way that businesses can
continue to drive.
And exist in New Mexico.
Thank you very much well we do
stand in opposition to this bill
thank you.
Thank you and apparently I
missed a couple of the
People in favor of the bill I
think that kind of model that I
missed you.
This.
Thank you okay and that I miss
Julie onako.
Yeah and I around role in will
post Miller's.
O. K. with that in mind that.
Right okay okay at home okay.
Okay well then I'll go back to
the.
I just need
some please you Mr chairman
members of committee I
Representative I'm a lobbyist
and I represent Planned
Parenthood votes New Mexico and
they have the a couple of
different perspectives one is
that their employer of over four
hundred employees across four
states and they strongly support
paid family leave because of all
the reasons that's already been
stated but also from the
perspective of supporting a
person during their pregnancy
and after their pregnancy I have
more friends than I would like
to count who have told me that
they had untreated postpartum
depression and I know that those
friends had to quickly go back
to work and did not get the
medical care that they needed
family leave helps to take care
of a person throughout their
medical needs and to care for
their family members so thank
you Mr chairman for recognizing
me and we stand and support.
Okay with that I think I really
am done I will go back to the
the sponsor do you have anything
to add.
Thank you chairman we're ready
for questions from the committee
okay at this time of that the
committee and I have a
representative on yeah I would
and rich right we would
pronounce your last name I'm
always messing that up.
Mr chairman it's one guy and
Representative Rubio and had her
hand at first I'm happy to have
Mexico.
before me if you'd like.
Representative Rubio would you
like to go ahead and go first.
Sure thank you madam chair and
thank you Representative got
I just wanted to take a moment
to thank you Representative set
up with all of the sponsors on
this legislation
because I I I mean I still have
a hard time conceptualizing how
we still have to introduce
legislation like this because it
should be a given these are the
types of services and programs
that we should already be
providing and so while I feel
like a task force is not
necessarily fast enough for me I
appreciate your willingness to
to go that extra mile and get
and get that done I. E. I. E.
Havel hello I I I serve
communities who have
struggled a lot in in in finding
places of employment that would
support their their their their
lives their their livelihoods
and their experiences and it's
it's very few and far between
and so I think that this is a
really great piece of
legislation I appreciate you
bringing it forward and and I
look forward to supporting that
and when the time is appropriate
Mr chair I I'd be happy to to do
with the past to move for the
past I wanted to do that do
that.
Sorry.
The bond.
Now it's your turn thank you Mr
chair at a when N. echo and
major Kerr leverage
Representative Rubio H. thank
the sponsor Representative
Serrato so much for bringing
this forward for our our review
today and thank you to all the
organizers into committee
members who showed up to talk
about this piece of legislation
and how they'll affect
themselves as well as their
communities I work in supporting
domestic violence victims and
survivors for ten plus years and
so much of what I heard from the
families who came to us was that
they were worried about missing
work and that would mean for
their families when they've gone
through such an horrendous
ordeal and.
I should be the last thing we're
thinking about losing a job to
be able to take care for I used
in I am just so.
Hopeful that this will move
forward
myself included I am a mother of
this three year old child I was
trying to get earlier but she
still that that late so
apologies for not being you all
visual beat but if if I don't
have the flexibility I do you
at my current employment and she
said can I live and and
and I have a multi generational
family as many of us do you as
my grandparents and if they are
made my parents if they get
thank if if anything happens we
have to figure out childcare and
if we don't have the ability to
take time off of work I can't
imagine ever upholding all full
time job while also being a
parent of the young ones so I'm
just very appreciative the only
thing I would ask of our sponsor
is and I absolutely agree this
is a racial equity issues I'm so
happy to hear it from that side
I just hope that you would
consider you adding our agent
perspective
said the task force knowing that
this population is
a part of the New Mexico fabric
and and hope that their voices
are also encouraging as you
craft some of this and and
figure out the perspectives that
are needed a study.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Representative Russ.
Mr chair thank your Mr chair
representative you know we have
system pretty pretty heavily
last year and
Mr chair and this is the bill
that we had we're we were hoping
for up.
A bipartisan more get reach out
to small businesses and and
several blanket of of Bill I
know that we had
Some discussions and
disagreements over that my
concerns were still overs small
business I think I think it's.
We know that we Capital One
rubber stamp of legislation
sometimes it doesn't always work
for as we as as Representative
Herndon said earlier rural and
and and and and urban it doesn't
always fit one one one size
doesn't fit all and you know I I
don't see Mr chair
Representative any thing how are
you going to guarantee your how
we gonna know that we're gonna
have a bipartisan.
In a small business large
business of coalition and all
recall pollution but this excuse
me this are you this board how
we gonna go this gonna be
balanced in a way that we can we
can have small business have a
word in this
because I I can tell you this I
know a lot of at home a lot of
businesses are very very small
and those poor guys are
struggling just to keep the
doors open up COVID is I'm gonna
say is.
Doesn't care what your race your
color your the amount of your
income it it's indiscriminate
Tory and it affects the affected
a lot of people and a lot of
ways big companies small
companies a lot of our smaller
restaurants are closed I I've
got some of my little
restaurants are my favorite
places that I used to go to Mr
chair representative in our town
and and other small businesses
that were devastated by what
happened and I think we're we're
you know I although I understand
that we should always be fair
again you know what I was
talking about how I treat our
employees.
You have because you have any
symptoms go home I want to
affect the infected the rest of
our staff go home you're gonna
be paid don't worry and but I
can't afford to do that not
every order small business can
do that and so and I don't mean
that they should not considered
their their employees but at the
same consider that issue their
employees but I think that some
of them are just struggling to
get on their feet and I just
want to see if we're going to
have any sort of a balance
in that can and that was a long
question Mr chair
representative.
I was looking at your eyes
wander the what we estimate
bustle so much.
So Mister chair representative
how do we know that we can have
some sort of balance.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative process and I
will headed to my expert
witnesses as well but I just
wanted to to make a note that on
this fifteen percent has forced
that's in charge of really
looking at the unique businesses
of New Mexico and of our unique
landscape in our population
really crafting something that
will work for our state agencies
to implement it does include a
full third of of that business
and interests including a
Merican Indian chamber of
commerce of New Mexico the
chamber of commerce New Mexico
to us statewide organizations
representing business a
statewide organization
representing his final business
and statewide organization
presenting African American
business owners and and so and
and then the others are mix of
some advocates and then neutral
parties such as the beer of
business and economic research
at UNM so bureau which is
already done a comprehensive
study on this legislation
previously and so bring but
giving those that many a full
third of you know this opinion
coming forward you know the the
objective here is to make sure
we have those opinions and and
also the last thing a hundred or
Mexican it would just that they
having to add but the objective
here is really to make sure that
you're right I mean again as I
mentioned I'm very lucky my
employer is has the ability to
give me time off not many
dollars and small businesses in
Santa Fe that I represent have
tried and give as much as they
can but they're limited so this
but making it affordable and
reasonable solution that works
across the board is I think a
lot of the objective here but if
Turley in or home or Tracy would
like to add I would want to have
to that.
Yes thank you thank you Mr
chairman and members of the
committee Representative Serrato
thank you and terribly messy
executive director for the
southwest women's Law Center we
did think carefully look at this
listing we do strongly believe
that this is carefully balanced
we have about eight
organizations who are advocates
we also have eight
representatives for businesses
this includes the chamber's
interests and also the small
business
to small businesses as well so
in addition as Representative
Serrato mentioned the other.
The other chambers the American
Indian Hispano chamber New
Mexico out African American
chamber so there we we do
believe that there are about two
neutral introduce I want to
mention the UNM the paper and
then a representative from the
native American tribal
governments.
So we we did the click at this
you know carefully we had
several people look at it as
well so thank that's all I have
thank you.
Madam chair representative right
I I think yeah balance is super
important because you know I've
been on I've been on boards
before other bank board and I've
been on different types of
boards whether it's on the
foundation for the university or
whatever and you know we can
have one seat at the table or
not enough seats I live it every
single day I'm living it today
committee we're out numbers and
I'll give you a perfect example
right now Madam chair
representative.
I I literally coming to
committee and have since I I US
cert took office and we're
always in the minority so
believe me I understand what it
is not to have a voice sometimes
in in some of this legislation a
lot of legislation this we were
I I felt that the it I just
taking up time and and and and
try to express myself yet the
things just keep passing and
passing and and too little
little or no regard sometimes to
what we're saying and I think
it's getting a little bit better
I will say that I've been able
to work with.
Mr chair representative other
representatives and stuff and I
think it's it's moving in the
right direction but it's very
slow and I hope that we can come
together to support one another
I just I worry that this is not
balanced enough for me I I I'm
wondering about our rural
upliftment thank you someone
that that we of of some of that
we passed over a position that
we passed to speak for the rural
rural New Mexico and I I think
that someone that should be on
this on this committee and I
just sit there sixteen position
so I I I that's really might
thing is balance because you
know again share it with your
eyes set and I've expressed
myself and and and when I've
given those examples
Mr chair Representative Serrato
I I truly express some honestly
and up front of the challenges
that we have in the things that
we're dealing with and to me
that's not political that's just
those are facts and I'm just a
numbers guy I'm a factual guy
and and I care about people and
and not saying that you guys
don't I think I just would like
to see a little more balance so
that's my only that's really my
my biggest concern thank you Mr.
Mixtape have Representative but.
Thank you Mr chairman I do have
a couple questions and I'm I'm
I'm important
I support families and and also
with business and so you know I
I'm kind as you seem more kind
of vision in my chair because I
really do have some questions
about this and what the impact
it may have okay.
So
I think we've covered about the
representation I just wanna make
sure that all but folks that
they have an equal opportunity
for that distance on.
But.
The the recommendations of what
this is gonna be made to the
governor of how are they get
Howard this committee how are
they going to be.
Compiling all this information
and and what the basing their
findings on and given to the
governor and then the second
part about that is by October
first of twenty twenty two I
mean if we're doing any center
job and we're looking at doing a
good job looking at this saying
is is that time and why October
first is a is that a realistic
time line is it something that
you know I don't want this to to
Russian try to get things done
for for certain percent thing
and we don't do a good
comprehensive impact so that's
my that's my first question
really about the are my first
concern.
Is about how the how these goals
how is this going to be compiled
and why we're looking at the
October first twenty twenty to
date okay.
your would Mr chairman to do
want to go to my second question
or do you want me to let allow
of.
Are
Supporters of the bill or are
growth critters the bill
respond.
Reward center I think what it is
while I would like the answer to
the first question first your of
Mr.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative I just wanna
make sure it clear so why the
due date and then how will they
presented is that right correct
what what are they going to be
based on their findings what.
I'm sorry I turned off my mute
what what what what kinds of
information are they going to be
gathering.
You know as far as are looking
as far as the size of the
business are they looking about
as far as the total
As far as the worst of the
business in other words you know
that it's very different between
we're talking about a mom and
pop two person operation of
flower shop or whatever else so
I just need to know was forced
how were they going to be making
these determinations about it is
that the numbers are number
please because on page three
lines four through sept seven of
the bill.
It talks about ninety six
percent New Mexico businesses
have fewer than fifty employees
are not required to.
Provide unpaid leave.
Through the valley Medical act
so right is it depending upon
the size of the bit so but those
are the questions that I have as
far as.
What information would be
gathered how will they make
their determinations in is this
bill really about you know is of
a cut off for the size of the
business that's.
My next one.
Thank you Mr and all of that
would.
thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative for those
questions they're very helpful
again all all kind of a broader
over.
Response and then I'll be happy
to transfer my expert witnesses
to give more information on the
paid family medical leave act
has been introduced a few times
by my by my co sponsors and they
have gone to great you know
efforts to make sure the talk to
local people and make sure that
they you know again got a paper
study on them you know we're
very surveys pieces like that
have already been in the works
as we speak and so with task
forces it is from my experience
fairly common to see them have a
due date that is around six
months or so after you know
giving them time to set up and
everything on you know that we
are allocating a hundred sixty
thousand dollars for the
department to essentially be
able to put together these these
meetings and to make sure that
they're able to get the expert
witnesses that they feel are
necessary in to make sure they
have a substantial report but
you're looking at for example
the rural infrastructure study
that I know that the rural
development task force that's
for the summer it was a similar
timeline to make sure that was
included on the internet I
handed to you or Tracy.
Sorry.
To talk a little bit more about
again what in particular we
anticipate being discussed
because I know in previous
legislation we had discussed are
the business of things but I
want to put that over to term as
well.
Mr chairman members of the
committee I am going to prompt
my colleague to also help me
with this question but I did
want to just kind of step back a
little bit Mr chairman members
of the committee and
Representative Baca and
Representative Serrato.
Here the
I will be looking at what they
and what infrastructure they
need to implement a paid family
medical leave program and they
will they're the best.
Well to to determine what is
needed so they will look at the
the computer the technological
costs that is needed to run a
paid family medical leave
program they also
So so that's one thing
that they get over they will
bring this information forward
with the ministry to the task
force the task force and the
department we're envisioning
will also work together in terms
of how that paid family medical
leave will be structured and and
so that's where those questions
have to be figured out as
Representative Serrato said in
the past we did bring forward we
work with Representative
Chandler and representative for
about Caballero
did you know with that kind of
bill and we had those kind of
system that was
that was described in
legislation so here what we're
proposing to do it all to the
together in the task force that
way we can address that
questions that businesses may
have that the chambers may have
and so forth.
So.
Mr chairman if I may also have
Thank you actually Mr chairman
the Indus Massey thank you
masters to a question or maybe
but a suggestion of of you
Because you're new to have this
task force but will this task
force be soliciting input on the
questions from the other
business community just like we
did for the day we got input
from those a supported you know
for looking at you know
providing input into the
development of a question from
businesses around the entire
state of New Mexico based upon
because each one has a unique
geographical and other community
needs and resources is that part
of it that they would be
soliciting questions of outside
of the committee to so the
committee can kind of formally
to put these questions together
is that is that if that's not I
would recommend that maybe
they'll be some that the
committee would consider that
will you get a variety of
different voices and people that
have not been here today to
provide that input and so the
you guys can get useful
information to make the right
kinds of decisions and
determinations.
Mr chairman and Representative
if I may you know that really is
up to the discretion of the of
the the task force again I in
the past I I know task forces
have determined to have in
various locations that may are
you know the most impactful for
their for their meetings and and
those pieces of of input so that
that is a possibility but it
would be up to the discretion of
the task force.
Thank you Representative Serrato
and Mr chairman I do have one
despite one final question and
one one comment
Mr chairman you know we did see
here on page three that I Rep I
reference a ninety six percent
of you know nice reset all
companies fit into that small
Business category right and we
sort of about about the pandemic
and how many have not survived
is because of the challenge of
the pandemic and again we we we
got our hearts go out to all
those have been impacted those
have been lost.
But I think that we would be
almost shooting ourselves in the
foot figure speech if also we
have this out there and also and
we have more and more businesses
are not able to open up or keep
their doors open and I think
that's that's one of things we
would be going moving backwards
and that's what I'm saying is
I'm very torn I'm I'm I'm torn
because I I understand in a
sport families I stand for
families.
But again with the with the
businesses in the way we need to
grow and we needed rebound from
this comment pandemic small
businesses are a key factor in
our recovery as a state as a
nation as a as a global
community and those are that's
really where I'm torn so thank
you Mr chairman for allowing me
to ask questions.
Thank you I.
Representative on P..
Thank you Mr chairman I just
wanted to say that very
respectfully say I also know on
the flip side that there's so
many businesses that are
struggling to hire employees and
as we think about the worker
shortage and what people are
rightfully demanding of their
employers so that they can have
a fulfilling life and they can
be there for their families and
they can contribute to the
economy of New Mexico I think
it's important to recognize that
thank you.
Are you okay your ended there
Representative Rubio.
Thank you Mr chair I move for do
passed.
You know in that building you to
let me do that.
I do have a proper motion and a
proper second madam secretary
would to call the roll please.
Representative Baca.
Representative Baca.
Vote yes but I'd like to explain
my vote at the end.
Yes right.
Your vote is yes.
Yes my vote is a yes but I would
like at the end.
To explain my vote but it is a
yes thank you Representative
bash.
Yes Representative black.
Now and I'd like to expand my
vote.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Garcia.
Yes.
Rubio yes Representative there's
are.
Representative offers.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Representative can you hear me.
You hear me I can hear you okay
Representative will.
Representative Terrazas.
Representative vice chair we're
Baca vital.
One second.
One thing that.
Yes she's she's she's there I'm
I'm sorry Mr chair could you on.
yeah we're asking for the vote
on the bill.
Are we voting not I mean is the
motion a do pass yes thank you
know I I I apologize I was
trying to do here and as you all
know I'm hearing impaired so I
was having a hard time I vote
yes on a do pass.
Yes I didn't get to vote Mr
chair I'm sorry I stepped away
from I feel I can hear.
One of four give you this one
time Representative yes yes.
No.
Again for okay.
Okay Representative.
Go go ahead and give us the
account and then I'll go to the
to that wanted to explain their
vote for ten second explanation
okay what was seven yes to no.
Representative black G. you have
more than ten seconds believe it
or not thank you Sir I I won't
be very long winded
again this was difficult I do
sports for business I do believe
in the families and I want to be
very clear that this is not to
actually enacted it's just a
group that's going to be
studying and to the tune of a
hundred sixty thousand so for
that is the reason that I voted
yes because it's to study it not
necessary to implement something
that could be detrimental to our
businesses.
Thank you Sir Representative
black.
With the second are starting up
thank you Mr chairman.
I might go a little longer than
seconds that okay if you have
the.
I just I just really my my
concern is that that the make up
of this is not gonna gonna touch
a lot of the rural areas I know
what I had heard testimony that
it was going to incorporate that
the Indian nation and and some
of those other large lobbying
groups I am concerned that it's
not going to you know pick up
the the the cattlemen or
anything like that so that's my
main reason for voting no on
that my other issue is a hundred
and sixty thousand I'm concerned
that that is not going to be
enough to actually do a
comprehensive study on this but
I I wish to sponsor well and
and.
Let's see what happens thank
you.
Okay ma'am thank given mute that
can pop that gift I can talk and
not on mute and just keep you
here all night right okay with
that I think we are done for the
day.
We'll adjourn kill what it
today's Tuesday right.
Thursday I'll keep in mind the
golden rod things are moving and
go into who knows what'll happen
between now and Thursday so you
have fun thank.
Body.
And I'm not.
That.
