three we can get I I just got
the substance on that one that
one came in late one eighty
seven also came in late sixty
two and sixty four came in late
two.
Did you want to do
Hear testimony I I on all of the
bills and then on those.
And then on those four wait
until Saturday first thing
Saturday yeah yeah.
I think that's a fair thing to
do that way I can kind of read
to substitute the people that I
mean a lot of we've got two
controversial bills for a lot of
people want to be heard so I
think we can get through this we
get all of the expert witness
can testify as a should will
just gonna hold off on our
voting until Saturday if that
works for you please.
We we are sticking with the
rules of twenty four hours and
and I'm just just for people to
know they the
The for I believe it I can't
remember which two of them two
of them were were forty five
minutes short of the twenty four
hour notice that wasn't any big
deal I'm and and again for the
public we will not be meeting on
Thursday because we're doing a
full day session.
Excuse me but we will be meeting
on Saturday I believe I one
thirty is that what I said if
there's someone knows different
okay I have too many things
rolling around in my head so
with that we will start with
house bill one sixty six and now
that's Representative lu Han and
she does have an expert witness
and I'm gonna two and I'm gonna
let her once in as a participant
I'm gonna let her give you the
names because.
They're not right where.
Okay so.
Sure madam chair another point
of order yes.
Madam chair I I know the least
one person that has has two
different committee meetings at
the same time on Saturday I
don't know the rest of the
committee has similar conflicts
and so I was just madam chair
wanting to know if we were
actually going to be able pull
together quorum on Saturday and
it does concern me that we have
multiple multiple committee's
going to sametime.
Welcome to the legislature.
Unfortunately it's how we have
to do it I mean I had somebody
on the committee yesterday
morning that was the had built
in three different committees
while they have their own
committee it's just kind of the
nature of the beast
Representative Pettigrew is that
you that has a conflict.
No madam chair I am available
it's I I.
I believe Representative ward as
often Human Services at that
time on on on Saturday and like
I said I don't know the other
members committee schedule
actually three of us on this
committee on health and Human
Services represented by arrest
Representative Lord at night and
I thought we had come to an
agreement of waiting
did not conflict with that
committee the I and I thought I
had that at the time so that
wouldn't come conflict I'm.
I I will look again and if we
need to we may adjust the time
but Representative Pettigrew
just is your committee meeting
on that your other committee
meeting on Saturday.
Your muted Representative.
Madam chair I'm blessed I only
have one on Saturday okay okay
so if we can work around health
and now and Representative
Romero the committee we should
be okay I think we have that
worked out so so if it's a
conflict with health that'll be
up sixty percent of our members
have a conflict with help so so
when I will
be heard in health that day as
well so okay okay so you're.
Schools and.
And madam chair madam chair I
just I've apparently I wrote
notes from down from the floor
because the I have schedule
actually does indicate health
and Human Services to be at ten
thirty not one thirty correct
and and I checked in with the
chair and now let her know that
we were going to be meeting at
one thirty and so that you know
she's got three hours
And so if that goes until one
thirty we may not I'm actually
start here to one thirty five or
so just so people can have a
chance to work.
To stand up for second or
something but I think we should
be okay on that.
So thank you for bringing that
up it's everything everything is
always confusing but in this
virtual world it's even more so
and that so we will see
Representative I.
Representative lu Han are you on
board.
I'm here Madam chair
representative who are your
experts okay so we have a Lauren
Custer and check.
And and you where once again.
Okay so we've got everybody that
we need Representative lu Han
when you're ready go ahead.
Thank you madam chair thank you
committee members until the
public that are with this
virtually today
we have a several changes to HB
our house bill one sixty six so
we submitted the committee
substitute to all the members
and the analyst so that you all
had to jacketed bill before
today's meeting I believe madam
chair before you up before I
proceed talking about the bill I
would like to move Committee
substitute for house bill one
sixty six for discussion okay go
ahead thank you.
Okay so this is about what is
commonly referred to as it goes
gun it is creating at at home or
anywhere a fire by using a three
dimensional printer to create a
gun out of plastic material and
compressing it into the shape of
a gun.
Anyone with code or instruction
and a three dimensional printer
may do this today including
minors felons Act sex offenders
or others that would otherwise
be prohibited from owning
possessing selling or buying a
firearm.
So what does that are this
committee substitute for House
bill six one six six two I'm as
you go through to the bill
now so N. page one and section
one this creates a new section
of the criminal code making it
an offence to a and subsection a
making it unlawful to
manufacture firearms unless you
have a federal firearms license
US objection be making it an
offence for a person to use the
three D. printer to manufacture
a farm frame or receiver or
major component of a firearm
unless that person is federally
licensed as a manufacturer.
On subsection C.
it did it would just talk about
just reading instructions on how
to print or create or
manufacture a three D. firearm
firearm frame or receiver or
another major component of the
firearm to a person in New
Mexico who is not a federally
licensed gun manufacturer.
Subsection do it's making it an
offence to self possessed
transfer convert or receive a
firearm fire arm that is not
traceable nor so that there
would be a serial number or is
this your number was scratched
off.
subsection II would creates
additional language about a
unique serial number engraved on
the firearm to comply with
federal laws about manufacturing
importation subsection F. talks
about making it an offence to
possess a firearm frame
separately or as eight as part
of the kids without it without
that serial number
subsection do
What to expect it.
A sense of thanks for person to
sell offer or sell or transfer
separately or as part of a kid
without a serial number and.
This subsection also addresses
building the firearm and and
needing a federal license for
that action in subjects section
age you'll read if the person
violates any of these sections
they are guilty of a
misdemeanor.
It was a previously as you
probably read or is been come to
tension was a felony and it's
now in in the substituting
misdemeanor section subsection
III the bill discusses exemption
for film props and producing an
operable firearms in subsection
J.
It's talk about protecting
permanently in operable fire
arms or those manufactured prior
to nineteen sixty eight and then
lastly in section not lastly
wouldn't subsection K. on the
bottom of the page and it
continues a on through the
definitions and that's that's
the bill in a nut shell there
madam chair members as mentioned
already have our expert
witnesses here and we now stand
for questions.
Thank you Representative
Lufthansa you yes experts are
just here for questions they're
not going to make a statement I
believe Lori and would be the
first to make a statement okay
go ahead Laurie and.
I thank you chairman Thompson
and committee members I'm Laurie
and constrained tech mom
grandmother and physician
serving New Mexicans for the
past twenty five years growing
up people said I was a
responsible reliable level
headed kid they need at age
fourteen I nearly lost that
level had.
After school a neighbor board
was showing off holding a tiny
pearl handled twenty gun in this
call claiming it was real I
didn't like the attention he was
getting for what was clearly a
fake reaching down I lifted the
toy toward my temple reporting
that's not a real gun well
gently pulling back on the
trigger to prove my point the
boy lunged toward me snatched it
away remove the safety and shot
a ball into the ground behind
me.
Kids are naturally curious and
firearms are deadly with ready
access curiosity too often turns
to tragedy three D. printing of
downloadable plans and in online
market for un serialized gun
parts available without a
background check has resulted in
the fastest growing gun safety
problem facing our country
today.
When I think of a modern version
of mine near miss I think about
how incredibly tech savvy kids
are these days I imagine tech
savvy teens experimenting with a
three D. printer creating a
version of that thank god that I
was tricked by tons whose parts
are un serialized untraceable in
all made in the privacy of one's
own home New Mexico needs to get
out ahead of this problem by
passing house bill one sixty six
to help make all New Mexicans
safer.
Thank you.
Thank you and.
Representative.
Thank thank you madam chair
We now stand for questions okay
thank you so we will we're gonna
start with the whole so that
will come I think do we have I
don't see it at the bottom so
let me check in with Allison do
we have a poll out west and yes
you're wanting right now okay so
so just
Show your support or opposition
to this bill.
And Allison I can't see what's
happening can you change that
just so that I can know when
it's when it's time to close it
essentially I can't see what's
happening there.
Yeah I can see that you do that
but looks like everyone who
wanted to vote has noted some
insurers all three okay okay
thank you.
Okay so we have done twenty one
in favor and eighty three in
opposition that eighty percent
in opposition and twenty percent
in support.
Okay so we will now go to the
audience for comment and I think
I stated and I don't know if the
I assume it's in the upper left
corner for everyone but there is
a timer and
You so you have one minute to
speak I ask that you not
repeating what someone else said
I mean you can say I agree with
our but don't we don't want to
hear the same thing over and
over and over again I'm and I
ask that you be civil and
respectful to everyone on both
sides and to and to the
Representative so you can go to
the participants are and click
on that.
And if you are in opposition to
this bill please raise your
hand.
Okay and as I said please watch
the timer as you speak because
I'm.
You may get a few secretary I'm
not exactly sure how this was
going to work you may get a few
seconds after one minute or it
may cut your Mike at one minute
so so please be B. R. aware of
your time so we will start out
with Brett COVID.
Mexico Mexico Mexico.
Just introduce yourself
Representative order madam chair
if I may the minutes however is
going to start after they
introduce themselves in the
group they're with so you want
to introduce yourself to go
ahead and do that I will serve
the time until you start making
a point thank you for that
reminder.
Okay go ahead Brett.
Thank you Representative Thomson
first off you know you're
hearing the same thing from the
constituents because it's the
voice of the people of New
Mexico and last session you know
during the red flag gun laws
Senator savant has was hailing
this bill as a leading example
of legislation across the
country during that session
there are multiple amendments
happening at the final hour in
the bowels of the Senate with
additional amendments that
happened in the house floor this
legislation is a disaster this
legislation continues to
infringe on our rights and
Furthermore it creates kind of
in in eerie feeling that this is
actually going to try to do
something to protect New
Mexicans in addition to these
new crimes our governor even
tried to ban three D. printing
at the federal level which is
just simply not possible on the
internet the plans are out the
always be out it's not going to
stop criminals and during this
legislative session there's
continue attacks on law
enforcement we're leaving New
Mexicans defenseless thank you.
Okay we will next go to
Michael's baby and a please
introduce yourself our and then
the timer will start and and if
you're with an organization go
ahead Michael.
Is Michael Beatty and I'm not
with an organization.
I would like to say that I have
federal and state constitutional
rights to keep and bear arms we
also have for over two hundred
years have the right to
manufacture our own firearms.
In this this bill in the format
that I read yesterday which may
not be exactly correct anymore.
It made me disassembling my
firearm so that I can clean it.
Or replace a broken part.
A crime which is absolutely
unreasonable.
I I don't understand.
I don't three D. print but why
should the parts that I need for
my firearms have to be
serialized when they're not
they're not the firearm itself
by the the definition of the a
TF and the constitution thank
you.
Thank you Michael we will go to
Patty Alexander.
Can you hear me.
We can hear you okay sorry about
that my computer is acting up my
name is Patty Alexander and I am
the single woman that lives at
home alone with her with her
hand can't mother and the fact
that you guys took a nose to
uphold our constitution both New
Mexico and federal
I just don't understand how you
can and you know anticipate
these gun laws as going being
with the constitution not to
mention that the department of
justice's survey that they did
mention that over ninety nine
percent of people that use guns
in crimes either founded a crime
scene or stolen they were not
purchased legally less than one
percent with kit purchased
legally.
And.
I am against this because I have
a right to defend are my home I
have the right to hunt.
Am you guys don't have a right
to infringe on that I'm sorry
but you don't in these laws in
French on our constitutional
rights.
I'll say at the federal level
not to mention it goes against
the due process.
And that's money that.
Thank you Patty Brian.
Go ahead Brian.
Brian if you're there we can't
hear you.
You are not muted it looks like
but we can't hear you so Brian I
think we will come back to you
since you are obviously having
some technical issues so we will
next go to Marci may.
Can you hear me yes okay my name
is Marcy may I am the new Vigil
Senator and and find.
Really it and gas at this bill
because of the language that's
in there are creating forces
creating new crimes regarding
federal arms
basically comes out and says the
anyone that use of the
legislature's standing as the
criminals is a criminal without
due process I also find it
highly amusing that well you
guys are behind two rows of
gates and fences and MPs and you
have arm state police officers
you guys are protected leaving
the individual citizens
on protected the second
amendment shall not be infringed
it was created to protect the
individual citizen against over
encroaching government case in
point with Afghanistan's were
attacked by Taliban because they
had their firearms removed from
them why are we being told that
we cannot defend ourselves.
Thank you Marci Keith Gardner.
So madam chair members the
committee my name's get Carter
Representative the national
shooting sports foundation which
is a group of tree Fundacion for
gun manufacturers and ammunition
many factors appreciate talking
the talk today although it's a
little bit difficult to discuss
a bill where we don't help the
version you're going to be
discussing today in front of us
but I can tell you there are
significant concerns with the
structure and some of the
implementation of the bill and
some of the language such as the
quote in subsection a of the
bill the original version or
otherwise assemble so as we
stated before what does that
really mean it's not defined and
so does simply taking part of
economic and putting it back
together create a crime.
There's also many federal laws
with regards to undetectable
weapons as as noted in the
national firearms act is this
duplicitous does it does it
really do something new
unfortunately I'm like to be.
Criminals don't use guns that
can be traced back to them they
use guns at their stoner gotten
otherwise and so this bill
although I understand the
intentions has many issues that
need to be resolved thank you
madam chair.
Thank you I'm Kim Chavez Cook
and now miss cook
I see that there are some
quicker quicker people on the
button here today than than our
normal.
Yes your game camp I know thank
you madam chair and it's
actually kind of nice to be in
the middle of the pack for one's
Kim Chavez Cook with the law
offices of the public defender
and it we do have some concerns
with this bill as the creation
of a new crime that may overlap
with existing offenses we also
noted that there this would be
somewhat of a sea change an
existing law where hobbyist
manufacture of guns from kits
and things like that are
currently sort of a common
practice and so at and I believe
are regulated so it to outlawed
entirely would definitely be a
change in the law in that regard
our primary concern though is
with the mental state
requirements where it does
require knowingly in some
contexts but not all and we're
particularly concerned about the
gun dealer and the possession
where someone could possessed a
gun they don't know was not
properly manufactured or could
be and employees selling guns
that they don't know are not in
compliance and then knowing that
requirements should attach to
those folks as well that being
said I want to thank the sponsor
for reducing this to a
misdemeanor which does carry a
lot fewer collateral
consequences so thank you for
that.
Eight thank you we have Derek
Scott.
Derek you will need to unmute
yourself.
Sorry about that my name and I
was speaking while the those
funds it was my name's Derek
Scott Representative gun owners
that are handicapped I represent
myself also their handicap that
carry firearms for the
protection of ourselves and
others because of not being able
to protect ourselves without any
type of
way to protect themselves any
other way well anyways to get to
the point here of string port is
already ruled on something to
this issue unfortunately so I
don't know why this law would
even have any standing as to the
Supreme Court already said to
the to the federal the the the.
Alcohol tobacco firearms said
that they can regulate this I'm
not saying that it's not maybe
have some good process in the
idea of it but we can trace some
of this stuff on like what the
law states are you can trace it
to the internet you can trace of
the plastics you can trace it
through the metals because they
need certain signatures that are
can be done but I would say that
this is infringing on the rights
of people that want to again
this and others that have to
alter their farms for people to
disability you're again going
after people with disabilities
and need to alter their firearms
for their use.
No.
Okay Jack Burton Brisbane.
Hello thank you madam chairman
maybe can you hear me yes
fantastic so I really appreciate
all what all the other speakers
have said and I will not I will
do my best not to repeat I just
and I do appreciate the the
intent behind the bill I think
that it comes from a desire to
keep unregistered firearms out
of the hands of criminals for
minors and so I I understand
that intent I do think it does
create a dangerous
situation as far as as taking a
group of people a large group of
people who are hobbyists and and
making them criminals I also
believe it's it's sort of
premature the Democrat party
holds all three houses and I
think that this will probably be
coming up in in federal
legislation they will look to
see what the ATS thanks you know
regarding their there
Right of the polymer eighty
facility and and you know the
determination which are trying
to reach as to whether these
things are actually falling into
criminal hands so I just think
this is not the time for New
Mexico to enact this law thank
you.
Thank you Derek Scott.
I just went so I'm gonna hand it
over to somebody else I
appreciate it though thank thank
you Derrick okay Valerie where.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee salary
worth a registered lobbyist for
the New Mexico farm and
livestock bureau we respectfully
oppose this bill as the bill
language is very broad.
And could potentially prohibit
transfers from within families
the bill does not define
transfers or assembly and does
not also
match to that ATF our definition
of firearms as well under this
piece of legislation an
individual may be in violation
if they sell their firearm after
assembling it for cleaning
purposes I'm so we strongly
stand in opposition of this
piece of legislation and ask
that you vote no on H. B. one
sixty six.
Thank you
jet okay
All right I'm.
If you could get rid of the ones
that have already talked so I
don't confuse myself Shane
o'donnell please.
Is next.
Hello madam chair yes good
afternoon madam chairman
admission on on all I'm
affiliated with the command blog
online firearms blog and the New
Mexico chapter of the NRA
however I and I am on rate and
I'm here out of my decision as
private citizen.
I respectfully urge you to
oppose this bill because I feel
that this bill is based on
unfounded fear and
misunderstandings about new
technology particularly
subsection C. which criminalizes
the distributions of files
relating to firearms online
these digital instructions are
merely instructions telling
machine how to move
criminalizing distributions of
these files would be tantamount
to banning the publication of
machinists drawings or technical
boot blueprints and I would hope
that this legislature would
never seriously consider a ban
on say books that included
firearm schematics get H. B. one
six six is affects would be
similar to such censorship to
prohibit the public for
accessing these files I feel is
nothing short of an attempt at
fear driven informational
control computer design and
three D. printing is going to be
a large part of our future going
forward and I don't feel that
this bill effectively addresses
some unfounded fears that the
legislature and others might
have about this technology.
Thank you
Shane o'donnell.
Madam chair I think she just
spoke okay okay Michelle
Martinez thank you.
Thank you madam chair good
afternoon members of the
committee
I'm first and foremost I just
want to thank you for allowing
me to take part in this as a.
New Mexico.
The second
I respectfully propose
this bill is due to everything
that the people from the needs
that I I wish I had more time I.
I do want to thank you so much
for your time and hope you have
you know that you will consider
voting no on bill H. B. one
sixty six thank you.
Thank you very person.
Can you hear me yes there is my
name is Gerry Pearson I oppose
this bill because.
Just like the others have said
it'll end up making.
The law abiding citizen a
criminal and that is just not
the way the constitution works
thank you for your time.
Thank you Richard van will.
Can you hear me.
Yes we can hear you yeah my name
is Richard von local I'm here as
a private system but I do
support many organizations
within the state one of them
being New Mexico four H.
shooting sports and I also
teacher education to for the
state New Mexico's game fish
Department.
The reason I'm calling about
this bill is in a lot of cases
when I'm working with you I will
take our arms and I will modify
them to move we need to the the
child and it makes it very hard
so what you're doing is if I go
ahead and change things out on
that far on your making me a
criminal so I can teach kids and
and and do that but I'll have to
do it as a criminal modify that
farm to meet your needs there
are a lot of things that are out
there that the ATF Authority
regulates and in great form or
fashion so if I need to get
another receiver and I buy a new
I have to go through an ATF
licensed dealer today I can
share my farm's part putting
back together and and and
include them I teach a lot of
kids how to do that also because
if you don't take care of their
the farms that you're using
you're asking for an accident to
happen so the way this bill was
written will seem very haphazard
and and kind of you lost a
thought track somewhere along
the way so hopefully you will
vote no on this bill.
Okay thank you Jennifer's
Sensipar.
Microphone check can you hear
me.
Yes okay awesome I'm not your
typical person is often in
opposition to this I'm a
freelance writer and a mostly
right about more mental issues
looking at this bill in and with
my familiar is a sin that I have
with three D. printing I own a
three D. printer and write about
them and their environmental
impacts is one of the big ones
are right about with that
I feel like it's not enforceable
files can be taken from the
internet you're not gonna stop
that I don't see how that could
possibly be stopped
I feel like we're wasting the
political capital of the
Democratic Party has right now
on something that's not gonna do
anything useful we have
important things like climate
change and other issues that we
really need to be addressing and
stirring up a Hornet's nest with
bills that aren't gonna make the
public safer.
It's just it's a waste of time
it's a waste of energy it
destroys the good will that we
might have with the public when
we really should be doing good
things to do good things for the
public like increasing
electrification of vehicles in
New Mexico and that sort of
thing thank you very much.
Thank you.
we have more re roof.
Hello can you hear me yes okay
thank you my name is more a roof
and I'm a regular New Mexico
voters with no attachment anyone
else here on my own so I'm
rather disappointed this bill
and I see several big problems
with it I get that the ideas try
prevent criminals and prohibited
persons from gaining access but
I asked how do you think you'll
Forces are you going to fund a
new China style five we'll
suspend route all internet
traffic in and out of New Mexico
to watch for people accessing
prohibit information you plan to
make a three D. printer police
that goes door to door to
examine what sorts of things
people are printing with their
three D. printers assembling
ability firearms is a very
common practice in New Mexico
especially the more rural and
poor areas of the state NMAA
filled with people who are very
resourceful and do things on
their own so even be important
for them from being able to own
and have a nice rifle for
hunting and sporting purposes
they were acquire used parts
pieces on sale and so on this
leads at this bill seeks to
make.
Sorry.
The other question I had was
what about the electronic files
this is New Mexico we have the
world famous Mexico tech that
offers a master's degree
explosives engineering are you
going to send the state police
to arrest students for working
on CAD files at home school work
so I'm opposed to this bill.
Thank you and I just a couple of
things have been brought to my
attention
so that the amendment the
amended that bill the substitute
Act no longer has assembly as
part of the bill so if that was
one of your concerns that is out
and also modifications are not
under this bill as long as they
maintain the serial number so if
if those were your issues those
those have been taking care of
but that we will next go to
barber chatter he.
Hello madam chair can you hear
me yes yes I'm Barbara chatter
G. I have worked in injury
prevention for many years in New
Mexico and elsewhere and I am
opposed to this bill as it is
written it seems to me that if
this bill is trying to address
the unmarked.
Firearms then it is important
that the key issues here are
that there are because the
materials are detectable whether
the gun is assembled or
disassembled whether that means
metal or other materials that
make them detectable in order to
protect our law enforcement and
the community for example if
they're going through an airport
checked and secondly to make
sure that the serial numbers are
are are are the all the relevant
parts the other parts of the
other issues that so many have
raised I have been really of
really separated from the key
issue of undetectable firearms
and it this bill is just not
written in a way that I believe
at this point it adds anything
to New Mexico law and I suggest
that you don't support this bill
as written thank you bye.
Thank you Joe Culbert thank.
Yes the prepare me yes.
Yes thank you Madam chairman
members the committee my name's
Joe Culbertson rancher and
Harding County.
lot of my comments were with
before the substitute changed a
lot so I thank you for the
clarification while ago so I'm
glad the assembly of a of a farm
can still be done to if you have
a background check and the
serial number
the first of three dimensional
printers of any criminal in the
country can a thank one of those
and all the information they
need to to make economic from.
Many sources of legal or not.
they go on the dark web.
There's lots of ways to get the
information to plug into a three
dimensional printer and anybody
can on one of those so I agree
with the person while ago that
said that the what we gonna do
go door to door and find out
who's got one of these for a lot
of people have a three
dimensional printer but they
used for lots of things of this
legislation does nothing to keep
farm from being a pain whether
criminals just another slap in
the face the law abiding
citizens of New Mexico thank you
very much.
Thank you Jonas Morya.
Madam chair members of the
committee good afternoon my name
is Jonas more and executive
director The New Mexico will
regards of corporation we are
grassroots organization that
represents sheep producers
across New Mexico respectively
oppose house bill one sixty six
due to the broadest of the bill
the lack of details regarding
for a firearm transfers within
families we also agree with many
of the positions that were
previous stated and for those
but reasons we urge you to
oppose this up this legislation
thank you very much for the
opportunity COVID.
Thank you and we have John.
Hi can you hear me yes yes.
Hi my name's John Brennan of
Kerala's I've been in New Mexico
for fifty five years.
And I'm speaking for myself.
I recommend opposition to this
bill
mainly because I think it's a
poor example of our thing an
example of poor governance
it doesn't really be it's not
really respectful doesn't
knowledge New Mexico's diverse
artists and heritage in
communities we are paying
jewelers artery makers
blacksmiths filmmakers and many
more and essentially this
justice respect the hobbyists
and artists and who does fire
arms it's over brought it
affects thousands of New
Mexicans anything and everything
essentially would be are related
to firearms would be a felony
It does not really address child
safety because no law really
replaces good adult oversight
parenting I find it devices
pushes us forces been mentality
analyzes sins for pursuing
personal interests were no
public benefit
I would ask that you vote
against this our preferred
believe that the sponsor.
Withdraw it we can do better.
Thank you we have Peter lines
Sen.
Hello my name is Peter likes and
just Representative myself.
You guys able to hear me.
Yes we.
Yeah I would just urge you guys
not to support this bill it it
paints with pre broad brush here
in the it that takes a swipe at
the the first by trying to tell
everyone they can't access.
Information in the form of CAD
files and drawings and do what
they want with that information
many goes out there and tells
everyone who wants to exercise
their second amendment rights
that they can't do that either
unless they go out and get
permission in the form of
permitting and paying fees and
jumping through any other series
of hoops that some other
government organization tells
and I have to do it's just urge
you guys to be cautious about
exercising this kind of story
over what are supposed to be a
bunch of three people.
I don't think it's going to help
save anybody here keeping one
safe and it's just gonna make a
bunch of people out less free
than we were before so please
just be cautious.
Thank you now we have Luis Rios.
Yes hi can you hear me yes.
Yes I just want to say that I
strongly oppose a.
H. B. one sixty six I believe
it's just the gateway type of
bill that's just going to be
implementing other tax bills in
two are up already saturated.
Gun law country I strongly
believe in the second amendment
I believe that it's a should be
upheld by everybody and
especially more legislation who
swore to uphold it
I think that.
It just we we tap into gun laws
so much especially with our new
president coming in.
I think that we should
definitely seek other ways I
don't I don't believe it's going
to help out by making a safer
being able to capture criminals
or do anything like that I hope
that you also strongly oppose in
the thank you very much.
Thank you we have G. M..
Hello this is GM can you hear me
OK yes we can hear you hi I
strongly urge you to.
Vote against this bill I thank
you for the opportunity to speak
today obviously our state
constitution says no law shall
abridge the right of the citizen
to keep and bear arms for
security and defense for lawful
hunting and recreational use and
for other lawful purposes R. as
does our US constitution I don't
think this bill does anything to
promote safety of the general
public or individuals.
Everyone has the.
Our responsibility to you know
handle their firearms properly
keep them safe from being stolen
and I don't see anywhere in this
bill that it's going to improve
that I think I'll just end up
violating our our search and
seizure laws
so I appreciate your time and
again I urge you to vote now
thank you for thank you more
more more more Nathan dial.
Yes ma'am.
Yes yes I can dial town
wristband you're most of
speaking for the local American
Legion
I have right now we still have
twenty nine second amendment
sanctuary counties in New Mexico
so if you're district the
majority of your district is a
sanctuary county to represent
your constituents you need to
vote against this bill.
And in saying that in common
practice back before we were
country let alone the state
everybody made their own guns so
with the second amendment came
about at a nation and as a state
it was in common practice to be
able to build your own firearm
showed numbers or not so what
was a common practice when the
law was written must follow the
law so therefore to make this
law you are violating the
additional tests of the second
amendment.
So please vote against this bill
and after World War two.
You can make goes out of bicycle
parts they were I'm sure all
number this is just an extension
of our right to defend
ourselves.
Thank you.
Thank you Michael.
Yes my check.
We can hear you.
Okay my name is Michael I've
been a lifelong citizen of New
Mexico and I do not represent an
organization.
I just like to start off by
saying that
These quick response to this
bill just saw it goes to show
that they didn't do very much
research in what actual gun laws
provide there are no statistics
that show that stricter gun laws
actually create safer societies
it is over reach of the
government.
And please everybody part of
this today let the vote.
Show you be a reflection of how
the people feel at an eighty
percent vote this is telling you
this is not what the people
want.
We feel like our rights are
being violated.
And it's an over reach and so I
just ask you to vote no and for
future reference.
Keep track of the way the vote
was today and in the the other
bills you bring to legislation
thanks.
Thank you Patrick Brenner.
Madam chair actually.
Error message it says a lot of
talk is not available because
this person using an older
version of zoom choose from our
the panelists to allow Patrick
to talk is that okay I very
panelists right now yes that's
my goal our pick Patrick Patrick
okay yeah go ahead.
I good afternoon madam chair
woman can you hear me yes we can
hear you.
Madam chairman members of the
committee good afternoon my name
is Patrick Brenner I regret
Representative the Rio Grande
foundation we're a nonpartisan
constitutional think tank and
free market research institute.
On behalf of the organization
and the people of New Mexico I
urge opposition to this bill.
Okay thank you I'm Lauren
Patterson.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Lauren
Patterson I just Representative
Mexico cattle growers
association.
Our association opposes.
H. B. one sixty six for reasons
previously stated we do
appreciate that the assembly
language was amended and that
that that simple repairs would
no longer be a crime but we do
have some some questions on why
pre nineteen sixty nine would be
exempt and those after we feel
we feel like this is just that
very broad legislation it needs
to be rethought thank you.
Thank you Janice.
Hi this is Janice and I
represent myself basically I
agree with most everybody's
comments before this I think
really there's an overwhelming
need to
Vote against this bill one sixty
six thank you.
Thank you next we have Rosalie.
Hi yes can you hear me yes we
can hear you okay thank you
madam chair and committee
members I am opposed to this
bill or again my name is Rosalyn
speaking as myself well for
myself not with the group.
And I've lost several relatives
due to guns and this bill would
not have saved their would not
save their lives have save their
lives
I just see this bill as
prejudice against law abiding
citizens by criminalizing the
act of fabricating a gun and not
the use of the gun in the crime
you know go after the criminal
and with this new technology
that people have been before me
have been explaining I mean it
makes it easier for the poor and
disadvantaged to exercise their
right to bear arms and defend
themselves so I mean with
obviously the crime rates New
Mexico
we cannot solely depend on the
police to protect the public and
the constitution is set up so
also this is will be able to
defend themselves so yes I agree
this bill is poorly written and
I hope the committee votes
against this bill thank you.
Thank you we have J. S..
Hello can you hear me yes.
Okay hello my name's one so I'm
just a concerned law abiding
citizen I'm a father of two
young boys so I take the time to
train and teach the correct ways
to be responsible firearm so in
my opinion I'm opposed to this
bill and I think instead of
trying to make criminals out of
law abiding citizens we should
take more time to educate them
we've got programs in schools.
To teach them about sex
education why not you know if
this is such an epidemic in New
Mexico and across our nation we
just spend more time educating
them I spend lots of time with
my boys.
Educating them so it can be done
I think we can spend more time
educating them instead of.
You know creating criminals
overnight thank you.
Thank you Pablo Martinez.
Hello you hear me yes.
Okay good afternoon fellow New
Mexicans and Americans.
Madam chair chairs of the
committee my name is Pablo
Martinez I'm a lifelong citizen
of New Mexico and I strongly
oppose.
House Bill one six six.
I believe that is an it is an
unconstitutional bill that
further infringes on our second
amendment rights another.
Reminder.
That you all took an oath to
uphold our United States
constitution I'm opposed to this
bill because there are already
laws in place that address the
issues in your bill.
Some are unconstitutional like
last year's red flag law that
you passed that directly
infringes on a constitutional
second amendment rights taken
away due process this bill is
unnecessary as it will not stop
criminal activity and is
ultimately unenforceable.
In my opinion this bill solely
targets law abiding citizens you
had an eighty percent approval
of this bill according to your
poll.
I just ask you to please stop
your communistic like genders
and start uploading our
constitution you swore an oath
to thank you.
Thank you and I'm just going to
remind people please keep it
civil and not no name calling so
we will go to Thomas other.
Are you madam chair have to.
List as well.
I.
The all right now I think I'm on
mute is old Madam chair on.
Okay thank you my name's Thomas
seltzer I am the legislative
affairs officer for New Mexico
shooting sports association
which is representing gun owners
in New Mexico since the nineteen
thirties.
We are opposed to this bill
which is just an assault on the
right of individuals to
manufacture their own firearms
making them entirely dependent
on commercially available
products in fact simply
manufacturing single component
of the farm such as a barrel or
slide would result in up to six
months in jail and that's under
the misdemeanors of the last
minute substitution bill.
Ording to a.
DC versus Heller the Supreme
Court so the prerequisite to
keeping and bearing arms is the
corresponding right to acquire
arms what is even more
fundamental is the right to make
arms yourself unbeknownst to
many Americans this practice is
always been a fairly well
established tradition section
one C. the bill is a blatant
violation of first amendment
rights of free speech I would
like to add as a retired
machinist the machinery
available to manufacture
firearms has been available for
over a hundred years it does not
take a three D. printer to make
a far are thank you very much
please oppose this bill.
Might lose their
Hello.
Yes we can hear you okay good
thank you hello my name is
Michael Cerro and laugh
thanks long resident of Las
Vegas New Mexico.
And I oppose this bill you know
us many other individuals.
Come for us and claim some of
the facts and logic of what this
Bill.
Has in store has in it also if
they've already had to amend
certain parts of this bill
simply because it doesn't make
sense and I think it also should
constitute the idea that perhaps
you should rethink the whole
bill all together because a lot
of it like many other end at
constituents and individuals I
am forced is it doesn't really
help in the New Mexico law
abiding citizens it certainly
doesn't protect anybody
of course like many and other
individuals of stat three D.
printers that are allowed to
make these are our arms
you know you there's no way of
balancing and checking that sent
the ramp it in sales you can't
pull something off the internet
that's another example of you
know that somebody I'm sorry to
you better right what was
already set
but I strongly oppose this bill
in all as many for the same
reasons as other individuals
have and.
Pointing out that people already
eighty percent have already.
Okay I'm do you.
Hello madam chairperson and.
Members of the committee Mary
yes okay.
Repeat what's already been said
because most people are exposed
what I'm intended to say let me
start by saying that some of law
abiding citizens here in Mexico
business owner some sports
shooter hunter.
And my experience going around
just last couple years in
opposition you
get legislation has been met
with.
Almost like a.
People don't want to hear what
you have to say.
It took me three different
business that actually
set down points across from
Daymon Ely that refers to the
like the it's where they don't
really care we have the state
and I hope we have a voice in
this law you guys just continue
to pass a constitutional laws
that hurt law abiding citizens
that put our law enforcement
officers at risk and don't
really do anything to.
Go after that criminal go after
the gun related crimes to
strengthen the laws behind that
this feature I would really love
to see for you guys takes action
and are going to get criminals
and leave law abiding the law
thank you for your car.
Thank you Jeremy.
Go ahead Jeremy yes I just
wanted to also stand in
opposition against this bill as
a.
A resident of New Mexico.
I don't see anything in here
that really is going to help
anything as far as gun related
crime is concerned as many
people have said fire arms and.
So many of these things have
already been addressed by the a
TF we have federal laws in place
we have background checks in
place and if people really want
to make
A firearm to commit a crime
they're going to do it and it's
gonna it's gonna do not do
anything except hurt law abiding
citizens who are doing the right
thing like many people have
already said I'm not going to
reiterate there's just nothing
in here that really addresses a
real statistics of crime and
punishment and we needed
judicial system that will
actually punish offenders and
take care of the things they
need to do instead of that
putting more unconstitutional
laws and restrictions on the
American people thank you.
Okay Chris.
Hello can you hear me yes we can
hear you hello my name is
Christopher you'll wish and I
was just thinking I don't see
what this bill does for public
safety I mean as a law abiding
citizen if I pass a background
check and FFL and I can own a
firearm I would be producing a
firearm be any less more
dangerous to provide the same
and law abiding gun owner than
buying to the store to me both
if you don't trust me to begin
with both situations are equally
dangerous are on dangerous on
your outlook of it and again
regardless if a criminal or
salary prohibited person makes
obtains a gun a leak you know
legally through another way it's
just as dangerous punish them
either way don't punish me
because you know it's like I
said it's no more dangerous if I
produce one off the books yet on
law abiding I bypass a
background check that shows that
I am worthy of owning a gun safe
and just kind of you know the
thing when I hear that they it
smacks of like universal
registration because they want
all guns to be registered to be
the only purpose of you doing
that is that some that you want
to come and grab him from thank
you.
They Brian Austin.
Brian you need to unmute.
Hello yes we can hear you all
Hey all right.
Yeah I just a wonderful way to
passionate against of basically
I I wish that the authorities
would prosecute gun crimes.
Of more than may then they have
then they let people if you know
the people off the hook too easy
of and the laws that keep coming
up with the existing laws are
not being followed and and and
prosecuted to the full extent of
the law and turning basically
honest citizens into criminals
for possessing guns in a safe
way contain defense recreation
and of the pretty much agree
with most everybody I've been
listening to.
What we don't need more laws
regarding firearms we need more
forced may to take care of the
laws we have already on the
books and that would probably
make everybody happier.
Okay we have and the need this
is.
M. S. thank your I'm sorry
about.
Not getting your name right go
ahead Anthony can you hear me.
We can hear you good you
actually did say rate is much
higher I I do represent myself
here
I'm asking you to please oppose
this bill I hear arms died a
study done by the FBI was
actually a survey done twenty
nineteen over two hundred ten
thousand criminals that were
there crime involved a firearm
and just seventy some percent of
on a choir there fire army
through Sask.
Non serialized.
Alright so we're not even an
option it wasn't even something
that the criminals are actually
doing so as has been said before
this bill would basically punish
the law abiding citizens and
does nothing to stop gun crime
done by criminals I appreciate
your attention this matter thank
you.
Thank you next is next Holman.
Hello can you hear me now yes.
Thank you my name is Nicholas
Bowman I'm just a private
citizen I'm all this is
manufactured farms to historical
part parts kits I'm concerned
not only with this bill
immediately plan and my hobby
but it would make me a criminal
also possessing firearms I have
legally constructed in the past
these are tangible assets worth
thousands of dollars.
The only justification for this
bill by the sponsors of the
individuals who cannot legally
own firearms are currently able
to three D. printer manufacture
their own it was insinuated this
bill would somehow prevent them
from doing so.
I'm having a hard time
understanding how this
legislation will prevent those
individuals from printing
manufacturing firearm if they're
already breaking the same laws
in order to do so.
Because of this I suspect the
true motivation is actually
intended to target currently law
abiding citizens such as myself.
Thank you.
Okay Danny Meyer's.
Okay.
Yes okay.
So is getting more and more just
just assistance
Mexico.
And
I'm advocating that the that the
the yup he's against this that
this bill I not only does that
the on it you know.
Is it not for slow but in order
to connect to a point that you
acted by late several other
items constitution size.
And our and also because it also
looks like it would attract
other people who are not even
for people that aren't just.
In line just I want to the
printers the further things are
and size which now.
This require right now that are
similar to those in relation to
what you made up our arms what
yeah the you since you guys are
committed with these arms is
buried in the actually not be
any price at all instead of just
to make a full of life love I'd
since since
since the bill.
Okay next we have New Mexico's
spirit of rebellion.
Hello my being heard.
Yes we can hear you.
Good afternoon.
Hope everyone listening today as
well my name is Daniel I'm here
to tell you that we you need to
pass a law requiring all New
Mexicans or the age of eighteen
be trained in firearms.
I represent the people of New
Mexico and the constitution
which is the supreme law of the
land and as your boss I commend
you to to oppose the bill as the
concerns of the students have
been hurt and we're in agreement
that this bill is an
infringement.
What the legislature.
What the legislature is
referring to as a ghost on it's
not just come from a three D.
printer but mostly comes from an
ethical dealer who
professionally in response we
might doctors use devices for
law abiding Americans we use the
money to pay bills and feed
their families thousands of
these guns are already in
existence but we create
criminals overnight or otherwise
law abiding.
I'm also extremely curious to
know what credentials your
firearms expert has what is that
experience placing it on her own
head the problem isn't guns it's
the people that know absolutely
nothing about guns and refused
to educate their children.
These are life lessons that a
piece of paper not teacher
trial I oppose H. B. one sixty
six.
Thank you.
Then.
hi can you hear me yes we can
hear you hi thank you madam
chair and all members of the
committee my name say
on my free time I'm of certified
firearms instructor focuses on
teaching marginalized folks and
people on the left in the
political spectrum of safely own
operate and build their own
firearms and I'm not
representing anyone or anything
but myself here I've got four
major objections to this bill
but I don't feel can be
addressed within the framework
of this bill and so I urge
everyone to oppose this bill the
former efficient.
First off that there is no
recourse for those who currently
on these firearms and there's no
grandfathering information and
steer surrender provision and I
don't think there's any right to
the story something that's
illegal.
Second it's not easier to home
manufacturing it's just cheaper
since amounts to imposing a
class there you're.
There's no real public safety
value here serial numbers are
not the main way in which
individuals are crimes involving
firearms and finally this bill
adds more crimes to the books at
a time when folks are crying out
for an into over policing police
militarization and the and to
give Jim crow we can't claim to
be dismantling white supremacy
well continuing to jail more
people for more reasons knowing
full well any new criminal
penalties for use first and
foremost against marginalized
people thank you.
Thank you.
More two ghosts.
Go ahead.
Martin R. Martine guy a ghosts.
We can't hear you you are not
muted.
Okay it may be that he's having
technical difficulties so we
will go on with the red.
The reddit you will need to
unmute yourself.
I was can you hear me yes
my name is Loretta's Burkman I'm
a lifelong resident of New
Mexico in I strongly oppose this
bill and hope that you will vote
against it I've looked at a lot
of the laws that are on the
books for the legislature's
regarding criminals and it seems
like they're decriminalizing a
lot of of the already in pro in
place laws and also reducing
crime time for crimes I would
ask that maybe you look at
increasing those.
Published man's and.
Hopefully not just go after law
abiding citizens thank you for
your time.
Thank you and we will go back to
Whittle no I'm sorry that's not
back I'm sorry it's just well.
The land needed yes you are
thank you I just wanted to
address one small part of this
bill it's written so broadly
that it includes the home
manufacture of a firearm on a
serialized receiver in other
words I can buy a serialized
receiver from the same
manufacturer that sells a
complete rifle for instance I
have to go through a background
check to purchase that.
And then I at some other point
to it and now it's a full
firearm but I've already gone
through a background check and
this law this proposed law would
make that a crime and that's
just completely crazy I'm I'm
not getting into whether I'm
serialized up is good bad or
indifferent I'm just saying that
the way this is written
criminalizes me for owning
serialized.
Firearms that I've built myself
on a serialized receiver I've
gone through a background check
to acquire it it's also possible
for one of these guns to change
hands a few times and then for
the current owner not to even
know that it was not built by an
FFL but it was a home built so
now they're criminal and they
don't even know it thank you.
Thank you Jamie Frasier page.
Jamie you'll need to on mute.
Jamie you are muted but we can't
hear you.
Okay it's it appears that Jamie
is having some technical issues
as well so we'll go on to Deanna
Osborne.
Hi I'm Dee and also for quite
County
Thank you madam chairman
Committee and also
Representative lu Han I'm a lot
of the concerns today have been
spoken by law abiding gun owners
sportsman of New Mexico and I.
I agree with everything they
said where I'm at on this is the
way it's written as many are
however my main thing is is I'd
like to I would like to propose
this bill number like for you
guys to oppose this bill
strictly on the back of more
research I mean I think if you
would research it you would see
that these laws what you're
trying to implement in a speech
one sixty six is already
implemented in federal law so
you have like title eighteen
United States code section nine
twenty two a personal
manufacturer cannot produce an
undetectable firearms described
in that in title eighteen of the
United States code section nine
twenty two also with that you
know
Title eighteen of the United
States code section twenty two
also says that it is.
Thank you.
Thank you we will go back to
Jamie Frasier page.
You are muted Jamie.
All right.
Madam chair members of the
committee.
Go ahead I want to speak in
opposition to HB one sixty six.
I'm vice president of the New
Mexico shooting sports
association and a member of the
NRA the second amendment
foundation gun owners of America
and the firearms policy
coalition under my retired
police officer.
This is a redundant Bill.
That will not affect the
criminal misuse of firearms.
I have seen in my career and
sense that the criminal misuse
of firearms is frequently and on
charged crime.
We need to deal with criminals
and not a law abiding citizen.
Under federal law as has been
stated.
It is not a crime to make a
firearm for your own personal
use it only becomes a crime if
without the proper licensure you
make a firearm to sell create or
otherwise moving to commerce.
I believe that.
This bill will not do anything
to enhance that already existing
structure what we'll do is place
a burden on law abiding citizens
without having any effect on the
criminal misuse of firearms
thank you for your time.
Thank you.
Sour lemon.
We we are we really can't hear
you you may need to get closer
to your might or or something we
just barely barely could hear
you can you hear me now that's
much better thank you okay my
name is Armine I consider myself
responsibly armed American
citizen.
more than that I.
I built things my whole adult
life which in quite some time
I'm getting older now.
I'm I don't mean to interrupt
you I think people are really
having a hard time hearing you.
Okay
is back in the room like a
little bit.
This easily so can you hear me
any better now.
We can hear you a little bit
just because loudly as you can.
I can't get my Michael.
Get any louder than it is.
What the cops get.
Okay
Again I'm responsibly armed
Americans citizen that has built
six things about my whole adult
life and I have an issue trying
to ban components that may be
made in the fire.
because what would be next parks
Lumentum plastic steel
I don't see how you can be in
the.
Because they might be armed.
Bill out of concern over serial
numbers.
At like a criminal per minute
and.
Got an illegal act one the first
thing's going to do is grind
off.
L. numbers don't mean a thing
Pickering middle.
a grandma use would be one info
anyway.
Matter of fact I'm gonna hammer
more dangerous my gun in my home
and it doesn't have a number.
Going to pay and hammers.
people.
That's all.
Thank you M. to Brazil.
Yes.
It's just hello can you hear me
yes we can hear you okay yes
this is David I live in requests
New Mexico.
You have a I'm concerned about
any any laws that hurt law
abiding citizens with guns
because I lived in Brazil for
close to thirty years and they
have a lot of laws against guns
are made any comment me just.
And the one time of traveling
through the airport and I found
two nine millimeter cartridges
and my suitcase and I ended up
in a Brazilian president.
And I did nothing wrong and I
don't know how the part she's
got but the we need to be
careful about making laws that
will hurt law abiding citizens
especially when we have the
constitution thank god I was
able to get out of course I'm
here.
Because the constitution says to
the security of a Free State the
right of the people to bear arms
shall not be infringed.
So I think be very careful about
this road will go underground
making all these laws against
guns for law abiding citizens
bank.
Thank you Russell.
Can you hear me.
Yes go ahead.
yes I oppose H. B. or this
Russell flam sister New Mexico
citizen
I propose that HB one sixty six
this bill this bill does nothing
for the law abiding citizens
it's unconstitutional law like
many have said we have so many
unconstitutional law already
that haven't helped.
The young lady that share
testimony on on safely handling
a gun or not we're not knowing
how to properly handle gun we
need to educate people on gun
safety and not for and on our
constitutional rights I oppose
H. B. one sixty six thank you.
Thank you I'm we're going to go
back to either marked Martin R.
Martine guy a goes.
You are unmuted but we can't
hear you.
Okay it looks like he's having
some issues with his set up so
we will go to Kerry flown.
In care you will need to on mute
yourself.
Readings hello yes we can hear
you hi my name is Kerry Sloan
and I am the president and
founder of an organization
called we the female our overall
mission is to arm women with
education confidence and self
defense and one of the things
that concerns me about this bill
in particular is as I read
through it I noticed that there
is no.
No actions and how this bill is
actually going to be enforced.
Part of that concern is that
you're also looking at a first
amendment issue as well as many
of the other violations of the
bill of rights but more
importantly when free speech is
also covered through coding.
And you're not banning people
from owning three D. printers
how exactly are you going to be
enforcing this bill Furthermore
the additional lawsuits but
you're looking at in violation
of these additional amendments
is only going to put more
financial strain on the state
government so I don't know that
that all of this was looked at
holistically when this bill was
presented but this is going to
be presenting a much larger
concern that just banning people
from being able to own or excuse
me produced a firearm in their
home thank you.
Thank you I'm.
Some Apodaca I'm sorry if I
didn't do that name well.
No no problem my name is Sonya
abduct I and I am a law abiding
citizen my son is also a police
officer and he deals directly
with criminals on a daily basis.
I particularly oppose this H. B.
one sixty six because it does
nothing.
It does nothing to support or to
minimize any kind of gun.
Gun violence or any or any of
the sort what it does is it
penalizes.
Law abiding citizens if you want
to do something to keep
criminals from getting guns you
have to think like a criminal
they're not going to buy a gun
they're not going to build a gun
in their home they don't have
the smarts to do that.
They're going to steal it from
somebody else.
And what we need to do if you
want to do something about
criminals possessing guns.
Put him in jail and keep them in
jail don't let it be a revolving
door.
I hear the frustration I stand
for he breast somebody and by
the time he's done with the
paperwork they're back out on
the street.
That's all I have to say thank
you.
Okay thank you so we will now go
to and I'm sorry for the
technical issues that someone
didn't get heard I so we will
now go to those in support.
Okay and just a reminder one
minute trying not to be
repetitive and please Senator
town so we'll start with Evelyn.
Vinogradov I am sorry Evelyn.
Hi can you hear me yes we can
hear you.
I thank you madam chair and
members of the committee good
afternoon my name is Evelyn
Delgado I'm grassroots organizer
in the Edgewood area standing in
favor of H. B. one sixty six I
would like to mention some
general facts and look at the
bigger picture.
California for what is currently
the state with the strictest gun
laws in the United States and it
also has the seventh lowest rate
of deaths by gun violence.
Unsurprisingly the states with
the strictest gun laws generally
have the lowest gun ownership
rates as well.
Consequently gun deaths are
significantly lower in states
with strict gun laws and low gun
ownership.
I'm in favor of H. B. one sixty
six for a very basic reason in
that it intends to strengthen
gun laws for the safety and well
being of my community thank you
for your time.
corporate secretary Ron.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members my name is
Clarissa Duran and I'm a
generational citizen from the
tier one basin also known as the
Espanola valley I support this
bill because of the portion that
covers guns made by three D.
printers I'm against people in
New Mexico printing weapons for
sale that will not become part
of the legal process of gun
ownership in New Mexico I have
questions about who exactly in
New Mexico can afford a three D.
printer and the materials to
make guns this issue becomes one
of privilege when we look at who
can afford to print a gun I'm a
social worker and I have to
wonder how many of you talking
about four people in New Mexico
have grown up with the
generational property that has
plagued our traditional Hispano
and indigenous peoples is those
in opposition want to stop crime
they should start investing in
helping people out of poverty
I'm asking the committee to pass
house bill one sixty six thank
you very much for your time.
Thank you Maranda fiscal.
Hello can you hear me now yes we
can hear you thank you madam
chair members of the committee
my name is Brenda school and I'm
a co president of New Mexicans
to prevent gun violence we stand
in full support of house bill
one sixty six guns goes guns are
untraceable firearms that can be
bought online and stumbled at
home that can be purchased by
anyone including domestic
violence offenders gun
traffickers and prohibited
purchasers as we know they can
also easily be printed on three
D. printers so that there's not
a serial number nationally law
enforcement officials are
concerned the ghost guns are
becoming a more common and
increasing concern for way for
criminals to by pass gun laws
and get their hands on firearms
many have been used and then
smashed two things one tragic
reminder as to how dangerous
these guns are as the twenty
nineteen Santa Clara Santa
Clarita California school
shooting we're a teenager used a
ghost gun to shoot and kill two
of his classmates and injured
three thank you very much for
your time.
Thank you and Dreyer hi.
About Costco.
Good afternoon madam chair and
committee members thank you for
the opportunity for.
To be able to talk to you today
my name is Andrea kite and I'm a
gun violence survivor.
Three and a half years ago my
husband was shot and killed
during a carjacking at our home
in press get there's.
Since that time I have become an
advocate for gun safety
testifying before this body in
support of the background check
and the red flag bills I'm
horrified that during the panic
buying of the pandemic ghost gun
kids have been flying off the
shelves they can be purchased
online delivered to your front
door and assembled in a few
hours all with no background
check and no serial number this
quickly developing phenomenon
poses a mounting danger to our
citizens for the public safety
of New Mexicans I am asking for
your support of H. B. one sixty
six thank you.
Thank you Tasha named.
Can you hear me yes we can hear
you
I'm hi madam chair members of
the committee my name is Natasha
named number registered
lobbyists for differs the gun
violence prevention organization
founded by former congresswoman
Gabby Giffords I just want to
say we stand in full support of
this bill and thank the sponsor
for bringing it forward thank
you.
Thank you I'm Representative
Stafford.
Okay can you hear me yes okay
sorry I I'm in the opposition
are I don't know how it got
skipped but I.
Anyway my name is Brad Sanford.
I'm a husband and a father of
two girls.
I just want to see that we do
not need any more regulations
against our second amendment.
The second amendment shall not
be infringed Chicago has some of
the strictest gun laws in the
nation and the high it some of
the highest murder rates with a
firearm in the country.
So.
The officer our state police
officer that was killed this
weekend was killed by a guy who
should never have legally been
able to own a gun he was a
convicted felon I was a
corrections officer in the state
prison almost four years and I
would see people come in and
out.
Year after year people would we
we come right back we believe
the come right back because of
these law tomorrow.
And then let him go policies.
I am strictly against this
please vote against this bill.
Thank you have a good day.
Okay thank you all of the public
comment so I will go back to the
sponsor and see if she has any
and.
Any response or or and go ahead
Representative lu Han.
Madam chair committee I want to
thank all those that spoke today
public comment and
Having giving them and having us
have the opportunity together to
listen
and to educate one another.
On this very important piece of
legislation common sense.
A gun reform.
Which I think we all can come to
a common ground and read it
what we're looking to do with
this is to eliminate the gun
violence.
We have in our states and saving
lives.
And I want to thank them
everyone participated.
And my voice is a little shaky
it's because.
This is moving to me it's moving
to me to know that.
That.
We are doing we're moving in the
direction to take the
responsibility and this type of
legislation that's before us
today and I want to say that in
doing so we stand it and I stand
and support to protect our law
enforcement officers by enacting
such.
Legislation that would increase
and protect and help our law
enforcement in this matter we
know New Mexico has the eighth
highest rate of gun deaths the
twelfth highest rate of gun
homicides and the sixth highest
rate of gun suicide in the
United States.
This is these the statistics
have continued to rise over the
last decade.
So when we look at those those
those issues and we know that
that this is a growing concern
and looking at the historical
value that was also talked about
today that we know that we have
to move in the direction of our
time the twenty first century
and into the technology into the
building.
A responsible government in
addressing this issue so again I
want to thank everybody who
participated and I also want to
say that there were some
There were some of the
participants in the audience
that didn't get to.
Call in I guess and I don't know
if madam chair if I'd be able to
mention their names if that's
possible if you accept that your
committee.
Representative were they having
difficulty getting I'm.
I I'm not sure the complete
issue madam chair they just
notified me that they weren't
able to to call in our chief to
become an attendant to
participate yeah go ahead
and and let me just put this out
there if you are listening and
you were not able to get in
please send an email either to
me or the committee secretary
and let us know we're trying to
keep track of things and this
that the first we've heard of
that so if you did have issues I
try and make sure that they
weren't on your end and then and
then let me know what they were
and we will try and fix it going
forward so go ahead
Representative thank you so and
in favor of this legislation in
support of it we had a Sandra
Janse Dransfield from
indivisible sos in Santa Fe we
had Synthia fine I wash and also
Barbara Luber and Jane
Nordstrom.
In support thank you madam chair
appreciate it thank you sure I'm
okay we will go to the committee
for questions are you first I
have Representative lower.
Thank you madam chair so excuse
me a minute because I'm going
between two pages I have the
regional bell the substitute
that I receive much later.
Madam chair and representative I
I do have a question I'm
speaking that just everybody
knows I'm the founder program
women a lot of people know that
I'm also survivor domestic
violence and it also is a buyer
of gun violence and very much
program because I don't care
what you do I don't care how
much you regulate this my first
husband would kill me with his
bare hands he did not need again
he would kill me no matter
what's the issue always goes
back to the person because we
all know guns don't kill.
So we like to ask you is did you
ask law enforcement and how many
law enforcement officers did you
ask about this bill because I
did and I wanted to if you talk
to them about this bill before
drafting.
No
madam chair and Representative
I'd like to our a talk to you in
and talk with our have and you
my own my expert witnesses here
talk to that thank you thank you
so much of the door to wire
pulling them.
Representative and thank
thank you madam chair I'm in the
procedimiento gun safety which
is the nation's largest gun
violence prevention organization
you know I I I can't speak to
you know the consultation with
law enforcement specifically but
I can talk from a national
perspective and say that you
know the this is the number one
concern we hear from law
enforcement the threat of on
serialized untraceable ghost
guns that are being found at
crime scenes is a national
threat it's the biggest threat
to our gun safety laws and that
you know currently out there and
it is a real concern I mean you
know we've seen a study from
California where.
Thirty percent of guns recovered
from crime scenes were ghost
guns and we're on serialized
we've seen it three hundred
percent increase in Washington
DC And goes down recovery so I'm
you know and there's plenty of
you know concern among eighty
have an online sports about
ghost guns and serializable
firearms so
you know I think it's a real
concern law enforcement and you
know other states that have
passed this type of legislation
have seen enforcement actions
and I've seen their ability to
deal with this problem increase.
Okay thank you for into that
managers and the reason I ask is
because I actually did going
talk to law enforcement and
discovered some interesting
things no one has ever seen it
go see on gun use and crime none
of them have ever found anybody
with the a ghost gun ever being
used there's no issue at all so
I'm trying to figure out and
that's what we need to the next
question so did this bill Madam
chair representative was this
bill presented to you by moms
demand action or every town a
blue burger Gifford was a
something that you thought of on
your own.
Madam chair.
You for the question this as you
saw my response earlier is the.
Is an issue that is it is very
concerning to me and has been
over my lifetime
we need to move towards common
sense gun reform and this is one
step another step that we we can
take in doing so.
Thank you madam chair she.
Thank you I I can appreciate
that but what we're finding and
madam chair representative
somebody these are presented by
moms demand action every time
bluebird and Gifford in totally
wasting our time and clogging up
our system especially now we
have so many other things going
on we're worried about bills
were worried about COVID we're
worried about opening up
industry I really wish that you
guys would got together and said
you know maybe not the session
because we just spent.
What our half time testimony we
haven't got a red flag and
there's gonna be another Allen
have testimony there's so many
other things going to dress with
if there's no goes gun issue
right now there's nothing going
on this is something that
could've waited for another time
and that is my opinion on that
so Representative work let me
what we as a practice we do not
question the motives of the
members of of of the body so
it's it's it's not appropriate
to ask where this came from or
what motivation was we that's
something we we do not do okay
thank you have anybody asked me
I will plainly answer because
all my god my bills were hand
written so all that did not know
the ruling on that just curious
okay so madam chair
representative so are you aware
that you can tactically by parts
of it that will let me ask you
this do you know what A. R.
fifteen is.
Madam chair representative
I did grow up in a family that
of hunters and was taught how to
respect gun usage and how to
claim
the simple revolver gun but
please educate me on that thank
you.
To tell you because this is
where it falls into that so I
can buy parts to assemble a gun
that that is a ready and the the
ATF is determined that a lower
receiver and eight air fifteen
is absolutely legal there was a
situation where they the it the
what arrested somebody who was
taking the air fifteens and
showing people how to mail them
they still decided that that
that was totally legal so as
well let you know that there's a
bunch of parts you can buy for
some live guns but when you get
to
Bayern assembly does have to go
through an FFL so you have
somebody is making a ghost gun
there's still parts of the gonna
have to get I think we're
missing the mark on this bill
all together and this time
souther said earlier we can
technically Miller gun at home
and make a gun ourself but let's
go back to one of the big issues
here which is
Right here we can hold on to get
the right one substitutes on.
I have them both in front of me.
so on the surface to part a I
just want to make sure that
everybody says because our
substitutes and some people were
wonderful and expanding it for
this bill is still on the fence
for person to manufacture are
costly manufactured a firearm
elixir is a person that is
federally licensed firearm but I
hate to tell you that lowers
according to the ATF is a
component that you can
manufacture or or or retained
and it is legal so that that
part is going to go and with
that what the ATF says and I'm
section is completely in a
violation I'm.
I also want to know.
To go through the.
Can you point out because I'm
trying to look between the of
the one I had originally and the
substitute there's a portion.
mental stability what section is
that.
Madam chair
Leave that is not part of the
substitution okay yeah I I saw
somebody and I couldn't find it
so thank you.
Representative madam chair.
Okay so.
I also wanted to address
something the where the callers
call then they said they were
from my district and they said
California's Mostra to gun laws
that's not actually true at
Chicago doesn't else of the
highest death rate so again I
wish you know I almost wish I
could sit down in a room and
I'll really talk realistically
about gun issues and how to
really stop people from doing
crime and how to get to the root
cause because.
We got guns flying in for Mexico
we have guns all over the place
and.
This bill is not going to
address any of that so let me
ask you just a few more
questions here again as will
make you understand that the
lower
is completely legal but the ATF
so that a person section eight
could technically have that
peace there's nothing against
them from owning that.
But I do want to tell you that
to
Police officers did make public
comment sent me emails about the
Senate share.
And Velarde and he actually
wrote a long letter saying that
fifteen years law enforcement
and left eleven years a patrol
in high crime areas south valley
he never saw a gun gun gun goes
kind.
What the issue is.
So in case you don't know when
somebody steals are gonna use a
gun to grind off the serial
numbers okay so you're trying to
address something that will
these ghost guns don't have
serial numbers will guess what
criminals to get guns they grind
off the serial number it's the
same thing that's already
illegal.
So.
What he said and what I agree
with this at this bill so it
just it makes criminals out of
this and people they're law
abiding citizen to have the
right for the a TF two only
Spirent parks and I I agree with
a lot of people to call in it's
constantly just going after
legal gun owners ensure Tony
mace also said that this is a
non issue in New Mexico we don't
know cases of three D. printing
there's a ready laws on the
books to handle on sterilized
guns so I'm just going to vote
no on this and I'm glad a lot of
people call Dan and
unfortunately I I just like to
see again I just wish this the
gun bills would put off until
next time when we could have
addressed more of the issues
that are COVID related and more
pressing so thank you madam
chair and thank you
representative I.
Thank you Representative
Pettigrew thank you.
Thank you madam chair thank you.
Representative for bringing this
bill and starting a discussion
I'm going to echo many of the
things that Representative lord
said without saying I'm again.
But I do want to draw your
attention representative madam
chair to a couple of legal cases
that I think become very
important.
Two thousand eight district of
Columbia versus Heller.
Two thousand and ten million
dollars versus the city of
Chicago.
Court of appeals DC circuit
Heller versus district of
Columbia.
And then also when references
farm control act of nineteen
seventy five.
And so I'm not gonna go and
deaths of those I am happy to
provide you the information for
each of those later time what I
want I do want to do the
following go through.
The bill.
As as Representative ward is
already called out section is
already dealt with Watson Watson
federal statute.
Section one
Insurance service for right
section one item C. still with
some court cases I just
discussed.
Same as section one D. section
one he.
In section one F..
Each of those are already laws
that already make this illegal.
So at the federal level.
And I want to go to our New
Mexico constitution.
Which section one the state of
New Mexico is an inseparable
part of the federal you and the
constitution of the United
States soprano is the supreme
law of the land.
So we recognize in here we also
in those to the on January the
nineteenth that we believe that.
And yet we're questioning
federal law now and the
constitution as written from
the federal level.
The other things that I want to
bring out and and.
I.
Madam chair representative I
think you know we're in this
bill is substituted definition
of it goes down can you please
provide me a definition of a
ghost gun.
Madam chair representative
Go to the.
Section if I can't find it quick
enough more mask and your fee
has at hand that definition and.
This.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair and I
thank you representative and to
respond to that question the
bill has several definitions
that govern what a ghost gun is
there is no single definition
but again the bill covers three
D. printed firearms that are
manufactured you're using a
three D. printer and without a
serial number and it real quick
and it also governs you know the
parts and and serialize parts
that are bought online without a
background check and assembled
into untraceable on sterilized
firearms by you know and what is
being found at crime scenes so
I'm there's no one single
definition in the bill as far as
I read it but there are specific
definitions that defined the
parts and to provide the.
The.
Alright that can be lawfully
manufactured assembled out with
the license.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you
Hello I have properly pronounce
your last name.
Carl what state.
All right thank you Mr Kirk
Austin thank you representative
well it becomes critical to
winning when when as and and
expert witness testimony we use
the terms goes down but then we
don't defined now.
We can go back into the parts of
this bill the start to the final
pieces so you have the that
we're just for fun madam chair
representative the court for ski
That.
We can already acknowledge that
have been dealt with in the
court cases I've discussed and
then to find again.
In the regulations last so that
brings significant concern to me
because I I I feel like what
we're doing is we're trying to
love some things and together
with the statistics that were
provided madam chair.
In California believe it was
thirty three percent or ghost
guns.
How many of those ghost guns
quote ghost guns we're really
just guns that had.
That could be bought in the
store could be bought in a
packet in an alley can be bought
anywhere.
we're just really over the
counter guns that had had had
the serial numbers not scraped
off of those and that thirty
three percent was it.
One percent but we're answer
lies or or manufactured pre
printed or was that thirty two
percent there were and and.
There were three D. printed
because I think we're trying to
log things together when the
reality is not that big of a
law.
So madam chair representative
Mr Porsche you have love in
answer to that.
Madam chair of Representative
Pettigrew what exactly are you
asking I'm sorry.
Thank I'm trying to get to the
root of the.
As well as those made during
testimony.
Where thirty three percent I
think it was in California
thirty three percent.
Of.
Gun related incidents we're
we're used ghost guns.
And I'm sure allies guns how
many of those once their allies
for discussions were really just
over the counter guns that have
the serial number scratched off.
Madam chair representative
appreciate the question however
you that detail has not been
provided to me here unless.
I would defer to my my expert
witnesses if they have more
information on that the point of
the the issue here though is
that we're looking at the
technology we're not looking at
the the the the other types of
guns here but the technology
that creates these types of guns
and and looking at reform to to
address that.
Thank you madam chair Sanders
would you have any other
information on that.
I thank you madam chair thank
you representative for the
question I don't have the
specific numbers on that my
understanding is you know they
are occurring to ghost guns you
know either that were
manufactured with parts that
were bought online outside of
the background check system I
don't know what percentage of
those are three guys but I would
echo the Representative
statement that the Rio impact of
this bill is to address you know
any three D. printing gone are
any widely available alright
that's available outside of the
background check system
including the background check
law that was passed a couple
years ago and prevent them from
circumventing the system and
falling into the wrong hands.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative thank you Mr
Corsi
I I'm I guess I'm confused
because I I remember
Representative saying that the
primary reason for this bill was
to eliminate gun violence neck
is completely I guess what what
was just stated and so I get
confused about that can you give
me one case Madam chair
representative in New Mexico
where a ghost gun was used.
Madam chair representative sorry
that you're confused about that
but the issue here again is that
this is an unregulated area that
we are looking to to bring into
That the day and age that we
live in right now and so that's
why we're here for this job
and that's where we need to
address it now because it is
becoming an issue it is an issue
and it's becoming a bigger issue
and thank you for the question.
Madam chair representative
I I contend that we've got
multiple laws on the books we've
got a decision by justice school
we a that.
Each of these items the that are
discussed on this bill are
highly regulated.
So I think.
I call that one on on task
because these areas are
regulated and and very well
documented across United States
It does concern me that you know
a multitude of people including
myself trade outsource on my
channel which time and so the
the assembly and modification
While removed some of the other
pieces of this legislation
still.
Make things
well sorry regulated there's no
purpose for this bill.
But
The
What I will say I've said this
madam chair and closing
Representative and closing
said this in this committee at
seven on other committees that I
will oppose any bill that does
not address the problem.
And and and in this case this
bill house bill one sixty six
and it's.
Re written form prior form does
not address the problem what it
does to as a whole.
Law abiding citizens to
standards.
That completely violates.
Yes.
That we all took thank you madam
chair thank you Representative.
Thank you representative
Representative vice chair Romero
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative lu Han and thank
you to your experts and so the
folks in the audience who spoken
up I just really have a comment
because they have heard a lot
about this bill both from the
volume of email and then of
course the time spent by the
experts in vetting this bill
I just wanted to
presents work madam chair I know
that the the the amount of folks
in the audience don't reflect I
think the folks who have been
affected by gun violence in our
community I know that in just
introduce this summer we had a
student from Santa Fe high
school at at murdered
essentially and it was it's
incredibly sad to see these
continue to happen we're working
so hard to try to keep schools
safe to try to keep our
community safe and yet what
happens so often with our
our laws is that the technology
moves so much faster and so I
just want to
Look it will basically the
reason for this bill is not to
criminalize tinkerers and
inventors and the folks who are
enthusiasts I think we
absolutely want to protect them
I myself am an entrepreneur and
I know that at some point you
know you didn't know what you're
getting into but that's not what
this bill does and Madam chair
representative I just want to
honor the fact that ghost guns
are absolutely intended to be
what they are called ghost guns
and that somebody intentionally
creating a firearm that cannot
be detected by metal detectors
that cannot be detected by
entering our chambers of the
round house
by going into public places and
doing damage madam chair
representative
I just I want to honor that and
that this is seeking to catch up
with that technology that's ever
changing and protecting the
future of our communities I feel
strongly that this is what is in
the bill is exactly what is
intended and
I just I I've spoken to many
many people about this and I
feel that we're we're we're not
only are we getting there but we
are there as far as what is what
we're looking at with that so
thank you madam chair and for
the folks that did come forward
I think we we've wrestled with a
lot of the language that was
that was bringing the the worry
about criminalization and that's
something that I'm really
committed to and so I really
appreciate the folks in the
audience and and for those
concerns it's definitely Russell
with so with that madam chair I
will move it to pass.
Thank you Mr Romero we have
Representative but it just who.
And mandate for another question
appalled at the way for a little
bit sorry.
Generally we let people go first
before we go to the second round
and Representative but it just
has a question okay yes sorry
that's what okay it's just a
question that's fine.
Thank you madam chair thank you
members of the committee and
Representative Han I.
I had concerns about this bill
and so did my constituents and
they emailed me just you know I
brought these concerns up and
they plan amended I so.
For me I just want to say that I
I I appreciate it because I do
see what you're what you're
doing here.
Technology is advancing in this
is just to kind of piggyback off
of what vice chair emeritus at.
Technology is advancing at a
alarming rates something that
right now could take a month to
you know perfect we could we it
here from now we don't know what
that would look like.
I also know of.
Cartels
who who have their hands on this
this technology and this
information are using it.
So I want to voice my support
and and just really thank you
for for bringing forward this
bill I I like I said I I
understand the concerns of the
way that I see it is the
concerns that I had my
constituents that they've all
been amended in fixed so I
appreciate it thank you thank
you representative but I rest up
for the second time
Representative Lord thank you
and
Thank you madam chair thank you
representative I did have
another question that I had Mr
earlier and all my notes so on.
The second well actually I'm a
substitute it's section one CD
it says it's an offense for
person to distribute digital
instructions.
Question is that for people in
New Mexico only or what happens
if somebody has those and they
send it from Texas and the
person in New Mexico builds the
gun how is that could be
handled.
Madam chair representative you
know this this this speaks to
how technology is moving ever
changing and and just like we
just had comments before and we
need to get ahead of this and I
think that you he poses a great
question because if we are not
going to be proactive about this
and and move ourselves in our
legislation in the issues that
are affecting us at two
technology than we are we are
phone behind and.
That's where I stand so you you
are bringing up you are bringing
up those questions that we need
to address and how we need to
address the seriousness of have
of getting.
This before it is up bigger
problem that it it then it is
now and I would ask if
and your if you would have
anything to add thank you.
Thank you representative for
your question and thank you
madam chair I don't have
anything to add a think it's
important to ensure that we are
keeping it track and advance of
developing technology and
preventing these plans from
falling into the hands of
domestic abusers in a violent
criminals and other people who
would do harm and that I think
that's subsection does that and
yeah.
Thank you I'm sorry I'm sorry
representative please you have
the floor thank you and thank
you madam chair representative
so I'm I'm gonna ask this again
just real quickly so if somebody
in taxes and let's say they say
ghost guns are legal and let's
say they say the digital
instructions are legal.
Mexico they're not how we you go
after that person in Texas who
was sending digital information
to people in New Mexico.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you representative that this is
in New Mexico bill and we as a
state have jurisdiction over
that thank you madam chair.
Okay so okay thank you I I guess
we're trying to get an apologize
but should get chair
representative that we don't
really have any jurisdiction
over that if somebody wants to
see if they make it that
distributing that information
I'm just want to have conflicts
going to be held I mean I guess
you can hold it to New Mexico
citizens but it does nothing for
people in the states are from
another country that can
distribute SSS China get to that
there's really no jurisdiction
for this at all okay thank you
that's all the questions I have
thank you.
Okay thank you I'm we do have a
motion for to pass on the table
chair I make a motion to table.
Okay we have a us at
alternative motion that takes
precedence so we do have a
motion to table do I hear a
second yes a second okay so
Representative so Allison will
you take the role for on the
motion to table house I'm.
House consumer and public
affairs.
Committee substitute for H. B.
one sixty six.
Representative.
No to table.
Representative Lord yes to
table.
Representative Pettigrew.
Yes the table.
Notre table.
No to table.
So by three to to that motion
has been defeated so we do have
a motion on the table and and I
believe that I made a mistake
and we did not have a motion to
accept the the substitute bill
so I will entertain that motion
first.
Moke so move madam chair.
Second set this up.
Second okay is there any
opposition to accepting the
committee substitute just two to
work on this doesn't mean more
passing it this just means that
it's what we're working off of
so is there any opposition to
that.
Okay seeing none okay so now we
are back on we are I'm on a due
pass for C. pack Committee
substitute for H. B. one sixty
six and we have a motion from
Representative Romero and I
believe Representative but I did
you second.
No but I'm second in it right
now okay okay I'm sorry I I
confuse my own self so madam
chair I want to get the language
properly because you it's and I
I'm have to move a do not pass
on the original bill and the to
pass on the current substitute
correct I just don't have the
numbers once you.
Okay and and it's a do not pass
on house bill one sixty six and
a do pass on
Committee substitute for house
bill one sixty six correct thank
you.
Okay Allison will you take the
role on that motion.
Representative number one yes.
Representative Lord no.
Representative.
No.
With an explanation.
Question.
Yes.
Madam chair Thompson yes.
So by a three to two we have a
do not pass on H. B. one sixty
six but I do pass on H. B. R.
committees eight four H. B. one
sixty six thank you
representative lu Han and we'll
go back to Representative
Pettigrew a for an explanation
of this about.
Thank you madam chair sorry I'm
making notes hi I just want to
be clear again that this bill
does nothing to make New Mexico
safer and
This is very disappointing thank
you.
Thank you Representative
Pettigrew and I I will just
chime in here and and and say
that.
We frequently are closing the
barn door after after
everybody's gotten out and I
think that this I personally
believe that this is a a
proactive
that and the fact that we
haven't we may or may not have
seen those guns commit crimes in
New Mexico I don't know that we
know that for certain but from
from what the studies are
showing we well so I think for
once New Mexico may be is that
is trying to be proactive so
with that we will move on to
house bill one ninety three and
I will remind the committee and
let the audience know.
That that agreement because the
I can't remember if it was a
committee substitute or the
amendment was a forty five
minutes late and I will take
full responsibility for that
getting out to our analysts we
will go ahead and hear it we
will hear public comment because
I know people have made that
commitment to be here but we
will not vote on it today we
will we will it will be the
first order of business when we
reconvene on Saturday afternoon
at one thirty so so we will do
everything except the actual
voting we will not take a motion
and we will not vote but we will
do the rest of it so with that
H. B. one ninety three we have
Representative Garrett and
representative Ely and if they
can be I'm not sure if they're
honest they can be promoted to
panelists.
We will let them go ahead when
they're ready.
And also if you if you have any
expert witnesses and and just a
reminder for the committee I
make myself a note I'm.
What we are counting the time
when some when that when an
amendment or a substitute
is gets out is the time of the
email so it I know I know that
if you are like me you probably
have seven thousand emails a day
and if you overlook it I'm sorry
but we're that's that's the
standard that we're using is
when the email was sent not when
when people were able to find it
amongst the thousands of emails
so with that are Representative
Eli and representative Garrett
are you on.
Madam chair on here I know
Representative Jared should be
here okay and do you have expert
witnesses you need promoted to
pay okay no witnesses okay all
right whenever you're ready I
see Representative so whenever
you are ready to start.
Thank you madam chairwoman Madam
chairwoman we do have a
committee substitute you want to
start with that.
Yes.
Okay so madam chairman and
members of the committee we have
are you should have received a
copy by now of house consumer
and public affairs committee
substitute for house bill one
ninety three the number at the
bottom should be two one nine
seven oh five point one.
Go ahead.
So I'm as many of you know we
passed of the chambers your I am
so sorry can I have a committee
member make a motion to I'm
aware this up for discussion
purposes.
Madam chair I'd like to House
committee of
one ninety three I don't know if
I need to read that to to number
no no Representative do it so so
okay do I have a second.
I second madam chair okay is
there any opposition to to
allowing this for discussion.
Okay I think I see none so go
ahead I'm sorry Representative
Garrett I'm I'm trying to keep
in order as I go usual style
we're we're juggling a lot of
Madam chairwoman and I just want
to compliment you and your
committee members for the way
you conduct yourself it's
inspiring.
Last year we passed the
extremists fire protection order
and now in statute but as it's
been implemented the
administrator of the courts the
administrative office of the
district attorneys and others in
the process of implementing that
felt that there needed to be
some amendments to make it work
more effectively and smoothly
the extreme risk fire protection
order has been applied in four
counties and it's also been
there's been attempts to use set
up by other law enforcement
officers but they ran into snags
and so all this bill does is
clean up.
Some of those ambiguities that
were identified what was
actually put into process so
what we're gonna do is
representative Representative
Eli is going to go through I'm
the amendments that are proposed
and the committee substitute and
then we'll stand for questions.
Representative Eli madam chair
and members of the committee
yeah let me just go through
these quickly there are seventy
changes I I I want the members
of the public and the committee
to understand what we're doing
so I will go through it section
by section but as I get
questions from the committee
after the public participation
I'm happy to go through
it individually but I want to
give everybody an understanding
as to what it is we're trying to
do so one thing is right now a
police officer district attorney
system Attorney General can
apply for an extreme risk
protection order that does not
change but under the current law
when a police officer presents
the information to the court he
or she has to rely on family
members school official on or
employer under this bill
at a at an officer could present
the court with information and
this just frankly from my point
of view make sense I can we we
made this we didn't have this
originally
you can find the information
he's personally observed as well
as information is learned from a
doctor or mental health care
provider or other personal as
reliable information they give
us the option probably cost so
this is the one I want to spend
just a minute on is that what
that means is is that when
officer goes in front of the
court and says I think that this
person is an imminent threat
because that's what this bill
does in imminent threat to
himself or others so you're
going here she is either a risk
of suicide or some kind of mass
shooting that the officer knew
based on his own personal
observations or from someone
else in the statute opens that
up but the officer still has to
have the standard of probable
cost given his own assessment of
probable cause and then the
court has to assessed probably
because none of that changes it
just expands the kind of way
that you can go petition for the
court.
some of the simple changes are
the DA and the AG's office will
not be tasked with taking
possession of religious firearms
because they don't do that as we
get in our original statute and
they don't want to do that and
so that would be of Law
Enforcement the administrative
office of the courts will be
responsible for alerting the
NCIS the national database of
what's happening not law
enforcement that simply because
that's what AOC does law
enforcement does not.
the District Court will have a
more reasonable reporting period
John for the national database
we had one day the
administrative office of courts
have please give us ten days so
that's what we're doing there
are reporting requirements for
local databases we were a little
more aspirational about that
thinking that's a little bit
local databases would have been
set up they have not been and so
that section has been removed
one thing I think that
particularly drawn advocates are
really going to like
and and I I I honestly mean this
is that evidence obtained
through this process will not be
used for criminal prosecution
which I do think support so in
other words the officer goes G.
and.
And
but changes are the gun or
whatever during the approval
process you can't then be used
in a separate criminal
prosecution and then finally and
officer if an officer is in the
house and here she sees a weapon
in plain sight they can take
that weapon it doesn't have to
be in the work and those of the
changes I think I've covered
them I'm not trying to leave
anything out on and with that
Madam les Representative Garrett
has anything further we will
stand for questions and I
appreciate committee's time.
Have nothing further to add
thank you Representative Eli
thank you madam chairwoman.
Okay so we are going to first we
are going to go to a poll but
I'm going to remind people that
this is not about the bit the
the the fight entire act this
what we are discussing today are
the changes that are coming in
if you don't like that that act
I'm sorry that's that's the act
is in law we are not discussing
that today we are only
discussing the changes that are
made to the law as discussed by
the Sanchez so at this point we
will do A. A. R. a poll.
Okay so it looks like I'm.
Okay.
It looks like we have thirty
four well thirty five well okay
thirty six people seventy eight
percent are in opposition ten
people twenty two percent are in
favor and so we will we will end
the polling and I will ask you
if you are in opposition to this
bill please raise your hands.
and I am ready I'm going to
remind you that this is not
whether you like this bill or
not we are only talking about
the areas that are being amended
within this bill so so if it it
and I'm gonna remind people
again one minute I'm trying not
to repeat what someone else has
said and let's keep it civil and
let's keep it on the measure
that is before us okay so with
that I will go to
Anthony not Anthony you jinxed
me because you said I got it
right last time so I'm not even
gonna try it this time because I
don't think I'll be lucky enough
to get it right twice now and
for the go ahead.
Just like it's spelled Senator.
Poses bills I'm hoping that you
would oppose this bill
I do not like the language that
police officer can have access
to private medical records to
make their decision in my
opinion inner city more than one
person making a decision to
violates my due process and my
second amendment rights I don't
see it I done in plain sights.
Part of that is a very good idea
either because maybe.
Maybe the officer was a you know
just doing random checks or
whatever you have to see smells
and he's gonna go ahead and call
right flag because is done in
plain sight
In in this day and age when
everybody saying that it's a
police are Brad.
You all want me to trust the
police to make decisions about
my rights and I don't feel
comfortable with that thank you
for your consideration.
Thank you during break your
page.
Thank you madam chair the
committee members I'm speaking
in opposition to this.
I don't see anything and mind
you I have not seen the
substitution yet
but going from what
Representative Wheatley said and
from the original bill I don't
see that these amendments remove
any of the objections that many
of us had when this was passed
into law to begin with.
as a former police officer I
don't think the giving the power
that this bill gives to police
officers is necessarily a good
thing.
Are some of the changes I don't
oppose.
There were mistakes in it some
of those mistakes have been
remedied such as making the dust
hold on the guns and some and
things like that but the basic
thrust in this even with the
amendments is still lacking due
process it is still placing a
very strong burden on the person
affected to prove innocence and
that is contrary to the way we
do things in this country thank
you for your consideration.
And I'm going to remind people
that stick with what is in the
bill in front of us the due
process issues were in the
original bill and this is not
changing anything about that so
we will go to Shane o'donnell.
Hello hello madam chair I
respectfully urge the committee
to oppose this bill
Representative flog red flag
laws as a general concept are
chilling to our Fourth Amendment
rights but this proposed bill
seeks to further curtail
individual freedom by giving the
police themselves the ability to
seek warrants for property based
on their own opinions of and
citizens actions and behavior
having a police officer service
and foreman and investigator and
executed of warrant strikes me
as a blatant conflict of
interest we often forget the
police are people too and if
given an easier way to do to
their jobs they will usually
take it lawmakers should not be
giving the police short cuts
when it comes to their ability
to a friend infringe upon the
rights of citizens I fear this
bill will lead to police using
red flag searches as a short cut
to search inside the homes and
to seize the property of
individuals in the police view
as unsavory without real
criminal evidence on all this at
a time when public cry for
police reform and
demilitarization are growing
louder and louder I do not feel
the police need more power
opportunities to exercise force
over citizens especially when it
comes to their homes and
possessions as such I urge you
to respond respectfully urge you
to oppose the bill.
Thank you Michael Beattie.
Yes I Michael Beattie and I am
opposed to this bill so the
amendments to this bill.
I like the way that
Representative Ely said mass
shootings I was going to commit
suicide or mass shooting.
Well.
I'm a twenty year law
enforcement retired number and.
I'm not gonna do that I don't
think
but then putting things in plain
sight it I live in my home and I
have an officer here to R. W.
here to to take a report for me
and he sees a firearm in plain
sight then he can do whatever he
wants based on these amendments
and that is absolutely wrong the
other thing is controls what
anybody can get from medical
records and that several law it
says you have no right and I
oppose this bill thank you.
Thank you T. Mike got.
Good afternoon madam chair of
thank you terra mention I
represent the members of the
national rifle association in
the state of New Mexico
it sounds to me like the
committee substitute expands the
definition of reporting party to
include anyone whether that
person personally knows or has
any connection or nexus to the
respondent for the person on
whom the proposal is being
sought for we certainly propose
that.
also.
The other glossed over it a
little bit but.
We question whether the order
Mexico itself effectually
effectively serves as a search
warrant does the fact that in
orders been issued against a
responded to him it's being
served grant the officer
permission to conduct a search
they still have to get a warrant
and lastly the bill appears to
cut off the option of
surrendering a firearm by
somebody who hasn't or bill out
on them to a federal firearms
licensee I think the language in
the bill says law enforcement
can seize weapons on site
notifying the option to go to
NFL so for those reasons we
oppose it.
Okay I'm.
Louis Rios.
Let me yes.
Yes so I strongly oppose the
bill I know that you said that
basically it's going to.
See the and the that the to
question the substitute or the
amendment of the bill but I I
believe that yes it is in
question that due process is in
question with this bill I mean
it is questioning due process at
all it also has to do with the
hippa violations.
If in case they want to ask
questions to the doctors and
it's giving too much power to
authority you work for us we
don't work for you you work for
us once again so therefore.
You need to be abiding by what
we want.
What was in question was H. R.
one ninety three are excuse me
H. B. H. B. one ninety three and
the people don't want to it was
almost voted against and your
opposing laws you're you're
putting it on us all these laws
that we don't want.
I mean it's not a dictatorship
we live in a Republic.
Thank you.
Thank you Jennifer sensible.
Yeah.
My big concern about this one
is.
I got a lot of friends that were
involved in black lives matter
in other you know antifa you
know the some of those
resistance movements and some of
them were injured some of them
in some places not none that I
personally know gave their lives
protesting for police reform in
twenty twenty.
And instead of police reforms
we're giving the police more
authority.
Instead of.
Having them go through a process
that the they should be going
through that's harder.
So I I don't feel like we're
honoring the people who were
injured and died and and
honoring all the people who who
put all the effort into pushing
for police reform last year
when we're just like oh yeah
let's just couldn't give more
power to the police let's make
it make it easier knowing we
need to hold the police
accountable not give them
additional powers at this time
thank you.
Thank you Derek Scott.
Thank you madam chair and the
representatives I hope that you
under my name's Derek Scott I
represent people with
disabilities and myself who has
a disability I hope you guys can
hear me
What I'm proposing to speak
about is the fact that again I'm
just I'm gonna try to stick on
the hippie here.
When you look into anybody's
medical records you're gonna
find any problem you can find
you're giving authority people
to be the judge jury and
executioner of a bill that would
allow whatever they find
whatever small micron of the
issue to then be safe sorry we
don't trust you because you have
a disability and those
disabilities can be an extra
Robley all the way up to mental
disability all the way to
physical disability mental
disability does not define you
to be a person that would go out
and do mass crime or some type
of issue Furthermore I the on
prior law enforcement myself I
demand for almost twenty years I
I'm disabled so I medically
retired and trust me when I say
this I'm an expert witness I
testified this about before and
like I'm saying here now this
extra part is going to shut us
it's gonna be worse it's going
to tear people apart especially
people with disabilities thank
you.
I'm.
Representative Stafford.
Okay can you hear me yes.
All right yes and no
I still feel like there is
issues with due process even
with this addition
being innocent until proven
guilty in a court of law you
don't even get that you're just
guilty right off the bat because
an officer comes in your house
for some reason and just use a
gun I mean I I don't understand
that my grandfather was a
captain the state police John
appears.
And
He a he opposes this bill you
know I mean I was a corrections
officer almost four years just
because I see somebody who is
legally able to own a gun it's
my job to then say oh Kate I'm
gonna take your gun away because
I I feel like.
You you're a threat without any
due process or.
Slide up here you know bye bye.
Judge or jury that that's not
right and up I'm leave it at
that thank you.
Okay more next than dial.
Can you hear me yes.
Yes dot com stature once again
This did not passed last year as
you're trying to pass it this
year so it's kind of
hypocritical that you couldn't
pass it last year got what you
got through and now you're
coming back to add what we
fought and got out of it last
year so you're just trying to
back door something that what
path just last year you also
passed a law three years ago
there.
universe background check that
has been used once in the state
of New Mexico an officer has
ability to walk in the house and
if they feel individual is a
threat to himself or others like
put on or sent to our whole.
And the fact that the DA doesn't
want to take the guns because
they know they don't want to get
themselves in this mess when it
if it actually moves forward and
the state get done advocates
will be happy because this is
Senator not criminal you know
once again you're just trying to
back for a way to stop our
second amendment right so please
vote against this bill.
And stop much more second
amendment rights and focus on
our economy.
Marci may.
Thank you.
Yes.
Okay couple things individual
citizen
I have some issues because the
language of with Representative
Ely saying that US gun advocates
should be glad that
that information will be used
for for further of criminal
complaints like and we're that's
how you view us that's pretty
diminutive and repugnant
And I agree with more dial that
this is going from a background
of back door exit to where you
guys want to continue to badger
The New Mexicans against our
second amendment rights so
rights are here to protect the
citizens from over approaching
government that's what you guys
are doing I wish she would just
stop telling us that you know we
should stop trying to express
just staying for being told that
were criminals when we're not so
that language needs to change
it's disrespectful to the
US citizens just disrespectful
to New Mexico and US
constitution thank you.
Thank you very.
Pearson
You can hear me correct.
Yes I want to just make right
bring something to your
attention we're asking it
possible young officer just
added the academy to come into
your home maybe for noise
disturbance you're asking that
gentleman now or lady to now
would be a social worker because
he sees a gun in your house that
may be behind a glass cabinet
and now this person has the act
as judge jury and prosecutor to
take your guns I don't think you
really thought this bill through
I would hope you did you would
not vote on it thank you for
your time.
Thank you
Martine guy a ghosts are Martin.
Can you hear me we can this time
can
I appreciate thank you so much
madam chair and to the rest of
the committee members for
allowing me to testify before
you in regards to the opposition
of this amendment I'm gonna go
ahead and read a statement that
I prepared because it's easier
for me to do so.
The introduction of this
amendment highlights firearms as
a target of confiscation harbor
New Mexico car New Mexico courts
New Mexico law enforcement
agencies for the New Mexico
department of justice have no
published data if the current
law has had any effect what it
was intended to deter.
Laws like red flag laws attempt
to appeal to the common sense
aspect of gun control and
understandably put a tragic
incidents such as school
shootings occur people expect
some.
Something to be done to protect
us our families and too many
people the politicians.
To pass laws to address the
issue and unfortunately more
than often we get knee jerk
reactions for the form of
proposals to ban firearms it's
easy to see why politicians
would prefer to pass red flag
laws and be able to say
something is being done by
confiscating firearms rather
talk about intangible efforts to
address the underlying mental
health suicide domestic violence
sexual assault homelessness
issues that seem to be the root
of many of these violent acts
and in many instances firearms
are not the economic employed or
the cause of death thank you for
your time.
Thank you and I'm going to
remind people that the the call
red flag whatever you wanna call
it is already lost that's not
what we're discussing today
whether you like it or not that
is not what's on the table in
front of us so please try to
keep your comments to the
subject that we are discussing
I'm next is Chris.
hello my name's Christopher you
wish and I just wanted to
comment it seems like this is
not addressing our concerns but
it's an expansion of the law
if I understand it I don't know
if the original lots and others
it seems very vague on to who
can.
The levy a credible charge
against you to me that seems
extremely dangerous to leave it
vague and to such an open number
of parties you know there's
people that may have disputes
with their neighbors any number
of issues that this seems to can
be abused.
Beyond just giving more powers
to law enforcement and that's
all I have to say thank you.
Thank you we have Tom's father.
Madam chairman after L. as in.
I'm sorry I didn't catch that.
After part
less than okay okay I'm sorry
thank you.
Hello madam chair can you hear
me now yes we can hear you thank
you.
My name is Thomas Salter on the
legislative affairs officer for
New Mexico shooting sports as I
mentioned previously secretary
are would like to say that the
as an organization we are
against the original of what H.
B. one ninety three that was
submitted
I'm sure we will be against the
substitute bill also those
difficult to come up with the
critics
To teach that makes sense when I
have the do not have that
document in front of me so we
will come up with a better
critique once we can see what is
actually in the bill as a famous
politician said a few years ago
we have to pass it before we can
see the what's in it but we are
definitely against the entire
idea of this H. B. one ninety
three took an already because
constitutional red flag law and
makes it worse with additional
violations of a due process
please vote against this bill
thank you very much.
Thank you and just a reminder
that we are not passing this so
that you can see it it is on the
website the committee substitute
is on the website so and nothing
is being done in the.
In the dark of night it's are
all the analysts have had it all
of the committee members have
had it for twenty three hours
and fifteen minutes so and it is
on the website so what I will go
to I'm.
Chris.
I I already commented okay thank
you and okay I think.
Dana.
Hear me.
Yes we can hear you okay thank
you.
I would only like to ask.
Which data.
There are is the criteria that
you're using.
To put forth
In constitutional.
Really amounts to search and
seizure.
cite your sources how was is
going to improve.
Safety.
I think it should be voted
against this unconstitutional.
And so many other New Mexicans
can you cite any sources.
Of how this with the sister
help.
This is public comment the
public does not get to question
them Representative.
Representative.
Thank you we now have Burt I'm
I'm sorry Brett.
Representative please say your
last name and hopefully I will
remember how to say it.
You will need to unmute there
you go thank you okay thank you
madam chair is preko cannot just
And I appreciate the opportunity
I would like to remind you madam
chair that the one minute used
by the public can use how they
see fit as protected by the
first amendment and under New
Mexico's constitution
Furthermore as day as
Representative Eli mentioned
about protecting New Mexicans
from suicide I find it very
ironic that this class of
representatives is also
advancing legislation that
legalizes assisted suicide which
is kind of contradictory and
regardless of your position on
these particular issues this is
a civil issue wrapped in
criminal paper as it was last
session.
This is more advancements
against gun grabbing policies
infringing on our constitutions
which creates an over burdened
some responsibility on the
falsely or potentially falsely
accused to defend themselves at
their own expense without public
defense.
Furthermore the other issues
that you're you're pointing out
is potentially opening up the
door for third party here state
which in normal criminal or
civil complaint is not
enforceable by courts so if this
does make it to a vote I urge
you to vote no and thank you for
the time.
Thank you Denny Myers.
Well.
Yes
Okay so
I would I would urge the
committee to.
On this bill because are you.
What is even more.
The
sites in place it's that's one
of but you're getting please
officers the ability to our
basically officers home just
based on on a on a site which is
you know which is are still
violation prostitution and your
distribution there are to do
that I think is a very very
dangerous precedents because
our.
Essentially it will just need
to.
You are wrote on our rights as a
as you know as it's a used a
future.
You.
What.
Thank you so that is all the
hands I see and I will now ask
Let's see I will ask those in
support to please raise your
hand.
Okay so we will start with
Maranda Scully and and the same
one minute be simple and stick
to what is in front of us thank
you.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Randy to
school and co president of New
Mexicans to prevent gun violence
we stand in full support of
house bill one sixty three I'm
sorry what ninety three sorry
what house bill one ninety three
are simply amendments to the
herbal bill as we know that was
passed last year New Mexicans to
prevent gun violence has met
with law enforcement and share
spread the request as well as
the ace AOC and spoke with
medical professionals as to the
issues with the regional bill we
are confident that these changes
will help us to keep guns out of
unsafe hands will serve as a
better and safer tool for law
enforcement thank you very much.
Thank you the cashier named.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Natasha
name registered lobbyists for
Giffords but we work closely
with the Sanchez last year to
pass this law and we fully
support these changes thank you.
Thank you Barbara chatter G.
chat chatter G..
Yes thank you madam chair
members of the committee I'm
also working with New Mexicans
to prevent gun violence and I
appreciate the efforts that have
been made with these amendments
to make the our our pope will
all more workable and effective
I hope you will support this
bill and folks for thank you
very much thank you and finally
we have and Maxwell.
Thank you very much madam chair
members of the committee I'm and
Maxwell and I work with New
Mexicans to prevent gun violence
and
yes this is basically effects
over the past years several
procedural issues that have been
identified by law enforcement
and we're responding to to those
issues this bill we hope will
address their concerns and makes
the.
The PO process more user
friendly for families for law
enforcement and for the courts
thank you.
Thank you and now we will go to
the committee for question or
actually no I'm sorry I go to
the Sanchez to see if they have
any any response are are and.
The floor is yours.
madam chair I don't know if
Representative dear want to say
anything.
Thank you thank you thank you
madam chairwoman for this
opportunity.
I'm.
Section forty seventeen twelve
of the extreme risk choir are
protection order act
They are required the court is
required to compile the
aggregate statistical data
requirements so that's how come
I know that as of January
twentieth of this year there
were only four request
for an extreme risk protection
order and only three were
actually granted just our
audience knows somebody.
Is concerned this is a very
narrow category somebody is
concerned that somebody is at
imminent risk to harm themselves
or others.
Walk and whether they're a law
enforcement or anything else a
law enforcement officer I'm is
required to to go to a District
Court judge and file a petition
they can't just grab a gun
because they're there for
something else there is a
process they have to go through
on the petition includes.
Warning party actually yes the
name and address of the
responded the description the
description of the relationship
but when we pass this bill many
people said angry husband or
wife in a divorce we use that
that is not the case they have
to described the relationship as
a whole slew of things you can't
just take a good so that's just
what I wanted to comment on that
you have to go to a District
Court judge and while are
required document before and
then the judge has to consider
it but maybe Representative Eli
did you want to add anything.
Your manager's problems what I
I've been looking to say because
the subject came up about
medical records and I'm looking
at it I don't see changes on
that I I can't find anything in
the bill on.
The fact is you study your text
you have the reporting
individual that has to sign an
affidavit yeah the officer who
has to out with just the actual
law enforcement officer the does
the actual filing the patient
has to our problem will cost on
and you have the judge it also
has one problem because in order
issues your and then the orders
issued so Representative Europe
is exactly right there are
protections upon protections and
remember what we're trying to do
was save lives including the
officers ones we don't want
people and harming themselves or
others or barricading themselves
in our house this is where an
officers will issue problems and
this year's tools to law
enforcement and as I said a year
ago and I continue to say at
this bill actually came from one
point that's really about is
this girl came from is there any
additional it's incredibly
dangerous to the public and to
the person who is an imminent
threat to themselves I did not
have this tool and we are trying
to make this work and I think
the with all due respect to the
opponents they don't understand
this bill one trying this is a
surgical approach I'm very
needed problem for law
enforcement that madam chair
will stand request.
Thank you I have I
Representative Lord.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you representative so as you can
see another controversial bill
backed back I anytime we have
gone bills are very
controversial can you hold on
sorry I'm is hello disruption
background I would never have
the gun bill Sir very very
controversial for reason people
are very particular about their
second amendment rights being
infringed and and that's what a
lot of these people fail so I do
have a question Madam chair
representative when you said
that law enforcement ask for
this bill which law enforcement.
Madam chair and Representative
maybe Representative Europeans
that I cannot this came from
yeah because I know AOC
specifically but I can't tell
you which law enforcement agency
I know working more with
representation but I can it is
Representative
I'm thank you madam chair and
thank you Representative lord
We I heard from Albuquerque
police detectives that they
would welcome this again it's
not something that they felt
they would use all the time but
in some cases one detective
there was one man behind the
door with a gun at her family
was trying to help her and they
couldn't help for
so local law enforcement of
talked about it police chief
Michael he'll from aspect
discussed that after the two
orders of students at Aztec high
school
again it's it's I don't look at
it is something that would be
used all the time but they said
it would be helpful to have this
available for those cases where
no other law existed
To be able to remove a fire arm.
And again this is not directed
at law abiding gun owners our
goal is not to remove guns from
New Mexicans our goal is to
provide a mechanism in those
cases where somebody is at risk
at harming themselves or others.
Thank you Representative thank
you madam chair of the reason I
ask that is because I wanted to
know if any of you had talked to
any of the shares could you the
civically to any of the shares
and the thirty three counties
about this because I have.
Yes Madam chairwoman and
Representative I did I talked to
sure Stewart she was.
Dona Ana County and she was one
of the people that heard
deputies went to use that
and they felt that the check
some of the changes what able to
enable them to use it so that's
one sure I talked to and then
the administrator of the Courts
talk to share some towels Santa
Fe and out west I believe that
was
San Juan County and it was
actually used in Eddy county.
Thank you for the question thank
you so if I were to call those
officers right now that I know
personally very well been to
their houses in San Juan County
or inTaos or in Santa Fe they
would say that they had spoken
to you second I'm not talk about
W. share some talking about the
shares so you're telling me the
share of of San Juan County do
you know is now.
I'm Representative I said that I
personally spoke to the share of
of Dona Ana County.
Not speak personally to the
others but I know that some of
these comments from where the
other or both were actually
filed and where they gave
feedback to the administrators
of the Courts
and other folks that are are in
the article thank you for your
question I appreciate it.
And the reason I bring that up
madam chair representative is
because they've been blowing up
my phone so you know they never
wanted this in the first place I
still don't want it now so I
have to disagree on the minutes
the only one you will get me to
agree with this that in the if
we had asked you I I was an
advocate that and everybody had
asked you guys to amend on that
floor to take up.
That was a craziness and there
so that is a one part that I do
agree that should have been
taken out on the floor so madam
chair and representative so.
The reason I'm asking you for
this is because this does apply
it applies to.
This is going towards law
enforcement and the third thirty
out of their twenty nine of
thirty three sheriff's all stood
together and said we do not want
this bill they still don't want
they don't want to ma'am they
don't want it all that's what
they don't want when I spoke to
one this shares this morning got
a bigger understanding a sheriff
that works in mental health told
me that you guys emit a harder
for them this is way harder is
actually easier before before
this law was enacted for them to
help people that were in crisis
and this is now made a
tremendous amount of paperwork
now that they didn't have to
deal with and and I want to for
that since the sheriff can't be
here like they normally are that
I'm going to be their voice
today during this bill so I wish
you guys would have spoken to
the sheriff's
I do want to ask you a question
I understand from the sheriff's
department that they had asked
you.
That asked the the presenters of
the of the red flag bill to
change it and instead of having
all of this convoluted stuff
that has spawned everybody at.
Why didn't you just take their
advice and amend the seventy two
hour hold meeting they had they
had presented if you brought
forty seven who are holed R. one
not just amended that portion
and I don't see that even in
this instead we're giving more
people power so I rather than
being professionals can make a
statement I think this could
have all been avoid this whole
controversy I think this bill
would have passed through it
wasn't a red flag bill and if it
would just would have been.
A seventy two hour hold this is
with the chair so many want to
start your household is issued
which is rightfully so because
of somebody is a harm to
themselves or others.
Why would you just take the gun
why would you take the person
because of their crisis you
should be taking them what they
had wanted you to do is make it
when they go and the sheriff
looks of the persons is okay
they have a you know gun to
their head they're suicidal or
they've said yeah I'm gonna go
kill people or there's evidence
there and they take them then
they get evaluated by a mental
health person then the judge
comes in and says at that point
that's when you could say you
know what this process issues we
should take their guns for ten
ten days until we can figure out
what is actually happening that
I think every would have been on
board with this is so many
things that fires the people up
and that's I think what I want
to understand is this is what
people get all upset and angry
and frustrated and
just it's not going after the
issue I read it as long as the
all the other people as this
being a a a way to punish people
and I don't like the fact that
there's not enough to process in
this so I'm gonna go to
Representative Lord I'm gonna
ask you to please stay on what
this is not about the due
process we have a lot of bills
to get through I'm just asking
you to stay on what this bill
intends to do not what was done
last year or two years ago.
Law thank you thank you madam
chair and and I'm getting to
that and reminder I am their
voice and say don't have a
chance to speak on this and this
does affect them everything
affects because when you go and
let's start with.
Let's go right into this I'm
going to the park but does
affect law enforcement so if you
go to.
The substance use have.
Section two exempt age I.
So now it is in section we have
a law enforcement officer absent
receipt of critical of credit
absent received credible
information.
Reporting party pursuant to
section D. who personally has
proper costly their spot to pose
a significant danger of causing
imminent harm themselves or
others that you know now they
can take the firearm so I have
two questions on that one.
Why did you choose to give the
law enforcement officers
discretion.
To make that choice.
But and the rest of the bill in
section fourteen the immunity
granted
As for or was taken away so you
put these officers in a weird
position right where they have
the discretion to do this.
And if they don't do it they're
looking at being sued so what
what was what was that thank
you.
Sure Representative all answer
questions law enforcement
officer goes up the house
there's no reporting person and
the person says I'm going to
kill myself.
I mean under our current version
while the officer can't do
anything about it so well he's
going to go away and you get a
seventy two hour bill and
whatever indicate where all of
this right to hundred percent
opportunity appears as opposed
to calling the court shall
should probable cost
taking guns away for that the
moment you give the officer a
tool to save a life that's what
we're talking about saving a
life and we take away the
officers the ability to
personally observe which is
consistent with the law if an
officer observers
a crime being committed the
officer arrested this is
required this is a life saver
this is what we are giving an
officer of the tools to say what
you know and so I think I
actually am at a loss to
understand why anybody would
have a problem I I'm sorry I
just I think usually I'm pretty
measured about this but Madam
chair representative I don't get
it if we're trying to share what
you want and that's what this
bill allows us to do.
The symbols that.
And madam chair woman and
Representative Lord you always
have the other option that you
described the mental health
check it doesn't always apply in
real life so that's why I said
this is Meryl application it is
and I hate to use this cliche
but I'm gonna use it it's one
more tool.
That families and law
enforcement but have to avail
of.
Thank you madam chair and
representative and interesting
you should say the life of the
person.
Things come to mind want to
think about the life of the
officer the house going to
confiscate these guns and being
murdered doing it and I think
about the person being left
alone if they don't do the
senator whole that they're there
to use a rope jump off a bridge
they can still kill themselves
so it's not really saving life
is just.
Taking a gun away from them so
we do have something else to
that I find very interesting so
Representative Eli I'm schedule
you directly or and
Representative Garrett I think
you've been in the communities
where they have talked about law
a law enforcement officers and
I've heard four times that
they're bad they're abusive the
abuse people they're homophobic
there transform trans phobic and
the rapist so if that's the case
I have a hard time wanting to
know why anyone would want to
grant a law enforcement officer
more power if that's what
they're doing because I've heard
that over and over and over
again their view said it seems
like if you gave them discretion
of that would be more rampant
but I'm just going off of the
people's testimonies so to go to
my question.
On page three.
This you.
I'm lying to H. so we're
changing the reporting party
means a person who has first
hand credible information that
respond opposes sixteen
significant danger of causing
eminent personal injury to
themselves or other.
So we're striking out.
Spouse former spouse parent
present form stepparent former
parent log etcetera etcetera.
So now we've literally added
anyone is this correct reserve
any people who can't do this
because it looks secretary
parties basically anyone.
At all there's no
madam chair and Representative I
gotta go back to something
I believe the law enforcement I
think most law enforcement just
like most lawyers let's like
most politicians are trying to
do their job so I don't when
you're attaching those educators
law enforcement that's on you
I'm not doing that and I don't
believe in that I I don't stand
for that and I don't believe it
and I'm not suggesting if you're
suggesting I do that has nothing
to do with this bill so when it
comes to paragraph age yes the
short answer is yes we are
expanding we are allowing police
officers to be the reporting
officer that hasn't changed so
law enforcement which by the way
includes district attorney's
assistant just yours and law
enforcement so that that
definition doesn't change so
they still have to be the person
there about for they still have
to do it but the reporting party
that is expanded to are those to
have first hand credible
information whenever they have
to sign an affidavit for which
they can get sued or prosecuted
for either perjury under the
criminal statutes or any pain a
panoply of several
enforcement like things like
defamation invasion of privacy
malicious visa process
for a lawyer is just literally a
toolbox of things that the
reporting party to get sued for
if they live near Avenue the you
are absolutely correct we've
expanded who can report to law
enforcement officer that is
correct.
Madam chair and representative
specifically Representative Eli
was not accusing you you and
that's why purpose that you
weren't here it's been really
hard and I'm not to discredit
dean what people have said a lot
of times things were brought up
that didn't even pertaining to
that case and it was really hard
and one when you went there for
the bill when they did excuse
law enforcement to be right this
and that was that was especially
troubling and I apologize I'm
not directing that toward you
all I did not mean that okay
Madam chair representative I
appreciate that yeah yeah I know
I wasn't trying to be a defect
that apologize so what I'm
trying to do on trying to do
here is I just want to make sure
that everybody understands
because I'm trying to make sure
the people that are listening
understand trying to make sure
law enforcement or stands I'm
trying to make sure that
everybody has a good
understanding is what is
happening here so the maybe
things are changing
As the anyone to report and that
the law enforcement does it need
some made to
to actually come and tell them
so I do have an amendment that I
would like to offer to this
the amendment being that we
strike out section fourteen of
the red flag bill.
That is the liability law
enforcement officers immunity
granted because that is very
troublesome for the officers
there.
Did you ever send their nervous
that if they don't go through
the red flag and they can't use
our discretion and they know
that this person is not being as
not credible they're afraid of
the lawsuits in the mass amount
of money.
And there being no cap on that.
Presented more do you have a an
amendment drafted with the two
oh two number no I do not okay.
Then what we you can you can
suggest that or before at if
they move on for the next
committee but we can't take that
we want
to make.
Okay thank you very much and
that's all the question and
again Representative Eli I I
wasn't directing that forty I
just you.
Madam chair and Representative I
appreciate that we're just I'm
I'm trying to think where this
goes.
What's
what's the next committee I
don't worry would be my guests
yeah I'm Madam chair
representative it is usually
helpful to the people opposing
my bill but what you could do is
if you send me the amendment I'm
sure I'm not gonna agree to I
like to see it and if we get
into judicial element a least
take a look at it.
She's now.
Thank you very much and again
it's it's a very emotional topic
so it brings out a lot of
emotions and people so thank you
very much part.
And madam chair or bed and I
Representative Lord it's nice to
see you on this side thank you
for a for running thank you
thank you I never thought I'd
hear that but thank you.
Thank you okay Representative by
vice chair Romero.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative I just had a
couple questions on just on the
logistics of some of the changes
just from some of the analysis
that we're looking at on in
particular I think I'm tracking
why folks are worried about some
of the it public health are hit
by a situation that we're
hearing in the for examples of
of what's happened since the
law's been put in place and and
what streams like streamlines
this laws what I would like to
clarify it says that with the
one of the four people who
reported someone being at risk
of their firearm was a counselor
and what it says in our notes is
that is essentially they were
unable to be effective at
basically making that claim in
the sense that they were risk to
themselves and so the judge
could not issue that order Madam
chair representative as part as
far as what we understand from
that investigation so chair
representative can you just
describe some of that
the issue of any sort of
privilege and and what could be
going on between you know a
doctor or counselor and is this
open that up and if so madam
chair representative what what
does that mean.
I'm having a Representative
Garrett I can't see it so small
I can't teach you how to talk or
not.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you representative my
understanding that it's of a
doctor therapists think someone
is going to harm themselves or
others that they have to alert
law enforcement and a case came
up in in two thousand and
fourteen in California at Santa
Barbara university where a young
student was under a
psychiatrist's care you tall he
revealed that he was going to go
and kill people at the campus
the psychiatrist notified his
parents they couldn't stop and
it was after that that
California actually enacted the
herbal bill and so that's kind
of a case
when we
went to law enforcement and I
don't know the exact particulars
of the case here it was
I can't really look at the data
right now but it would appear
that the judge.
Hearing all the evidence
that it did not qualify to get
an extremist protection order
that's the only thing I can
conclude because the person who
it's directed against can
discuss their situation or
perhaps they've gotten they've
gone into a mental health
situation and been treated the
condition no longer exists and
so the judge does not give a one
year Paul.
I hope that helps.
Thank you madam chair yes thank
you representative I think I'm I
think the concerns are you know
we're we're in the limitations
for that in the sense of that
privilege you know and I and as
I we are continuing to hear
about the input from the courts
I think that I feel thank as as
far as where the line is drawn
is based on evidence and of
course that discussion the
question though still remains
between that sort of that
privilege point I think
Judiciary will have you as far
as what that question will be
and where that line is and I do
think that needs to be
strengthened just in the case of
you know we're talking about a
counselor what kind of counselor
however they qualified and how
can they make that distinction
so madam chair representative I
think that's where folks are
concerns that who's qualified to
make that judgment and how our
courts gonna be informed by the
legislature to to know that they
are that they have that ability
to do that
so that's my recommendation and
madam chair representative the
only other thing I'm unclear
about based on a sees
analysis to is just how it works
in practice so when we are just
folks are actually looking at
weapons in plain sight if
they're in a householder in a
situation is it then that they
can obtain the firearm or do
they have to have a warrant
issued prior to and I'm just
trying to understand the car or
situation as to what sort of
authority they have in that
situation where folks can be at
risk Madam chair representative.
so Madam chair representative
yeah languages relatively clear
it says law enforcement reading
on page six beginning at line
nineteen the law enforcement
officer or law enforcement
agencies are also take
possession of any firearms
owners covered by law
enforcement plain sight or are
discovered pursuant to a lawful
search and go in there I just
don't you know I I'm into
building deprivations and so I
try to be is that yes absolutely
members of the public officer
Garson G. is gone it's a lawful
search warrants pursuant to the
how are what are we goes in the
house is using.
That just makes sense to me very
against the bill I get but if
you're going to go in you're
worried about having guns being
an admins right to that person
or others you want the option
take the guns away and so that's
would not single out isn't going
to I understand the debate from
Representative large cheese
exactly right there's always
debate about the need to but I
want to be clear option she's
the guy gets to it.
Okay.
Thank you madam chair
representative.
Thank you madam chair
representative that clarifies it
for me because I think that
between the temporary
positioning of being able to
keep folks safe and how that
works out in the process I think
is important for just because
the the question was and asked
of the AOC so I really
appreciate that I support your
bill and I support its intention
as I have in previous years and
and working with law enforcement
and and of course the entire
process of our criminal justice
system to keep our communities
safe and with that madam chair I
all well wait.
I see Representative editor's
hand pandemic thank you thank
you Representative thank you
madam chair.
There Romero okay Representative
Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair I
When the echo Representative
works comments again there this
this does not seem to make it
better they do have a concern
or.
There is comment earlier that so
we need to keep to the left hand
and I I think the problem is is
we are keeping to bill hand and
not to the commentary that was
provided on what proper probably
have made this a better bill.
The last time it was passed to
and now with all the commentary
that I have received a busily
and emails on on what was sent.
To adjust this bill to make it a
good bill and so that does
concern me that we have to keep
the for profit when when the
reality is is of we actually
kept to the topic of the last
three hundred and sixty some odd
days probably wouldn't be having
this conversation right.
So you know I I do think that
it's that is important to note
that that.
We now.
Specialized bility on on in my
opinion.
My opinion only on on our on our
law enforcement officers to do
something
the with respect to a firearm
but that same officer walked in
to the situation and found as
of.
K. number three that has to turn
their back on that will grab the
gun on the way out.
And I have a problem with that
we we're attacking we're
attacking civil look we are
attacking our constitutional
liberties and avoiding civil
liberties I have I just I have a
problem with that this is a bad
bill one of us begin with it's
not any better now and I can't
support thank you madam chair.
Okay thank you I'm open to a a
motion.
Madam chair I moved to pass act
actually this is the committee
sub is that correct I.
Let me correct my motion madam
chair I moved do not pass on
house bill ninety one ninety
three and a do pass on the
committee some for house bill
one ninety three okay thank you
madam chair I do believe it's
beginning of the of the
committee here and we agreed
that one ninety three one ninety
seven sixty two and sixty four
would not be able you are
exactly right it's not I have
written here and.
Representative pedigree you are
correct.
It was too funny I completely
forgot.
And I have it written right here
on the agenda and I get involved
and you are exactly right
Representative Pettigrew we
will.
On the table we will come back
on Saturday afternoon at one
thirty and not take this up
there will be no public comment
there will be no questions we
will just do a motion and we
will the at that time thank you
for the reminder Representative
Pettigrew I need all the help I
can get.
Keeping my head above water so I
appreciate thank you monsters
thank you madam chair
representative thank you and we
will and madam chair eight madam
chair a point of order
I believe in our initial
conversation and I think we to
HB one ninety three to four I
believe if we go back to at
least aware of my notes is that
we would agree to hear the the
bill sponsors we would agree to
hear the testimony we would re
and we would hear public comment
but we did not agree to hear
committee questions and so my
understanding was that we were
going to come back on Saturday
the committee questions we're
going to be available but not
public comment because that's
not what that was not what we
agreed to in the beginning right
let me check on let me see if I
can pull up the email
and that was that was my
understanding
Okay so I'm.
Okay that the I'm I say we stick
to the rules I would like to
hear these bills tomorrow as
long as we don't vote on them
that would be agreeable it
doesn't say anything it I'm.
It's it's it's for the for
members of the committee it's
from Representative Lord
yesterday at
three forty five PM so I will
read it to you thank you
representative Thompson for
bringing this to my attention I
think we stick to the rules and
roll the bills to a later date
if you would like to hear these
bills tomorrow as long as we
don't vote on them that would be
agreeable Representative
Pettigrew was in a committee but
I sent a text message about this
and he agrees that we should
stick to the rules.
Madam chair that that Lenin's
accurate representation of the
text messages I do not believe
it's an accurate representation
of how we started the committee
meeting today because on top of
one ninety three one ninety
seven we also added sixty two
and sixty four and we had a
discussion specifically about
public comment but not about
committee COVID.
Representative Pettigrew as the
chair I'm gonna rule that that
was the intent
and that that is what I'm.
We are just trying to keep we
got more bills today we are just
trying to keep things moving I
don't see hear anything here on
the email that talks about
whether we would have questions
from the committee are not so
I'm going to rule that we we are
just going to stop with we will
stop before we vote but we will
do the rest of the and and as a
reminder these two these two
bill are this bill and the next
one one eighty.
One eighty seven.
I'm we did get with twenty three
hours and fifteen minutes notice
so I'm I'm gonna rule that we
are going to continue as we are
going and we will vote on
Saturday.
Thank you for hearing my point
of order madam chair thank you
so not.
Madam chair you're on mute.
And.
Representative Lord I thought
your flossing your ears.
Thank you madam chair thank you
committee.
We we we maybe by the end of
this we will laugh not not talk
when we're needed but so we will
go to H. B. one eighty seven
which is Representative Rehm we
will follow the what we have
been doing we will.
We will have the sponsor present
the bill we will hear public
comment we will have.
Questions from the committee but
we will not vote on that one
until Saturday so if
Representative ring your I see
him in here Representative Rehm
did you have expert witnesses
you needed to have admitted.
yes I need Diana loose and I'm
trying to get my screen set
we're we can see.
You can see me
C..
Representative Rehm.
Okay you mean the real you do
not sure not sure on your end
shut.
Okay okay and miss Lewis is here
now okay go ahead.
and I presume that we're going
in in order one eighty seven is
the drug driving bill.
Correct yes correct that's the
order we have a man here M. and
and the reason they're out of
number order I believe is
because of how how we got the
amendment six that are in so so
this is how we order them so the
rest are yours
I'm at I guess if you have a
preference to to go in some
other order we can but it on the
agenda it's one eighty seven
next no ma'am that's fine okay
all right go ahead.
Okay so what we've seen since
the nineties as a real increase
in drug and alcohol.
Mixtures and R. DWI driver's
many states that are legalizing
marijuana or using the five
nanogram.
want to level so if we were to
Colorado Oregon and Washington
state that's what they've use
we're going to hear from the
opponents that there's no
scientific data to go ahead and
show that I agree but the
problem is if we're gonna have
recreational marijuana we're
going to have to have some and
this would be a per se level
such as point zero eight is with
alcohol.
We are the fifteenth highest in
the nation and DWI
you know we just saw last
November there is a individual
driving here in the Albuquerque
area at seventy miles an hour
with marijuana and alcohol and
it's the mixtures that tend to
be more
troubling than just being on
of marijuana only.
Anyway that in resulted in a in
a fatal traffic crash I sent you
the.
Article from the journal on that
so everybody has that.
Our highway safety traffic funds
that come into the state to
address DWI are tied to but laws
that we use to enforce DWI for
one and other laws that deal
with traffic safety issues and
New Mexico support more what I'd
like to do is have our we
wouldn't go to the FIR.
In.
Twenty eighteen no not on page
three that the.
That is so an officer takes a a
breath test or a blood sample
Representative has gives you a
result right away a blood sample
goes to the scientific lab which
is part of the department of
health and then they analyze or
so of those test you see there
the third noting that ninety
percent of those test
We're blood test were positive
for drugs and not alcohol.
And that's troubling.
so when we look at that we have
a problem here in New Mexico
that we need to
be addressed.
The and kind of the FIR speaks
for itself now one of the things
we had a problem with well as
the clarity of for the confusion
that came between how the bill
was written and so you all have
an amendment and it is two one
nine.
Seven zero six point one.
Thank you to motion to what
except the the amendment for
discussion.
Okay
Is there any opposition okay go
ahead Representative Rehm with
your with your amendment.
So with this amendment I haven't
seen your committee FIR but I
assume this would clarify the
confusion that we have.
And does that appear to address
it from your.
FIR.
Sorry madam chair I'm trying to
find the actual amendment.
Do are analysts have that madam
chair I know we just are trying
to discuss it but I would like
to
look at it
is is that analysts did not just
to make sure you you did do your
analysis with the amendment is
that correct.
Yes okay.
No that's okay.
We're a little bit out of fun we
had yeah I was I we have an
amended for the other one too so
I was trying to yeah I take a
look and make sure but yes
thank.
So that the in the
File share correct.
Yes it is okay all right
Representative Romero have you
found it.
I'm in the midst of digging for
a but I think I think as long as
we know that everybody's asset
all thank you madam chair okay.
These these virtual things are
Challenging I'll just say
challenging for go ahead the
floor is yours Representative
rain thank you madam chair and
file share I'm still having
difficulty and so.
I want to remind everyone that
if we take marijuana just as
that drug there are if I
remember correctly two hundred
and thirty four metabolites that
are generated when a person
smokes marijuana so after the
the analysts who analyzes the
drug has to be able to
articulate to the court that
this metabolite that I found
which is short lived and
previous we we had Dr David
mills from
of from the the health
department would testified he
said that metabolite had a life
of about four hours and it was
that metabolite that was
psychoactive that because the
year and behavior so one thing
you're gonna hear about it
thirty days later you can't
relate to errant driving so you
have to have the metabolite you
can directly relate to it.
anyways so that's the amendment
to clear up the the language
Mr loose the I'm I'm not sure
she'd like to add more to this.
Madam chair.
Members of the committee on the
amendment is just meant to
clarify on that the.
Specific section giving specific
amounts for the specified
controlled substances is in
addition to any drive because
Mexico has the impaired this
policy period and we have to per
se we know eight are for alcohol
and so this amendment is just to
clarify that this is just a
subset in.
Are not we didn't want any
confusion are regarding that you
wanted someone to wonder why it
was illegal to drive.
But I I'm glad to answer any
questions thank.
Okay thank you Representative
Rehm is that all for you.
Madam chair I think that that's
fine for right okay okay so we
will now go to the audience.
First for a poll so I'll listen
If you could put up a poll.
And again support or opposition.
Okay it looks like we have two
or eight okay.
Every time I open my mouth to
changes the support we have
three or nineteen percent
opposition
it was eighty one percent it's
since changed but I'm so just a
quick look at that okay we will
go to the audience for comment
for public comment if you are in
opposition to this bill please
raise your hand and again it's
under participants on the bottom
of your screen.
Okay so we will go to Emily
Kaltenbach go ahead Emily.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee and.
We also in opposition
you were built in past years we
are very concerned though like
this would further criminalized
medical cannabis patients whose
blood that usually have more
than I say even if they have not
notices of that are twenty four
to forty eight hours before
Friday we also know that
scientific evidence does not
support local blood
concentration levels as
appropriate indicators
behavioral.
Alcohol I'm so we're really
concerned about the language
again when it comes to marijuana
we.
Someone could have a high
concentration of THC but that
does not
you were meant to be very
careful when we when we create
the for say amounts that we
maybe for
years.
One one if you are the state and
that's really important but I
believe that this legislation.
We will not achieve that will
they provide.
Thank you very much and
but not.
Thank you Emily Kim Chavez Cook.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Kim Chavez Cook
with the law offices of the
public defender we do also
oppose this bill for the reasons
that we're just stated in terms
of the science the the critical
piece from a criminal defense
perspective though is that where
that we the we know there's a
scientific consensus that eight
point zero eight alcohol level
blood alcohol level actually
corresponds to a scientific
certainty across the board to
all people with impairment in
driving that is not true for any
of the per se limits proposed by
this legislation so while it is
designed to try to make it
easier to get convictions in
cases without having to jump
through the hoops of lab tests
and and toxicologist experts the
problem is that it doesn't
actually prove impairment and
that is just a crucial piece
that I think just we assess this
bill will not accomplish the
desired effect and will over
incarcerate people who might
have been driving perfectly
safely thank you.
Thank you Rikki Lee Travis.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Rikki Lee Chavez
on behalf of the New Mexico
criminal defense lawyers
association we appreciate the
Sanchez
at the sponsor bringing this
bill before the committee
however we to respectfully
oppose I think that Miss cult
and blocking Mr Chavez Cook laid
out our concerns are opposition
is not meant to disparage
disregard anybody who has been
impacted by impaired driving
however we do feel that the
legislation with its per se
limits on certain substances
does go a step too far in trying
to prove what impaired driving
is so for those reasons and
those stated before we propose
thank you.
Thank you Clarissa Deron.
So sorry of you hear my dogs
barking somebody just came in my
house but hello my name is
Clarissa the amendment I am from
the tail they will wait to hear
what basin also known as the
Espanola valley I am commenting
today because my husband who
recently passed away was a
recipient of medical marijuana
treatment and I just need people
to know that my husband had
suffered for years with terrible
knee and back problems and
finally when medical marijuana
became available to him he was
able to control his pain before
that
people were always suggesting
opioid see him and he did not
want to become addicted to
opioids my husband had been a
truck driver when he was young
and he was extremely careful on
the road and so one of the
things he always made sure to do
was not to ingest money one on
before he was striving well
people more may not be as
careful as he is but people
should have the opportunity to
take the medicines that they
need to take without being
criminalized for that thank you.
Thank thank you okay now we will
go
Two people in support.
Of this bill if you want to
speak please raise your hand.
Okay
And we will start with Derek
Scott.
Hi my name's there's got I've
been talking before about a
couple bills and I appreciate
this from the chair and the
committee I'm in support of this
bill partly because I don't
think people can have their cake
and eat it too you have to have
laws as we see in Colorado more
crime went up when marijuana was
legalized and as a prior law
enforcement officer I've seen
marijuana involved crimes and
with other drugs if this isn't
passed I would it would be a
detriment to New Mexico and I
think in general for law
enforcement because people do do
crimes under the influence and
should not be allowed if they're
gonna do the influencing of
let's say marijuana let's say
gets legalized they will have to
abide by the laws as everybody
else I would say that if you're
gonna do it do it at home don't
be driving don't be flying don't
be doing anything that would
impair or because impairments
and I am definitely in stop
support of this bill and the
sponsor and I thank you for him
bring it forward and being
forward thinking about this
thank you.
Thank you and Jamie Jamie Fraser
page.
Thank you madam chair.
Members of the committee our
speak in support of it.
Of like.
You got me.
Yes yes.
We can.
I speak in support of this.
I also am in favor of
decriminalizing the use of
marijuana but as the previous.
Person said.
there have to be consequences
for the use of inappropriate
circumstances.
A retired police officer I've
seen a fair amount of.
Impaired driving some of the
cost I alcohol some of the
caused by marijuana some of the
calls for that matter by
prescribed drugs.
to matter of individual
responsibility.
Well the Hughes not settled
science it is that we use to
start and if we are going to
legalize marijuana for
recreational use in the state I
think it's something that needs
to be addressed in needs to be
addressed in a timely fashion so
again I say I speak in support
of this bill.
Thank you that's all we have for
public comment and now we will
go to the committee for
questions I'm sorry
Representative ring did you have
any response to anything you
heard.
Thank you madam chair thank you
I I think it would be real good
I want to re review the DWI
steps you know for an arrest so
the officer saw errant driving
you stop the driver he talks
with the driver and through that
believes that there impaired on
something you know whatever it
is the us to perform a field
sobriety test.
They either refuse or they do
that field sobriety test and if
they failed a field sobriety
test they are arrested for DWI
so this is not going down the
road just taken blood samples
and again these tests they would
have to be blood tests and our
state law says that blood test
must occur within three hours.
Of the arrest and while the said
there's no evidence that.
These levels are showing
impairment there's no level
there's no evidence that shows
they are not impaired in fact
there's some levels there's some
evidence that are showing lower
levels of THC are actually
impair.
Taking medicine well
look at some of the medicine
bottles we have and then as a
warning label.
And if you're impaired under the
current law I don't care that
it's a prescription drug then
you can be arrested and
prosecuted for DWI.
Colorado has noted that over
sixty percent of its fatal
traffic drivers involved in
fatal collisions I have more
want to.
And then I don't know if miss
Louise has anything else you
need to add before you go to
committee.
Madam chair members of the
committee I would just add that
right now sign in New Mexico you
can do it over the counter drugs
it can be a prescription drug
I'm in right now because they're
not on per se levels I it is
impairments in so we're looking
for that are you impairments
funds to bring that driving so
right now there is a standard I
and so on it doesn't matter if
it's a prescribed are are or
noted the counter our agent
here's your driving the state
you can charge just as
Representative as outlined I
would note that Colorado has the
the same level of five nanograms
for marijuana in their current
law hi your is owner I'm doesn't
have a level it's you might have
a lot of marijuana are doesn't
require that impairment as
Mexico in it is just a per se
you're not gonna drop with the
drug in your system so recognize
that our neighbors are are
already addressing this issue in
New Mexico who has led the
country for delivery us and
giving us the Taliban's we
certainly do not want to go
backwards in the state we want
to protect our citizens and the
forward thinking on our part of.
Thank you.
Okay.
Questions from the committee.
I will I will ask the question
and so I and I and I was really
struck me was when you said that
Arizona in the midst have what
yeah I don't know that this is
true or not but I have read that
metabolites
cannabis can be detected up to
thirty days later so I is that
do you have a sense of how long
that those can be detected in in
your blood.
Madam chair if I can answer on
the short answer want to go back
when I used to have doctor David
mills he's now retired
from the scientific lab you said
you had he would have to equate
what metabolite he found to the
errant driving.
And those metabolites that he
would look at were I have a
lifespan of about four hours
from the time they smoke
marijuana.
Yes you can have a metabolite of
marijuana thirty days later but
you can't relate that metabolite
to the errant driving.
With that Mr chair I'm not used
to being the chair the chair
asking questions I'm so so I'm
in this is off topic but that's
really kind of scary that
Arizona has has put that in but
I'm just just out of out of
curiosity have these blood
levels been published in a peer
reviewed scientific journals
where the court could use that
as a you know as that peer
reviewed
double blind you know that the
real hard science that that I
would think would be required
for something like that.
Madam chair I'm not aware of it
as we know federally marijuana
is still a schedule one
controlled substance and so
forth to do is steady
in the end there are they are
they are looking at in doing
some studies but I don't think
they're quite to that point yet
you know but particularly when
you look at other slide here one
and stuff like that you know
While you could probably find a
population that would come in
volunteered to be tested you
know it may not be in the best
medical advice to do that.
Thank you for that I'm are there
no court other questions from
the committee.
Okay seeing now and we will just
stick a pin in this and move on
Representative Rehm to H. B.
sixty two prosecution time limit
for certain felonies and this is
another one we will not vote on
we will just go through all of
that the data gathering and then
we will so go ahead
Representative Representative
rain did you have a different
expert you needed in.
No madam chair okay okay go
ahead.
Okay so HB sixty two it's a
second degree murder and
currently we are the only state
in the nation who has a statute
of limitation on second degree
murder.
We.
The difference between second
degree and first degree deals
with the intent the planning and
so it's a very thin line between
the two.
When we look at the west mesa
murders.
Most all of those would end up
most likely being second degree
murders.
I think last time we discussed
Ellen slider gilder has been
here in my district at our
teenage son helped her bury him
in the backyard and then built a
concrete driveway over yeah.
the teenage son became an adult.
He shared that with the another
person who told the police it
was outside of the six years and
consequently
They ended up charging her with
first degree murder and resulted
in a plea bargain but
if they if the jury had found
her guilty of second degree
murder she would have literally
walked out of the courtroom.
By a legislation it's back a
couple years ago has if we look
at the F. B. FIR it actually has
a statute of limitations for all
the different states if someone
wants to review that.
What this the FIR was critical
of the language and so we have a
committee of so.
And if we can if we could look
at two one nine six three eight
point one the committee sub
okay.
To accept the committee staff
for discussion.
Sure so okay and I'll take that
as a first and a second go ahead
Representative Rehm.
And I think you look at the
language is so what clear you
know the intent of the bill so
what we're doing is we're going
to make second degree murder not
have a statue limitations like
first degree murder and we're
gonna take our.
Drug trafficking which currently
doesn't have a statute of
limitations and moving it to a
six year statute of limitations.
that was part of kind of the
deal when we were in Judiciary
and it was Judiciary that had
made the language that that was
confusing but bill let's let's
read this and see if it isn't
clear to everyone and perhaps
your FIR said that and then this
will be sold talk about.
What's needed for conviction
because a lot of it talks about
faded memories and all that you
can get a conviction without
some physical evidence so all I
have missed loose address that.
Madam chair and members of the
committee on the difference
between first degree murder and
second degree murder in New
Mexico it takes thoughtful
reflection intent or planning on
those words may not seen on and
not just on the face of it to be
on March but when you bring your
instructions and you're trying
cases before juries which I have
done well over twenty first two
murder jury trials and my
prosecution calling of.
Those are it is a big difference
when you have to argue facts
that show that they had time to
reflect and think are otherwise
it becomes second degree murder
so most often what we're looking
for in charging in case is
working and what facts we have
to support that and often the
jury trial even if we had facts
are going to be the lesser
included second degree offered
in the time of when the crime
was committed and when the state
charts that it seems that six
years we're not allowed to give
that was to include in jury
instructions per second
degree we are proceeding only on
first degree I don't have those
types of cases
we often hear the prosecutors on
may over charge leaving us with
only a six year statute of
limitations for a murder are a
lost of a lot I'm often leads
law enforcement and prosecutors
looking for how can we charge
something his first.
Or want to tell a family of the
victim there is no justice there
is no justice for this victim
it's from the time the con is
committed on you're aware that
there is an exception for I
think students children to have
a totaling and extension of time
respond that when this murder
offense happens doesn't matter
if it's the age I turned in the
second degree murder summary
we're asking for this committee
I to see the need for this in in
a clarification on the Canadian
side specifically the
representative noted that in
statute there wasn't a I.
The women's team for first
degree trafficking I was a first
degree felony said be treated
this person the felony
perceptive limitations and
certainly I think that that's a
common sense our amendment on a
realistic are and how we should
be prosecuted cases that have
that limitation for drug
trafficking to be the six years
our second degree sexual
limitations on and without this
regarding sort out any questions
from the committee.
Okay thank you I'm so we will do
a poll of the audience.
Madam chair if if we can adopt
the sub and now we're for that
okay okay so so I'm I need a
motion to adopt the sub.
So madam chair I thought that's
what we just did I may be
confused not we we we we opened
it up for discussion
essentially.
I'd like to move madam chair
that we
Discuss the substance.
You can see a doctor okay and do
I have a second.
So second okay is there any
opposition.
Okay seeing none Representative
Rehm you have a committee
substitute and now we will go to
to the pole.
Okay so it looks like we have.
Three in support these are easy
now for in support at thirty six
percent seven in opposition at
sixty four percent so we will
not close the poll and if you
are in opposition to this bill
please raise your hand.
Again it's I am part under
participants at the bottom of
your screen.
Okay so we will go over I'm this
is opposition okay Jamie Frasier
page.
Madam chair I actually am
speaking in support of this bill
also comments okay thank you hi
Diane my cash.
thank you Canadian I'm even
after listening to the
explanation of the bill I still
have serious doubts about the
wisdom of removing the statute
of limitations from second
degree murder as years pass I
can only imagine it would become
increasingly more difficult to
mount a robust defense for a
number of reasons six years is a
long time ten fifteen twenty
years seems like would be
impossibly long this legislation
looks like a solution because of
some anecdotal instances where
charges second degree murder
might reasonably have been
expected to be proved beyond a
reasonable doubt after the six
year statute limitations and
limitations of past it's
reasonable to feel strong a
strong sense of wanting justice
when people do horrible things
and horribly hurt other people I
feel it too but that feeling
doesn't necessarily make this
original piece of legislation in
general are for the long haul
the probability of harm to
innocent people caught up in a
charge for something that
happened years ago is just too
high thank you very much.
Thank you we have our Rikki Lee
Chavis I hate when I stumble but
I got my work.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Rikki Lee Chavez
on behalf of the New Mexico
criminal defense lawyers
association again we appreciate
the Sanchez work however we do
respectfully oppose the
legislation as stated before
statutes of limitations are
there to protect are adversarial
justice system unfortunately
when you eliminate those
statutes of limitations you also
eliminate opportunities and our
what our constitutional Ford's
criminal defendants to arm
themselves with the defense so I
do again want to mention that
are COVID in opposition are not
meant to disparage disregard the
the fact that there are victims
of these crimes out there
however eliminating the statutes
of limitations is not something
that is going to serve our
criminal justice process in fact
it's likely going to clouded and
muddy it further thank you.
Thank you lose health Campos.
Members of the committee my name
is Lucy let composed some of
policy associate both futures it
The New Mexico nonprofit
organization we stand in
opposition of HB sixty two as an
organization led by and for
people of color we know the
impact over policing in cycles
of incarceration and
criminalization have had in our
communities expanding the
statute of limitation would
simply keep people in the state
of anxiety while they await
prolong statues of limitation on
their cases.
It would also cost us more money
as we go through a lengthy
investigations which would also
allow time for evidence to be
deteriorated or tampered with we
ask that you stand in opposition
Ambode against HB sixty two when
the time comes to about thank
you.
Thank you okay and we will now
go to those in support.
Okay so we will start with Derek
Scott.
madam chair and representative
thank you for hearing me I like
to my name's there Scott and
before like I said a prior law
enforcement I've worked in
states where the statue
limitations was just about
incident on secondary in first
degree in Colorado so I totally
support this bill just like with
the marijuana bill a totally
support of this bill because
again it gives a tool to law
enforcement to do what would be
grand and good law and what I
call good law is law that will
you know go after the people and
bring justice and understanding
to the people that have been
hurt by this so I really
appreciate that he brought this
up and he's moving forward with
it so thank you so much guys for
doing this and I appreciate it
I hope you see a theme here
though that I support good law
but don't support that law thank
you have a great day.
Okay Jamie Frasier page.
Madam chair members of the
committee.
I am speaking in support of this
bill as a retired police officer
I don't see one New Mexico has
to be the only state in the
union where second degree murder
has a statute of limitations
when I was a police officer I
spoke with the victim's.
The three ladies who spoke in
support this we speak for the
perpetrators I do not think that
their voices should be heard
more loudly than the voices to
speak for the victims I think
this is a logical thing to do
both for second degree homicide
and also for trafficking both of
those are serious problems both
of those are problems that are
not well addressed and I think
this needs to be calm law in the
state of New Mexico and bring us
into line with the rest of the
United States thank you for
coming your consideration and
think Representative green for
bringing this bill I appreciate
it.
Thank you we'll we will go to
know each of the.
I'm getting a echo did you all
hear an echo.
Yeah okay well whatever it was
hopefully it's gone I'm.
Okay we will go to the committee
for questions.
Okay I am not seeing any so I
will say again that we will take
this up on Saturday when we
start at one thirty and we will
just go down there that the list
in order and we will just take a
vote we will take motion than
both so Representative Rehm on
to sixty four and a same
question you have another you
have a witness who you need to
be promoted to a panelists.
Mr.
All the legislature okay okay I
will try and remember that not
us every time so the floor is
yours Representative ring.
So
I and I've sent you two articles
on the the use of body armor.
Back in the seventies.
The manufacturers of body armor
would only sell to law
enforcement or the military
today the market is expanded and
there's many people
manufacturing that and so
they're selling to the general
public and we're seeing
criminals who are now are buying
body armor in using body armor
in the commission of their
crimes.
We have the article I sent you
of from November fifteenth of
twenty twenty we're the
The.
Two people dealing drugs and
kind of known as the brutality
of drug dealers.
What they had body armor and
semi auto rifles and guns and
bulletproof vest and.
Then we had another one that was
October second of twenty and
this person kidnapped a of
person down in our Dona Ana
County demanded a ransom of two
hundred fifty thousand dollars.
Had a pistol with the serial
number removed.
And had a silencer attached to
that.
Our our he was also wearing a
bulletproof vest.
We have the our April sixteenth
where the mongrel switches a
motorcycle gang.
Our were stockpiling weapons to
have a war with the bandido
motorcycle gang.
At the bottom of page two of
that are.
That article the one of the
members of the mongrel Spragge
about using a car to run a
bandido off the road and that
bandito was killed in a
motorcycle collision.
At the top of page three
They talk about how with the
public this respects them
they're getting members that
they will tab that public member
so we're talking about a violent
game here.
This gain also directs as hate
crimes against them in the past.
And on the very bottom of the
page three they brag about how
New Mexico doesn't have a law
against convicted felons wearing
body armor or possessing body
armor.
If we look at just today and I
am glad the legislature honored
officer Jared.
The offender in that that that
killed officer Jared he's a
convicted felon and he was
wearing body armor so that's our
most recent one.
There are FIR said that the.
definition of body armor was
vague.
And so what we've done and if we
go now the other man met and we
are two one nine six three nine
point one.
And this has a new definition of
body armor.
The committee to move that and
it's it's an amendment that a
committee set up correct correct
okay the amendment for
discussion.
And a second.
Thank you okay any opposition
okay go on go on with your with
your pin Representative ring.
This amendment and I all have
missed we speak about it but
this amendment is from federal
law what the definition is
following and in misli skills
speak on the bill.
Madam chair members of the
committee on the definition that
are for body armor is taken
directly from federal law it's
already a crime for a felon two
I'm.
Has our body armor under federal
law.
I'm in New Mexico what we are
talking about is I'm dealing
with the worst of the worst I'm
in the past you have heard from
myself on other district
attorneys talk about some of our
laws have made New Mexico the
best place to be a colonel I in
the era of the colonel Justice
Reform we are looking at those
who are ready are convicted
felons
who are it should be restricted
R. one they can possess a farm
in New Mexico I in so we are
simply adding our with this our
proposed legislation that they
cannot have body armor
Representative points out that
in the past body armor was
restricted for purchase that
only law enforcement on and and
those restrictions no longer
exist I and so on we often talk
about you have today talk about
farms and who you know how those
inducted and certain individuals
handful obviously the worst of
the worst we're talking about a
convicted felon in New Mexico
remember that felony the printer
felon on is limited to ten years
our current the latest of
whenever they served a total of
their sentence are they
completed their probation or
parole and so there's a
limitation in town I have one
more they are found I and so
that definition of tracks
exactly federal law we have used
federal definitions are for
other legislation
specifically when we look at hi
the law that was passed by the
legislature last year on
brandishing a firearm on
Representative Maureen also but
to federal law for that
definition I and I would stand
for any question.
Thank you we will go to the
audience for the whole.
And Turkey we adopted then we.
Thank you I do I have a motion
to adopt the amendment.
Thank you okay is there any
opposition to adopting the bill
I mean that amendment it's
getting late it's getting to be
a long day I'll say that we.
Is there any opposition okay
seeing that and you have an
amended bill Representative
right I did you have anything
else are you ready to go to the
all.
Thank you madam okay all right
thank you.
We will go to the poll.
Madam.
Thank you.
Yes you called timeout Hey go
get
something step cap building or
something so what I'm gonna ask
the audience please don't raise
your hands and tell your
requests to do so because that
then you may get
you may be on the wrong side of
the issue that you wanted to
speak on so now we will go to
those in opposition of the of
the.
Bill and.
Okay so we have a Rikki Lee
Chavis.
Thank you thank you madam chair
members of the committee Rikki
Lee Chavez on behalf of the New
Mexico will defense lawyers
association we do respectfully
oppose the proposed legislation
as a point of policy we propose
the creation of new crimes
especially those that would be
felonies do you have insurance
FEMA mandatory enhancements for
felony convictions on our books
as we have seen an R. and
science shows us and I'm sorry
data shows us from scientific
reviews the increased penalties
and increasing crimes does not
actually
deterrent criminal action nor
does it make our community safer
for those reasons we
respectfully oppose thank you.
Thank you remind people if this
is in support so if you are not
in support please lower your and
and.
Okay so we will go to Kim Chavez
Cook.
Thank you madam chair Kim Chavez
Cook with the public defender
and to clarify it did did you
say this is for support of the
bill I could have sworn it was
for opposed to the bill this is
no this is in opposition okay
great just making sure I
actually did it right thank you
and that you as with the the
agency Travis is but before me
it we do respectfully oppose
this legislation I have not seen
the amendment so I don't know if
what that definition is that we
did we were one of the people
who raised vagueness concerns in
our FIR so I hope that that has
resolved that issue I will take
a look after once it's posted
but we do also have concern with
the them possession crime just
possessing body armor and would
recommend that the bill be
limited to punishing the use of
body armor in the commission of
a new crime only and would
recommend a less than a third
degree felony for that since
that will be inherently on
tacked on top of the crime that
they're committing as well and
so for that and a few of the
reasons I don't have time to
tell you we do oppose this
legislation thank you.
Thank you for not under
Trujillo.
Yes you are correct heading out
a little bit trying get.
I right can you hear me now is
expected okay thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is fed non
look through your policy fellow
with both futures and we stand
in opposition of the H. three
sixty five which would make it
unlawful for Representative in
the connections to that body
armor for the criminalization I
enhancement or creation of
penalties has not shown to
enhance public safety as
mentioned before people living
with convictions currently
cannot lawfully possess or
purchase a firearm a
constitutional right lost after
a felony conviction but for an
individual to use their right to
peacefully protect themselves
with body army especially in
these volatility aims to that we
are encountering that's just and
reasonable if enacted this law
would once again
disproportionately affect black
and brown indigenous people who
are more likely to be targeted
by law enforcement and in turn
to be prosecuted in our criminal
legal system because that is not
a criminal justice system.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Fernando Margarita and Soriano.
Hello good evening madam chair
members of the committee my name
is moderate the study on the and
I'm an organizer with the ACLU
of New Mexico we respectfully
oppose this piece of legislation
because for us the other reasons
are stated this creates crime
and arts counter to public
safety and I urge you to oppose
as to house bill sixty four
thank you.
Thank you and I'm gonna remind
people again if you are this is
if you are in opposition so
please do not raise your hand if
you are in support I'm so I
think you will get your your
opportunity to speak just it's
confuses the issue to have
people who and who raised their
hands at the wrong time so we
will go to Diane my cash.
Good evening I'm Diane cash I
propose HB sixty four on the
examples I've heard and talking
about this bill show that
multiple other crimes were
committed when Bader body armor
was that creating this new prime
stacks penalties on to already
existing penalties for already
existing crime it creates a way
to re incarcerate people who had
been previously convicted of a
felony by creating the new
felony crime of merely
possessing body armor
researchers shown that
increasing jail time is not a
way to increase public safety or
reduce recidivism more
incarceration isn't the answer
to increasing public safety when
my son was incarcerated I
sounded well for two or three
years and he made plans for a
better life it was heartbreaking
to David and the ensuing couple
of years the him crumble under
the sheer weight of that
experience and yes he didn't do
well upon release I've seen no
evidence that locking people up
for longer longer periods of
time makes us safer this
reactive rather than proactive
approach to public safety
distract us from the real work
of building a safe and healthy
community thank you.
Thank you for Carissa Deron.
Thank you once again.
chair and committee members my
name is clear Clarissa do than
I'm here as an individual and
founder of and principal of T.
two twenty thirty two and use
actually I'm a generational
resident of just Espanola valley
I've been a social worker on my
adult life and have mainly serve
use in older adults and our The
New Mexico as a war why from
desert storm I chose to become a
peace activist in my younger
days I participated in many keys
protests throughout New Mexico
during several those protests
rubber bullets were shot and
then women and children who
peacefully protested our
invasion and occupation of Iraq
today I am a mother of two young
adults one of whom has
participated in peaceful protest
on that same child was convicted
of a non violent felony and as a
person who who strongly supports
my child and believes in wall of
mom's I would do anything to
make sure that my son could
survive while peacefully
protesting so I believe he
deserves to wear body armor to
keep them safe just like I
deserved to be safe when the fat
fat rubber bullets at me.
Thank you Derek Scott.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative for being
here tonight and you know
running through all this my
name's there Scott again I'm
representing myself people
disabilities and also just you
know round about family a lot of
voters
HB sixty four is kind of a
double edged sword for me in the
sense that I do agree that
criminals maybe.
Should be charged right but I
don't agree with the fact that
it's kind of broad in the sense
of just possession of body armor
should not be the issue I think
maybe possession of body armor
while committing a crime should
be more of what it should say
again I use body armor I have
death threats that have been
lobbied against me many times so
yes I have body armor myself as
a prior law enforcement officer
in as somebody who's been
politically active and had many
and it many people lob threat to
me through the internet so there
always is a concern so all I'm
saying is is I would just ask
that it be maybe adjusted or I'd
like to help with the
representative to maybe get it
to be more refined and defined
because.
I kind of agree let's not make
it a crime thank you.
More Nathan dial.
Mr more you need to on mute
yourself.
Can you hear me now yes all
right once again others eight
and I'm speaking as a citizen I
think I'll not more nice about
that I have not spoken much
constituents in this matter yes
for the record.
I oppose this bill because of
its broadly written.
The way it's written.
Especially that it's already
been used against the motorcycle
community I know a lot of
individuals that where kevlar
how much as their helmet for the
motorcycle technically under
this bill if they were this with
past they would be a felony
possession of body armor body
armor just not the best there's
many variations from kevlar
pants for steel toed boots and.
In all the examples given.
On the battlefield issue moving
communicate so with that all
you're using a felon should be
able to have a telephone or cell
phone because are communicating
so this is just expansion.
Keep her body armors from fell
on is just a feel good law in my
opinion thank you.
Thank you okay now people who
are in support of this bill.
Please raise your hand.
Okay we have Jamie Fraser Jamie
Fraser per page.
Madam chair members of the
committee
I speak in support of this bill
and former law enforcement
officer.
I wish involved in an officer
involved shooting.
Where a man heavily body armored
was able to under fire advance
and kill one of my fellow
officers.
I don't think there's any reason
for felons former felons to
possession body armor they are
not allowed to possess firearms
I don't think they should be
allowed to possess.
An item which protection from
gunfire.
I will say this about
enhancements all these people
speaking about the enhancements
in my experience in a career in
law enforcement in California
enhancements for the use of
various items in the commission
of a crime are almost always the
first thing to go on a plea
bargain so they are in essence
totally ineffective this would
be a law against it not an
enhancement a separate crime and
I favor that thank you for your
consideration and think
Representative really for
bringing a bill.
Thank you.
Steven gray.
Stephen you'll need to unmute.
Steven we can't hear you you are
muted.
Okay.
We're not getting anything from
Steven here your muted okay now
he's okay and then Derrick Scott
already spoke in opposition so
I think that hand just didn't
get taken down so we will go to
that I'm we will go to the
sponsor and see if he has any
Any response before we go to the
committee.
Thank you madam chair.
I think we did make it real
clear where you need to be a
convicted felon within the last
ten years.
Our and and then it's a crime to
go ahead and possessed body
armor.
it we also have a clause in
there if you are a felon and
you're you're working in an
industry that supplies body
armor it's not a crime.
When you leave that employment
you have to turn in that body
armor and I don't know if miss
loose has anything else you'd
like to add.
Okay we're ready for the
committee thank you.
Okay are there any questions
from the committee.
Okay I don't see any so we will
just move on to our final bill
on the agenda which
is H. B. eighty one and
representative review did not
happen amendment or a substitute
on this bill correct.
Madam chair now we have a
substitute you have a septic and
when did that get in.
Can one of the analysts yes tell
me.
Last week.
Okay okay so we're not okay
there's just there's too much
going on go ahead Representative
Representative okay.
Julie did you have something.
No madam chair thank you okay
okay go ahead Representative
Rehm.
More to current members the
committee are quite frankly when
we see that all all individuals
are trafficking in drugs or
trafficking in humans they are
carrying firearms and just.
Briefly this says that if you're
doing if you're trafficking in
drugs or your trafficking in
humans it would be a third
degree felony.
And we want to try to address
those two issues and miss Lewis
may have something to add to it.
All in if we could move the sub
for it.
Adoption as well.
So.
First.
Okay so that we this is a motion
for for and discussion is there
any discussion from the
committee on the sub on the
substitute if not we will
I will entertain a motion to
accept the substitute.
A motion to add it to accept the
substitute
We we we have we have accepted
it for discussion now we will
accept it as the bill that we
were we are looking at.
Yes ma'am okay second.
Madam chair I second okay and
I'm sorry this is so confusing
obviously it's confusing to me
too and that so most of you are
freshman so
It's a bumpy ride around here
we're we're all out figuring it
out as we go so is there any
opposition to accepting the
substitute.
Thank you have a committee
substitute Representative ring.
Go ahead the floor's yours.
Okay thank you madam chairman we
decoded Committee now.
Okay we will go to the public
first and.
We will go to the poll.
Okay it looks like we have one
in support at eleven percent and
eight in opposition at eighty
nine percent so we will in the
poll.
And we will go to the audience
for them and again if you are in
opposition to this bill please
raise your hand.
And you want to speak.
Diane my cash.
Good evening again I'm.
I propose HB eighty one is a
crime to use a firearm in
commission of a crime and is in
a person with a previous felony
conviction already subject to
penalties for firearm possession
regardless of whether they're
trafficking or not and
trafficking carries its own
severe penalties correct I
remember hearing years ago a
claim that probably half the
people are community had guns in
the glove compartment Karen are
having firearms to do seems to
be an entrance part of our
culture trafficking is a crime
is it should be with its own
penalties already in place
possession and carrying of
firearms is not an unusual
practice in New Mexico you might
say it's part of our culture
does not on its own connote an
intent to threaten someone are
to harm I see this proposed
legislation as mostly redundant
and an attempt to increase
prosecutors ability again to
staff charges and increased
potential prison time it's
legislation that's reactive
rather than proactive and I
believe it's unlikely to benefit
public safety thank you.
Thank you and Rikki Lee Chavez.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Chavez on behalf
of the New Mexico criminal
defense lawyers association I
apologize it is we now are in
this house but we respectfully
oppose this legislation I agree
with the previous speaker that
there are already laws on our
books we do not support the
creation of new crimes or
policies that would increase
penalties there is data that
shows that this not make our
community safer it does not
eliminate crime from happening
in our communities often when we
create
communities of color and so for
those reasons madam chair we
respectfully oppose thank you.
Thank you M. Kim Chavez Cook and
you're getting slow their Rikki
Lee beat you out this time.
Yes madam chair thank you Kim
Chavez Cook with the law offices
of the public defender and for
many reasons already mentioned
we do oppose this legislation it
because we do know that people
who make their living in that
the illegal drug trade tend to
be arms merely at adding a new
crime for military.
I switching our here to
for merely carrying a firearm
during a drug transaction is
going to guarantee that every
trafficking offense is going to
have this new new crime also
tacked on top of it where a
second offense trafficking is
already in
senior mandatory sentences
I apologize for the toddler I
will leave it more we do believe
this is unnecessary legislation
that is only going to stack on
top of certain convictions that
will already arise and
sentencing enhancements that are
already available thank you.
Thank you and I'm glad to hear
those toddlers in the background
because sometimes I have my
granddaughter and now so I'm I'm
I'm feeling like you're giving
me permission to have her her
her little voice in there
whether I want it or not so we
will go to more to retest
Ariano.
Hi good evening members of the
committee and madam chair my
name's moderate the study on on
what the ACLU of New Mexico we
respectfully oppose this piece
of legislation because they sell
you strongly stands against
creation of new crime and for
all other reasons mentioned on
that this does not make our
communities safer.
Safer thank you.
Thank you now we will go to
people in support if you want to
speak please raise your hand.
Okay we will go to Derrick
Scott.
I'm guess I'm the only one my
name's there Scott yes I do
support this I want to also say
that
I'm finding a very interesting
thing here that the people
opposing to the people for seems
I don't know it just seems very
odd that this would actually
align us with more states and I
want to comment also I.
Messed up on the other one where
I raise my hand sorry about that
madam chair there's no way to
say that I there's no way to say
that I propose and support
because like the last bill I
have I oppose just a little
issue but the amended it so just
want to comment that I lights
what do amended on the last bill
but eight eighty one again I
think this supports issues that
are in New Mexico there are
being resolved for law
enforcement in general that we
aren't finding being done and
I'm glad to see that the the
William is getting it done here
and I appreciate him sticking
his neck out for us in that
results so thank you very much
thank you for letting me Madam
thank you madam chair.
Okay thank you and that's it for
public comment so I will go to
the committee for any questions
let me switch over
Representative Lord.
Representative lord you are
muted.
I just talk about how late it is
yes we're all getting a little
out.
I don't think
thank you very brief thank you
madam chair my question is I I
wanted to get understanding
because people were saying well
this is already on the books on
the books I talked to law
enforcement and they and they
really do love this bill they're
very excited about this bill
this will help them can you
maybe explain a little bit to me
into those are listed about how
this will be helpful to law
enforcement and how it maybe
there's some misunderstanding
about how maybe this particular
thing your dress is not on the
books thank you.
Matt and Representative implored
this is not currently on the
books and we find a lot of drug
traffickers arm themselves with
firearms
we look at just when we had that
discussion a minute ago about
bulletproof fast how many of
them were armed and had bullet
proof vests let's look at
officer jerit.
What was the offender doing drug
trafficking and then he goes
ahead and kills an officer in a
in the commission of it.
We're offended by the mules
bringing the legals into the
country and they're living under
the fear is are brought in those
individuals are armed and
threatening notes those
individuals this is directly to
address it I want miss leaves to
go ahead and talk about some of
the crime as well.
This is madam chair and
representative on this crime
does not exist on the books I'm
there is a difference between
the language and specifically in
this bill for carrying a firearm
verses what is now brandishing a
firearm on that is an
enhancement trafficking right
now all of drugs or I will and I
believe there's legislation that
the term generals hearing this
year are to raise trafficking of
people human trafficking to a
higher level
felony on so this bill addresses
both on and in its caring are
are they all have to have it out
winning and someone are they
don't have to shoot it is curing
it having another person are
either there or trafficking
drugs over there trafficking
people
and it's what the representative
what kinds are in that if you're
that was put there and be if
someone is does not have a
felony conviction and you're
charged with trafficking and now
they have the farm whether it's
drugs or humans this is the New
Mexico they can be added on
so I understand that that
changing the law last year our
for use of a farm to brandishing
I just simply caring it doesn't
fall into that that would not be
an enhancement and so they can
have a farm on them the
trafficking drugs in humans and
billing for that so that's why
this legislation is so important
because we do know that drug
traffickers and human
traffickers usually do have fun
I hope I answered your question.
Yes thank you.
Madam chair representative and I
do have another question based
on that if you could please
explain to me so if I understand
correctly right now as a law it
stands so somebody could have.
A car full of drugs there's a
gun in the back but they don't
take the gun out and touch it so
is is that's why I'm trying to
send is that.
So with this bill would be to
have the gun in the car and so
this is the part that would
address that nothing using it or
touching about it being in the
car being part of the
trafficking process as one
exemplar that thank you.
Madam chair and Representative
board.
That's a little more complicated
so let's let's deal with the
first half about brandishing so
clearly they haven't shown the
guns so the brandishing laws out
it doesn't apply to now having a
gun in a vehicle and having
drugs in the vehicle you don't
automatically say that that
persons in possession of that
gun or those drugs you have to
show that they knew that was
there and they had it they
possessed.
So which was routed to the front
seat if we will and put it on
him now it's clear that he had a
gun and the drugs are right
there it is hand and he's using
it in the commission of the
crime of trafficking and I'd see
if agency will use as anything
else that.
Madam chair representative
that's what this one which is
very specific that it has
unlawful carrying on it did not
of the the sponsor did not to
point use the word possession.
I'm House possession can be a
father interpretation under
current New Mexico law I into
this is very specific in caring
I and so I that is important and
I hope that your question.
I was just talking on on mute
sorry thank you for answering
the questions it is way late I
appreciate that hopefully it
answered questions for other
people as well and that's all I
have thank you.
Representative group.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative for bringing this
important legislation I I
appreciate the substitute and
I appreciate your continued
effort to.
Ensure that.
The people that should not be on
the streets are off the streets
and so I just want to thank you
very much for your continued
effort and support.
Representative Pettigrew.
Yes madam chair I think you okay
okay I'm so being no other hands
right I I will be open for I
have a motion on this Amanda
Amanda HB.
One madam chair just as a point
of order is this it get to me go
on this one today or we also
getting sent out this when we
had the amendment
In plenty of time actually so
that I know it's it's kind of.
It's hard to keep keep track of
but this one is it we we got
everything and times that we are
in the twenty four hour period
so I am open to eight April
motion thank you madam chair
well I appreciate the intent I
do and many green and with much
of the opposition I would like
to move to table madam chair.
Okay all right so we have a
motion to table and H. B. eighty
one as amended and Alison what
you call the roll please.
Representative Barreras.
Yes to table.
Representative Lord.
Representative.
Noted table an explanation
please.
Questioner Mero.
Yes to table.
Madam chair Tom yes.
Okay on a three to two vote H.
B. eighty one has been tabled
and we will go back to
Representative at a group.
Thank you madam chair and and
Representative Dale for bringing
this bill in the current
environment so we have.
In the legislature and and
leadership
All I can say is I'm I hope you
keep bringing these back thank
you.
Okay thank you thank you
Representative Rehm for for
hanging in there thank you to
the audience for hanging in
there although and you all
should get a gold star because
that it's down by about seventy
five percent so those of you who
hung on thank you for being
involved in your government and
with that we will go in recess
and just a reminder we will not
be meeting on Thursday because
we are doing a full day for
session we will be back on
Saturday the expected time is
one thirty it may be I know that
at least three of us have health
and Human Services at ten thirty
so if by some chance.
Like we're ever on time that we
are running late we will send
eight eighty
attacks to folks and let you
know that that three of the
committee members may be tied up
but we will get started as close
to one thirty as we possibly can
on Saturday and thank you all
for your hard work and now go go
feature time you spend take care
whatever other staff you got to
do go read the bills for
tomorrow good night all thank
you madam chair can and
everybody in that.
