On here.
Sir we do not have a quorum.
For members present.
Thank you for starters
Committee.
And we will start with the house
bill nineteen now Representative
Serrato.
Share our.
Representative Serrato are set
up there with.
I think so the window was for
sure.
We go back and forth.
And I go from job to local and
is.
Well from what I'm gonna do I'll
go and get a lot of these.
Mr Chairman can I have my by
witnesses come in now or when
would that work for you yes and
then raise your hand.
And they should have
Fred Nathan and Christina
Fisher.
You know the K..
I have read and you said
Christina with the K..
To raise your hand.
Representative Todd Stephens
years.
Thank you Mr chairman I'm here
today to present each me
nineteen which we'll update our
tax structure to offer relief
for seniors well offering a
revenue positive solution with a
one time tax on the highest rate
highest priced real estate in
New Mexico so H. B. nineteen
increases the tax exemption on
social security income to
include middle income seniors
who make up to seventy two
thousand dollars individually or
hundred twenty thousand dollars
jointly this includes three
quarters of New Mexicans years
currently paying the so security
tax and it pays for this with a
one time transfer fee on the
transfer of real estate in that
more valued at more than five
hundred thousand dollars at five
hundred thousand seven hundred
forty nine thousand eight zero
point seven five percent and and
seven hundred fifty thousand
about it's one point two five
percent we do maintain the
exemptions on Camilla Carroll
cruel wealth or on her property
and government transfers for
economic development and I do an
amendment the kind of goes into
that last point a little bit
more on that I want to kind of
legal and first I know you've
heard other so security
exemption bills before so I make
a very brief but today there are
fifty five thousand seniors who
are primary care takers New
Mexico's youth and you know even
beyond them in this current
climate you know just countless
more are day cares after school
care or just really a
stabilizing force off for our
our use and so on but social
security is really a burden on
middle class and low income New
Mexicans nineteen eighty seven
more than thirty years ago was
the last time we raise
exemptions or security to twenty
four thousand and since then the
world is very different and that
that values change significantly
the average senior will pay
annually around seven hundred
dollars a year on their so
security income on and that
amounts to about fourteen
thousand of the course their
lifetime and because we're one
of thirteen states you know
taxes security the second
highest it does amount to a
significant amount on it doesn't
serve our families because our
seniors supporting our seniors
as part of support.
Our families now I want to say
this bill is different than most
transfer taxes that are talked
about and most of security tax
exemptions and talk about I'll
start with the transfer tax
element thirty seven other
states have transfer taxes but
none that start above the median
cost of homes like this one does
on you know the the even
Colorado there's a transfer tax
and it still remains at a higher
percentage of that women with
this would be and that hasn't
slowed down the market ours is
different we designed this act
more like a luxury tax and
really focus on those who can
afford it only two counties in
out of New Mexicos thirty three
have a median property value
over four hundred thousand Santa
Fe Los Alamos and that's and
that's it we try to be
reasonable with this tax rate
we're trying to work with folks
on it you know I mentioned
earlier that seniors over the
course of their lifetime will
pay fourteen thousand dollars a
second time around on on taxed
social security income but this
tax proposal we have forward you
would be less than how much I'm
sorry a million dollar home with
that transfer taxes to be less
than that fourteen thousand
dollars our seniors are
currently paying on a million
dollar hole and these are these
are hardly new on in two
thousand three The New Mexicans
Blue Ribbon taxi recommended for
a property transfer tax and it's
one of a handful of
recommendations it has not been
implemented and even as recently
as December the revenue
stabilization and tax policy
committee commissioned a study
by PFM consulting that re
recommended it so this is also
different that in as a school
security tax exemption bill
because it does not and the
entire revenue source I know FIR
of diabetic are has stated that
in well I just like the so
security that tax on principle
that but it is a consistent
stable revenue source of the
state regardless the national
outlook but this bill would
preserve that taxes are included
thirty income at the highest
levels present preserving forty
percent of it well were it
replaces the rest with something
that has a fairly high growth
rate residential housing has
more than doubled in value since
two thousand including the
crashing.
Two thousand eight commercial
state has grown by more than
sixty percent even with you know
efforts set to work from home
piece like that we've seen a
consistent growth like other
school security tax exemptions
it will inject money into the
communities across New Mexico
because each dollar so security
generates a dollar seventy one
economic activity so this is
really hitting every corner of
the state on and I I see this as
as benefitting truly the middle
class seniors as attacks and
Revenue Department analysis
pointed out quote since
inception in section I of this
bill can only be claimed by a
relatively lower income
individuals the benefits of the
exemption will mostly be enjoyed
by those on fixed retirement
income and I want to just give a
quick little anecdote you know I
I hate watching you see the much
higher transfer taxed I know
someone who recently bought a
home there for his family and I
asked because it wasn't easy is
very small the replacing of
Maryland on the to the north in
Virginia of the south and a lot
of times our tax rates are
significantly lower and I said
you know how how did you do you
calculate that and how did that
work when you're paying you know
wasn't a consideration did that
was that you know concern
because it was it would be
higher than what what we have
proposed here and he literally
started I have no idea I didn't
even think about it and so a lot
of these properties were looking
at it is the significantly
higher ones that aren't
impacting most of our districts
most places in the state I will
not you will likely affect my
district more but many seniors
in my state my mic my district
and looking very closely and and
wanting to change this so with
me today I have on my two
witnesses I think for the
there's gonna say something very
brief but I also have an
amendment so Mister chairman how
you want to proceed all I'll
refer to you.
Sir you are muted.
Thank you
you will hear from your expert
witnesses and then we'll go to
your amendment.
Thank you Serrano Representative
Serrato for bringing this bill
on friend Nate then I'm
executive director think to
Mexico with which is a
bipartisan think tank and can
everybody hear me.
Sums up okay so thank you Mexico
spent two thousand nineteen
studying the issue of retirement
security in New Mexico and
producing this report which you
might remember which we sent to
you last October called solving
the hidden Crisis achieving
retirement security for all New
Mexicans the report was prompted
by one key statistic and that is
nearly two thirds of adults in
New Mexico have nothing saved
for their retirement and eighty
percent have less than ten
thousand dollars save for their
retirement these folks are going
to try to make it on their
social security income alone in
their retirement even though
social security was designed
not as the sole source of one's
income but simply as a
supplement so to address the
looming crisis we had three
proposals and one of those was
advocating for the repeal of the
tax and social security it makes
no sense to tax social security
income with nearly two thirds of
New Mexico New Mexican adults
depend on social security as
their sole sort sole source of
support in retirement now some
background.
New Mexico's taxed social
security began in nineteen
ninety it was actually passed at
the very end of that session on
page twenty nine of the thirty
page a very complicated tax bill
and it was passed without any
public scrutiny or media
attention it was designed to
close a thirteen million dollar
deficit fast forward to two
thousand twenty one and New
Mexico is one of only thirteen
states that tax social security
income of those thirteen states
New Mexico's tax treatment of
social security is the second
harshest.
and now I'd like to point out
that social security is taxed
more harshly than other public
benefits or retirement savings
no other public benefits like
Medicare Medicaid ten F. food
stamps are subject to tax
similarly the four oh one K.
plans individual retirement
accounts individuals are taxed
only once either when you put
the money in or when you take
the money out here you're taxed
when you put the money and and
when you take the money out so
let's talk about who's really
harmed by this tax and who would
benefit the most if it was
repealed the tax and social
security income is particularly
burdensome as Representative
Serrato pointed out to fifty
five thousand New Mexicans who
are the primary guardians for
their grandchildren and also
struggling to pay for retirement
these people could use this
relief on their house bill
nineteen more than three out of
four seniors currently paying
tax on their social security
benefits would be exempt from
this double tax that's seventy
five is it excuse me seventy
eight percent of married couples
eighty five percent of
individuals according to the tax
revenue department analysis and
is Representative Serrato noted
the benefits of the exemption
will mostly be enjoyed by those
that are on a fixed retirement
income according to TRD since
this is the labor committee let
me close by talking about the
economics of repealing this tax
for low and middle income
seniors.
And I think you understand that
if it's repealed that money that
saved will be spent almost
immediately by seniors many of
whom are living social security
paycheck to social security
paycheck
And my final point.
Is that there's really no
question that the group that has
been harmed the most by this
pandemic is our seniors and I
can't think of anything else you
could do is legislators this
session that would be more
beneficial or more impactful to
our seniors then to repeal this
punitive tax which never should
have been enacted in the first
place it's urgent to be done
this session and we urge the
committee to pass house bill
nineteen thank you very much.
Who do you have one I think
that's all the the comments very
I know I have that it was
Christina Fisher just for
technical information in case
that does come up.
At this time of the you have and
that you have and then magician
injection you having forward yes
thank you Mr chairman so it's
We have a motion on the
amendment for discussion
purposes.
I have second.
I have a second on the.
Thank you.
Representative of you will go
ahead and.
Thank you Mr chairman so this
this ammendment came out of
conversations with folks as
we've been working on the still
there really just technical
amendments on and then the first
section of it is just to make
the in the title clear that this
is impacting the transfer
property sold at least five
hundred thousand dollars or more
to make that very clear for
folks and then two three four
five two three four and six on a
change it so that it will say a
county treasurer collects the
tax can be triggered a little
rather than the county clerk we
just had a clarification from
the association of county and
then finally in point I this is
this is sensually changes in the
Billings will that not explain
it the original intent of the
original language was to allow
for economic development by the
state on the industrial revenue
bonds IRB's are generally
recognized as an important tool
development the states are you
know renewable energy economy
and so this really just
clarifies that that for
transfers that Iraqis go through
a landowners developer of the
county to they can occur without
is to being subjected to and
then position of the tax and
really that transfer over and
over again be impactful so we
talk to them to make sure that
we do this correctly and by this
language will and ensure that on
the political subdivisions are
you the counties can change that
land over for economic
development and it doesn't
increases tax.
Mr chair I'm so sorry to
interrupt I
because I didn't get on them and
I don't have that amendment from
you Sir and I was just trying
to.
Understand the chairman and
she's on section one.
Done let's let her finish
explaining the amendment and
then if you have questions you
can ask questions if you're
go to your share file the
amendment is in there.
Look for Sir I'm sorry.
Thank you all.
Thank you Mr thank you SO so
this this number I really
address the language and found
in the exemptions page on page
four initially have it would be
I transfer real property to the
state or any of its
instrumentality and we change it
to be a transfer an interest in
real property to or by the state
or two or by any political
subdivision or instrumentality
of the state and that clarify
that language on in and enjoy
the infants have.
Okay now do I have questions on
the amendment.
Thank you have a question on the
amendment.
Yes Sir Mr
Representative there is one
issue on your proposed
amendments number for.
On page three line three
straight clerk in insert in lieu
thereof Trevor so by doing that
you can change it to read the
county treasurer shall not
record the transfer until the
tax has been Hey the county
treasurer does not record that
would be the county clerk thank
you that's a good that's a good
oversight thank you
Representative black I'm sorry
thank you Mr chairman and
Representative black for that
oversight.
Yeah that that definitely needs
to be cleared up because it's
muddying the waters thank you
okay.
Thank you Mr chairman was all I
had on the amendment.
J..
Sure.
Okay anybody else on the
amendment.
Do I have a motion to accept the
amendment raise my hand Mr
Chairman I just now side okay go
ahead Sir are you Sir and and
and I apologize for interrupting
I just she said it really quick
and I and.
I would I'm having trouble with
my other computer connecting so
Mr chair representative.
On the amendment it says real
estate transfer instead of sale.
This.
Because you said something about
sale it catch it and I was
trying and I just don't have it
as my computer's give me trouble
I got this one and if if I do
too much on is going to crash
and then I miss more than that
so.
Representative so if you go to
page for online fourteen and
fifteen hundred ex it currently
reads a transfer real property
to state or any of its
instrumentality and we expend
the expand that to include
counties and other subdivisions
and what that language become is
Transurban interest in real
property to or by the state or
two or by any political
subdivision or instrumentality
of the state.
And so there was no amendment on
the actual language of transfer
to sail.
Where I am and.
Looking at the beginning of Mr
chairman of Representative the
first page this is section one
through three of this act may be
cited as real estate transfer
tax act if we if that is a
language can be changed to real
estate sales tax act thank you
Mr chairman and representative
on no so in that in the envelope
on page one line twelve so
essentially that and the title
section we just amended so it
says that imposes a tax on the
transfer of property sold at a
price at least five hundred
thousand dollars to clarify the
intent of the bill.
I'm.
Can we debate on on this at this
point
Mr chair representative.
Questions that I guess my
question really on that is
When it doesn't say sale.
That that could mean that if I
don't know I have a piece of
property and I want to put an
LLC or they'll see any sort of
change or I want to give it a it
is six one of the family maybe
go to my spouse or my parents or
so forth by transferring it that
means anytime you change the
name of that
that deed it's going to get
taxed even without commencing
the sale that's that's that's a
big question that that that I
have
Are you willing to change that
language to sail.
Mr chair and.
Mr Chairman representative on
page.
Three sorry.
On page three we list out in
section II all the way through
to page four we list out
exemptions on to this to the
transfer tax and really so that
we capture all of those
suggestions on if really status
transferred because of an
inheritance not even just of
letting her it's been
inheritance in general if on it
is transferred because of an
agreement in a divorce if it's
if it's in a will you know if we
have one through we have an
sorry we have.
A through J. are exceptions
options and those those
exemptions are really created Mr
Chairman representative to
address that concern that you
have on because I I I understand
you know I'm I represent Santa
Fe there's so many families up
here whose properties have just
skyrocketed in value and the
intent of this bill is not to
affect their their you know
their pocketbooks on to be quite
Frank it's it's that's not
impact so we really do try to
cover all of those examples that
you played for Mr chairman and
representative Mr chairman my.
Representative
I think I just talked on turning
about it because I was concerned
about the language and he said
that it definitely even though
it's spelled out here I think it
would be a lot more
understandable and easier to
understand where they can't be
questioned that nothing falls
through the cracks that is says
sale on would you be willing to
see that as a friendly amendment
used for just the words remove
transfer and changes to sail.
Mr chairman and and
Representative I'd be open to
having that conversation in the
long in the longer term because
I'd like to talk with our folks
on it helped us develop this
language to see how that would
affect the the overall estimates
and and and the unintended
consequences that may occur
But Mr chairman and
representative for my
conversations LCS and item taxed
read that having come up as as
an additional concern but I
appreciate and I I'd be able to
have that conversation yes that
and and and and thank you Mr
Chairman representative I think
that's an important part of this
you know I'm I'm going to say
that everything passes that it
is it is we want to clean up
some of language in some of the
issues I think that that would
just show that the comments as a
sale rather than just summon
turnaround saying Hey you know
what even those spells it out if
you inadvertently missed
anything it's going to get taxed
and
and and they could easily argue
that it was transferred even if
you have some exemptions here.
I really appreciate the
conversation we would like and
that's all I have Mister
chairman representative on this
amendment.
Thank you anybody else on the
amendment.
Yeah I have a motion to move the
document.
I'll second that so I have in
any opposition to that motion.
I want to raise your hand.
Representative Dan lasses okay
Pamela and secretary called the
roll that in that case on the
amendment
Jody of house of.
Raul
Sir Representative bash yes.
Representative black.
Yes.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Hernandez yes.
Representative Rubio.
Yes Representative Stapleton is
excuse Representative Terrazas.
One when we cast a vote yes and
just one my my vote.
Madam vice chair Roybal
Caballero.
I had to step away
can you just repeat to me what
we're voting on the amendments
yes ma'am to adopt the
amendments that Representative
us about the presented yes ma'am
okay so I will yes I was paying
attention to have one here in
the thank you.
Mr chairman Alcon.
Yes.
So you have about two seconds to
explain your vote this role just
keep that was just my concern
over this the the that is one
language but I've obviously I've
voted yes because some of the
other language does help a lot
thank you.
Thank thank you all and to stay
in the.
You're a euro your ledger
amendment and you're done with
your a thanks for testimony and
now we can go to the audience a
yes or to the intent of the
state that we column in today's
world and.
I know you're new on time or
okay I don't have a timer I use
you know they need one.
But I'm going to ask and I'm not
going to ask because they were
supposed those of you who have
your hand raised you because in
order for the new year pro or
con you're gonna allowed one
minute let me tell you that the.
If you don't stop all finally
stop you okay so with that and
we'll start the day and
mackenzie.
Against this because I believe
that it the real estate tax is
already they pay enough taxes on
things I think that transfer
taxes is unfair additional tax I
believe that the closing costs
of transferred on properties
likely to reduce the ability of
loan current homeowners to buy
and purchase a home I also think
that
the limiting the tax on social
security for retirees is great
but then to pay a transfer tax
defeats the purpose of having
retirees in Santa Fe New Mexico
so I'm very much against it and
I'm a realtor.
Thank you we will go to our
medical this so yes Sir thank
you Mr chairman and members of
the committee Markle Gonzales
and I Representative up pattern
energy which is a renewable
energy developer in New Mexico
we're doing about four thousand
megawatts of power which is
about a seven billion dollar
investment in the state in I am
not here to speak in favor of
the bill but to the amendment
and I just wanted to say thank
you to the sponsor for she
correctly and I couldn't explain
it any better in subsection five
of the amendment address the
issue on I. R. B. transactions
by including the words political
subdivisions which town covers
counties basically polities
we're involved in these
transactions with all different
kinds of companies and so for us
this really make sure that to we
are not included and it's very
helpful to the renewable
industry in in that regard so I
appreciate the Sanchez
willingness to work with us and
I think the committee this
afternoon for the time thank you
Mr chairman and members the
committee.
Thank you Sir
Mr Carson Roger cars.
Yes my name's Roger Carson I
live in Santa Fe New Mexico the
current president Santa Fe
association of realtors
you know although I believe the
on the goals of the bill are
honorable I really do believe
it's an unfair method of
attaining them no I have eight
five strong reasons why this
bill she voted down but I'm only
going to speak to one of those
not affordability right now the
entire nation's stock in the
portability Crisis in the coming
harder and harder to buy a home
this is a problem because
homeownership is the primary
vehicle that the average citizen
can build wealth and provide for
themselves will become seniors
so increasing property taxes
decreases affordability and in
New Mexico we already pay above
average national taxes and I do
believe that this affects the
entire real estate market as a
practitioner I know that if the
five hundred thousand dollar
home appreciate five hundred
twenty thousand dollars well
that four hundred eighty
thousand dollar home appreciates
the five hundred thousand dollar
home so I think this is just of
a bad way to achieve the goal
and I oppose it thank you very
much.
Thank you.
All right.
Mr chairman members of the
committee representatives I'm
Laura Riley today on behalf of
myself my family and as a
registered lobbyist for gavel
and solutions his clients
include natural resource
extractive businesses in
agriculture introduce I'm also a
licensed real estate broker to
preacher in New Mexico.
My family's own landed property
in New Mexico for over a hundred
years this bill I'm fairly and
disproportionately places that
tax burden on a small segment of
society and people of New Mexico
in ranching family business
announcements are largely
composed of real property well
some of the current the state
planning practices are exempted
many others that are utilized to
maintain generational properties
are not this further increase
costs for the next generation of
farmers and ranchers in
maintaining and establishing
agriculture production in New
Mexico.
In addition this legislation
will increase the overall cost
of property ownership in New
Mexico this incentivizing
relocation and growth of other
sectors of the economy.
I thank the sponsors for the
intent of bringing forth this
bill however we think they're
significant problems that cannot
support it for these reasons and
many others we hear today I
respectfully urge you and others
to oppose passage of this
legislation thank you.
Mr kids.
Hello there we go thank you Mr
chair J. it keeps muting.
My name is Kent Simpson I am a
farm owner and a real estate
broker in Los crucis New Mexico
I also hold an active real
estate license and Arizona.
And I support the idea of
eliminating a tax on social
security income.
I do not agree with utilizing a
transfer tax as a method for
funding.
At.
It's a slippery slope once you
open up a transfer tax no matter
what price point you said it act
it opens it up to further.
Going down further into the
lower income ranges and I have
seen personally in my practice
in Tucson one at
transportation split on the
condos because the I. it all was
calm.
Engine.
Thank you we will go to Mr John
Garcia.
Mr Chairman thank you for the
opportunity to speak my name is
John Garcia executive vice
president on builders
association of central Mexico
and I'm a former secretary of
economic development for the
state of New Mexico as stated
before the tax really started
nineteen ninety when the
legislature passed that you gain
a balanced budget.
with consideration of this
transportation on transactions
about five hundred thousand the
only active another deterrent in
attracting senior demographics
to New Mexico because we don't
allow for dynamic scoring we
will never know the economic
benefit of trying to attract
active seniors to New Mexico and
the benefit of the discretionary
spending this goes contrary to
attracting adults active adults
to New Mexico the FIR cautions
that the increase in transaction
costs will slow down the pace of
sales negatively impacting
businesses including and
specifically farms and ranches
in New Mexico.
The increase in revenues may
result in lower taxes in other
areas causing an increased
capacity for government services
this is all in the FIR.
we are in an economic downturn
this will only make things works
the FIR suggests this will not
help earners.
Thank you.
We ask that you don't support
the.
Sorry.
So.
Actually that's me
Representative d'onta Valencia.
I'm speaking on behalf of eight
European New Mexico
and I wanted to thank you for
the opportunity to testify today
on behalf of air peace over two
hundred forty eight thousand
members we continuously hear
from our members and your
constituents that aside from
being grossly unfair taxes on
their social security benefits
could go to several other
essential uses like paying for
the ever growing cost of
prescription medications as well
as food and utility bills many
retirees are telling us that
they're using your social
security benefits to help care
for their spouses their own
parents and more and more often
they're taking on the financial
challenge of raising or helping
to raise their grandchildren
they also feel that they have
limited options for rejoining
the workforce in virtually no
time on the horizon to increase
their savings.
Within our state New Mexicans
age fifty and older create
economic impact much greater
than their portion of the
population as a percentage of
state residents over fifty
continues to grow so whether
contributions to our economy.
Ready to our air P. longevity
longevity economy report New
Mexicans fifty and older
generated thirty nine percent of
the state's gross domestic
product totaling over forty five
billion dollars a year he looks
forward to working with all of
you and urge you to support this
bill thank you.
Bill Jordan.
Thank you Mr chair of Bill
Jordan with New Mexico voices
for children I really want to
thank Representative Serrato for
taking on two really tough
issues and putting them into one
bill we stress stand strongly in
support of the real estate
transfer tax New Mexico doesn't
have any kind of wealth tax and
it hasn't since the federal
government essentially abolished
our state tax with rampant
inequality devastating racial
inequities this tax can be an
important tool for addressing
wealth inequality especially at
a time when the luxury home
market has sky rocketed and so
many are struggling to afford
rent I hear the realtors oppose
this but seriously if someone is
pan a half a million dollars for
a home they can surely afford a
few thousand dollars the
realtors themselves add six
percent to the cost of the home
and yet they balk at one percent
more or less I do want to add
that well we like the real
estate transfer tax we do
believe the social security part
of the bill could be better
targeted at those who really
need help New Mexico doesn't tax
the first twenty four thousand
in income so low income seniors
are going to get no help we
appreciate our.
Thank you very much.
Mr.
Right.
Mr chairman members committee
thank you so much for letting me
speak in thank you for the the
work you're doing under really
different conditions these days
I'm of the executive director or
CEO at the greater Albuquerque
association of realtors we stand
against this legislation for for
many reasons but you know one of
which I I didn't hear your
presenter talk any thing about
the the impact of a real estate
transaction on the economy on
the average of the sale of a
home which is around two hundred
fifty thousand dollars roughly
seventy two thousand dollars
goes right back into the economy
racing through to find jobs and
other benefits for the economy.
So for that reason for that
reason and many more that you've
already heard we will we will be
opposing this legislation Mr
chairman thank you.
Thank you.
K. Fajardo.
Hello.
You are Representative nobody
coalition a group of in New
Jersey manage land water in New
Mexico told proximity point
eight million acre feet and land
in a stand in opposition to
eighteen nineteen majority of
members rationing arms in ranges
that would be greatly impacted
by the all this bill limits the
ability of Family continued
generational.
By Chris exes on real
transparency rental sales do not
occur in the current political
and economic climate farms and
ranches are under attack in
failing to Kenya the biggest
seeds to overreach regulations
and burdensome just statute.
Thank bill state transects are
discriminatory Harris against
one type of asked.
To think that such stocks and
bought this disproportion.
Families this majority of Family
and children really are members
already pay property taxes
transects isn't unfair and on
and burdens that.
Mexico's route.
Thank you Mr.
done.
Mr done you're still.
Can you hear me now you can hear
you all right.
I'm Bob done from Santa Fe.
And I'm a real estate broker
past present Santa Fe
association as well as the
realtors association Mexico just
out called Mexico association of
realtors.
And I've been in the business
for forty years.
And I just don't see this as a
way of accomplishing what you
want I'm in favor of tractor
more seniors here so they can.
And and lower in the social the
tax so security is certainly a a
good goal but I don't think a
transfer tax and I think it was
Mr Simpson pointed out and I
will again that is it's a you're
just open up a can of worms
because who's to say next
session or couple sessions now
you would lower to two hundred
fifty thousand dollars and then
also what about stocks and bonds
and other things that the people
who may not own real state that
are contributed all some people
really do they they move here
there wealthy people it's a
second home and they just they
really don't care or they don't
invite health so I'm I'm very
much against it for a lot of
different reasons also because
think they would be if.
The.
Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you so much
quarter Bundy with us so if this
were a ban on the sale or
purchase of homes over five
hundred thousand dollars I would
agree with local people said
that would be terrible the
reality is on a seven hundred
thousand dollar home which is
well out of the reach of most
New Mexicans this would amount
to about twenty five hundred
dollars each for the buyer and
seller to say the twenty five
hundred dollars each on a seven
hundred thousand dollar home is
some help or do some or one St
generation tax of twenty five
hundred dollars each year as
burdensome for people whose
assets have grown
astronomically frankly doesn't
pass the smell test we think
that putting money in the
pockets of our retired matches
are retirees but all retirees
below the levels that are
secretary makes lot of sense it
helps economy and this is a good
trade off to make that happen
thank you Sir.
Thank you.
Mr.
Yep sorry I was muted.
Thank you Mr chairman speaking
on my own behalf as a real
estate broker and real estate
investor in New Mexico.
Does the bill strongly I think
you will have an effect on
investors that want to invest in
real estate New Mexico has a
somewhat of an effect on
residential real estate the ones
that get over that threshold of
five hundred thousand but I have
a very big impact on commercial
real estate many of those
properties but Jordi large
majority those properties are
over five hundred thousand
that's a large and so I strongly
oppose it.
Thank.
Josh well paying.
Yes thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee Josh
pane president San Juan title
company in Farmington I wanted
to echo Representative tries
concerns about the language
regarding sale I think that is
important to look into also I
didn't notice any difference
differentiation there's a lot of
talk about home median prices
but there's no differentiation
between commercial and
residential transactions of the
bill but more importantly up
from a title standpoint looking
at this logistically we have to
I would invite the sponsor the
author to reach out to talk
about the logistics of actually
pass a title company to pre fund
a portion of the disbursement in
order to gain a signature from
the treasure to walk the title
over to to the courts to be
recorded which is in violation
of our responsibilities to the
lender who actually need
recording information before
they'll give us any funding and
disbursement approval I think we
can work through it I think the
intentions overall of the tax
are admirable but there's a lot
of logistics that are left out
of the bill that need to be
discussed at but it as it's
written I oppose it.
Thank you.
W. real.
Mr chairman and committee
members thank you for the
opportunity to comment this
afternoon tip near a very
registered lobbyists for New
Mexico farm and livestock bureau
we stand in a respectful
opposition to house bill
nineteen in the establishment of
the new excise tax for property
transfers further we propose a
lack of opportunity for the
public to vote on the new access
tax which will directly affect
them this legislation will
negatively impact our state's
agriculture producers as many
producers transfer property
within the family unit so that
the next generation can carry on
the business.
This bill also deterring
divisional from entering the
agriculture industry as they'll
face an additional financial
burden did this excise tax one
of wiring new property for their
operations this is one of the
major up.
Financial burdens that doesn't
allow new individuals to enter
the industry and New Mexico must
provide a friendly business
environment for agriculture
producers as well as for the
next generation thank you for
the opportunity to comment this
afternoon.
Thank you
is Cathy Kahle.
Sir we have Michelle crossed.
L. frost in our.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Michelle
frost speaking on behalf of New
Mexico cattle growers in New
Mexico will growers we stand
opposed today to house bill
nineteen also my team would be
devastating to ranchers and
their families as it would leave
them in a position to having to
put their family businesses into
a trust or to make it a
corporation if there is a
transfer from an individual to
an LLC there still will be an
assessment the transfer tax on
the former right so will also
require disclosure sale prices
stated in the FIR house bill
nineteen creates a tax
expenditure with the cost that
is likely significant and the
LFC has serious concerns about
the significant risks to their
state revenues from tax
expenditures to the increase in
the revenue volatility
progression in the revenue tax
base for these reasons and many
reasons previously stated we
stand opposed to have some
nineteen thank you for your
consideration.
Thank you.
The call of.
Hello thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my
name's topical then on the
twenty year realtor here in
Albuquerque and I speak against
house bill nineteen while I
support the intent for seniors
the transportation going to have
some unintended consequences
that I don't know if they've
been properly thought out it's
going to overall increase the
cost of homeownership and it
trickles down even I know you've
started at five hundred thousand
but it will trickle down to
homes under the limit stated in
the bill.
We have a real property problem
right now with the portable
housing as it is this is going
to make things worse and
respectfully I feel this should
go to the voters so again I
speak against the motion and I
thank you for your time thank
you
Mr John Carroll a.
Mr Chairman Representative
Serrato I'm a I'm from Carlsbad
and I I haven't had but good
with the state double A. R. P.
I. echo what demands of the
Lancia said earlier.
We take the position that we
fully support the repeal or the
reduction which this bill does
and social security taxes.
So security taxes they stand in
New Mexico has a double tax tax
once when the individual learns
the income.
And again of when the individual
receives a social security
benefits so we stand in full
support of this bill of I'm a
retired lawyer and I've also
seen plenty of grandparents who
are retired raising their
children on fixed incomes
including social security and
the taxes that presently exist
can be devastating to local
seniors thank you.
Thank you.
Mr ending trainer.
Thanks committee members my name
is Randy trainer representing
the New Mexico home builders
association apart Association in
New Mexico in NAIOP commercial
real estate developers
association.
We oppose house bill ninety it
is counterproductive to economic
development.
He will widen the gap in housing
affordability and homelessness.
It does affect homes under five
hundred thousand dollars the FIR
for house bill ninety raises
serious questions we should be
resolved prior to any official
action we oppose house bill
ninety thank you.
Thank you Sir
was Diane McKenzie.
I've already spoken against the
bill I also think that it should
be separated out the eliminating
tax is already spoken with
somebody else have a chance.
Lies.
Your name.
My name is Lisa now I'm with
Keller Williams realty in Santa
Fe and I I totally agree that
the tax on social security
should be removed but I do
oppose the transfer tax this tax
discriminates against people
like many of my buyers who have
worked hard all their lives to
afford a house in Santa Fe.
The average price for a home in
Santa Fe right now is more than
five hundred thousand dollars
these people are trying to
remove here often seniors and
they don't have a lot of extra
money they put everything they
have into their homes in Santa
Fe yes the homes are expensive
but just because it think they
can afford a five hundred dollar
houses not being they they have
the excess money to put into a
transfer tax.
All right I I.
More and more taxes to people
who are already struggling under
way too much taxation I think
government should be run much
more efficient way so I ask you
not to support this bill thanks
so much thank you.
Listen.
Hi there thank you for hearing
me out today I'm my name's
Melissa Padilla I am a broker I
do brokerage in Bernalillo
Valencia County
I have heard the people speaking
I oppose this bill and I think
it needs to go to the voters I
do not think it is right in out
the way it needs to be right in
out there's a lot of things that
are left
and sad and there's a lot that
goes into real estate maybe
people need to investigate a
little bit more especially with
all the cultural land farmers
there's a lot of things going on
with the farmers right now all
with drought with different
beings these taxes are prima
huge burden on them it there's
other places that that it
doesn't have to just involve
real estate over five hundred
thousand
I agree with some of the other
comments that not everybody that
makes five hundred thousand or
as save their money to get these
things are are rich by any means
and can afford it yeah.
In NMAA our standard for.
Yes Mr chair this is my name is
Steven I out I'm the CEO of the
New Mexico association of
realtors and we stand in
opposition to house bill
nineteen are we're we're very
sympathetic to the problem posed
by the taxation of social
security income and and actually
have gone on record to support
various proposals to repeal the
tax however the proposed
approach to replacing the lost
revenue is the greatest policy
concern for realtors every
session realtor strongly oppose
transfer taxes transfer taxes
are bad policy because they
simply add to the cost of real
estate and the term real estate
sales we would ask that you
oppose the house bill nineteen
thank you.
Thank you Sir I have a car
awesome thank you.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and members of the committee on
Carlos contacted president of
the New Mexico business
coalition.
We are opposed to this bill.
I want to tell you that I
appreciate the Sanchez intent in
trying to help seniors and to
cover the cost that's important
to do but this is not the way to
do it we absolutely need to join
them Jordy of other states in
not taxing social security
income we are not doing well by
our seniors in that regard but
instituting a transfer tax.
Would be a horrible thing to do
to them when they're already on
fixed income as well as on all
of the other New Mexicans so for
those reasons and everything
else stated we oppose this bill
and hope you will as well thank
you for your time.
Thank you all.
Thank you.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee my name is Paige
knight and I am representing New
Mexico voices for children I
just wanted to expand on what my
colleague Bill Jordan spoke to
earlier we highly support the
real estate transfer tax as a
way to address growing wealth
inequality but we do believe
that there are better ways to
target economic relief for low
income seniors then that social
security income exemption
proposed so what we really
appreciate that this approach
does not go to higher income
retirees and that helps bring
the costs down substantially but
it still gives me folks a tax
break who really may not need it
especially when our schools need
funding we have higher rates of
uninsured and our roads are in
need of repair so we believe the
best approach to helping low
income seniors and although
income families is to increase
the low income comprehensive tax
rebate which already provides a
larger repeat for low income
seniors so any want to apply
prepped Representative Serrato
for her efforts with the staff
thank you.
Thank you.
And with that I think.
From that side.
To discuss
Representative go ahead.
Sir there's never mind.
Okay.
Thank.
Okay Representative general.
I stand for questions I'm ready
for that get rules committee is
Representative black.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative I'm.
This bill as you heard from all
the pros and cons so far
Representative I will have to
say that I support the idea of
the social security issue as far
as the transfer tax itself I'm I
can't support that can I ask you
Mr Chairman representative do
you know the logistics on how
properties actually transferred
in New Mexico at the local
county level.
Mr chairman and representative
of the the question you we base
this on this piece on other
transfers actually done in other
parts of country and I work very
closely with LCS to make sure
that we were it within the
bounds of their the to make sure
that it fit within the structure
of the New Mexico.
Okay thank you for that
Representative in Mr Chairman so
you don't know how property is
actually transferred at the
local level is that correct Mr
chairman
Representative currently we
don't have a transfer tax on.
Property and some and I guess
I'm confused by the question
okay so.
Mr Chairman representative when
I saw you a piece of property
how do you obtain title to that
so we go Mr Chairman
Representative we go through the
county on.
And what office would that be
Representative Mr chairman
Mr Chairman representative Lee
that would be to the transfer.
Okay Mr Chairman representative
let me in like new will have
works of the county level.
So if you sell a piece property.
Then the person that buys it the
buyer actually transaction use a
title company the Railers help
facilitate that so when those
documents are actually done
those are taken to the county
clerk's office for recording.
Then that information is
transferred ninety assessor who
updates the tax roll which that
information is then passed on to
the county treasurer and county
treasurer collects the property
tax okay once property taxes are
collected on the fifteenth of
every month the county treasurer
disperses those funds to the
entities entities that are
entitled to this one school
districts the state and so
forth.
So I'm Mr Chairman
representative we currently have
a law and I forgive me I don't
have the number right it at the
top of my finger tips it was
actually passed several years
ago and it had to do with if you
wore to split or combine your
property the law changed and it
and it became a it came into
effect that if you do that you
take a five acre piece of
property and you have it
surveyed out into two pieces
that two and a half acres each
then the property taxes have to
be paid in advance before that
can actually be transferred to
the two new owners is that makes
sense Representative Mr Chairman
representative deeming the
initial year property tax you
would so in New Mexico your
property taxes you you are
paying for the prior year.
So in November when you get your
tax bill you're being billed for
the whole prior year.
January through December okay so
in effect if you're going to do
the split you would have to pay
the state you get you're going
to split in February you would
have to pay that full year's
taxes that normally is not due
until November in February C.
paid in advance okay the reason
I bring that up Mr Chairman
representative is so when this
law went into effect it says you
have to pay the taxes you have
to get the tax release form
signed off from the county
assessor you take that to the
treasure they sign off on it
they collect the money that
information then goes to whoever
your local whether you're in a
city or county however your
zoning person as they sign off
on it and all the information is
taken to the clerk's office and
record okay so here's the issue.
If you do not have that piece of
paper when that information is
taken to the county clerk's
office the county clerk cannot
say you are missing this piece
of paper I cannot record that
the county clerk by law has to
record anything presented to
her.
So in this bill I I'm I'm seeing
that there's going to be some
issues that it's it's not going
to flow through as easily is as
written I'm so there's a there's
a couple of technical issues in
this I would suggest maybe you
get together with the the county
treasurer's billion account the
assessors affiliate and county
clerks ability.
We have three affiliates that
have thirty three county
treasurer's thirty three county
clerk's and assessor's and the
New Mexico counties so ciation
could probably help you.
If this is something you really
want to do but as far as this
bill as written right now there
are very very so many technical
issues at I don't see it as a
good built this point so I just
want to share that information
with you and if you want to
speak offline please let me
know.
Thank you Mr chairman and I
thank you Representative I'm
sorry that you're no thank you I
thank you one thing I do want to
mention that the that was not a
question thank you Sir.
Thank you all Representative
tell us us.
Trying to get a hold on this
trip.
News.
There you go sorry about that
thing they wanna on mute I'm
the ground but my
Headphones are Mr chair.
Representative so.
You know I I'm gonna say what
we're gonna start here is.
Going to say that I.
Was one of the guys that sat
here and I.
Vigorously for H. B. forty nine
two X. exempt so security.
To help lower income people and
I was up there and I and I are
you a bunch of these points of
why it's so important so I I
truly appreciate Mr chair
representative are your your
efforts in trying to to help
those that are I feel in need in
for Social Security as matter of
fact I I remember right I mean
the motion to pass that in our
committee and thank the lord and
pass but I would have loved to
have heard all those people who
are called in today.
I heard a quite a few people a
few people that were
in.
In favor of helping all those
that have social security
income.
So.
To to to relieve them from those
taxes the thing is.
There is concern again as I
brought up the sales of
the language that and other
people brought up some of the
other points today alone we I'm
not sure if you recognize this
Mr chair all
Representative another bill was
was proposed today two ninety
one which again is going to
increase taxes on real estate.
Now.
When I want to go back here
just in twenty nineteen this is
what what I'm a little confused
I did some homework in twenty
nineteen the tax rate was
increased.
Seventeen percent for income tax
to the higher bracket
are individuals in the state of
New Mexico that is going into
effect July first of this year.
were you aware that Mr chair
Representative.
Yes Mr chair and representative
I was.
Okay so it might May my question
to that Mr chair representative
is why did they feel that they
syncing range all those taxes
just pretty much just one
portion why did they feel that
they would.
Need to specifically target.
Real estate to pay for us all as
New Mexicans to relieve the
burden on those receiving social
security or are being burdened
with taxes on their social
security income.
Mr chair representative why why
do I believe that one time
transfer tax on to alleviate so
security is is what why did I
think that.
No of Mr chair representative I
guess my question is a little
let me clean it up a little bit.
Why is it that we felt that that
we felt that we had a target the
real estate or do it in this
matter I guess let it through
transfer rather than Saylor
through.
Why couldn't we was there what I
and I'm sure you try the order
so I'm not beating you up please
don't don't take that that way
Mr chair representative my
question is why did we end up
with this bill in this matter
rather than other avenues.
Thank you Mr chair
representative you know actually
that's a that's a great question
I appreciate you asking it and I
actually that was because of the
president and what I what I
really did we looked at a number
of different ways of doing this
and with the ultimate goal of
not farming middle to low income
New Mexicans that have been
struggling during the COVID
nineteen and what we and I
looked literally a number of sin
taxes are established in order
to decrease but that the the of
the of the impact of syntax that
over time the decreases on the
value over time that wasn't the
likely I looked at on the you
know like higher costs I
primarily did look at luxury
items up because when in
economics typically speaking
luxury actors Act items can
often times not always often
times act differently than than
moderate things were sometimes
with increases in cost it
increases in value and that
somehow is is is a budget it's a
debt which we're market and so
we did look at those things we
do this the unique thing about
this this transfer tax is that
oftentimes a transfer tax and
what we heard a lot of ready is
that they are a regressive tax
which means that it hits
everybody equally which means
our extra burden on loan E. and
and and and convoke this is a
progressive tax in which it
really high highlights about
four so you know that was really
the consideration that started
I've you know I've I have been
talk and conversations folks
commercial realtors and and as I
mentioned in conversation with
folks at the sensation counties
that you know we're working
together on these amendments and
making sure that these things in
the long run for articles of
economic development and and
ensuring that people can buy
homes which is why we look at
this tax and which is why we
developed the way we did.
Thank you Mr chair
representative I guess I guess
my point was we just being that
would just raise taxes into our
twenty nineteen they're going to
a quake two two hundred fifty
million dollars and it's and in
additional revenue for the state
that is a.
About to actually target those
people that you're actually
mentioning right now for by
raising their income taxes it's
already past is done we're going
to we're going to be receiving
seven well we those the people
at the in in the state of Mexico
I should say he could not
everybody but some of the people
that are making that top tax
brackets people you're targeting
are already going to be
Yet for an additional seventeen
percent raise on their taxes and
that's why I'm I'm concerned
like we're already getting this
revenue coming this new revenue
it's new revenue has and then it
has it's not older revenue this
is new revenue that's about to
come in why could we take a
piece of that new revenue and
use it to pay for this I'm a
hundred percent with you Mr
chair representative on on help
in schools those in Salisbury
income you hear a bunch of
different people say well
anybody under twenty four
thousand well that's if you're
married filing jointly and and
there's other things to that I
mean I talked about all that
when our school security bill
that that passed I wish you
would've maybe been on this
on and on that day and I'm sure
you're busy and other people
that are
supporters of saving of those
people from the burden of school
security income tax but it
didn't happen so again I wish I
I I would like to see why the
state didn't you it wasn't.
Why why would you take the the
the time to see Hey can we take
some of those new revenue we're
about to get.
Two hundred and fifty million
dollars and use it to pay for
this give it back to the people
that need it the most instead of
targeting.
Another a certain person or
industry which which is a real
estate or hold it basically it's
it's a real property so that's a
lot of different things it's it
it's a broad band of of of
people and it really hurts those
people who work with heritage
property again I I think I raise
my issue wasn't that I didn't
like your amendment Mr chair
representative it was that I I
thought the language needed to
be cleaned up when it came to to
it needs to specifically say
sale at least so that it just to
be transferred or you change it
or you put it in a in an LLC or
a subchapter S. review of give
it your son your daughter
whatever it doesn't get it
doesn't get automatically taxed
and I think that's really a big
issue.
My
So this bill that is the just
got introduced today are which
is another another whole
different thing seems like it's
just piling on certain and I
don't know why
they're targeting the the real
estate industry what might my
question is
Were you aware what are each B.
two ninety one I just kind of
just scan through it would due
to the real estate market in
addition to this.
Mr chair.
Representative that's I mean and
I don't think so I mean I I
don't know that Bill Evans so my
bill you know we introduce this
bill to address I mean because
if it's for serious about ending
social security tax then we have
to pay for it somehow and so
this was the one time fee as
opposed to raising property
taxes for everyone Mr Chairman
representative that was the
intention here I I can't speak
to any other bill that's been
introduced that it that then not
a sponsor that's fair Mister
chair representative that's very
fair what what what I'm gonna
say is I I'll get with before I
go on to do explaining that
would you be open to if there
was another Avenue to if there
was another pocket of money
another tax
created or somewhere we could
find another place in the state
would you be open to amending
that maybe targeting or sharing
it with another industry.
Representative and Mr chairman
you know I'm I've I've kept this
promise vote of of talking to
talk to you the books were
attendees as well and I've been
open to that the might my
primary focus here is that it is
dark progressive tax that hurts
low income New Mexicans or
middle income New Mexicans.
I'm sorry your your your primary
I I didn't catch that I'm sorry
I'm sorry secretary Mr Chairman
representative I would actually
be open to that conversation I
think there are a couple of
things that are that are high
bars to meet that this is a very
unique feat one that it's a one
time fee to that the the impact
again is only felt not my middle
and low incomes New Mexicans but
by those that can afford it on
those those are really aspects
that I was looking and looking.
Awesome thank you Mr chair
representative and and that's
the key you're you're right
we're trying to help the middle
and low low income people I'm a
hundred percent with you I just
think there's there's probably
another way for us to do that it
is a one time fee but every time
you transfer so I when I talk to
the attorney if I if I ate.
Just give it to my study abroad
and sell it I just got hit with
that with that transfer fee if
you decide Hey I'm gonna put
this in an LLC he just got
another transfer fee and that's
what makes it dangerous now one
of the the the main points that
everyone is concerned about is
there's no.
Guarantee that this is going to
stay at five hundred thousand
dollars our manager excuse me Mr
chair representative what I'm
what I'm what I'm trying to say
is.
That's what they thought in
nineteen ninety one the past
this whole security income tax
right on on on those who are the
the poorest in our state with
the intention was just to
balance the budget for just that
here and here we are.
Thirty years later still taxing
those people.
And this is what happens
unintended consequences to our
actions.
Mr chair representative I think
I'm gonna explain a little bit
about this about the bill just
got proposed because it kind of
ties into this the tax rate
which just went on on it's a are
what we call it
It's a long term capital gains
tax that any time that you make
any additional money on the
sales we buy something for I
don't know two hundred fifty
thousand dollars I think you've
made that point earlier and then
it goes up in value let's just
say it goes up to five hundred
thousand dollars that that
automatically right now instead
New Mexico.
He has just been in July first
is going to be decreased from
fifty percent in exemption to a
forty percent what does that
mean that means that they're
gonna get taxed additional on
sixty percent.
At a sixty percent of almost six
percent to five point nine
percent okay.
What this new bill that just got
a introduce today completely
eliminates that entire exemption
so from forty now that the forty
percent exemption down to zero
meaning they're going to pay six
percent automatically on top of
that the transfer fee another
another a quarter percent again
I'm not trying let me tell you I
am a hundred percent we do to
help the those insults the those
who need and faster to keep in
mind you know that but might so
here's what I'm going to go with
that we're looking for a place
to find who can pay for this
without just beating up one
person.
Mr chair representative would
you entertain
the idea of we give the the the
entertainment industry who are
billionaires.
Much more there are there are
they have a lot more money than
your average New Mexicans their
multi millionaires billionaires
that are giving that are
receiving a fifty million dollar
tax credit every year we have
actually given the the the
entertainment in the movie
industry.
Hundreds of millions of dollars
at the expense of people who are
on social security are their pay
that so three income we can say
I mean I guess I could you
venture to say that on the backs
of those recipient's social
security income.
They have paid for the movie
industry would you be interested
in working on on on changing the
bill to her maybe we could
potentially use our take that
money from take that taxed right
away are returned do you know
the rate of return on on on that
investment Mr chair
representative.
No Mr chair representative forty
percent on the dollar forty
cents on the dollar now and so
what I'm saying is we're
throwing away for every dollar
we're getting a forty cent
return
I feel that you know what you
some very serious and and I love
that you're trying to help those
in need so on my I think we can
have a great conversation and
and I would be willing if you
entertain a some time for us to
have a conversation I think
you're very serious about doing
this and so I'm I I I think it
if you would allow me to to work
with you and work with some
other people
I don't want to put my name on
the bill at that your bill share
your idea I'll just I just want
to be part of helping you and
and so I appreciate all the
efforts that you're giving but I
guess the end of the day are you
you know used you stated earlier
you be open to that would you be
open to to possibly amending
that that
That.
Your bills to to maybe our.
Work with the movie industry and
and let them let the
billionaires in the million the
multi millionaires pay for this
rather than than the those are a
little bit higher in the tax
bracket.
Mr Chairman representative you
know as I mentioned above those
conversations about this on you
know I'm very wary of things
that will affect our economic
development potential I think
that's something that that that
is a red flag because race for
me however I'm you know what I'm
looking at Representative
chairman and my door is always
open for all these conversations
and many people that have spoken
today have contacted you had
very helpful conversation so I
we can always talk about any
option on the table however at
this point and Representative
chairman this is the bill that
stands because I believe this
one time.
It one time fee to replace and
actually come in less than for
most seniors the who are you're
paying this I feel that this is
the right balance is being
struck.
So you think we should let the
Mr chair representative you
think we should let the
billionaire's get away with
getting that fifty million
dollar tax increase and they've
already taken Mr Representative
us to stay on the bill.
I am Mr chair representative
Representative I think it's it's
very important to we're we're
trying to search for a way Mr
chair to to pay for and help
those in are in need of social
security.
Come the tax relief
Representative.
In the house Representative we
do this respectfully.
Thank.
All will you'll for now until it
so I come up with another
question thank you.
Representative Garcia.
Thank you.
Thank you so much chairman and I
think you are.
Representative Serrato
For bringing this legislation
for forward.
As the more speaker
I see a lot of merit in in the
effort in terms of of the the
concept behind the legislation
And that the other side and
smaller.
Chairman I I kind of seen
Also kind of a a downside and
it's not necessarily for the
same reasons that my colleagues
on this committee have addressed
or that the audience addressed.
but I'll get into that
Just a month chairman
And Senator up though I
I understand that this is a one
time fee.
If you are and it's good and
it's an excise tax.
If you go and buy a car.
As much chairman.
at the point of closure they
impose a state excise tax.
And
and for many of us.
We see that number it's
shocking.
You know.
Especially if you're like of of
middle income or are lower
income.
Because you're you're not
calculating that that figure in
terms of the purchase of the car
is that the he says then it
becomes a shocker you know and
So okay so we know that the auto
dealer basically.
Imposes a tax and then passes it
on to
To the state.
And then the state.
moves it into the general fund.
So in regards to this transfer
tax.
I would think that it would have
the same route what may be the
middle person would be a title
company.
And and closing at the title
company
date thank god all the.
Property taxes etcetera etcetera
and possibly other types of.
cost ceiling with beams are
property that has been
impossible property
so you cure those you care the
liens
and then there's if you're
because a lot there's a transfer
tax which is an excise tax.
So so there
what is the route.
that excise tax is go to the
state.
We into the general fund to the
title company or does it go
another route.
Mr chair Mr Chairman
representative it would go
through the counties to collect
it and and then it would go to
the state.
I think.
Okay that's that's one issue.
In terms of this at this
transfer tax is going into the
general fund.
For use by the legislature or
whatever purposes.
it could go into education.
Mr chair it could go into
Developing more programs.
it could go to a that.
It could go into the reserve no
different things to share that
at this excise tax on.
Coming from the transfer tax.
Could go into.
So there's no definite.
There's no there's no definite
place where for instance.
You know when I first saw this
bill Mr chair one another thing.
That was graced by some people
in the audience.
is the issue of that this taxes
trump attacked Mr chair.
There are.
Should we should go before the
voters.
And the and as some of us know.
the state has no referendum when
it comes to tax.
We can't put a tax.
On the ballot.
We can do a lot of things.
In terms of.
referendum.
What a tax no.
And on the other hand Mr chair.
misspelled these.
Possibly impose.
Transcriptomics.
and a counties.
Possibly impose a transfer tax
am I correct in stating that
Representative Serrato Mr chair.
Representative Chairman
representative yes.
And
So just to kind of.
the air in regards the comment
that was made by.
Some of our.
Many realtors you know I think I
know some of those in the
audience of they are outstanding
in their field.
You know and Mr chair
representative of optimum.
When I first.
Kind of came across your
legislation.
Thank you mind was this effort.
Representative undertook back in
two thousand.
two thousand one two thousand
three.
And
And it had to do with equity.
And
And also in terms of kind of
our.
basically have to do with
gentrification Mr chair.
And what we were seen.
and we're probably still seen at
a to a lesser degree but this
was exclusive in terms of
What we're seeing Mr chair in
some of our traditional Spanish
communities.
with members of high numbers in
terms of.
on lowincome and some moderate
incomes.
Well most borrowing comes.
Is we're seeing a gentrification
Mr chair.
and actually people like to move
into our traditional spanning
communities because of the
traditions of culture and.
Customs
that flow from.
The traditional land holdings of
these communities through
Spanish land grants that are
centuries old.
And our second systems you know
that that feed our
sustainability in terms of on.
Animal and props.
And
Mr chair
We have multi million dollar
homes.
Going up right next to grandma
grandpa.
They were paying on average of
two hundred dollars three
hundred dollars a year property
tax.
What do you see when that first
multi million dollar house
showed up in the village.
Well.
I'm in Grampus separate taxes Mr
chair awesome went up under
present.
And
and then it didn't stop there.
Here's another.
In a multi million dollar house
one up.
Right no one we're not you know
for four blocks away sample
mildly.
So son Erin Graham Parker
sitting this little island.
You know in multi million dollar
houses.
And.
The property taxes continue to
grow.
And before you know what the
property tax and Roman Grampus
house Mr chair.
Is one half of their total
income.
And so we did a.
We did a property tax valuation
pres.
For low incomes.
Two thousand one for the elderly
sixty five and over.
In two thousand three Ford
disable.
We started off at eighteen
thousand now we've amended back
to where it's right around
thirty two thousand.
Many because whatever well.
So now grandma and grandpa that
maybe their taxes to go up to
maybe a hundred.
But then you've got these are
multimillion dollar houses Mr
chair they're paying anywhere
from four to eight thousand
dollars your property tax.
Not Roman grandpa's house stays
at that valuation of.
Five thousand dollars until they
die.
And to see that's that's that's
a real create a way.
Okay.
Sending our elderly and our
traditions and communities about
their lives in their homes many
times it's a home that's been
transferred down for
generations.
You know and
and I could see this legislation
Mr chair.
Kind of doing something like
that.
Mr chair it's not.
It's not targeted to do that.
I'm very easily support this.
Yes that transfer tax Mr chair.
When in to in the for oil
housing fund.
To be utilized throughout the
state.
For for rural housing.
And C. that's correct it.
Funding.
Is coming.
From people that as you stated
Representative Serrato Mr chair.
That in most four.
You have to pay out of pocket
she.
and
and see that's what I have
problems with this legislation.
Is that it's not target.
The outcome is not targets.
And in the way.
I don't see it as a progressive
tax.
As a progressive tax is when we
raise a personal income tax.
At certain brackets.
Under fifteen.
To fire thousand.
Find a thousand.
Two million.
Million plus.
We we we we kind of.
Increase the rate Mr chair on
these.
Income.
there's
to where it's spread across the
board.
And.
The higher incomes.
Million plus get a higher rate.
The lower rates.
Two hundred fifty five hundred
thousand or five hundred
thousand to one million it all
right hundred fifty to five
hundred million of lower lower
rate than the one million plus.
You know and and that's it's
it's it's kind of inequitable
matter Mr chair.
And.
You know in the and actually a
year ago two years ago we did do
a fix.
But it's not enough in terms of
the personal income tax.
Because we before we did the fix
last year one is saying.
You know Mr chair a person
making.
Thirty five thousand dollars a
year was buying the same rate as
a person making thirty five
million dollars a year.
You know and and we have nobody
to blame but.
You know ourselves the
legislature.
The body into that scheme of.
Representative.
who some of us right after the
percent of the bill.
I don't.
You know the kind of restore
those rates the go to a a
favorable you know increase.
I think you know it more subtly
what with what we have some.
But you know Mr chair
There is that industry.
They're not all purist.
Mr chair
And
And and maybe more so in the
past.
And
because I think it's a real
atrocities.
In the real estate industry and
I can and I can attest to that
in terms of
Mr chair.
In in terms of specifics.
Because I wasn't real estate.
After a thank you element
community organizing days
Up to nineteen eighty six.
You know I wanted a realistic.
Maniac my habit of the sphere of
influence.
From those.
You know fifteen years of
community organizing their
Mexican south valley.
And
And there's a lot of issues.
The real estate regarding our
land grants management rents.
Mr chair were allowed our
comments were lost because of
income taxes.
and
The most important is because
I wanted to kind of
Really help.
The community in terms of.
Protecting your assets.
And also allowing future
generations to.
To buy affordable homes in the
community that my ancestors
built.
You know since the sixteen
forties.
And
And you know Mr chair
I did good.
We're being kind of a grassroots
become a civil rights activist.
broker.
I was nominated okay the year.
First year and naturally
I didn't quite make it but you
know I was talked to.
And
you know Mr chair
I saw a lot of things.
With the top the top real
estate.
Agencies.
No mention them.
One company.
Thanks.
People in the real estate
industry know how the one
company cannot implement some
corruption.
And
This is what was going on Mr
chairman again it it kind of.
Brings us back to.
What the Sanchez trying to do.
With our legislation.
In some degree.
But
There is global real estate
agents are coming into a.
This the traditional spanning
communities of the south valley
at the school being the biggest
one.
And.
And they to analyze they do of
property analysis on these
properties that are elders on.
And it was the locus seat that
you know kind of in that.
Slide the dilapidated you know
on but you know two three four
five six acres on.
And
Yes to real estate agent we're
kinda.
Speak with the family as the
lawn is
Thank you know sometimes a new
interpreter Mr chair.
And
Is it didn't speak Spanish.
And
So then.
Real estate agent kind of then
realize that maybe these people
would want to sell.
So you higher strongman.
Strawman.
The bundle of cash.
Representative to the elderly
people.
You know and I'm from twenty
five thousand dollars for six
acres locascio.
Property that was worth in
excess of.
Two hundred fifty thousand.
You know and
So Mr chair would only get to.
I mean you're talking about
people.
In my community that no my
family attend the same church
that I do.
I'm gonna put up with that.
Senator have filed complaints
against this agents.
And actually what the agent
would do.
Is that basically the strongman
would be back the property to
him or her.
He put on the market or by the
property and sell.
More likely put the property
back on the market.
Two hundred thousand.
Under fifty thousand.
You know and
So you could see.
When I stated earlier Mr chair
that.
The state in community having
been pierced.
And where they change their ways
I imagine so.
I really think that they change
their ways and those all ways of
exploiting.
Marginalized people.
Is is is no longer to be found
in today's.
real estate community.
That's my wish and my prayer.
Mr chair.
And
You know Representative Serrato
on Mr chair
I would really want to support
your bill.
But the way it it's open ended.
I really can't.
If you have a focus on their.
If you had to the creation of a
fund.
For affordable housing.
Or something similar to do with
housing.
You know I would jump on it.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
versus what.
Your muted.
Representative do you blank to
the second one is that.
Mr Chairman ready to make a
motion when you're ready.
Okay I'll make a motion.
Hi a motion to table please.
K. I have a motion on proper
shaking the table and that takes
precedence over everything else
I just.
Your motion and me that there's
nobody else I hope there's
nobody else that wants to come
in on this I I like legislation.
I just know all.
Problem
with how we're approaching this
just like the last meal before I
mean I heard Mr small of Mr need
to the state
That we're helping lowincome the
bill or not have the low income
people with this I mean there's
there's nothing for the low
income people in the state of
New Mexico.
What I would love to see you see
a bill that raises money so we
can put money into the low
income comprehensive programs
that are available thanks for
the.
It is in the works right now to
where people the.
On social security real people
that are on social security are
you receiving low income.
Would be able to get the rebate
doesn't they get.
Yeah like I said the last time I
think of somebody that's making
the Senate in early versions a
over age sixty five making
seventeen thousand dollars
roughly on social security.
It's a forty dollar rebate
risking in New Mexico.
Coming around even and just like
the last piece of legislation
that came through like and
support because he doesn't know
anything for the low income
people.
It doesn't help.
You can see this I wish that the
there was a way to work where we
can do something the money that
would raise would go into that
form or another or
Representative.
Yes yes it into housing for low
income people but
I believe that so let me before
I go to the local.
I believe in representing their
CD I hoping correctly we need to
go on record just through that
we are a full committee right
now.
Know what to call the roll again
Mr chair no Mr chair no what
once once the fifth in line four
that automatically put us into
the whole Canadian standards
need to not have a roll.
Thank you for thank you Mr
Miller but the never encountered
this problem before all the
years that I've been a chair to
where.
I was working on a farm on.
With that.
The.
Their data mode to cultural.
The motion.
Representative bash.
to table Representative black.
Yes Representative Garcia yes.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Rubio no to
table.
Representative Stapleton is
excuse Representative thousands.
Yes to table.
Madam vice chair Roybal
Caballero no to table.
Mr chairman Alcon yes.
We have four in the affirmative
and three in the negative.
Thank you.
Representative.
Your loans has we we are still
having a lot of the state maybe
we can get together and work on
some other making this a bill
level work thank you Mr
chairman.
Well I.
Fifty three to sixty eight Sir.
No.
Representative the law.
We heal right that's what I'm
looking for now yes Sir.
Representative hi you will still
and with you Mr chairman thank
you.
K. Zel to this year's whenever
you're ready thank you very much
Mr chairman I also want to make
sure that my experts Mr Steven
Curtis is on with us as well.
I am here yes.
Can you tell the people who
would bill you're looking at
right now.
Chair Mister chairman that we're
talking about house bill two six
eight.
Thank you.
I'm ready to proceed when when
you are well.
Representative to this year's
whenever you're ready thank you
very much Mr chairman members of
the committee House Bill to
sixty eight as related to
workers compensation it what it
what it does is creates a
rebuttable presumption that
Corona virus or COVID twenty two
COVID nineteen is called an
injury by accident arising out
of and in the course of
employment for essential
employees allowing them to be
granted access to workers
compensation benefits are also
permits for employers to rebut
the presumption and it also
prohibits workers compensation
insurers from using the Corona
virus disease twenty nineteen
claims and developing their
rating plans it also includes an
emergency clause at this time Mr
chairman and defer to my experts
to see if you would like to make
a statement.
Yes
thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Steven
Curtis on attorney in
Albuquerque if you've seen me
before you know that I represent
my firm represents labor unions
and workers
And as you all of this the
committee is well aware there's
a fundamental bargain and
workers compensation law which
is exclusivity of the remedy on
the one hand and ease of access
on the other and there in this
with respect to the COVID
nineteen this fundamental
bargain is in some ways broken
down I know from my
representation of labor unions
that we have had members who
had.
I'm unquestionably caught COVID
nineteen at work within the
corrections department and have
been denied by workers comp as
as the Representative has
already indicated it fixes this
problem by creating a rebuttable
presumption that COVID nineteen
was caused in the workplace and
it does so in a very creative
way in in a way that
incentivizes good behavior on
both the part of employers and
employees it creases presumption
if the employer has violated any
of the COVID safe practices that
are part of any of the public
health orders that's how it
incentivizes employers to have
safe workplaces it also
incentivizes employees by
removing that rebuttal that
removing that presumption in the
event that they have in
themselves engage and extra
Clemente risky behavior I think
this is a very good bill for
workers and I would I have
nothing further the state unless
there are any questions
regarding thank you.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
Mr chair we also have an
amendments the two oh two
numbers point two one nine nine
four point one and I don't know
I I leave it up to the cause of
the committee or you Mr chairman
whether or not you want to
discuss mover discussed
amendment now if you want to
wait.
Go ahead.
Madam you
just work on the amendment I
will remove the amendment for
discussion purposes.
And Representative actual
second.
Motion so doing.
Explain your amendment and I I
apologize Mr chairman and
members the committee could you
just repeat the tier two number
one moment for me absolutely Mr
chair that the two oh two
numbers point two one nine nine
four point one.
Thank you.
So I'm Mr chair members of the
committee this ammendment
basically deals with some of the
early criticism that we received
on this bill it helps to further
define it rebuttable presumption
it also includes a of a better
definition of the sensual worker
and it is also taking away some
of the issues are concerned and
and terms of making sure that
the state is within the purview
of the workers compensation
administrative courts and
but also adds the ability for
employers to have and so chilly
players employers you have
submitted and had approved by
the department of health a COVID
testing and tracing plan it
would exclude them from the
purview of this law.
With that Mr chair stand for
questions.
Members of the community anybody
have any questions on the
amendment.
The money raising your hand.
Everybody says I do have a
motion to accept the amendment.
The
Maxon will him the second that
motion and stuff up then with
okay what would you do if you
thank you what do I have the
option to adopt in the
amendment.
C..
The amendment is adopted.
Okay.
So what we'll do is discuss our
didn't down but admit now so
we're probably doing pretty
good.
will if you are you ready if you
you have a Representative yes
the one of the the idea is that
ask for support or.
Our offices.
Yes Sir Mr chair.
K. that that being the case and
you're like I have done earlier
I am going to ask you who's for
against you got a minute to tell
me what you think in the and
Roz Joram were all.
Thank you Mr chairman committee
members I'm John Roberts to
executive director for the New
Mexico Chile Association and
respectfully oppose this bill.
Our businesses are struggling in
New Mexico including our food
processors manufacturers and
farmers for all stencil
employers.
Our food processors are
manufactured and spent millions
throughout pandemic keep them
PlayStation and continue to put
food on our tables.
These businesses ahead zero
communities spread of COVID
nineteen at the work place but
rather they have seen other
employees contracted fires
outside of work at family
gatherings and parties.
This legislation if passed will
open up our food processing
businesses to liability issues
and increased cost.
The amendment that includes
businesses that are here today
agreement between the business
and the NM Environment
Department is not financially
viable option most of the
struggling businesses to
complete surveillance testing of
all employees every two weeks
will cost of business with one
hundred boys at the very least
an additional fifteen thousand
every two weeks these food
processing plants in our state
employee up to eight hundred
more employees in the future
Cherry sees that that's at least
an additional hundred twenty
eight thousand and cost every
two weeks.
This is not feasible for these
companies thank you Mr.
Mr Cheney Dustin Justin Cheney.
All right thank you Mr.
Committee members my name's
Justin Cheney and the president
the Albuquerque area
firefighters representing eight
hundred eighty firefighters we
stand strong support of house
bill two sixty eight as you know
with the pandemic kit labor did
not stop later continued to
fight and labor was the ones on
the frontline so we strong winds
that are we stand in strong
support of house bill two
sixty eight we have the same
instead of labor thank you.
Thank you Stephanie will well.
Thank you Mr chair I'm speaking
on behalf of Stephanie Welch
state my name is for the parking
lot and I am an attorney at the
New Mexico Center on Law and
Poverty all essential employees
working outside of their home
this is our workers compensation
benefits if the contract COVID
nineteen while many workers are
safe from COVID nineteen but
what from working from home
Senator employees are far more
exposed and continue to risk
their lives staying essential
please such as grocery store
workers home health aides and
janitors also tend to be low
which employees earning less
than the recommended wage
meaning that if they contract
COVID nineteen they are at high
risk of suffering severe
financial hardship nonetheless
these workers have kept in the
country functioning during one
of the most difficult public
health pandemics deck is the
least we can do is provide all
essential employees that
contract COVID nineteen simple
patch workers compensation
benefits at this time many
states have created legal
presumption in our workers
compensation statutes like the
presumption that H. B. two sixty
eight attempts to create we
strongly support HB to skate for
prioritizing the needs of
central proceeds to contract
COVID nineteen we encourage the
committee to pass.
Thank you.
Thank you Sir we will go to Mr
John looks at.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee John Lipschutz
with The New Mexico federation
of labor AFL-CIO how we
represent tens of thousands of
workers around the state and
their families and are for some
of the reasons stated previously
I that this bill is really about
fairness and are for those are
bad actors out there whether it
be on the employer or employee
side just you know you are
holding them responsible applied
to we have essential workers
that are putting their lives on
the line the shade certainly
receive fair compensation if I
their employer has acted in an
inappropriate way putting them
in harm's way so thank you very
much for your consideration and
we I do think the sponsor and
hope that you'll support this
measure.
Thank you Mr Ryan come.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Brian Condit
executive director New Mexico
building trades council all we
Representative fifteen
construction unions what state
New Mexico we unanimously
support this piece of
legislation all provides a
framework to protect employees
and employers
who are abiding by the governor
to help order as you're all
aware our line in our utility
workers or teachers healthcare
workers are construction and all
maintaining all our of our
communities are in dire need of
all swift is great for
protection from COVID nineteen
if they acquire the workplace
thank you.
Thank you Mr Robert Scott.
Mr chair thank you so much for
allowing me to testify my name
is Bob Scott I've represented
injured workers to close to
thirty years in New Mexico I
stand in support of this bill I
did send out a detailed email to
each member of the committee
outlining my support for this in
the reasons I do ask for to pass
thank you Sir.
Thank you Sir.
As we.
Good morning Mr **** good
afternoon Mister chair members
of the committee again actually
long with the American
federation of teachers on we had
a fifteen Mexico Representative
over twenty thousand educators
across the state and we stand in
strong support of the bill we
appreciate the Sanchez work and
we're asking all of you to stand
with workers as well by
supporting this measure thank
you.
You.
The members of the committee and
lose one registered lobbyist for
the New Mexico rural electric
cooperative association.
We this time on do not support
this legislation we don't think
that the bill has been as
amended has been Bobby better
organizations like the workers
comp Advisory Council and
business leisure and so at this
time we stand in opposition of
this legislation thank you.
Thank you.
Can we.
With Kelly how's that.
Chairman members of the
committee thank you I'm Kelly
wrecked your seo agency New
Mexico we stand in strong
opposition to house bill two
sixty eight essential businesses
across New Mexico are doing all
they can to protect workers
while also meeting unprecedented
demand for personal protective
equipment availability
infrastructure development and
other important services needed
during the pandemic this
presumption significantly
increases employers potential
liability and uptick in workers
compensation claims and result
in additional expenses to
employers including increased
insurance premiums interruptions
to business operations and other
associate administrative costs
such as the testing and tracing
plan presented in two days
proposed amendment another
concern is the implication this
will have on self insured
workers comp groups this
legislation fails to
differentiate between commercial
insurance coverage and
independent workers compensation
cover claims members of self
insured groups pull their own
funds to create a reserve cover
costs of their collective
workers compensation claims
because exposure caused by
production like this one could
have never been projected the
solvency of insurers group or
individual could be put in
jeopardy.
Do as.
Yes good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee my name
is Allison Smith on the
registered lobbyist for The New
Mexico restaurant association at
this time The New Mexico
restaurant association
respectfully opposes this
legislation responsible
employers are doing everything
they can to comply with the
constantly changing public
health orders while struggling
to stay in business as is
pointed out in the FIR this
presumption is unduly broad at a
time when there's already
community spread of the virus so
for these reasons and many of
the others you've already heard
we do respectfully oppose the
legislation thank you for your
time thank you ma'am Stephanie
Rivera.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee to near their
registered lobbyists for New
Mexico farm and livestock bureau
we stand in respectful
opposition to this bill the
legislation before you provides
no protections for our state's
agricultural producers or
manufacturers who are among
those that are classified as
essential workers to reiterate
what Mr door on noted earlier
our cultural operations are
price takers who would not be
able to absorb the increased
costs associated with this bill
further delays in business
operations caused by these
claims could potentially
threaten the production of crops
and food products you and I can
see which day finally we think
the language in this bill
pertaining to strict compliance
is ambiguous and we cannot
continue to place these
unnecessary and burdensome
regulations and requirements on
our state's agricultural
producers we respectfully
request that you vote in
opposition of this bill thank
you for the opportunity to come
in this afternoon thank you.
Dear my every need.
Thank you Mr chair Jeremiah
Richie general counsel for New
Mexico mutual we are the largest
workers compensation insurer in
the state of New Mexico at I'm
like so many other states have
enacted presumptions.
Workers that contract COVID
nineteen through their
employment are already covered
under our workers compensation
act our experience we've had
several hundred COVID nineteen
claims that have been submitted
and we've accepted the vast
majority of those and Mr chair
we're not presently litigating a
single COVID nineteen claim
before the workers compensation
administration.
This legislation goes much
further than any of the other
presumptions that we are
familiar with and it shifts
workers compensation for
workplace injuries to litigating
public health orders which we
don't think is is appropriate
for the workers compensation
administration for these reasons
we respectfully oppose the bill
Mr chair I would also like to
thank the sponsor for allowing
us to submit some of our
comments previously.
Thank you Mr Moore read more.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Brent
more of a registered lobbyist
for the American property and
casualty insurance association
we respectfully stand in
opposition to house bill two
sixty eight I haven't seen the
amendments to the bill but
essentially the bill has a
presumption in a prohibition on
the use of data related to the
claims and we think that in both
instances the proposal is flawed
one of the things that you have
to understand about this
proposal is the public health
orders are really brought in
were changing throughout the
process so what was an essential
workers what was an essential
business changed many times as
the orders were out there and
please look at how broad those
orders are as it relates to
essential workers it covers many
many industries beyond you
workers and firefighters it
covers a broad vast array of
workers to the to the second
amendment the a prohibition on
data that is unique as far as we
can tell in terms of prohibiting
insurers to look at data related
to claims and that is
significant because you get the
benefit of coverage without
people assessing the risk
including some of our.
Right.
I.
Your hand muted now.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Brian
Fallon with Albuquerque
publishing company we don't
necessarily stand against this
bill but we do question what we
see as an inherent conflict the
bill has a date specific of
January two thousand twenty
three for the presumption that
comment is or could be work
related and yet
the.
The health orders from the state
can change at any time as has
been stated and both the the
presumption for the employer to
prove himself
innocent if you will or the
employee to prove that the
illness came from work says it's
based on the existing public
health orders related to the
Corona virus then in place and
we think that if the health
orders go away does that leave
the of is it an unanswerable
question if there's a date
specific in the bill thank you.
Thank you Sir Rhonda Rowland
yes.
Good afternoon Mister chair and
members of the committee Randall
M. Lopez the executive director
of the mechanical sheet metal
contractors association.
And I think the sponsor for
bringing this bill forward.
Have to respectfully stand in
opposition to this nation many
of the reasons that responded
earlier.
As well as the fact that workers
comp in initiation and I are.
Have been covered this crisis.
Thank you so much.
For.
Request for.
Somebody.
From.
Or for the next.
I'm trying to find out.
Eight three point.
Dollars.
Josh Anderson.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Josh Anderson with
us Council eighteen
Representative public employees
across the state many are
essential frontline workers we
want to thank all the sponsors
bringing this bill forward very
important bill essential workers
and we urge the committee to
please support and obviously we
want to stand in solidarity with
all of our other non union and
private sector workers thank you
Mr chairman.
Thank you.
You.
Mr Jim Garcia.
Thank you Mr chairman my name is
Jim Garcia and I'm the executive
director of the associated
contractors of New Mexico
representing over five thousand
employees that are deemed
essential workers at this time
we would oppose this bill for
several reasons listed in the
FIR it's very onerous on players
this presumption significantly
increases employers that's
liability an increase in workers
compensation claims due to
infection with COVID nineteen
could result in additional
expenses to employers including
crease insurance premiums
interruptions to business
operations with that we are
opposed to this bill thank you
Mr chair.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman committee
for allowing me to speak today
my name is Chloe Jake and I'm
speaking on my own behalf indoor
malls were allowed to reopen on
June first twenty twenty after
the state shut down and I return
to my job as the assistant store
manager of a retail
establishment at the Coronado
mall in Albuquerque when we re
open my store put up signs and
implied Masco's mandatory
however internal guidance was to
continue to allow customers
without master shop as normal to
be non confrontational to
continue to provide an excellent
customer experience because as
my district manager put it we're
not the mask police many many
customers came through our doors
and mask on July sixth my
symptoms began and on the
seventeenth and went to get
tested for COVID nineteen before
my shift my results confirm that
I was infected I was allowed to
meet at work for many days
because of company policy that
dictated only people with no
exposure should not return to
work I took my personal
precautions very seriously and I
will never know exactly how we
can budget but there's a
significant possibility that I
caught it at work the company
had developed safety measures
the stores were instructed not
to follow them so as not to to
improve the customer experience
Ellen by saying that I continue
to suffer from the effects of
contracting COVID spill is
critical to production Mexico's
workers ninety two passed thank
you.
It.
Thank you.
I can.
Thank you.
I.
K. E. L..
Thank thank you for all the
of BJU international brotherhood
of electrical workers IBEW six
eleven
we strongly support this bill as
Representative two thousand
seven hundred forty nine members
in the electrical industry
across the state of New Mexico
providing service and power for
communities in surrounding areas
and we're out there providing
service to these people and
performing our work and we
strongly support this bill
because we're around people and
potential exposes on a daily
basis and we try to mitigate
hazards the safest way possible
this will help and protect our
work force out there thanks.
Thank you Mr John Brock.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is John block I'm a native New
Mexico native and a business
owner here in the state I oppose
H. B. to Sixtyeight its current
form because it would presume
responsibility on a business
owner for employees contraction
of COVID and the employer would
not be required to produce any
evidence that they were exposed
at work also it states that if
the employee has established
that the employer has not
strictly complied with the COVID
mandates they are held liable
however the bill doesn't define
the term not strictly complied
and as such any accusation of
supposed violation frivolous or
not would open business up to
liability so please oppose H. B.
to Sixtyeight in its current
form or offer an amendment to
clarify the language mandating
that the employee must put
forward proof and define what
strict compliance means thank
you so much chairman members of
the committee.
Thank you Sir
okay I have a we'll be doing
during.
Mr chair committee members and
sponsors of the bill changer and
again with the New Mexico
utility contractors association
we oppose house bill two sixty
four work with workers
compensation loss revenue
reserves are built on prior
experience an actuary
projections a presumption that
contract that contraction of
COVID nineteen as work related
and to be covered by workers
compensation with calls carriers
to take on an unknown amount of
loss exposure that has never
been contemplated I think that
in no way have been prepared for
the provision that prohibits
insurance carriers from using
data collect data related to
COVID nineteen claims in there
right development will not
protect self insured programs
claims against self insured
programs would be paid by the
members to an assessment putting
the cost of the pandemic
directly on the small business
this bill fails to consider
whether individuals have
complied with the health order
outside of the workplace and
assumes that the workplace is
the conduit of infection and
that the employer has failed to
observe the publisher Carmen's
necessary term from out east a
health and safety workplace at a
time when we are seeing a
possible end to this crisis
which is.
Jason Espinoza.
Chairman members the committee
Jason Espinoza state director
with the national federation of
independent business and we do
stand in opposition to the
legislation just to add some
extra points that my colleagues
have not yet made well this bill
explicitly prohibits insurers
from using COVID nineteen claims
arising in the course of
employment and developing their
rating plans insurance premiums
may increase for all employers
as a result of not just for
those with a significant number
of claims additionally as noted
in the FIR the state personnel
office notes that while employer
compliance with the public
health orders to be encouraged
this presumption seems on duly
brought at a time when there is
community spread of COVID
nineteen additionally just a
back up Mr Ritchie's points the
workers compensation
administration does report
current statistics indicate that
insurers are paying COVID
nineteen claims and the
introduction of a presumption of
this type is likely to create
new wishes and litigation for
example the median strip
compliance with the public
health order could be contested
the potential increase in formal
education could result in
employees experiencing longer
waiting periods for the
resolution of their case so we
do stand in strong opposition
thank you Mr thank you
scurrilous Sunday.
Good morning this are good
afternoon Mister chair members
of the committee on Collison tag
the president of the New Mexico
business coalition we stand in
opposition to house bill two
sixty eight are you know this is
just bad public policy it places
the burden of the on going
health pandemic on the shoulders
of business owners.
This is the worst time to place
more bit more burdens on
business and especially our
frontline workers who have
worked at times when others
could not.
The workers comp system was
developed for workplace related
injuries it was not designed for
claims arising from viruses and
it should not be used for that
purpose there's no way to trace
where a person contracted the
virus.
And to put that on workers comp
is going to cause rates to go up
for everyone and every time we
look at increasing rates against
business in any capacity those
costs have to be passed on to
the general public if they can
or they result in hours or jobs
being cut just a bad decision
for New Mexico and I urge you to
say no to this now thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Gerald
yeah well and I service
president of the labor's union
local sixteen and we represent
labors in the construction
industry across the state of New
Mexico Paso West Texas area and
the Navajo Nation.
For all the reasons previously
stated we and it's strong
support of the bill thank you.
Thank you Sir.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Carla
Coogler I'm with associated
builders and contractors a
commercial construction
association serving all of New
Mexico we stand in opposition of
health bill to sixty eight we
all want to see our essential
employees protected but
broadening the already
functional workers compensation
coverage is will further burden
employers the workers
compensation system and
ultimately this bill won't help
either employers or employees
for all the reasons stated from
colleagues before me we ask that
you deny this legislation thank
you.
Thank you March and.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is mark strand I am the
president of the central New
Mexico labor council we stand in
strong support of house bill two
sixty eight I'm personally in
alignment that goes from house
to house repairing the power
around the City of Albuquerque
and the exposure that we get to
going from place to place is
just unacceptable and we would
like to know that we are
protected if we do come into
some kind of contact into.
I would like to know that we are
protected thank you.
Thank you Sir
Robert all
hello I'm sorry.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman no normal
committee members I'm workers
compensation attorney of New
Representative workers for about
fifteen years I want you to know
that someone bills like this the
past throughout the nation and
the.
You've heard from New Mexico
mutual that they are covering
this is not always the case and
also when the voluntarily agreed
to cover things they can change
them on and then you can we can
revoke and not cover the future
workers need to presumption
you've heard a lot of lip
service here today about
businesses caring about
frontline workers all throughout
this pandemic you hear
politicians and people talk
about caring for procurement for
frontline workers this bill
protects them and there is a
rebuttable presumption that
employers sure can we bought the
presumption that provides
fairness those who need it most
the workers will lose benefits
and could become a public dole
if this is not passed so we
think this is fair to workers
the insurance industry is
indicated to you that they're
going to cover all this just
creates a presumption that they
will do that senator bubble
thank you.
Thank you
Mr Robert dot org.
You Mr chairman and committee
members my name is Robert
over and I'm the president of
painters local unit twenty three
for the reasons previously
stated we stand strong support
of HB to Sixtyeight thank you Mr
chairman and committee members.
Thank you Sir.
No we'll go back to the
committee.
Representative on the hill.
Thank you very much Mr chair I
think we're ready for questions
from the committee that yes we
are and I have a Representative
Hernandez and raised up thank
you Mr chair.
and Representative I actually
just have a couple of questions
so my first one is why is the
subject of this bill not until
twenty twenty three should it be
when the governor's health
orders lifted or with the
vaccine is widely available.
I thank you very much Mr
chairman and Representative
Hernandez you it's it's actually
a point well taken that date was
are selected in terms of giving
any sort of workers compensation
insurers certainty as to when
this lot would no longer be in
effect so that was that was
behind our decision to to take a
specific date now that's not to
me that the vaccine can continue
to bring down the caseload I
which at which you know point
then we'll see even fewer cases
being taken for the workers comp
process and hopefully it will
become eventually appoint.
Thank thank you for that answer
my second one is
I mean we we keep hearing or we
heard from public comment
about the that there was not
definitions of what substantial
non compliance would mean
what can you give me can you
elaborate a little bit further
on that and tell me what
substantial non compliance of
the employer would actually
mean.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and and Representative Hernandez
so I think at this point to be
useful to kind of associate on
the worker's compensation claim
process a little bit the way
this works is at St when the
social worker comes down the
COVID they are appropriately
diagnosed they then have to give
notice to their employer I would
provide employer would file a
claim with their if they aren't
insured by say a third party
that claim is then processed by
the workers compensation insurer
they decide whether or not
they're going to pay the claim
if they pay the claim so yes
that that usually ends the
process right there however if
the claim is challenged by the
insurer and then goes it's
rooted into the workers
compensation administrative
process at which point it is
assigned to the workers
compensation Department it goes
through a mediation process so
started of mediators assigned
and at which point there is a
fact finding almost a discovery
period which then allows both
parties to submit information so
what I call but in terms of.
The for the rebuttable
presumption I caught a
rebuttable rebuttable
presumption because at this
point the employer actually has
to prove to workers compensation
administration that their
employer is not substantially
complying with the public
support health order now what
does that mean it's a great
question I it's going to be fact
specific and so in the law we
usually we usually call that a
preponderance of the evidence
that means that the employer the
employee will submit information
I like we heard public testimony
earlier we have young women
state that she was given a
directive from her employer that
if people are coming and not
wearing masks not to disturb
them that's going to be
substantial evidence of of non
compliance of public health at
which point the mediator would
then evaluate all the evidence
submitted including the evidence
submitted by the employer to
provide you know stating are
well you know we never knew that
employee was going out without a
mask or we caught them you know
congregating with several people
and across state New Mexico
space that's when that process
would be six to a objective
third party to make that
determination and that's what I
did want to for further defined
in the law because we want to
keep that discretion in there
for the process to work.
Okay that makes sense what if
what if an employee who files a
claim has refuse the vaccine
will those will they still be
covered under the presumption.
I thank you very much Mr chair
and representative Hernandez so
I think that I I don't think
that falls within the rebuttable
rebuttable presumption that I in
their refusal to vaccinate does
not equate to recklessness we
all have autonomy over our own
bodies and I it's not taking
unnecessary risk like
congregating in a closed space
going to an illegal indoor rave
I think that's gonna hit the
standard more so than just
refusing to take a backseat.
Thank you Mr Chairman
representative I'm almost done
so focusing on these tentative
measures where we're not
focusing on other efforts to
keep people safe for example you
know this bill includes school
teachers and I do I I I also
want to keep them safe but Rio
Rancho public schools have a
vaccination clinic a couple
weeks ago and for some reason
the department of health cancel
that shouldn't we be focusing
more on keeping those people
safe than something like this a
workman's comp.
Bill.
Thank you very much Mr chair
Representative Hernandez I I
would dispute your assertion and
that this this bill is exactly
what we need to keep our social
workers safe and that it is
giving them an Avenue to seek
recourse in the event that they
are unnecessarily exposed I know
what happened with vaccination
clinic was very unfortunate I
can't speak to the facts that
that we're underlying that
decision but where we are is
here now and here now we have
consideration the bill that's
already been implemented in some
form or another in seventeen
other states and it's a way to I
believe adequately balance of
responsibility for the COVID
nineteen pandemic among you know
our social workers we depend on
to keep our economy going in our
society operates at also you
know balancing one on the
shoulders of our of our
businesses who are you know in
most cases contracting with
third party insurer to allow for
these types of benefits to be
available.
Yes so on that point
sorry Mr chair and
representative on that point
would you be open to amending
this bill at some point through
the process to ensure that our
teachers are moved up in the
prioritization of the vaccine
upstart vaccination process you
know we need to make sure that
they're vaccinated it seems to
be the number one priority on
all parents minds in our state.
I thank you very much Mr chair
representative Hernandez I don't
see how that amendment would be
appropriate within the purview
of this bill but what I can tell
you is I'd be happy to work with
you at the department of health
to advocate for our teachers and
to make sure that there's an
inclusion for them for the
program to figure out and and
require ask for additional
information as to what's going
on with that fact.
Mr chair representative thank
you so much for that answer I
think that that concludes my my
questions but if not I'll come
back at you.
I was no for promotion
representative us us.
Thank you.
Thank you Representative of.
Can you hear me Sir.
Representative okay thank you
how are you today everybody long
day all righty
The question that I have is.
How were you kind of explain
that you know we're gonna go
back and I'm just confused maybe
I didn't understand it but how
we gonna prove that the virus
was contracted at work.
Want to see it is what it says
here on page three.
A line twelve.
Basically if you want to.
Work twenty days prior to the
diagnosis.
I miss reading that.
Mr chair representative.
Thank you very much Mr chair
representative to access so I I
would say to the crux of this
bill is not specifically
determining that the COVID
infection the COVID nineteen
affection was picked up at work
as a determining factor to allow
for workers compensation
benefits to be dispersed it's
it's the meeting of a
presumption that that essential
employee was subject to you know
their employer's choice not to
comply with the public health
orders which at incidently put
them at greater risk we have
seen rebuttable presumptions of
this type could be implemented I
you are here Representative but
last session we put in our
medical presumption for
for PTSD in our firefighters
because we can't without with
any certainty prove that they
are you know picked up a PTSD
diagnosis because of their work
is firefighters but we know just
based upon the nature of that
work that there's a pretty good
likelihood that they did and so
that's that's me and that the
analogy that we're trying to
draw and this piece of
legislation and that's what
we're focusing more so on you
know the facts surrounding what
could have contributed to the
factors leading to the diagnoses
not on the presence of the
diagnosis being picked up at
work specifically I hope that
answers your question right.
Thank you Mr chair
representative so what you're
trying to say the way I I
understand what you're saying is
you know so it's only for those
who want to call it
A rogue business.
That would I mean you're gonna
have look you're always going to
have somebody that that falls
rules and people don't break the
that that can stand the rules
and you have everybody in
between.
One of the things that I've seen
happen and and I'd like for you
explain this because it was used
earlier yes so I think somebody
said Mr chair representative
that.
If somebody walked into the rest
the the the whatever the case of
business and refused to put on
the mask or maybe whatever was
wearing it properly.
What would be the proper.
protocol that would constitute.
Them being in compliance
if they tell because I mean I I
and I'm not get so that will go
on and on Garcia July ten
questions.
When a person refuses and and
you have people that do refuse
and because confrontations and
we I have actually witnessed a
confrontation were some we're a
where you please excuse me
walked walked up and said
Should one second.
You.
Anyway
so I we're all in.
With the passing with eight
anyway
what they said Hey look you have
to wear your mask and this
started a confrontation and
that call please send it just
got people that we got
pushed and and go run.
So what what would constitute
and I'm trying to get more
specific here because I I've
seen that happen it's it's
happened in my business to us
we're we asked look this is all
you're after sometimes is no
walk in and and and and violate
that school would not be out of
compliance.
Thank you Mr chair
Representative **** you know
just based on the fact that you
gave me and and you know not
making any sweeping
generalizations of regards the
law I think that as long as an
employer makes the best effort
they can to be in compliance the
health order that's going to
prove substantial compliance for
instance if you have a customer
who came into your funeral home
refused to wear a mask you Aspin
repeatedly to wear a mask at
which point they refuse I've
seen this in confrontations
myself they're always incredibly
uncomfortable and I'm fortunate
you know and then you you ask
that person to lead because of
the a private business owner you
have the right to do that you
know that I think those facts if
you have been to the worker's
comp worker's comp and and the
station as part of a a fact
finding mission related to one
of these times that would that
would be substantial evidence
towards you know compliance or
efforts to to meet compliance.
Mr chair representative I I
appreciate that answer really
means a lot I just think that
the the language can be is gray
and it could cause
cause us.
Consequence that I see and I'm
locked.
I'm the kind of guy goes and I'm
like looking at all the have
those houses really because I
really feel it that's our job
and communities to like throw
all these Bennett as much as we
can so that we can
Question four or stop it and we
think it that so we have good
legislation so my point of that
is
If two family members came home
they both contracted Corona
virus one more set plays a and
B..
How does that get sorted out how
you know that a didn't come in
and and the other guy says well
wait a minute
there's some gray area.
What what how would that be
handled.
Thank you very much Mr chair
representative trusses so again
let me take you back to the
process process and how the
rebuttable presumption is
assumed so if you have worker
eight who is an essential
workers business a and then you
have worker bees essential
workers as a state worker Hey at
work the business where they are
not in compliance with public
health order there let it let
people come and go without masks
they're congregating in small
spaces you know they're they're
not following other comment safe
protocols they're having people
come in that are calling in sick
that could potentially could be
affected with with COVID
nineteen let's say that's
business a right and that
essential workers you know
brings gets infected the COVID
and brings it home to essential
workers be but let's say
essential workers building works
for an employer that is in
substantial compliance with the
corona virus you know the public
health order so essential
workers eight would I would have
if if the determination was made
would be granted access to the
rebuttable presumption for
workers compensation benefits
whereas worker bee would not
because they can't meet the
rebuttable rebuttable
presumption that would allow
them access to those benefits so
you just have to let the process
work and all of these facts will
be flushed out within the facts
presented in evidence.
One more thing Mr chair
representative what is the
opposite.
The person that that Hey this
guy goes work they've they're
maybe not so careful but but
we're gonna use your a of
assumption they follow all the
rules everything's fine they
contracted first but then I am
and they're sick and a week
later then the the other
employee be was living with that
person ends up being contracted
could that employee go back and
say Hey wait a minute you guys
are in compliance in reading get
their and abuse what we're
trying to accomplish here today.
Thank you very much Mr chair
representative assets so again
yeah that evidence would come in
on the employer side so the
employer again through the same
process would be afforded the
ability to present evidence that
you know Hey this this employee
lives with this other at the so
the person who is not being
careful you know we can we can
prove that we were in
substantial compliance of the
public health order and so
they're these additional facts
that should be brought into
consideration so as to not hold
the employer liable for the
application of the rebuttable
presumption in that case.
Thank you Mr chair
representative is is now with
the disease and I have all
almost all my life actually the
majority of my life and so I
recognize this this
Actual of viruses new value you
get people don't really
understand the the microbiology
behind it but
the truth of it is this is a
mostly contracted by
touching things in our it it's
rarely it's not up.
This is something sometimes
people get all
Reporter but it's not a true
airborne disease where you walk
through the hall and it's
lingering there for two three
hours and then that's and then
you walk by and infrastructure
that we
because of this before to try to
get in trouble because I didn't
finish my sentence and Sheryl
the the you know you would never
walk into a viral laugh with the
type of masks a Dallas Cowboys
and being compliance is no way
you would of our love will never
let you walk in there so my
point was that of those masks.
One going to help us that being
said the only reason I'm saying
that is most people get it by
touching a surface shaking a
hand going to the gas station
pumping gas not washing their
hands before the touch interface
and so forth and so what worries
me is that it it I mean you can
contracted anywhere anywhere at
a place of your just not careful
and so we're grace of god all
this time and I work product
cases since this started and not
a single one of my employees
have have been contracted but
we.
The districts in rules on in
off you must wash your hands and
protect yourself in many ways I
think what what worries me is
you know it's very easy to slip
up I stepped up I mean I even
sometimes I I think it's
something that you all know I
just did that you pray to god
and three or five days you're
not you'll come back down sick
but what worries me Mr Chairman
representative is that if it
this could be diverted only.
Clog up the.
We'll get through litigation
The workman's comp.
and.
With planes and and all that
and.
And so.
That being said it could be
caught up the the R.
The process.
With the claims going back and
forth people trying to prove who
who was at fault and who's not
at fault in and so I mean
Are you getting a lot of I mean
is I'm I've heard a lot of
people here chair representative
stating that you know what a I I
work in and and some of those
people I'm sure are are they're
following the rules and all that
their players are following the
rules of the running around with
their working inside outside on
yet they're big.
Big supporters of this bill.
I guess we're we're right I'm
worried about it is what happens
I lost my train of thought
because everybody's touched the
back your across the hall
My worry is that that that it'll
clock the system and and are you
getting this was wells in the
state are you getting a lot of
reports a workman's comp not
covering these people.
Thank you Mr chair
representative Ross says so you
know there's a lot to unpack
their to answer your last
question are we getting a lot of
reports of people not being
covered we have gotten
conflicting information gotten
information that of most of the
of the claims that have been
made they are being settled
which is a great which is a
great thing for New Mexicans and
essential workers and if if that
at you know if that part of the
process is working so be it
that's not the our intention to
interfere with that in any way
what are legislation intends to
do is to create an additional
safety net for those essential
employees that for whatever
reason and continue to fall
through the system because their
claims are being unnecessarily
are unduly rejected or they are
fine subjected to disease and
illness because of the bad
actions of the actions of the
bad actor and so this
legislation is intended to
create an additional safety
layer for those essential
workers to give them recourse a
lot of our social workers in New
Mexico are our minimum wage
workers there make their working
two and three jobs so of you
know at a time to provide for
their families and if they get
sick with COVID nineteen or
anything you know Alice then
they don't eat and a lot of
cases and so you know they need
to know that there is an
availability of benefits
especially in these particular
scenarios in which they are
necessarily being denied
benefits and we do now that
there are claims again we heard
from someone and the audience
earlier you know I also have you
know heard several stories as
many of you know publicly and my
husband had put the nineteen he
was put in the emergency room
yeah he was in ICU for eleven
days he doesn't intend to file
you know workers workers comp
benefits but you know affected
our family very much so and it's
affecting all of these families
and workers compensation just
like any other insurance
contract is a contract and for
many of these people you know
these benefits don't come for
free they are being paid for
through
You know various insurance
contracts and usually that cases
split evenly between the
employer and the employee so you
know we know of specific cases
in particular areas I'm not
going to mention those areas
because I don't want to call
anybody out but that's just
problem essential please that
work with a particular type of
population in New Mexico where
we know there are bad actors and
there are you know potential are
not potential but there are have
been employers who have been
necessarily denying these claims
and putting people in a very
precarious position and that's
exactly what this laws designed
to prevent another thing to
mention is that the workers comp
system.
And the and the law is written
is actually written with an
angle towards fairness to both
parties of both parties are are
very much encouraged to work
with one another one another to
find a solution so that fairness
and equity can be found in a way
that crosses which that works
for both parties that's were
aiming to do with the fact that
they were aiming to do and
allowing you know an employee an
employee the ability to to get
access to these benefits when
they really need them and also
to allow an employer recourse to
to you know object to these
benefits and they feel like they
are unnecessarily are
unnecessary unwarranted so
that's what we've been trying to
do we've also been trying you
know I I someone at some point
so this is bad public policy I
could not disagree more this is
actually fantastic of public
policy because what we're doing
is we're encouraging employers
essential employers to be safe
and keep their employees safe
and keep one another safe and
are doing everything they can to
hear the public health orders
and tell our numbers you know
really get to a point where we
don't have to worry about this
pandemic anymore and I very much
hope that happens very soon
rendering you know this entire
conversation moot but until then
we have to do what we can to
encourage our employers to abide
by the public health orders and
that's why we've actually
created a car about a total
exemption for employers that are
keeping testing tracing policies
are on record with the
environment department to the
department of health you know so
we we don't we want employers to
be exempt are in every way that
they can and for those times
when when people are are falling
L. because of the actions that
bad actions of others that need
to be held accountable you know
and and and and and we don't.
There's also the argument that
this is going to fall on the
shoulders of small business I
would disagree with that as well
that's why for the majority of
workers compensation benefits
are are are.
Administered by third party
insurance companies and it's
their job to ensure people
that's the bargain that they
have that they have struck so I
hope that answers your question
Senator.
Sounds like you're having a
party in your office New Mexico.
Are still not having a party
what a blacked out the screen
and join the.
Let's let me tell you Mr chair
representative one of the things
that know everybody's worked my
whole but anyway
What I was looking at what I was
gonna say is this I know that
you're passionate about this we
had a conversation privately you
and I but your husband
having them thank you for
sharing I I do want to bring
that up on this you did and and
so I know you're passionate
about that you're trying to
you know health New Mexico the
best you though the way you see
fit
I just thought.
I I don't know then maybe I'd
misunderstood this earlier
somebody made a mention that was
a requirement in here and I and
it is here where you're required
to
yes people.
Every so often was a requirement
there I mean I heard someone at
early or say something to that
effect.
At Mr chair representative no
there's no requirement for that
agency law.
I couldn't find it now to your
point earlier that you know we
need to we need to Mr chair
representative provide.
that we need to hold people
accountable and we need to
pressure them that's existing
right now it's pretty simple
you.
Look up creating a nineteen that
restrictions there's a button
there you call of the governor's
office and the hammering of five
thousand dollars for the
violation pull your license if
you're not if you're not in
compliance there are people
actually running around I'm
gonna be honest with you at the
mortuary what we brought up my
business we had a young a young
young person passed away.
And we have the parking lot was
full of cars.
Although we were only allowing
five people in the building we
have people that were driving by
monitoring us and calling us
saying what you guys think you
are you are you exempt from this
a set and and so Mr chair
representative I got on the when
I I I I receive that message or
call the person back to first
one and I said look.
I said we're doing everything we
can this young man passed away
we have a.
A hundred people that want to
come in we're allowing them to
come in I at a time.
And and so those people that are
out there are just waiting their
turn and we're doing everything
we can and we can only control
them to a certain point and
they're sitting there outside in
the state in their cars for the
most part but nothing's going to
be perfect and I asked him do
you do this at other large
businesses like Walmart or
Albertsons and all and so forth
and so what I I guess from going
with that is there are people
out there monitoring their
people are coming into
businesses that are are looking
for violations whether they feel
they're violated or they're
actually policing that we have
state police we have
other other departments were
running around citing and and
and and doing this already
the Mr chair representative I'm
gonna go back to what
Representative Hernandez said
earlier I mean I've been
fighting might for my district
to get enough I rex vaccinations
and and.
They're just not there and and
so I think everyone's trying to
do the best they can I
appreciate your legislation I
know your passion you you're
you're definitely expressed that
and and it's hard when it when
it hits your family I too have
lost some very good friends and
and
and so I I truly understand but.
Thank the lord hasn't had our
family so with that I yield
thank you so much.
Your muted Sir.
Representative Rubio.
Mr chair I move for due process.
More from promotion and improper
second will the secretary
cultural.
Yes.
Representative bash yes.
Representative black.
Representative Garcia yes
Representative Hernandez no
Representative Rubio yes.
Representative Terrazas.
No.
Madam vice chair Roybal
Caballero yes.
Mr chairman Alcon yes.
We have five in the affirmative
and three in the negative
Representative you you are on
your way to the floor and all.
Thank you Mr chair this is our
first committee.
Thank you so much.
Okay Representative Harper are
you around.
I'm promoting him right now Sir
all know don't promote do lower
G. as.
That is also going.
Representative Harper do you
have an expert witness that you
need me to promote.
Great you're hero is.
When the attendee list.
Yep.
Awesome and maybe Susan paired
as well.
Okay.
Thank you to provide Susan
thank.
Thank.
Okay.
Perfect.
All right
Thank you chairman my.
To go.
That night.
Representative Harper how CTE is
using in.
Awesome thank you chairman.
So just remind the committee
couple days ago I presented a.
Possible to seventy seven which.
allows for someone to change
their survivor beneficiary for
para.
And
I was asked to go work with us.
Here folks Greg and Susan on an
amendment.
And
We have that amendment prepared
that they've asked for.
And.
I got to the committee
yesterday.
The.
Amendment number is two one nine
nine seven one point two.
Sir you are muted.
Okay here
can find.
Yes Sir Senator right now.
Thank you.
Existentialist happy Sir and it
is and share files for all the
other members.
Representative.
Thank you so this amendment is
very technical it really does
not change the intent of the
legislation at all
I'll just briefly explain it and
then if it's a if it's
appropriate chairman I'll ask
Reagan Susan if they would like
to add.
so what this bill really does
is.
In Sri parts.
Of.
The bill.
It adds language that says.
C..
The person can designate and
other individual as a survivor
beneficiary now here's the new
language and may select either
from.
The uniform of payment B. or
form of payment see so they're
they're basically allowing them
to have the option to choose
between.
B. R. C. which I believe are the
true spousal options are option
a is only the individual option
do is children.
Options B. or C. you have to do
with our spouse.
And so we include that language
in the in three different parts
in the bill.
We've been strike.
language that says retired
member shall not have an option
to change from the current form
of payment because we're giving
them those two options for B.
four C..
The last thing it does on.
Page four line thirteen we're
adding the words.
For divorce from so now read
retired member who was
previously being paid a pension
under form of payment B. or C..
But because of the deaths of
four divorced from.
Designated survivor beneficiary.
Our continued continue the taxed
so.
R. that's.
If we what what it does so again
doesn't change the intent but
just so nice technical fixes and
I'll turn it over to.
Mr hill Mr speaker if they like
Adams.
If.
Good evening Mr chairman members
of the language that the
Representative Harper presenting
the amendment does fix our
concerns well I would want to
make one a point that the pair
board is not taken an official
stance on this bill as of yet
however the administrative
Issues with the bill have been
addressed with his amendment in
happy to answer any questions Mr
chairman.
Anybody else you need to do is.
Where are you want to add
anything Mr chair.
Mr chair that I'm Representative
Harper and then in the committee
we just wanted there to be
consistency among the per
provisions are so these
technical fixes have helped us a
great deal.
What we have a motion to move
the amendment did with.
Some of.
Thank you okay all right.
Questions on the amendment.
Do I have a motion to accept the
member.
We accept the amendment a second
thank you I don't have any
opposition to that amendment.
Show all members present voting
in the affirmative on the
amendment.
And now.
This
number of you ready to go to the
I think we already which is
basically to the added to the
disease before we discuss this
is there anybody out there that
really has to say anything on
this bill.
Raise your hand if you if you
you really have to.
We just last.
And I think we're okay okay so
with that in mind.
In the body of that has any
questions on the amended bill.
Remember the committee none do I
have a motion million buddy
Committee the amended bill.
Over the past.
J. from promotion or proper
second on house bill two new
seventy seven is amended to add
number right.
Yes Sir.
In just to be safe madam
secretary Colorado yes Sir
Representative bash.
Yes Representative black.
Yes yes Representative Garcia
yes Representative Hernandez yes
Representative Rubio yes.
Representative Terrazas yes.
Madam vice chair Roybal
Caballero yes.
Mr chairman Alcon yes.
In the affirmative.
industry formerly reductions you
and understand you have a
question about the the rec
recording of the of the road one
of the bills yes so on the
tabling of HB nineteen
apparently I did not hit the
mute button well enough and my
but was not recorded can I get
that into the record.
Okay I don't have a problem with
that because it has not been
reported so we can do that I was
Mr chairman I was a yes to table
your is a yes to table.
We have that here he's on the
record now thank you so much.
Thank you so with that we're
done today thank you
Representative Jim the need all.
You know landet right thank you
sure thank you thank you Mr
chair thank you everybody god
bless.
Thank you thank you everyone as.
Money and.
OCL at the end of that.
