this afternoon, evening, uh,
with co-sponsored representative
Joshua Hernandez and uh sponsor
Yanita Grola.
Uh, Madam Chair.
This bill is a fairly simple and
straightforward bill.
It attempts to do in my
estimation, two things. First
and primary, what it will do is
disallow any uh proprietor of an
establishment that that were in
the employee.
That they can
that that establishment cannot
use a portion of those tips to
pay for transaction fees on
cards. Federal law allows that.
Uh, but states can, can opt out
of that, and that's what we're
attempting to do. And at this
point, what I'd like to do is
have representatives,
representative Hernandez says a
few words.
Um,
I'll take part of what he said,
but House Bill 22 is a simple
but significant measure, um,
that ensures that tipped workers
in New Mexico receive every
dollar of the gratuities that
they earned, um, right now, some
employers deduct credit card
processing fees from employee
tips, meaning workers are losing
money even to the point that a
lot of the uh.
POS systems that you use in your
restaurants, for instance, um,
come with the feature and
between the business, um, and
that's what we are trying to get
rid of. Uh, I also do want to
mention that, you know, this
bill is not meant to penalize
small businesses as a small
business owner myself, I
understand what, you know, it
takes and the hardships that
they that they
face for operational costs, um,
But what we're addressing here
is a practice that unfairly
shifts a business expense onto
an employee, uh, who's already
working at a lower range, at a
lower wage. So,
Um, I would like to now turn it
over back over to Representative
De la Cruz.
Thank you, Representative
members of the committee, this
bill is about fairness, credit
card fees are a cost of doing
business and employers should
not be passing that cost on to
their employees. Workers in the
service industry rely on their
tips. It's not extra money, it's
their wages. Other states have
already put similar protections
in place, ensuring that credit
card processing fees aren't
taken out of
I'm sorry to interrupt you, but
our, we just got noticed that
our webcast is down.
So, um, we can't proceed. That
is going but our webcasts, so.
Someone texted us, are you?
I
So was it the break between?
OK.
OK.
OK,
sorry for that interruption.
We're good, Madam Chair. Should
I start again?
right.
As I was to say, in other states
have already taken measures to
prohibit this, and as a and as
representative Hernandez
mentioned, many modern point of
sale systems have updated their
settings to stop this practice
making compliance with the law
even easier.
This is a common sense update
that protects employees without
creating unnecessary hardship
for business owners. Finally,
this bill is.
I, in my estimation, an
emergency because every moment
that we delay in enacting this a
potential for tipped workers to
lose money that they desperately
need is reduced. I'm sure the
three of us are here to answer
questions, but let me just add
that to as far as my knowledge
is concerned related to states
that have enacted prohibition of
this type is California, Maine,
Massachusetts, Minnesota, New
Jersey, Pennsylvania.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
now stand for questions.
All of it, OK.
Sorry, madam, that's the three
of us stand for questions. OK,
thank you.
So we will go to the Zoom.
There's no one on the zoo for
this bill. OK, none in
opposition nor in favor,
correct? OK, thank you. Now
we'll go to the audience. Is
there anyone here in the
audience in opposition?
To this bill, HB 22.
All right. Anyone here in the
audience in favor of HB 22.
All right, so we have 2 in favor
if you would, um, the sergeant
at arms will hold the mic for
you, and you may begin.
You have 2 minutes. Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, thank you, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee, my name is uh Kristen
Thompson and I represent the New
Mexico Restaurant Association.
We're actually neutral on this
bill. I didn't know how to stand
up and say that. We do support
the intent.
Um, and, and upon talking to the
sponsors, we understand the
technological reasons why, um,
we believe that this is already
covered in state law, um, that
the minimum wage Act does, um,
does make it clear and it should
go back to my notes, um, does
make it clear, uh, that, uh,
this is a this.
Practice is prevented. Um, I am
grateful, however, that this
bill does highlight the hidden
costs of credit card processing
fees on tips, and how that
impacts the restaurant industry
and our employees from the FIR
on this bill, New Mexico's
restaurants process an estimated
$3.2 billion with a B in annual
sales with a significant portion
of that coming through credit
card transactions. When
customers
using a card, Restaurants are
forced to pay the processing fee
on that tip. Um, typically
ranging from 2% to 3.5%.
Um, at the high end, this
results in over 11
No.
$112 million per year. Million
with an M per year in fees paid
to process those tips. This
money leaves our state's economy
and could better be used to
support wages, benefits, or
business growth. For small
independently owned restaurants,
the fees on tips alone amount to
tens of thousands of dollars
annually.
For one
One establishment. Again, we
believe New Mexico's minimum
wage law already ensures that
tips belong to employees, but I
did want to raise the issue that
restaurants are forced to
subsidize financial institutions
through these fees instead of
reinvesting in our workers and
communities.
Thank you.
Madam Madam Chair, members of
the committee, I'm in favor of
this bill. I did not know that
practice was happening. I always
left cash for a tip.
But um now I'll be able to pay
the whole thing with my card.
Thank you.
Thank you.
And um so now we're too on the
committee and haven't seen any
hands yet. Representative Hall.
Madam Chair, Representative, his
mind's more of a comment.
Thank you for bringing this to
light.
I had no idea.
This was happening. I'm tipping
away my servers and generally.
Pretty good tipper actually.
So thank you. I just wanted to
say thank you for bringing this
to light because I have no clue.
Madam Chair.
Any other members of the
committee?
And be
I'm sorry,
who? I'm sorry.
I'm sure I kept seeing you look
over there and over there. I'm
sure.
Here's the thing.
Madam Chair, we are very
passionate about it, passionate
about this committee. I've never
left this committee because I
love it. I think it's a great
committee. I think we hear some
real interesting things. Um, but
Ma' representatives, I think
it's a great bill.
Um, you know,
This is one of those things
where it looks like you've got
us all together on, on, on as a
business guy myself, you know,
you have the right to
Um, charge.
A a percentage for use, the use
of your card.
Some restaurants could very
easily.
Pick up an extra 0.5% on, on
the, on the fee, right, because
it, what happens is that the
you, you said it perfect, the
point of sale, um, software.
Sometimes if you get your, your
receipt, it calculates it based
on, on your sale plus your tax
and all that, right? But it
doesn't consider the tip, right?
Because the tip is just the way
the software is made. And so the
tip is left off and they don't
calculate it in. Some people
probably don't realize that they
can, you know, maybe they're
paying 3%. They could go 3.5%.
And cover that and not be
impacted, and yet still take
care of their employees with
that tip that they that they
earned and they should keep. And
so I appreciate that you brought
this up. I, I don't know if
they'll after this, if this
situation passes, if they'll be
upgrades uh to the software
where they can show the whole
thing and make it a lot easier
for um for restaurants or
whatever, right? To just, when
it's all said and done, they can
that all back in there. I'm not
sure how that would work,
because you usually do it after,
as you're leaving. I'm your
representative.
Right, so, um, Madam Chair and
Representative, so, um, in the
back end of a lot of these POS
systems, it's just calculated in
so at the end of the night, each
server gets a receipt with the
tip, the credit card amounts.
are to receive and it it just
out of that takes whatever the
percentage that was set up in
the system and I'm sure it's
different across different POS
systems, um, of what that
percentage is, but then you just
have your receipt that says, oh,
you made $74.12 and it has after
this, that will have to be like
not done anymore, so maybe it'll
come out to be $84 instead of
the $74 because that percentage
has not been taken out at this
point.
I think this is a win-win
situation, Madam Chair,
Representative just a little bit
of adjustment from both the
business end and, and, and it
helps the, the, the employers,
or excuse me, the employees, uh,
benefits, so great legislation.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Representative,
before I, before I recognize no
other there's, I'm gonna just
ask for a clarification.
And I'm, I'm happy that I.
I'm able to participate on this
bill. So thank um
representatives. This is
critically important ever since
of office, I've been asked to
address this issue. I have done
so with the introduction of
those uh that includes.
Uh, to employees and all other
uh we haven't gotten to that
point yet.
Hopefully this is to do this
bill, but
It's been brought to my
attention even after we passed
the last minute number of
employees.
Um, and it was brought up my, my
sons, my son has been a, uh, at
least he worked himself through
school that peeves was that tip
and they were all keeping track
of it.
And then at the end of the day,
they were all afraid to because
they were needed their job in
order to finish school and they
all thankfully finished school.
Um
And lately, I've been hearing
more and more.
About this. So for years and
years and years, our practice,
um, because we know.
That this has been a, a problem.
So on page 3.
Where you added the new section.
This is the new section that
you're adding.
Which then
is reinforces your presentation.
Which says that an employer that
allows patrons to pay tips by
credit card.
shall pay the employee the full.
Amount of the gratuity.
That the patron indicates with
no deductions.
So I just asked this question,
do we have any feedback?
From um
The tip employees or from the
restaurant or from anybody.
How they then can determine and
maybe representative and on is
sort of touched on that, that
can determine whether that in
fact is happening because the
employee doesn't, isn't privy to
what the charges are at the end,
so that's my concern or my
question. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So,
To my microphones are different
than ours next door. Um, OK, so
in talking with a handful of
restaurants, um, about their POS
systems in the last handful of
days. My understanding is, is
that um when they get them and
they're installed, this option
to have the portion of the
credit card tip is, it's a check
box. It's, it's enabled by
default anywhere that isn't on
the list. Um, now, the way that
it would work is the uh
On the bill goes into effect,
the check box would be undone,
um, through a software update
and then any new POS systems
that come into the state would
not would not be allowed to have
that checked. It would be like a
grayed out checkbox. Um,
I don't run a POS system, so I
don't know how valid any of that
is, but that is the information
in talking to a, a handful of
restaurants, um, that I got
because I was curious about the
same thing is how
You know, how can we verify that
it's been turned on or off, and
it's apparently just a setting
in, in the back end of their POS
system, a lot of people, um,
three of the restaurants I
talked to had never actually
logged into the back end of
their of their.
Um, like the settings panel, but
they knew it was there. It was
a, it was a feature that they
could look up on the, on the
website and see that it was, it
was something that was
installed. So,
I am, uh, yeah, so there is a
whole path with this. It may not
go into effect exactly on the
day, but pretty close after is
my hope.
Thank you, then we'll have to
just trust that the systems are
working and then employees will
know what they have done.
Um, yeah, we, it, it's a trust
game with this one because
there's hundreds of POS software
developers trying to get in
touch with every single one of
those it's gonna be another FTE
somewhere.
Thank you.
The committee would pass, but
I'm sure.
OK, so there's a motion that was
made by Representative Tarazas
was there who seconded?
Representative Anaya, all right.
Is there any opposition to this
bill?
Any opposition? All right. Then
representatives, uh, you have a
due pass by acclamation.
And um thank you for your
patience. Thank you for waiting.
I don't even know how many hours
it was anymore. But anyway,
thank you. You have a you pass
3.5 hours. Thank you.
