Representative Alcon chair hill.
So for all Representative dela
Cruz joined he was in the
attendees so I promoted him and
he's not here when he was here
before but not top okay what
about Representative Garcia.
Representative Garcia things
will be late.
Okay so we I think we're very in
the attendees handle a.
Mr chair.
Excuse me I just wanna let you
know that I ran into
Representative Anderson on the
way up here any asked for me to
message to you that you like to
roll the bill he wasn't feeling
very good today and he wanted it
is on his way out he said he
didn't feel is not feeling well.
Thank you about one.
Yes Sir Mr chair.
It's a great.
Actually there's a letter I
think everybody's that didn't
that nobody's got a dinner
tonight the democratic pockets
so this will get everybody to
dinner on time.
Thank you Representative for the
information.
Okay so in that case
Representative Garrett did you
bring this has to be brought in.
Yes I need stand rounds and of
David Archuleta.
Correct correct that if you're
there raise your hands okay they
are I wish to spend rounds.
Yeah.
Workshop which down round and we
want for the second one.
Okay now we have one.
Okay.
We got a.
You read you representative here
at the house bill seventy three
yes I am Mr chair.
Okay so you're ready the hot
seat as years go ahead and start
okay House Bill hold on a second
thank you.
Years.
The door for me.
I'm sorry he's in the next room
so you can
Your.
I just got a close the door.
Okay.
The three as amended is an
educational retirees return to
work
as amended it creates a new
return to work program for
educational retirees who are
receiving pension benefits from
the educational retirement board
currently an educator who wishes
to return to full time work has
to sit out for a full year
before returning.
Then not retiree can return to
work for as many years that they
want to work fifty more years
twenty more years seven more
years they can't.
This bill allows a retiree to
return to work after ninety
dates but there's a cap the
individual can only return for
thirty six months the employee
and the E. R. B. employer both
have to eight to the R. B. fund
and the employer does not accrue
any additional work credit they
do continue to receive their ERP
tension during this time the
urgency of this bill is that
we're at a tipping point more
we're short more than a thousand
fifty teachers were short more
than four hundred and fifty
educational assistance for
instructional aides and we also
have shortages and
transportation workers
custodians cafeteria workers
secretarial and clerical staff.
This provision will attract some
educational employees in any E.
R. B. work category
But in analyzing it because they
continue they have to pay into
the E. R. B. it doesn't have any
significant impact on the
frontier with that I'd like to
invite this okay Mister chair a
stand rounds is the executive
director of the New Mexico
mission of educational leaders
and then David Archuleta who's
the executive director of the
New Mexico educational
retirement board is here to
answer any questions.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I'm gonna go ahead
and do this off my phone because
the audio on this computer is
not working just a sound check
can you hear me.
Okay very good thank you so much
so Mister chairman members the
committee this bill does not
make any changes to the existing
return to work provisions in the
law as Representative Garrett
that sponsor indicated there
several provisions including
laying out a full year the
fourteen come back come full of
full sorry there's a provision
that is a twenty five percent
provision there is a provision
for fifteen thousand dollars a
maximum over adding is a new
section hi and this is to deal
with the emergency we're at this
point or we cannot provide
substitutes for cheaters in the
call are certain this provision
allows a lay out of ninety days
and then an employee being of
the returned for either thirty
six consecutive or non
consecutive months under this
particular provision now that
you go back out and come back
from some of the provision of
the future but this limits the
liability to the ER bait the
offset is that the employer and
employee both will pay their
standard contributions that are
not if all the all of this so as
we all spent on we believe this
bill revenue neutral impact to
the R. B. but allow us to have
teachers returns after ninety
days lay out and do the
important work of selling
classrooms today we have over a
thousand classrooms without
teachers and a daily right on
top of that we have four to six
hundred substitute assignments
on failed we have the expertise
required.
Mr chair I don't know if David
Archuleta the executive director
of ERP wants to add any.
Thank you or David if you would
like to just be there for
questions up to you.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and members of the committee as
mentioned my name is David R.
twelve to the executive director
of the educational retirement
board I'm here today to help
answer any questions that may
come about as executive director
actually answer to a board and
that board did not actually
adopt a formal position either
supporting or opposing the
proposed legislation since they
haven't met since last time this
bill since this bill has been
introduced so we stand neutral
given the fact that the the
board that the bill has any
material impact on our on our
finances and with that I would
stand for any questions.
Thank you.
And with that Representative
Garrett and you're ready to
You go to the attendees and see
a have them give their opinion
on your legislation.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Okay at this time we'll go to
the attendee list and I will ask
those of you who want to speak
in favor of the legislation.
Raise your hands I will give you
approximately no more than two
minutes okay I don't think you
need more than that.
I and
I see a few hands up there so I
will start with the first one
Sean Powell.
Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you very much
for the opportunity to address
you I am the presentation Mexico
university at Roswell I'm also
retired veteran for members of
the committee I was in the Air
National Guard and also the Air
Force so I appreciate the work
your committee is doing.
I think the state knows that
this is the first time that the
National Guard has been called
out to service substitute
teachers.
Typically the guard mission is
to have a federal mission state
mission in a local mission but
the state of New Mexico put
soldiers and airmen on state
active duty to work as a
substitute teachers I believe
it's the first time in the
history of the National Guard
that that's occurred I would
encourage support this
legislation due to the time
limit nature of it also from a
local area because perspective
here we have around two hundred
full time employees on the
Roswell campus with the
interview and last year in
twenty twenty one we went for
months and had thirty openings
so that's more than fifteen
percent of our full time staff
and so we do have concerns
about being able to fill all
these vacancies and I believe
also higher education is part of
the R. B. and I urge give
support of this legislation
thank you Sir.
All.
The.
Really may R. G. sh.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee it's a pleasure for me
to be here with you this evening
I am willing more tease the
legislative liaison for the New
Mexico school board association
and Mr chairman The New Mexico
school board association
maintains a membership of eighty
nine school districts throughout
the state of New Mexico with
four hundred fifty strong school
board member voices Mr chairman
and members of the committee
because of the crisis of the
current teacher shortage in her
Mr rounds mentioned that there's
about a thousand open classrooms
every day it is critical Mr
chair to write a mechanism that
will bring qualified teachers
back into the classrooms The New
Mexico school board association
has continually over the years
supported return to work
legislation which allows retired
school personnel to return to
work after their retirement The
New Mexico school board
association also supports
legislative action that keeps
school personnel Floyd and in
front of our students we
wholeheartedly believe this let
session Mr chairman we just the
committee for favorable
consideration and to move it
forward and we think the sponsor
Mr chairman for all the work
they've done to bring this
legislation before you thank
you.
And then we'll go to wouldn't
that a
Warniment.
Thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee I'd like to
first thank the sponsors for
bringing forth this legislation
I am the deputy secretary at the
public education department we
stand in strong support of this
bill you've heard eloquently
about the need to fill vacancies
across our educator ecosystem.
We are standing in strong
support of this bill for those
reasons but more so because
these educators play a vital
role in building the mentors
being those veteran educators
who are grounded in community
the leaders that will help
support and bolster the pipeline
as once as we simultaneously
work to build a those younger
educators who are now filling in
rules so these educators these
veteran educators that are
returning to work a really
critical piece of providing some
solid expertise that is much
needed in our system right now
so thank you for your
consideration.
Thank you and John rice.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my
name's John birch I'm with the
American federation of teachers
New Mexico and we're also here
in support of house bill seventy
three the sponsor Representative
Garrett laid out a lot of the
reasons why a bill like this is
appropriate at this time as
educational you we generally
have been hesitant about
revisiting return to work
provisions however the the
crisis that we're in right now
in our schools regarding
vacancies and the need for
experienced educators to step
into those roles really makes
this legislation critical at
this juncture in our educational
process the other thing that's
nice about this legislation is
that it would encompass any of
the rules within the E. R. B. as
already we've had educational
systems transportation
professionals and retired
teachers all reach out to us and
say we're ready to roll up our
sleeves and get back in the
schools and help out our
students and our community so we
would urge the committee to
support house bill seventy three
for all of the reasons that
folks have mentioned so far
thank you.
And peers Jones.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee and
thank you Representative Garrett
for sponsoring this bill my name
is and Pearce Jones I am
president of the A. F. T. New
Mexico retirees chapter and on
behalf of our organization I am
speaking in favor of house bill
seventy three as amended we
strongly support the bill.
We have a staffing shortage of
crisis proportions in New
Mexico's public schools in this
bill is essentially a crisis
intervention measure the bill
would allow retired educators to
help alleviate the crisis by
returning to the classroom on a
short term and very part time
basis hired directly by local
administrative units it would
provide stable experienced
licensed educators who are
capable of landing running.
Who are interested in helping to
mitigate the current crisis but
who do not wish to I'm retired
so to speak retire res used in
this way would provide staffing
stability and the hiring
districts and would be more
qualified than either
substitutes or national
guardsmen.
They would help ensure that New
Mexico's children receive a
quality standards based
education.
The ninety day lay out period is
reasonable and it makes it
possible for more recent
retirees to step in to serve.
Since not all retirees maintain
their licenses after they retire
allowing recent retirees to
serve increases the pool of
persons eligible to serve and
insurers that educators with
recent experience can help.
Requiring these retirees to make
contributions to the E. R. B.
would benefit the fund in a
positive way.
The retirees would be capped at.
Point two five F. T. and less
than fifteen thousand dollars
per year in earnings this is not
a living wage nor is it likely
to be equivalent to a retiree's
pension benefits retirees would
also be limited to a maximum of
thirty six months of service
under the program under these
circumstances continuing
retirees pension benefits as
provided in the bill is critical
to their economic ability to
step in on this limited basis to
help mitigate the current
staffing crisis.
For these reasons A. F. T. New
Mexico retirees strongly urge
you to support house bill
seventy three as amended thank
you so much.
With the Rodriguez.
Thank you chairman and members
of the committee I am Stephanie
Rodriguez nine the cabinet
secretary of the higher
education department and our
agency stands in strong support
of H. B. seventy three as
amended and we think the Sanchez
for bringing this piece of
legislation forward higher
education has a role to play the
majority of faculty members at
our colleges and universities
make contributions to the
state's educational retirement
system and many of our future in
newly retired faculty members
are eager to assess the state
with our current educator
shortages but currently the
statute and rules discourages
them from teaching in our
classrooms upon retirement this
bill would allow our retired
faculty members to teach without
any benefits or wages being
penalized retired faculty
members from our colleges and
universities are highly
qualified and able to step up
for New Mexico but we must do
our part to protect their wages
benefits and lightly hits thank
you Mr chair.
Laurie Harris.
Hello my name is Laurie Harris
Mr chairman and members of the
committee I would like to stand
and support at this house bill
seventy three
The shortages that educators in
New Mexico in the US is a
complicated issue will not be
solved with one bill but however
in the feet past few years every
time a bell rings an educator
lease leaving the that
profession and when one leaves
it just put stress on those are
left behind in school is
resulted in emergency situations
and retirees would like to help
house bill seventy three gives
school districts immediate
access to hire from a pool of
skilled educators who were
previously unavailable changing
the waiting period to ninety
days will make recent retirees
available to return to work in
September being flexible with
time and scheduling will also
help get retirees back in the
classroom often schools need to
have time educator for position
retirees are the perfect answer
to fill these spots for example
permanent subs testing
professionals reading and math
specialist tech support title
one X. cetera would be
attractive positions to recent
retirees imagine how much help
it could be to a school
dispassionate substitute on
staff every Friday your support
this bill will show educators
and students that they are
respected and valued in that
you're listening to their cries
for help thank you so much.
Years ago.
I believe that I already spoke
Mr Chairman
Let's do it again all right
okay do we have anybody opposed
to the legislation.
And anybody you raise your hands
the lead to back backdrop system
that'll see anybody.
So I hope I'm not missing
anybody did I miss anybody on
the other side.
No okay I don't have any hands
right.
So I will go back to the
committee and Representative
Garrett.
You are the.
Sponsor you have anything to add
before I go to the committee.
Thank you Mr chair I'm I just
believe that this bill is really
going to support our students
and their families and our
schools it gives a way for
people to return that makes a
lot of sense and so with that I
stand for questions and Mr round
sent Mr Archuleta will also be
here if it a question is
appropriate to them.
Representative.
Your first.
Thank you Mr chair and
do I understand that retirees
will be limited to fifteen
thousand dollars a year.
More and and Representative that
was the error on the part of the
person there is an existing
statute that you can come back
after ninety days if you are
only working a point two five
F. T. E. R. that's already in
statute this bill allows
somebody to come back full time
after ninety days but again they
can only do that for thirty six
months.
Thank you that makes more sense
to me also has any a taken a
position on this bill.
Mr chair and representative I
spoke with their president and
their governmental affairs spoke
in favor of this at the house
Education Committee but I can't
really speak for them personally
except for having heard the
testimony.
Thank you methyl my questions
thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Representative I will
go to Representative view of
black.
Thank thank you Mr chair
representative.
In this bill.
Have the provision where they
the teachers already have your
retired or would they be allowed
to retired state this week or in
two weeks from now and then come
back in is is there something in
this bill that would.
Prevent that mass exodus of
everybody that's sitting on the
can retire to be able to retire
then to come back.
Mr.
Representative that's a great
question are we really don't
expect director retirees
retirement itself takes a couple
of months as somebody who
recently went through it to
myself but maybe Mr rounds are
Mr archer led to if you would
like to comment on that.
Thank you madam sponsor and
that.
Representative the the ninety
day prevention would come into
effect
after signature by the governor
and the waiting time that is in
statute for that this does not
have an emergency clause it is
most likely the people protest
rates would naturally retire at
the end of this year and the
service might be delayed as far
as October the first for next
year
but what this does do is provide
that opening for staff we
believe that the thirty six
months limitation does a
consecutive or non consecutive
months by the way will most
likely present the access
question you're asking.
Okay thank you for that I'm.
I guess I'm still a little.
This.
Confused by that because I I
would be concerned that we've
got teachers that are they're
sitting at their twenty five
year and they could actually go
ahead and and do their
retirement set out for the
ninety days
potentially that would be what
this goes into effect in June
July would I believe.
I'm David.
I'm sorry
you Mr chairman.
That would be correct they most
likely fire engine.
Perhaps there would be than that
ninety daylight out right by
office right the model.
What about October first as our
availability at that point the
box would be a thirty six months
service clock that they can
serve and then this protect for
this particular feature in the
retirement return to work within
seats on their behalf.
Mr Chairman representative I
want to add one other thing that
so work currently we're working
to pass a raises up to fifty
sixty and seventy thousand for
current teachers I do believe
from teachers that I know who
are eligible to retire that
that's an attractive way for
them not to retire at this time
so just want to point that out
to everybody.
Thank you for that and
representative so I okay and
then that triggers my next
question so for instance if it
at I miss can you tell me what
the teacher of that has a
master's degree gets paid.
Mr chair and representative we
have three levels level one
level two level three currently
I believe it's forty one
thousand.
Of the forty five thousand
eighty five thousand sixty five
thousand please correct me if I
am off on that
that's that's a about the pay a
someone with a master's degree
through the level two would get
fifty five thousand or in that
range.
somebody who's completed their
dust year masters or is a
national board certified teacher
would be in the sixty five
thousand range currently
salaries are slightly different
of people get certain seconds
for certain jobs.
Thank you.
Madam sponsored.
Chairman that the point that the
monster made is that under your
current house bill two and the
enabling legislation Senate bill
one that they are raising those
minimums to fifty sixty and
seventy thousand dollars and
while we can't assure you
exactly what those hours would
be I think you could consider
the rains are added eight to ten
thousand dollars the numbers the
representative Derek just gave
you as far as next year
salaries.
Thank you for that and one last
question so if a teacher were to
come back next year would they
enter back in at the at the
level that they retire at or do
they start at the bottom and go
back.
A great question Mr Chairman
representative they ensure that
where they left they don't if if
they were a level three teacher
making sixty five thousand they
return as a level three tier
with that salary category.
Okay thank you Representative
thank you for answer my
questions.
Yes Mr chair.
Employment mute button
Representative long gap.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Representative for thank you for
bringing this bill forward for
us I don't have any questions I
just wanted to see thank you we
are in sector crisis right now
within our education I think my
heart broke when I saw the
National Guard called in to
teach in our schools and while
I'm so incredibly thankful we
have the men and women who
served in that to help out
within the education system we
need teachers so desperately who
are trained to be able to teach
our children in the classroom so
while I understand this bill
isn't a solve all the lows in
the education world I do think
because we're in such a crisis
mode right now that is
absolutely critical also and
thank you again and if there are
any educators out there for
those who support the schools
in other capacities just want to
say a huge less Utah to to all
of you because I our children
you need right now thank you.
Thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Representative I have
to say that I'm hoping some of
those national guards are really
inspired to go into teaching
because in talking to the people
that do are COVID testing some
of them have incredible
background so maybe this will
give them a push just my little
observation there.
What will be my last the
representative back up.
Thank you Mr chairman
I'll tell you I support this
bill being an HR myself in
overseeing it in my district and
also being president of the New
Mexico personal association I
support the bill.
My only question is regarding
the
health benefits from the report
the employee retirement benefits
as you guys know one of the
things that kind of complicated
why we saw mass sex it is in two
thousand twenty was that in
order for the folks to to not
have to work to age fifty five
they had to retire by June
thirtieth of twenty twenty so my
question to these folks as those
folks that left in two thousand
twenty because they wanted to
catch a cab how are the eligible
for health benefits how will
that affect them in any way so.
I hope you can answer that are
because even thought about that
but the employee health.
Budget as you guys know that's a
big reason why a lot of people
do that it's very expensive.
With these people then be able
to get the lower rate.
For their health benefits if
they choose to come back and
they are I'm not quite fifty
five.
Mr chairman and members the
committee I can answer the
question I used to I was
previously at the retiree health
care forty up until about a
month ago and I was there when
we implemented the rule change
requiring people to meet that
minimum age requirement I would
tell you the different the
retired before June thirtieth of
twenty twenty one which was last
year they are grandfathered
under the previous rule so even
if they return to work for a
period of three years are long
and they say return to work and
they're still not the age of
fifty five David qualified for
that hires for the subsidy
levels that were provided to
them before.
thank you Mr chairman I do I do
think that that could be
attractive to folks because
again some people may not I I I
can tell you that right now we
had folks retired in my district
of.
In December of twenty twenty one
so I just want to make sure that
these folks coming back in there
fully understands that if they
come back they will then go to
the
Payment and the subsidy from the
district and for the state that
they will see increase or lower
health costs to their insurance
if they are now paying for it on
their own.
That is correct as of my correct
in that.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Mr tell us I know for the
questions.
Make sure you got the right
answer to this I have been to.
So.
I think you're going to be able
to enter this so this due to
those back.
We'll continue having the
benefits that that teacher had
when that teacher was working
full time with that that exactly
what we're saying.
Mr chairman you are correct in
that if I retired in December of
this year that this past year
and let's say I laid out until
the beginning of the next school
year I'm gonna be on the retiree
health care of forty and then as
soon as I become an active
employee again I can then pick
up benefits through the school
system as an active employee at
this see that the subsidies are
higher for for an active
employee in the costs of less
for an active employee than they
are retiree they are eligible
for those benefits when they
rejoin the workforce and then
they can transition back to the
retiree health care forty when
they retire retire for the
expiration of the thirty six
months.
Thank you thank you that's great
well I mean I I I had to do that
retiree health care and it was
crazy okay I will go to
representative that ISIS.
Sarah Representative thank you
for bringing this legislation
out we definitely need our
educators back without shortage
my question is we'll start with
with this Mr chair
representative the emergency
clause is the reason why we're
not get emergency calls
reporting on the March to close.
Mr chair and representative to
us we just decided that it
wasn't needed so we didn't go to
the emergency clause it was just
you know fifty fifty we didn't
do it.
As a survival rates complete
answer more if you look at the
timeline to how this bill would
roll out after the governor's
signature if you put an
emergency clause on which was
the additional pressure it would
not gain you much net and what
the actual
cadence of retirement would be
as we didn't feel like that was
a necessary part of your
consideration.
and I can't remember the
timeline that Mr chair
representative that she has to
sign it I think it's fourteen
days after the session closed is
that correct.
I believe shows.
It's a decision on signature and
then I believe there's a
fourteen day period well I
believe it's upon search I think
it's a twenty day but I may be
wrong Representative I'm not
sitting in one of your chairs.
Mr chair representative I I just
was trying to get this thing
going because I'm thinking if
this is going to if I understand
it right so then we are just
June July August what should be
July first so July August
September and they come to work
on October I'm just thinking
about
Yes having the National Guard
service.
Well then and I'm just trying to
get them back out doing you know
but back home or whatever and
get these teachers and they're
so as possible what what do you
what would the difference be and
in time.
How much time would regain if it
will have development birch
Clause Madam chair
representative Mr Chairman
representative it's based on the
retirees ninety dates so if the
governor let's say she said she
finds that and March and let's
say the retire reed already
retired on December twenty you
know thirty first they can come
back even at at the beginning of
summer for a summer program for
example many retirees retire on
June first or July first and so
their ninety day period would be
based on legislative some of the
retires I know retire may first
so they could come back ninety
days so so it's the ninety days
is the retirees ninety days
regardless of when the governor
actually signed into law.
Thank you madam chair
representative the other
question that I have are they
going to be contributing into
being that they're gonna be
fully employed will they be
contributing into the retirement
fund Mr chair and representative
absolutely that they fully
contributes to the E. are
building their employer Mike
white's fully contributes their
portion.
What
are responsible and the.
But.
So Mr chair a Representative I
hope that these people go
golfing and joy there more
whatever the gonna do fishing
hunting well I don't know what
they're gonna do for ninety days
take a break and come back and
help us bring our kids
education back up and and
hopefully this works thank you
that's all I have and I support
your legislation.
You will get your go again we
get about my mute button am I
missing anybody if not I will go
to vice chair Roybal Caballero.
And thank you Representative
first I'd like to just up go
ahead and and really expand my
thank you thanks to the National
Guard to the governor having
kicked in hi dear so fast in
addressing our teacher shortage
but more importantly and
ensuring that our students on
learning needs continued and I
think I think that was the
perfect example of how
I'm National Guard does
exemplary work in public service
so I just wanted to start with
that and then
wearing several hats and wanted
to bring up Mr chair couple of
things one that I also sit on
the house Education Committee
and we overwhelmingly endorsed
this bill thirteen zero to move
forward toward committee for
this all of the funds that were
stated obviously and then we're
going to have the and then
investments and pensions
oversight I did have a question
for distracted that that if you
could
Mr chair and representative and
that is that in discussing and
having discussions throughout
concerning our retirement funds
I want to make sure that it's
understood that one I'm very
proud to say that B. E. R. B.
it.
Have an exemplary report and
actually use on moving into an
affect on a faster pace than
probably for a lot of different
reasons in a dressing compensate
and so if Mr chair that that
could please explain
What impact if any the this bill
would have and what is described
as having really neutral the
school.
Could you do that Mr Chairman
representative.
Yes Mr chairman and madam vice
chair Caballero.
So basically.
Requiring the non refundable
employment where contributions
largely offset the negative
impact that return to work
legislation would have
you know basically these people
are anyone the returns to work
is not going to get an
additional benefit but they are
required to make those
contributions to the fund that
will bank roll and help support
benefits are being paid to
members that today so really the
the only potential negative
impact that there might be is
incentivizing in individual to
retire sooner than they
otherwise would have so if I was
you know I thought to myself I'm
gonna hang around another three
years because they're boosting
salaries and I'm gonna have a
higher pension earning or let's
I'm gonna hang out another five
years
Otherwise the Senate and
incentivizing them to leave
sooner than that which is
impossible to measure but.
Basically it's it's being offset
by the fact that anyone that is
coming back into the system is
required to meet those are non
refundable contributions.
And now Mr chairman madam madam
vice chair hope that answers the
question.
I think that the term offset is
really important in this
conversation because that's
exactly what it does and that's
important to note in these
discussions and that's what kind
of differentiate by obviously
there are a lot of reasons that
differentiate.
Differentiate this particular
bill from the others that we've
seen previously concerning para
but more importantly I think our
our children's needs are being
met and there are provisions
that were written into this
particular bill that find.
Take into consideration
the intent is not to create a
temporary fix without paying
attention to the bigger picture
and I think the Sanchez and all
know that that's really being
can't I just wanted to stand for
support of this
Bill and encourage
the members of all right thank
you Mr.
Representative thank you madam
vice chair representative asked
if your hand is still up.
I already spoke with Mr chair
thank you I'm sorry I lowered my
hand all will pay
Representative but I see your
hand back.
Yesterday Mr I make a motion for
a do us.
On a house bill seventy three.
Sierra house bill seventy three
as amended in my correct.
Okay.
I just have one question I have
a proper second the proper
motion and a proper second but I
will question everybody else ask
everything else that I wanted to
hear of the thirty six months is
that thirty six consecutive
months or is that thirty six
working a lot.
Mr brown can you answer that
please.
Thank you the answer is that it
is thirty six consecutive or non
consecutive months Mr chair is
your including two there may be
situations where you would work
last Matt Paul Bahnson surface
and therefore to stand the
amount of time if you will for
the thirty six months to be
utilized our I think we'll have
to see how that plays out but
the office that we believe will
like keep the sun implies and
allowed districts to work with
those who step up in the service
provisioning to take care of
what needs to happen in schools.
The good work either way.
Yes.
Okay I have I'm done I have a
proper motion proper second
madam secretary would you call
the roll please.
Representative before I called
Rowe Representative Art De La
Cruz has been trying to log in
and the people from I. T. came
into the committee room at three
fifteen and they can't find
them.
We're going to coach yes.
You want to.
Representative reams offering.
Okay.
I would like Cruz.
No that's that's the no it's
Representative Art De La Cruz
the new member.
No I understand that but that's
what I'm saying that that.
I'm not sure.
Yes.
This is our dealer Cruz I can
hear you loud and clear I am on
on Representative remains a
computer because my state
computer went on the blink I've
been going from office to office
finally found Representative
Rehm and so here I am that's
it thank you Representative
okay.
White hair and his initiation Mr
chair there are is the right way
to treat a new fresh.
Thank you Representative do you
think you were figured out a way
to join us in this case now we
are ready to vote on house bill
seventy three I will.
Representative you're able to
hear enough to make a decision I
did I could hear but I couldn't
get anybody's attention I'm
going to vote at this time
chairman at this time we will we
were going to start the vote
thank you.
Right now that we got this
together you can start the.
calling the roll see if the vote
okay Representative Baca yes
Representative bash yes
Representative black yes
Representative well thank yes.
Representative dela Cruz yes
Representative Garcia.
Yes.
Representative Rubio yes
Representative Terrazas yes.
Representative Roybal all come
by and vice chair.
Yes
Representative chair yes.
Thank.
Those ten zero one half.
The interest zero vote the
luck and not just another
committee before the floor I
know this is where the floor
thank you Mr chair thank you
committee all right thank you.
And I will belong I got a
gentleman like.
Okay for the benefit of those
people that that didn't hear it
early here Representative be
with
less informed us that
Representative Anderson would
not be here it will be here to
here house bill one ten the
distinctive somebody's waiting
on that.
We're not going to hear it.
So we will go to house bill one
of six Representative Rehm.
Representative related hill.
Yes Mister chairman I'm here
okay so you have anybody we want
to bring up that the panelists
yes I want to bring up.
The New Mexico state police
chief Tim Johnson.
Okay three years later they're.
You've just been promoted.
Mr chair members the committee
yes ma'am yes Sir I am I'm here
thank you Sir okay
Representative Rehm.
Are you.
The hot seat as years go ahead
network eight thank you Mr
chairman okay so I've got house
bill one of six house bill one
of six is state pension and
oversight committee and Bob
first piece of legislation and I
want to go through a couple
particular areas that this bill
covers so if we look at.
If we look at page.
Eight one fifteen sixteen in
this bill only applies to law
enforcement.
And so if we look at one fifteen
and sixteen you see that the
separation is ninety days the
reason for the separation being
short is that a police officer
has a two year period to do
forty hours of a basic we heard
it in service training and forty
hours of advanced training it is
training is not up to standard
or he if he's gone beyond that
two years Danny just to go back
to the Katamon or to a cert by
waiver class so that's why it's
that short.
Down at the bottom.
E. J. eight one twenty four so
the member can decide a I'm
up so spend my retirement go
back to work get more service
credit.
That's already available to in
and that will remain available
but in line eight or twenty four
if you decide to come back and
collect his retirement he's not
gonna get anymore time and
greater retirement service the
budget is our retirement.
And on page nine.
He's going to continue to make
contributions well that's really
important and there's a document
that I sent to Mr Chairman last
night hopefully it's in your
share file it's a you are a
letter.
some.
Somewhere I can find it
something like that.
If you all have that your turn
to the last the second to last
page and you'll notice for the
first couple pages what it's
describing as how much money
have these return to work
versions put into the retirement
fund with no future benefits.
Well what you see on that page
is just seeing the M. total is
thirty one thirty one point four
million.
And that's our contribution to
the fund with no future benefits
that's what these return to work
guys would be doing if you look
down at the bottom you'll see
are different funds that we have
and so we see state police and
correction and we see that it
has a funding ratio of a hundred
and twenty nine percent.
It's over funded and the reason
is over funded is because we the
legislature from that.
If we look down at
Municipal police we see that
they need an increase in this is
in the far right an increase of
six point two one percent is
there funding go ahead make it
fully funded.
So these return to work or going
to put money into this fund and
are gonna have no future budget.
Now look at this page money and
we look at number eleven and
there's two things on there I
want to highlight this person
can come back as a sworn
officer.
Or you can come back as a
civilian.
Now why would we have a civilian
we could use the man and
the
evidence of a crime scenes and
many of the different jobs that
he doesn't have to be a sworn
officer.
R. the other thing that's on
that wine is entry level.
And I want achieve Johnson in a
minute to speak about what is
entry level what does it mean
because each agency has a
standard operating procedure or
an agreement as to how
individuals will be promoted so
entry level has specific
meaning.
Now Mr chairman I have an
amendment.
And I'd like to move the
amendment and this is amendment
to to to.
Four nine nine point two.
The bill a mixed baby amendment
Representative.
Okay this is on page.
The amendment for discussion
purposes okay thank you and I
have a second from
Representative device us.
Okay good.
Thank you.
No.
On page nine between winds nine
and sister ten we will insert a
new paragraph six and it says
retired member is not
subsequently employed by the
largest municipal police
department located in a classe
county with a population that is
greater than six hundred
thousand according to the most
recent federal.
US Census.
And the reason for this is.
APD says they don't want to.
And so if they don't want to be
part of it then that's fine
we'll just take amount and this
will help those smaller agencies
in New Mexico state police.
And with that Mr chairman I'd
like your chief Johnson to talk
about what is in tree level.
Well let's finish the amendment
part for okay let's do that okay
I was just wondering if I had
anybody anybody have any
questions on the amendment.
No do I have anybody in the
audience who wants to speak for
or against the amendment.
Nope I do okay.
branches Gonzalez would you like
to do with us say something
about the amendment.
I guess not.
Okay not go back to the.
I go back to the committee no
but no one has any questions
about the amendment.
Representative Maestas go ahead
Mr chair I don't have a question
I just want to thank
Representative read for making
that adjustment because I was a
big issue apparently and this
this this is wonderful because
this amendments committee.
Support all the rural
communities that are really in
need of this legislation thank
you very much Mr Chairman
representative why don't you
make the motion to accept the
amendment.
Except the amendment Mr chair.
And.
And I have a second I'll second
that.
Okay that so therefore you have
an amended bill Representative
do Rio.
Okay thank you.
Okay.
Yeah.
Levels.
Representative.
Chief.
Whenever you're ready yes Sir Mr
chair members of the committee
thank you those some background
noise wasn't sure that you're
calling me.
Also again I appreciate the
opportunity speak today have
many things to say
Representative Rehm told me to
hold until the end but to kind
of discuss what entry level
employee would be for a police
departments it would be it would
be an officer out on the street
or as he mentions in the bill a
civilian that we can use to
replace officers on the street
and so I think what's what's
important here is I think last
Thursday we overheard to built
back to back where there was
some opposition and they brought
up some things about stifling
wages about the.
Career progression of of law
enforcement officers I think
it's very important from a state
police standpoint to explain to
all of you how that won't be a
factor for us and and that won't
be a factor because of our
policies and procedures which
state which lines out how
quickly a new officer contest
for sergeant how quickly a new
officer well contested for a
lateral transfer from patrol you
know to say our bomb team or to
our investigations bureau so we
already have that lined out so
that I think that kind of
eliminate some of the things
that they were talking about
last week our policy is very.
A very solid on those matters
and of some of the things that
were brought up which I assume
will be brought up again today I
believe are eliminated by strong
policies and procedures which
which the state police has and
frankly we could use this
legislation at this very moment
as as good all your communities
so I think that's what you want
Representative thank you Mr
chair.
With that Mr Chairman will stand
for questions.
Your Mr chair.
You see what I really love the
only one intelligent enough to
understand me that's why you
can't hear me.
I will at this time go to the
attendees and those of you'll
want to speak in favor of this
legislation if you will raise
your hand I'll give you a couple
of minutes to speak up.
I see do hands right so far so
I'll start with the first one
Sarah fitz Gerald.
Good evening Mister chair
members of the committee I'm
sorry it's Gerald's senior vice
president of the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
we're in support of this bill
and we think Representative
Ramon all of his co sponsors for
bringing it for many years our
chamber has supported allowing
police departments to hire
retired officers under certain
conditions in order to bolster
their ranks return to work for
police officers would reduce
response times increase arrests
and all experienced veteran
officers to remain on our
streets without this policy in
place we're inviting officers to
retire here and move elsewhere
why would we do that what a loss
that is for communities we badly
need officers throughout New
Mexico return to work is one
important tool we can use to
help thank you.
I will go to a friend's is once
had this.
Good evening Mister chair
committee members and thank you
to Representative bill Rehm for
sponsoring this bill and for
least Terrazas for co sponsoring
this bill I would like to I'm of
from the Baird city council over
here and bear New Mexico and I'm
from the rural area where a lot
of our police officers have been
hard to higher and to recruit
one of the biggest things that
we have that we have faced is
the retirement and or they're
moving out of town and not a
state and so it's been really
hard for us to employee we're
supposed to have six officers
for our areas and the other tri
city and a lot of those rural
areas have been seriously
affected by this and so it
definitely strongly support and
asked for a due pass for this
bill they would strongly help us
especially in the rural areas
are councils would certainly
appreciate it thank you.
Thank you related illness.
Good evening Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is
Miguel Gomez tonight I'm
representing both the retired
public employees of New Mexico
and the New Mexico state police
association.
Our PNM represents the forty two
thousand retirees and the New
Mexico state police association
represents our current state
police officers and retired
police state police officers
both organizations strongly
support this legislation as you
heard with the the previous
legislation there there's a
crisis in many communities
throughout New Mexico crime is
is overwhelming many of our
communities and this is this is
a good first step that's
narrowly tailored to meet the
needs of our communities the
state police in particular are
down approximately a hundred
officers this will go a long way
towards producing that need and
we we strongly urge this
committee to support this
legislation thank you Mr
chairman thank you members of
the committee.
Okay at this time of the the the
opposition anybody opposed this
legislation of you will raise
your hand again I'll give you a
couple of minutes to a.
It was your thoughts and I will
start with Mr Sean will be.
Hello Mister chair thank you so
much can you hear me.
You hear me OK thank you so much
for the
Legislation it's a let piece of
legislation that's been brought
every single year I think for
the last decade.
The H. away vehemently opposes
any form of double dipping I
believe that laws the state of
New Mexico to kick the can down
the road instead of dealing with
the actual issues plaguing our
communities it allows them to
persist for the next election
cycle to deal with you know one
of the concerns I had and I
don't know with nothing but
respect for the state state
police chief chief Johnson I the
you know he said something in in
his in his presentation of this
bill that this would allow us to
hire civilians for jobs that are
normally taken by police
officers I don't necessarily
think that's a good idea it's
important for this legislature
understand that nobody forces
these folks to retire in the one
of the major concerns I have is
if the answer to everything in
policing is we're gonna bring
back our our our retirees as a
stop gap what is to stop this
legislature from making our
twenty five year retirement
which was changed to sacrifice
and current employees under
solvency for pair up from a
twenty year retirement to a
twenty five from going from a
twenty five to thirty year
retirement you know this is a
young man's game the right I've
have a ton of experience with
Herrell retiree programs these
para retirees do not want to
come back into positions of
patrol they simply do not and I
understand the struggles
struggles of rural communities
all over the state of New Mexico
well like I said in the past
there is there's a fifteen
thousand dollar bonus up for
grabs that is usually paid by
the state to keep the best and
brightest and most experience
officers for one more year in
the state of New Mexico police
departments in counties all over
but not yet one department is
taking advantage of that benefit
so this is an easy way for
management to keep wages down
it's an easy way for management
not to address the real problem
counselors and cities and
municipalities all over the
state need to become more
competitive and stop relying on
yesterday to fix today.
It's problems thank you so much
and I appreciate the time.
Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you so much this
is part of a new with us the
first thing I would note is that
after looking at H. B. one of
five which we heard the other
day I have that what was the
brought one not a law
enforcement one but it was
discussed as to what we're
additional law enforcement one
so with the exception of the
amendment offered by
Representative three today to
exclude ATD it is the exact same
building you already thought we
were voting on the other day so
all of the same arguments going
to apply.
We markets cross boundaries the
the downward pressure on wages
all around Albuquerque in Rio
Rancho Valencia County in Santa
Fe in Burley Idaho that
absolutely still has a downward
effect when you bring in a bunch
of people who are going to
double their take home pay and
respectfully it's not really
sacrifice when they doubled that
they're coming and they're
doubling their take home pay
that absolutely.
Kurtz the wage market for law
enforcement officers we also
represent law enforcement
officers in places like Espanola
and in different service areas
and I would noted they would be
affected by this as well in the
negative way our entry level
that I respect of course chief
Johnson talking about their
procedures first of all still
not defined and there's even
talk of all we have civilian
entry level positions so it
really doesn't guarantee anyone
new on the street Furthermore it
does absolutely nothing to deal
with all the problems we
discussed when we thought we
were discussing this bill last
time which is that when they
come in and we have experienced
this is not a hypothetical when
they come in as a double
jeopardy matter what their
official title is they will
apply for these vacancies
because trump's right trouble
these right this is a young
man's game they would much
rather have a desk job that pays
more and that it may be is
closer to what they were doing
when they left they will apply
for those jobs and the EEOC is
very clear that you can't
discriminate based on age and it
was a strong enough case that
all these are double dippers who
are currently in the system the
vast majority are in those just
jobs not just jobs are important
but this doesn't do what the
bill claims to do the final
pieces there are plenty of other
solutions Mr will be mentioned
one you're in the middle of a
session where you're going to
have a huge recruiting and
retention fund available for law
enforcement and further there's
hopefully another bill coming
down that would increase the
amount that people are allowed
to take home when they retire
from ninety percent to a hundred
percent we think that is a far
better Path this bill still has
all the same problems at the
previous bill had in our earlier
discussions and we strongly
encourage you to vote it down
thank you so much.
I'm not done that.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
Canadian journalists units with
The New Mexico federation of
labor are actually we believe
that the case has been made very
well by Mr will be an Mr Bundy
we stand in solidarity with with
our law enforcement our rank and
file law enforcement on this
position and for the reasons
that we stated on the previous
double dipping bills heard last
week we respectfully stand in
opposition to this bill thank
you very much.
Thank you.
Yes thank you Mr chairman
members of the regular here with
P. E. R. E. of the one be
repetitive we did this last week
and the power board does oppose
this bill and I'm happy to stay
on the line for any questions Mr
chairman thank you.
Okay Representative are you
didn't miss anybody some day
without.
Tomorrow another somebody will
say I didn't get to speak.
But I don't see any hands right
so now I will go back to the
committee and Representative do
you really do you have anything
to add before I go to the
committee yes yes Mr chairman
Bob Martinez from the F. O. P.
was telling me that he was
having trouble technical
troubles but he had sent me and
I believe he sent a letter to
you and door seeing that if I
could read that the fraternal
order of police support House
Bill ones six and respectfully
request that the committee
passed this critically important
legislation there is clear need
to address the an adequate
staffing levels in New Mexico
especially in rural areas house
bill one of six will be
instrumental in addressing the
need to fill law enforcement
decisions in our rural community
the F. O. P. is the largest
organization of law enforcement
officers active and retired in
the state with more than three
thousand six three hundred sixty
four thousand members across the
country signed by Martinez
return order of police.
I'm not sure it will be I and
his state PD their pay and
thirty two dollars an hour to
start and they have hundreds of
openings so I think they have
some unique problems that they
can deal with what I would like
to do now Mr Chairman is see if
chief Johnson has any comments.
Mr chair members of the media I
wrote three pages today I don't
know how much of this you want
to hear but
I can go through all of it it's
up to you I can speak quickly
well I can address some of the
things that I think some of
those in opposition mentioned I
can just talk from state police
perspective so Mister chair all
how much the appetite for Tim
Johnson do you have this evening
Sir the state us some of the
members of my committee I wanted
to go to dinner at thirty.
Okay I make a motion to approve
this bill and we'll just go to
the we'll go eat.
that okay go ahead G. all right
Sir so some of the things that
were brought up last week and I
apologize and have an
opportunity to speak as much as
I did today on this but well
some of the things that and I
have respect for all the folks.
The that were in opposition to
this I've spoke to officer will
be many times over many
different issues I I have a
mutual respect we we just don't
see eye to eye on a couple of
these issues but we talked last
week about stifling wages by
bringing on return to work folks
and I I respectfully disagree
with that of this the notion and
I'm I'm not sure most of those
folks work but well it's kind of
a slap to my face basically
saying that me as a police
executive.
Well by bringing back return to
work employees that I will get
lazy and not fight for more for
higher wages for my employees I
find a little bit ironic this
year I think last week I was
complimented of the fact that
I'm I'm down there every single
day fighting my tail off for
nineteen and a half percent
raise for my police officers and
at the same time I'm here
fighting for a return to work
bill so I will be there again
next year fighting for a budget
to get a raise from my people
again well you can expect to see
me all of you that know me know
that I'm down there every single
year begging to get our guys
hire guys and gals more pay so I
don't know that that when I I
again I professions or
respectfully disagreed
The career progression which I
can understand how depending on
how this bill was roled out in
some agencies which why it which
is why I think it's important to
have strong policies and
procedures I can understand how
some folks in opposition or even
some folks on this committee
with think that our current
people would laugh have less
opportunities within within a
law enforcement organization and
that's where all all tell you
like once again our policies and
procedures line out of line out
when you're eligible to move
laterally when you're eligible
to promote and frankly I think
from reading this bill
sunsets in five years if I'm not
mistaken Representative Greene
these folks would not even be
eligible to test for sars and in
my organization you have to have
five years of experience to
tests for the state police and
that I mean state police
sergeant so that that kind of a
again I respectfully disagree
with that
one thing that was discussed
last week and not just just
necessarily by the folks in
opposition but I also heard some
of the people are all on this
committee and again I'm not
trying to disrespect anyone just
putting you know trying to line
out every single issue of this
but I think some of the members
the committee were discussing
this was a long term or more at
the
A systematic issue that we've
had with in state government and
within city governments and
county governments in that we're
just not paying our employees
enough
and so you know that the answer
to this is pay all of our
employees more which I agree
with however I'm in a unique
situation in that I I I can't
argue with you on that because
the folks staring at me right
now on the screen are the folks
to give me my budget so I agree
with you we have need more races
in the past I've always looked
to you all to work together and
we have done a great job over
the years getting that done but
my budget comes from you all
there was also mention of return
to work and some of the EO
stuff or or some of the
discrimination stuff that comes
other could come from employees
coming back and not having an
opportunity I just I I say once
again like strong policies
improve procedures can prevent
that in that if you have have it
lined out when they're eligible
to transfer laterally haven't
lined out when they're eligible
to test for supervisors.
Would people know that going in
and so again it and and someone
in closing and I can ask
thousand things till talk to U.
P. E. R. A. October respect for
Gratiot I don't understand how
the board would not vote for
this.
I did it my I can't figure out a
way how they would be losing
money on this and I've heard the
argument in the past that there
are the you know the board is
looking for new employees to
come in and be paying paying
into the.
The into the fund for twenty
five twenty thirty years which I
did
but I also you know so they want
new employees and I'm here to
tell you and I have some data in
front of me if you care to care
to hear it but those they can
those positions are gonna sit
vacant until we can figure out
some solutions to this law
enforcement prices so we're not
getting money and you won't be
getting money into the P. R. A.
coffers either way so again I
don't understand that argument
either and again all due respect
Mr you about I can closing read
a critical mass of that building
I had interim committee meetings
with the on conversations all of
you either overtly or covertly
have assets what you all can do
to help
in this is a solution I think
that can help us in the short
term and immediately well it is
my opinion
the you know that this will have
no impact of P. E. R. A. and if
done right
in implemented right doesn't
affect career progression which
we talked about it will stifle
wages and most importantly if
done right it puts cops in all
of our communities very quickly
which is not happening right now
well and I'm sure all of your
constituents or screaming and
begging for that from all of you
all and frankly as as a
representative mentioned we're
or the Mr Gomez mention we're
ninety officers down well we're
getting a critical mass here
were we have to start saying no
to some of the things that we we
all have traditionally asked us
to do.
all the assist to the rural
communities that we do
I mean we have two officers on a
shift our current four counties
right now and again that that
can be blamed on me that can be
blamed on a lot of things I'm
here to beg you to figure out
help us figure out a solution
and again if this doesn't work.
Then it shuts off in five years
I think that might be the beauty
in it but otherwise Mr chairman
of the committee I will I will
be quiet.
Hearing.
Mr Chairman we're ready for
questions.
Okay I'll go to the committee
Representative device out.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative for this
legislation I'm I'm glad that
the chief expressed what he did
when it came to our talking
about the.
The is you know the shortages
because I think
as as a family member of the I
have family members that have
been in law enforcement being
short law enforcement out there
in rural in those rural areas
are is very dangerous would you
agree with that you know what
I'm preaching to choir
Representative Rehm what you
tell me when they're short
handed is it is it dangerous.
Representative trust is
absolutely of state police knows
that very well we have one
officer over I mean it basically
Ana County and in some of our so
yeah it's real dangerous a I've
had communities called me in
support of this talking about
you know they have vacancies and
I only have one officer and they
need more officers and they've
got retired officers we live in
the community but can't come
back to work.
Mr chair representative in in my
area right there in my region we
had a we had a fallen officer I
really don't want to get into
all that and I think but I think
it had to do with I I know in
part it had to do with the
shortages of staff it's very
difficult and Mr chair Mr chair
representative also I love that
you have the entry level
put in here just to remind
everybody one of the things that
I didn't want to see is somebody
exit and then come back right
into one of those upper level
positions you've taken care of
that and that was a need that
when I was talking to law
enforcement all throughout the
that was something that we the
there's movement up up the
ladder you're not these newer
guys that are the bottom to ship
up and all these other retirees
to mentor.
I think you and I had a
conversation Mr chair
representative Reem where you
and I have the conversation I
said you know what
Representative I'd love to see a
person that has a lot of
experience mentor a young man
coming out of the or young
person should say ma'am a young
officer coming out of the
academy and and let them know
you know you get fired up when
you're out of the academy and
you you sometimes think you're
up you want to do certain things
that possibly aren't the safest
and having a senior officer
mentoring you would you agree
with that that would be a great
thing or for law enforcement.
Mr chairman and senator Russ is
absolutely you'll find that the
re hire is not the problem
officer they're not re hiring a
person are they have a history
you know twenty twenty five
years so they can look back over
that history and tell if he's a
good officer and up your doesn't
have a lot of complaints and so
it's a good it's a better
vetting process actually and
when we hire a man but you're
right a young kid is
fresher out ready to conquer the
world in a older officer is
trying to make sure the world
done Cocker him.
Mr chair representative I'm
gonna really hurt because these
guys are hungry I saw going he's
ready to go to dinner so I'm
just gonna say.
Mr chair representative this
bill is wonderful it's a
bipartisan bill back to your
point as a fuel director
sometimes we get these new
graduated young men and women
that come to the to our to our
profession and that when they
get out and in the field
the the thank things are going
to be a certain way and and
sometimes we have to tell well
this is actually a it's done so
I think this is a great bill I
don't want to go on anymore
simply because I I the time
restraints that we have thank
you so much Mr chair
representative we appreciate
this and I'm fully supporting
your bill.
For the record I'm not driving
from the launch of some thought
that it would a dinner okay the
chief Johnson will have one of
those people pick me up on the
way for Lloyd hundred twenty
miles an hour sorry Mr chair I
thought yeah I was trying to
help you there.
What it does is they will go to
Representative black.
Thank you Mr chairman I'm I
don't have I don't really have a
question more just a couple of
comments I'm I'm I fully support
this bill actually signed on to
this bill I'm and I would like
to urge the committee to to pass
this on to Shariat share
something that happens my
community so in a rural county
we actually are responsible for
starchefs offices responsible
for staffing our courthouse
security so it used to be years
ago we would have the older
retired or nearly retired
officer sure stop deputies it
would then the courthouse
security.
Well we were they retired so now
my sheriff's office is
understaffed severely so in and
we don't have any of the senior
member more so what's happening
is we're actually taking
qualified certified sheriff's
deputies out from they're not
out in the field they're not
patrolling.
So that they can sit in the
courthouse to watch the metal
detector now I'm not saying that
that's not an important job.
I'm saying we're we're hurting
ourselves because we don't have
the young qualified.
Please I getting the ability
there they don't have the
ability to go out and and it
take care where they're really
needed instead of watching that
you know the courthouse security
camera so in this particular
instance I you know I strongly
support this my County is in
desperate need desperate need of
law enforcement we've got school
resource office positions I'm
our detention center our county
detention center were down
thirty people we can't we don't
have people to to work so I
think this is a really important
bill I'm in my other thing is as
I appreciate that Representative
redid did take out Albuquerque
out of this bill I think that is
very important because
Albuquerque apparently from the
push back that I'm hearing from
them they seem that they have it
under control which I I'm glad
they do but this bill is very
important to my community and my
constituents so I would urge the
committee for the past thank you
Mr chairman.
And given that that.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Representative Rehm
for bringing this forward
First I want to thank chief
Johnson I want to thank all the
law enforcement officers around
the state did a PED for a record
of state that you guys many
women put their lives on the
line every single day and what
we can do is legislators when I
we sit on the floor as one of
seventy.
We we we are response our
constituents our districts that
we serve what I said on this
committee I have to make
decisions based on what's great
better for the state of New
Mexico from the far northeast
corner the state to the far
southwest corner of the state.
This conversation comes upon the
most violent year that we've
seen in New Mexico was farmers
number of crimes murders
And so we do have to make a
decision and I think the
decision with this although not
a perfect situation we need
police officers out there in the
field.
I think that we have to show our
support for our communities and
so with that I make a motion for
do passed on house bill one
sixty eight as amended.
Global world that.
What I wrote down.
Representative back out we will
get back to you for the motion
but you could not make a motion
that.
Thank clearly you're a freshman
so.
Well we will get back to you.
For the motion.
Okay at this time I go to a vice
chair Roybal Caballero thank you
I wanted to make a motion to
table.
We have a motion to table and
that takes precedence over any
thing els I have a second to
that motion.
I second Mr chair this is Ripper
B. R..
Chair representative really a
second level proper motion from
vice chair.
Representative from
Representative Rubio.
R. madam secretary would you
call the roll please.
Representative Baca to table.
Representative bash yes the
table Representative black.
No to table.
Okay okay.
Yes.
Yesterday what.
Yes you.
Representative Cruz.
Representative thank all Garcia.
Yes.
Representative Rubio yes to
table.
Representative.
Table I'd like to explain.
I'm sorry I didn't hear your
vote.
With.
No to table I'd like to explain
okay.
Representative Roybal Caballero
vice chair.
Table.
Representative Alcon chair.
Yes.
Yesterday with that but the will
to stay down.
So.
Seven two three.
To table.
Representative remain on your
bill has been tabled.
And then we will go on forward.
Mr Mr chairman if I can ask the
committee what a fight maybe
this restrictive to where it
only applied to state police
with the then be of willing to
passes.
Sure I'd like to make a motion
to right to accept his
amendment.
At this time we don't have an
amendment amendments have to be
accepted within the twenty four
hour period.
Also are at this time we will
not taking amendment sorry but
I'll tell you what
Representative Rehm that the
talk about this and see what we
can do okay I'll give you a call
tomorrow thank you thank you
I'll be around.
They though.
Okay we are going to go to our
last meal of the day and.
Representative Dow you around
yes your.
No hero.
You have not Mr speaker.
Some of us might wish you were.
What you don't know how horrible
it would be if I will us.
Argue with you Mr chairman let
me make this brief so you can
get to dinner and I'm not going
to deter okay.
Right we just said that it.
I didn't realize you don't rely
on this okay yes Sir.
Okay so go ahead the
Representative Dow you'll are
house bill one sixty eight the
house of cedars years Mr
chairman and members of the
committee and this bill is in
response to calls that I've
received from my district as
well as conversations I've had
across the state with veterans
and those who serve veterans in
assisting them in getting
transportation to and from their
medical appointments that
disabled American veterans
program is largest program in
the state helping veterans with
their transportation needs it's
not the only one I'm but but
that they have personal
assistants on purchasing
vehicles they are five oh one C.
threes they do have to raise the
difference of funds and they
have the most support there are
other programs that are better
funded completely by local
community nonprofits and local
efforts just private donations
and so especially with COVID
they were unable to do their
typical fundraising and able to
do their typical events and so
these folks have been reaching
out asking for assistance with
adaptive equipment on vehicles
they ask for vehicles be donated
to the need adaptive equipment
they also rely on volunteers to
go to and from appointments if
those volunteer appointments
require overnight stays of
veterans are able to stay at the
Fisher's house if there if
departments in Albuquerque but
the volunteers have to find a
hotel they have to eat and these
are things that are not covered
by the current programs at so so
basically this bill and and by
the way at right back as a co
sponsor Randal Crowder is a co
sponsor in cherry Garcia is my
co sponsor chairman Garcia and I
think I guess he's he might be
at the caucus dinner but but
what we're looking at is
establishing a program and the
need is greater than a million
dollars but let's start with the
million dollars we are third
year of a surplus we're under
our veterans services are
underfunded they've agreed to
take this on it's a million
dollars to replace vehicles or
to assure the communities have
the proper vehicles to.
Transport our veterans to and
from their appointments that
means they are most likely
fifteen passenger vehicles and
have adaptive equipment for ADA
compliance which puts them
around eighty five thousand
dollars a piece then if they
need assistance with drivers and
they cannot find a volunteers
the the the Veterans Services.
They will come up with the
program to distribute the funds
so million dollars a year for
three years under spent funds
will revert to the general fund
if the need is greater than we
can assessed at that and figure
out what we need to do so with
that I stand for questions.
In our you don't have anybody of
the are you on the that speaking
with you.
Now okay with that I'll go to
the attendees and I will last
those in favor of this
legislation raise your hand I'll
give you each approximately two
minutes no more so with that in
mind I will start with Mister
Steve hope that.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee members I appreciate
the opportunity to participate
in our legislative process in
this fashion I want to thank
congresswoman Dow for bringing
this bill forward and the rest
of her co sponsors I am an Air
Force veteran and I'm also a
board member of the New Mexico
veterans business advocates are
group represents a lot of of
sure you know several hundred
veterans in the state and many
of them can benefit from this
bill I'm very much in favor of
the bill thank you.
You're a Williams.
Good evening Mr chairman and
members of the committee I am
very Williams I serve as the
associate state director for
community outreach for A. R. P.
New Mexico I am also proud to be
a member of did you just hear
for some I served here in New
Mexico in in various capacities
in I am very much proud to be
able to come before you tonight
Representative A. R. P. and to
offer support for house bill one
sixty eight of our veterans here
in the state or disabled and
they need the services that have
been identified we have also a
large amount of our veterans who
are aging and the costs of
geography or are not able to get
a very readily to their
appointments this bill and the
Sanchez up or doing a great job
of bringing this information for
that focuses on the needs of the
veteran community not only will
this help our veterans but it
will help their families as well
so A. R. P. stand in strong
support and we appreciate the
opportunity to stand with our
sponsors of this bill tonight in
support of H. B. one sixty eight
thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee.
Mom Carol.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name's Bob
Carroll I then break or veterans
I'm here on behalf of the
veterans and military families
called Sliq our caucus supports
house bill one sixty eight for
many of our veterans it is a
significant drop from their
homes to the VA hospital in
Albuquerque back home again
elderly that that to live in
rural areas and that's were too
ill to drive safely to the VA
hospital need this assistance
this bipartisan bill deserves
your support and I would urge
the committee to get H. B. one
sixty eight a do pass
recommendation thank you very
much.
Master sergeant Martin K. A. go.
Mr chair madam chair members of
the committee I'd like to
express our appreciation to the
to those individuals are those
Representative that are
sponsoring this bill.
I am a retired master sergeant
of the Mexico Army National
Guard of thirty seven years and
I and the legislative chair
person for the military veterans
leadership council I speak on
behalf of several veterans
service organizations.
And military associations an
organizations organizations or
part of the M. B. L. C. that
also includes the disabled
American veterans and paralyzed
American veterans are are also
part of the of the LC.
We want to express our
appreciation to Representative
Dow representative Garcia for
introducing this legislation in
support of our disabled
veterans.
This legislation if passed would
go a long way to eliminating the
burden on those vets who live in
areas whose medical services
require facilities in the larger
metro areas of New Mexico such
as Albuquerque Santa Fe Los
crucis.
Even though services are
available in some locations
there are still backroom in New
Mexico.
Who are living in the
underserved areas such as mortem
Las Vegas Springer Platon some
Senator some and the list goes
on the M. B. L. C. strongly
supports this legislation a
request to do passed by this
committee thank you very much.
So.
You do it.
We can hear you all right good
evening I'm Sonya Smith
secretary department of Veterans
Services we stand in support of
this bill because it provides a
solution that will help disabled
veterans get to their medical
appointments currently we have a
federal grant for veterans
living in highly rural areas
which only serves fifteen
counties at this time and
volunteers to the disabled
American veterans organization
assisting would rise when they
are available the funding will
be used to develop a dedicated
program specifically for
transportation to and from
medical appointments this
appropriation will help DVS
ensure the health and quality of
life of our veterans so that we
can continue to support them we
thank Representative down
Representative Garcia and the
other Sanchez for thinking of
our veterans and we do stand in
support of this bill thank you.
Thank you madam secretary
actors state we will go is there
anybody in opposition to this
legislation.
Okay my miss anybody for any
reason whatsoever.
If not I will go to the
committee at this time on or
Representative Dow you have
anything to add before I go to
the committee.
Mr Chairman I'm good.
Okay at this Representative.
First.
I'm.
Mr chairman I am prepared to
make a motion for the past when
appropriate.
A lawyer the only one who has to
have it up so I guess it
is important to get the rest of
seconded that I just have one
comment before a we go to the
vote okay I'm Representative
style madam vice chair.
I just wanted to support the
bill and do a make a motion to
be passed the kinds of poverty
infected and I'll pass it to a
great bill
Representative Dow thank you for
right presenting it with your
colleague and our colleagues
Representative Harry Garcia
we've been hearing throughout
the years Mr chair how critical
transportation has been not
having transportation for
veterans has been and in many
cases it has really then a life
and death situations that we
heard throughout that the the
various incomes and and
throughout the years so I
appreciate you bringing this
forward and thank you for that
thank you Mr chair that that.
Thank you madam vice chair and
representative now the other
thing I wish is that this
legislation would be earlier.
Where we had junior mining.
All the.
St new yes.
Us if they are big if they could
somehow get together with us and
see if we could owes the money
and for this purpose because we
have the what that forty eight
hour window to play with that
would that money.
School is yeah.
There is no way that the people
and Saturday can get back to me
as a debut that was needed and
there was no way that I could
get anything what we what I was
really hoping that I.
That I could have gotten an
answer in time to under I could
at least call the couple of
people and said Hey let's throw
in fifty K. E. R. N. to do your
money and all of the gathered
maybe would have at least a
couple hundred thousand dollars
but I couldn't get it done I
didn't have the time frame and I
didn't have the availability to
speak the people in the officers
and that if they but then they
got back to we are we we had to
make a commitment on that money.
There was no way I could do it.
But with that that Madam not
Representative that'll we have a
motion a proper motion for a new
bass in the proper second on
madam secretary would you call
the roll pretty low.
Representative Baca yes.
The bass yes Representative
what.
Well what.
Yes.
Representative okay.
Yes.
Representative Cruz yes
Representative Garcia.
This.
Representative Rubio yes
Representative terrible yes.
Representative we're Baca my
advice to.
Chair yes.
Ten there are.
Okay Representative Dow your
on your way wherever you're
going.
What thank you Mr chairman.
Okay appropriations next.
Okay thank you and thank you
members of the committee are
you.
We got done early which is
fantastic
keep an eye on the golden rod
with that one more house bill
that I think is still pending
and I believe that the there's a
couple of Senate bills that are
that of the head of that we are
heading our way so keep the eye
on that for Tuesday and we
should be good to go.
I had a question.
Real quick that.
I I know the last on the last
vote.
I think the numbers were off at
that was four to six I was
keeping track but
One of us did get counted right
is what I thought okay so what.
I can't do and I have a seven
three.
Thank you
right Mr Chairman.
What is our our newest member
freshman.
Is what his vote might have been
or maybe I heard it wrong.
It's asking for clarification
Sir okay that's a but it's done
okay it would ever question
anybody's vote okay I'm I'm I
wasn't sure because I heard
something else thank you Sir
okay okay folks think you will
see a but you money on on the
floor.
While.
Shall.
