As you can see, we have corn.
So I'm going to, we will begin
with an organizational meeting
and then the um bills that are
on your agenda.
We will have um the possibility.
Of House Bill 67 and 68.
If the um
Sponsor is not available, which
most likely will happen. Chavez
will present those two bills.
So uh
there's
the um.
Vice chair will present us 3667,
68, unless someone wants to
afford her help, but I don't
think she needs any help with
presenting them.
But um I'll go ahead and get
started. I want to recognize the
ranking member who is
representative Luiserrazas.
Welcome back.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I, I
appreciate being here. Uh, I, I
look forward to working with you
guys and having our colorful
discussions and I actually,
Madam Chair, and I should have
probably talked to you before I
did this. I, I think what we
should do is with your
permission is just have a quick
moment of silence for uh former
chairman uh Alcon.
Oh, I'm sorry. I didn't mean to
take thunder, but I, I just, I
would like to do that and, and
um when, whenever the chair see
sees fit.
But um it we see some new faces,
Madam Chair and I think we're
gonna have a good committee.
Thank you.
Thank you and uh before I was
going to begin the
organizational and the meeting.
And it's very difficult for me.
I didn't want to break down, but
I have been with who I call.
My Mr. Chair.
Since I first um took the oath
of office in 2013.
My Mister Chair was the chair of
consumer and Public Affairs, and
I was appointed his, and we've
been on this long road together.
Since 2013.
So, um, it was extremely
difficult.
For me to go through, um, his
pain and suffering with him.
The last few months, but it has
been an absolute honor.
Um, between he and um then.
Representative Gale at the
beginning together, I would not
have learned what I learned in
terms of the protocol decorum.
And um serving.
In this capacity.
But also and um I, I just want
to um.
Take a few minutes for all of
us.
I'm not, I'm not filling any
shoes.
Um
They're impossible. His boots
are impossible to fill.
attempt to do so.
It is a new dawn,
and I know as I whispered in his
ear.
That he knows that we're
starting this with his so at
this time, I'd like for all of
us.
To honor him with a moment of
silence.
I'm going to take a moment,
sorry.
So, um, I introduced, um,
Right. And that's important to
note because as we proceed in
this committee, uh, we want to
do so.
Always beginning from a point of
collaborating as a point of a
collective as a point of keeping
communications open. And I know
that ranking them maintain those
open lines of communication. And
we will talk about, um, that's
how I wish to.
Extend um our welcoming.
To all of you. I'm gonna do a
little bit of something
different as many of you have
been here before. You've seen
how we've kind of rotated things
around, and we did so because
we've heard over the past few
years, how difficult it's been
presentatives that were kind of
snug analysts.
And we wanted to accommodate
you, so we started our
collaboration that way. So I set
up, set up.
And then, um, that I also places
us uh on the other side.
Of the um.
Of the aisle, so to speak, and,
and we do so not because we're
recognizing any divides.
Although we know that they do
exist, um, but we do so to
accommodate it's very important
for our analysts and our
committee assistants to have
access to us. And so if we're
not.
Bumping into each other to do
that, it's better. And then I
also want everyone to
acknowledge I don't.
I have a hearing impairment.
Aunt besides a little bit of a
temporary, just hopefully it's
temporary disability, but
If
I ask you to just speak up or
repeat. It's because I'm having
difficulty hearing you, so I
need that to be real clear
hearing in our tea coil is not
always real helpful, and we get
a lot of.
feedback with my hearing, um.
Devices avoid.
I'm trying to.
So, um, going now to the
organizational, how we're gonna
proceed as a committee.
I want um the audience and those
viewing.
Uh, right now, before we get
started, I'd like to have all of
those that are on Zoom.
Um, that will be.
Offering testimony.
In opposition to line up now.
We will have opposition first.
In all of our committees.
Uh, unless things sort of
change, the goal is to proceed
and then we'll proceed with in
support.
So for those of you that are on
Zoom right now.
Uh, if you would please raise
your hands.
For this, OK, and then begin to
line up.
accordingly.
And then have them lined up,
question 12, and 3.
We want to make sure that
everyone gets their question and
taken care of before we move to
the next and then to the next,
and that way.
Representative to process. I'm
not.
Kicking you out, but um others.
Would be cognizant of that time
frame.
And that priority so that we
don't just go for them, we
should. So there will be, I
won't ask.
I won't interrupt you. I need to
move on and if we can do that.
So I just want to make sure that
we respect that, um, I know that
we take care of that and I
thought that would be the best.
Now, if it doesn't work, we'll
accommodate and continue to be
moving as it best works for all
of us. If you have anything that
you want to let us know about,
feel free always to let me know.
So that's one thing. And then we
will give a 2-minute time frame
for all those that are here to
give testimony in opposition or
in um support of and again.
We ask that you stick to your
Key points that we're addressing
on the subject on the bill.
And that you not repeat as much
as possible if you've already
heard someone raise a particular
point.
Then please refrain from raising
the same, or you can say, I'm in
agreement with the previous
presenter or one of the
presenters, however way you wish
to do that, but just be
cognizant of not repeating, not
being repetitive this way.
We already have people in the
hallway waiting. They're in
line. This way we're able to
accommodate.
Those that are in the audience
in in the seats as well as being
able to accommodate those that
are waiting in line.
My um.
How I like to operate.
And I hate using the eye. I hope
we can embrace the we and the
us.
Is that I like to give everyone
the opportunity.
And the only way to do that is
if we
Stick to the confining the
confinement of, again, I'll have
to remind people often, but I
just wanted our committee
assistant's name.
On a regular basis is Alyssa
Madriz.
She will be in the office and
she will be here. Unfortunately,
It's very early on, she is ill,
and this is why today we have
our um.
Assistant that I.
Uh, yes, uh my name is Jalebre
for Lisa today and uh looking
forward to meeting all of you.
And um
We have our committee analysts.
Um, let's see. You don't have
mics? Do you have mic? No, you
don't have it. Can we pass the
mic to?
Howard, please.
Hi, Howard Dela Cruz Bancroft?
I'm the minority analyst, and
I've been here for a few years.
I'm happy to be here and meet
you all.
I am Amanda Kincaid. I'm the
committee analyst.
I've been here for a few years
too.
Good afternoon. My name is Edwin
Herring, and I've been here for
2 years.
Thank you. And now, I'd like to
go around and have our um
committee members briefly
introduce yourselves and just
state where you're from and
perhaps something that.
One brief point that you'd like
to um share.
That is important to your makes
sense, just very briefly.
And.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, I'm Representative
Bill Hall from District 3,
majority of the state's water
comes through San Juan County.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Luis
Terrazas, District 39, Silver
City, Grant County area, uh,
Hidalgo and Catron County. I
think, uh, we come from, uh,
copper mining is our main source
of our biggest employer and
we've got a beautiful uh
Uh, university, and so a lot of
farming, ranching and we're
discussion between rural and.
Thank.
And, and I'm going to defer as
representative Garcia who really
is the ranking member of this
committee, uh, I want to
acknowledge his history, his
contributions and uh acknowledge
and respect for his.
Uh, 10 years.
Madam Chair, committee members
and audience, my name's Diane
Torres Velasquez. I am house
chair
Thank you Madam Chair. Um,
welcome to House District 42 in
community is seeing lots of
changes, might just be, you
know, tourism coming up, and we
have to really find some
opportunities for folk governor,
lots and lots members and Senate
members gave cemetery, it is
beautiful. Uh, thank you, Madam
Chair, Eleanor Chavez, I
represent House District 26. Um,
I have a very diverse district.
Um, Isa, which is, uh, they were
closer to the border, they
would.
So, um, my district is diverse
issues, um, you know,
Good jobs with good pay and
benefits, um.
I have a lot of union members in
my district and education and
housing are also and healthcare.
Or some of, so I have, I'm
Patricia Royal Caballero. I
represent House District 13.
And um I wear many hats all
applicable to this committee.
My history of uh being in labor
organizer, community of, um, so
that's the labor association.
I also am the daughter of a um
World War 2 Normandy drop.
Uh, Korean War, prisoner of war.
Purple Heart twice.
And my father served two tours
of duty in Vietnam, Green Beret
Special Forces.
So
have the veterans be able to
um areas of expertise, but as I
understand.
I don't know how do my best to
help manage through our
discussions based on my lived
experiences, knowledge that I
have and free to visit with me
and move on.
The agenda I think of quickly.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
Madam Vice Chair, my name is
Angela Solis.
And I am retired from New Mexico
State government, and I'm happy
to be with you.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair. My
name is Diana Thatcher, and I'm
proud to be a committee attend.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair. My
name is Francis.
The assistance I want to.
Acknowledge everyone, the
sergeant of, uh, they really
May help us navigate through um
army so I want to make sure that
we acknowledge everybody. Also
for your point of information,
um, captions and no video, the
videos are down, but the zoom,
we have audio open, so.
Those of you that will be
testifying, just know we may not
see you, but we will hear those
attention, uh, committee members
also.
We'll
I'm gonna go ahead and call up
um our first bill on the agenda,
which is house bill, as I
mentioned earlier, all 3 bills
will be presented unless the
sponsors uh end up coming uh by
uh vice chair.
Representative Eleanor Chavis
and.
I'm sorry, what that does is it
throws off.
Thank you, um, thank you, Madam
Chair. um, I am going to present
uh House Bill 66 for
Representative Bill, um, and the
bill, what this bill seeks to do
is increase the amount of money
that can be advanced by
employers for discovery costs
and also increases the maximum
amount of attorney fees that can
be collected in workers'
compensation cases. I do have
with me an expert witness, um,
who's gonna dive a little bit
deeper into the legislation and
I'm gonna ask him to introduce.
Thank you, Eleanor. uh, Madam
Chair committee members, good
afternoon. My name is Ben
Sherman. Uh, I am a worker's
compensation attorney. Uh, I was
also a member of the task force
that was created to look at this
issue in more detail. Uh, it was
a balanced task force including
attorneys from both sides. I
happen to represent workers, uh,
but we had attorneys for the
employers, the workers we had
actually injured workers. Uh, we
had a representatives from the
employers, union members, and
insurance members. And so, uh,
I was a member of that task
force, and we are largely
responsible for the numbers that
you see here. I'm also a member
of the New Mexico Trial Lawyers
Association, and I'm happy to um
dive into some more detail and
of course answer any questions
that you might have.
And, and can you hear me OK?
Yes, and if I would just ask you
to um refer to the
representative as
representative.
Uh, Chavis. Thank you.
Representative Chavez, I
apologize.
Thank you. So,
ahead.
As you can see, um, we are
proposing that the attorney fee
be represented for uh the
attorney fee cap for workers'
compensation attorneys from
22,500, uh, which was last set
in 2013 to $30,000 and we are
also asking that the discovery
cost advance be raised from 3000
to $6000 and just some to uh
point out some facts. If, uh,
the last time the attorney
was increased in 2013 to 22,500,
um, if it were to strictly
follow inflation, that number
would be $32,750 today. So this,
uh, was a big compromise. I
know, um, of course, there are
attorneys that thought it should
be much higher than 30,000.
There's also, um, attorneys and
interested parties that thought
it should be lower than 30,000
and so we met 8 times. There was
a lot of back and forth. We
Did a data call, um, looked at,
um, over 99,000 cases
ultimately, we uh focused on
over 5000 cases that involved
attorney fee caps and uh we also
did a uh data call from
insurance companies regarding
the discovery advanced and legal
costs, we um did an attorney
survey which was sent out to all
attorneys that practiced in
workers' compensation. We had a
great participation rate in that
uh survey response.
And this was ultimately uh an
agreed upon number that $30,000
attorney fee cap, uh, was a
compromise between all members
of the task force and that is
the recommendation and that is
what we are, um, asking you to
consider regarding the discovery
advancement, uh, $3000 was what
was last set. We, uh, the task
force recommended 3500, uh,
which is only a $500 increase.
Um, part of that reason was, um,
it was felt that uh some
attorneys did not uh use all of
that, um, or that it wasn't kept
good track of it. I think that's
the key is um when we looked at
the data call from the insurance
companies, there wasn't a lot of
good data on Discovery
advancements, and I think it's
because it's not always
categorized and easy to read
manner. Um, this, this bill
proposes a double, uh, from 3000
to 6000 and
If that were to keep up with
inflation, it'd be, it'd be
$6250 today, uh, instead of
$6000.
And a, a big reason why uh we
included that number is we're
having a big issue in the state
uh with doctors who wanted.
Treat injured workers. There is
a shortage of treatment out
there, uh, if you're an injured
worker trying to get treatment
and a big part of that is
because doctors are not paid,
um,
commensurable with, with Doctors
who do private insurance or are
paid uh in other ways to do um
to treat workers. Um they are
limited, uh, and the amount they
can charge for depositions, uh,
which is not very much, and
there is some pending rules to
address that and part of those
rules that the workers' comp
administration, uh, will be
promulgating contemplates a
large increase in the amount
that uh doctors can charge for.
Uh, their deposition prep and
time being deposed and uh we
feel that a uh a modest increase
to $3500 will not adequately uh
uh allocate enough money to
really uh get doctors uh
interested in, in practicing,
knowing that they're gonna be
deposed, um, and almost every
case, healthcare providers are
deposed and workers'
compensation. Uh, doctors don't
like that, and they especially
don't like it if they're not
being paid.
They're being paid in other
cases when they give deposition
testimony, so that is a big
reason for the increase. The
other reason is, um, you know, a
lot of workers don't get
attorneys and they are
responsible for um litigating
their, their case. What the law
allows is that the insurance
company advanced some of their
legal costs and currently it's
$3000 and if they prevail, they
substantially prevail, they get
uh reimbursed.
That, that uh money or if they
don't uh substantially prevail,
um, you know, they could have,
they could be out of pocket for
that, but it, it just allows um
the cases to be litigated uh
better. It allows for more
access to justice, uh, for
workers. There is currently a, a
huge shortage of attorneys that
are uh practicing workers'
compensation, especially in
rural areas, um, those committee
members that that are in rural
areas might see that.
But it's almost, it, it can be
almost impossible if you're not
in Albuquerque or Santa Fe to
find an attorney to, to
represent you if you're injured
on the job. And so, um, part of
this attorney fee increase and
the discovery advancement
increase is to allow uh access
to justice for to have more
attorneys do workers'
compensation. It's, it's a tough
area to get into and learn.
There's a steep learning curve
and what we see is a lot of the
attorneys right now are, are
getting up there.
age and there's not replacement
attorneys to take their spot. So
this is a huge access to justice
issue when we feel that these
numbers represent a compromise
uh between both sides that would
address that issue, while at the
same time take into account the
concerns with the insurance
companies, uh, and other
parties.
Um, it was that Madam Chair, we
stand for questions.
So what I'm going to do um is
we're going to take the zoom.
The zoom, um.
Please, um, designate, have they
designated names, unfortunately
come up and then remember that
we are staying close to the
two-minute time frame if you can
do it 2 minute or less, that
would be advi Deve Westful.
Well, good afternoon committee
and Madam Chairwoman. Thank you
so much for taking the time to
hear everyone's concerns. I'm
Deal Westfall, executive Vice
president for policy and
programs at the Greater
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce.
And I'm here to respectfully ask
that you oppose HB 66. The
chamber believes that workers'
compensation payments should
first and foremost help injured
workers. But according to the
bill's very own FIR, the 2023
task force warned that raising
attorney fee caps has the
potential.
for a larger portion of workers'
compensation awards to be
allocated to legal fees instead
of aiding in the recovery and
the compensation for lost wages
among workers' compensation
claimants.
That same task force found that
the vast majority of cases fully
93% didn't reach the PA. And
there's also the concern raised
with this proposal last year
that the increased limits will
contribute to higher losses
incurred for insurers.
That will translate into higher
worker compensation insurance
rates, which will hurt New
Mexico employers who are already
struggling.
As lawmakers, you all know
better than most about
unintended consequences. And
unfortunately, HB 66 is rife
with them. We respectfully ask
that you vote against it. Again,
thank you for your time today.
No longer have anyone else.
No longer in opposition. We will
proceed to those that are uh on
Zoom who wish to speak in favor,
and by the way, that was one
minute, so great. Thank you.
Stephanie Welch.
Madam.
Yes, thank you. Uh, Madam Chair,
um, my name is Stephanie Watts
for the New Mexico Center on Law
and Poverty. Uh, we think the
sponsor for this bill, we
support the bill because
workers' compensation is a vital
safety net that protects workers
from the economic hardships
created by medical bills and
lost wages after a worker
experiences a workplace injury.
Yet many workers that suffer
these injuries and who have paid
into the workers' compensation
system never obtained the
benefits of that system, partly
because of the lack of incentive
for private attorneys to take
their cases by increasing
attorneys' fees, this bill would
help more workers receive the
support they need.
And by increasing the amount
that employers may advance in
discovery costs, this bill helps
level the playing field between
workers and employers, and
offset some of the advantage
that employers often have
because they have more financial
resources.
This bill is good for New
Mexico's workers and ensures a
more equitable workers'
compensation system for these
reasons, we support the bill and
urge the committee to pass it.
Thank you.
We will now go to in person.
So, would you raise your hands
all those.
Sorry
So, um, raise your hands again.
these opposition. All right,
we'll begin with the gentleman
here.
He
Young lady and then to the far
back. Thank you.
If you would speak into the mic.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee members. My name is
Randy Aiken. I'm the
administrator for Builder's
Trust in New Mexico, where
workers' comp group is is self
insurance fund out of
Albuquerque. We only insure New
Mexico contractors.
Currently insuring over $850
million. We oppose the bill as
presented as it does not follow
the task force recommendations.
The uh uh house memorial that he
created. I was a member of that
task force along with Ben
Sherman.
It was a compromise
recommendation. Obviously,
there's several different
opinions that come through. We
talked about inflation and
ultimately we could not agree
that there was that this should
follow any type truthful, which
is that it was the 30,000 was a
compromised amount.
Realize that any attorney fees
can decrease the amount of of
compensation or benefits to the
injured workers.
We also, so we, we would support
the 30,000 complicated
environment and should come back
to a a scenario like a task
force in the future. We talked
about whether or not we could
make it automatic or not, and we
decided that we're back and
negotiating uh every few.
We also discussed about the
discovery, we saw no data that
supported any type of
It's only a map that the
employed workers' attorneys.
However, in the, in the mode, in
the direction of the compromise
when after we agreed on the
$30,000 which there are several
that wanted more, several of us
who wanted less than that
30,000. We also looked at the
$3000 net, yes, we would do 500
as a compromise. That was the
recommendation of the task
force. It was to increase to
30,000. No other provisions, and
also the Thank you.
Oh, you do. OK. Um, good
afternoon, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Grace Phillips. I am, uh, now
the risk management director of
the New Mexico Self-insurance
pool. We provide workers'
compensation counties.
All of the dollars that go to
pay workers' compensation claims
or taxpayer dollars just the way
risk management dollars that pay
state workers' comp claims or
tax dollars in the same for the
league's fund, um, a 30 fees is
gonna put pressure on, on the
pool, but um the reason I wanted
to speak specifically today is
because of the language that
would automa um beginning in
2025. Um,
We think that you should follow
the recommendations of the
bipartisan task force, which
specifically um recommended
against that, um, and also to
OK
So all those in support.
Just step up
All right, go ahead and um.
Um, madam.
members of the committee. Uh, my
name is David.
Jawski.
I'm uh
was injured
19 years ago.
I was an electrical inspector
for the state of New Mexico.
And I took a bad fall on a job.
I've been an electrician since
1980, so I've done this my whole
life.
But um
Yeah, I kind of busted up my
neck. I have uh 4 and I have a
spinal cord injury.
My main concern is, uh,
You know, long term
Help
You know, what happens to people
like me?
My attorney wants to retire one
day.
Well, there, there's many other
things too, I mean.
Uh
I've had a hard goal, uh.
With caseworkers and
And recently, the state, uh,
Contracted out to a different
company.
That was in uh CCM and uh
It went rough at the beginning
for months. I mean, I I don't
get my meds, it's bad.
Problems, but um.
You know, it's just um
Now, they have it dialed in
good. I have a really good
caseworker. It took a while, but
Oh.
much.
Madam Chair, members of the 32
years, Mr. Suo 6.
We probably
Representing him since him, I'm
the one who's trying to retire.
I, I'd like to wind this down
bad.
Abandoning Kearney, who's going
to take on a client and work for
free.
It's just impossible.
Um, so I'm encouraging
The committee to adopt the
increase.
To pass the the increase in the
in the discovery budget to 6000.
I know the committee.
The task force met and had that
number. I think it was after
that time that
The rules were going to be
changed, proposed to be changed
to give diving their deposition
taken for having their prep, and
if you double
The amount that you pay the
doctors to, to have their
deposition taken, have their
preparation time, you're
basically cutting in half.
Madam, Madam Chair and members
of the committee, uh, my name is
George, um.
I'm also said and I'm tired. I
mean, I'm.
Getting tired, I'm still but.
When I
He and I have done a lot of free
work is uh
So if I understand it, so, uh,
we will go to representatives
Thank you for the question, uh,
Madam Chair and committee
members, the, uh.
Discoveryment
levels the playing field
somewhat.
Workers that are not represented
or even if they are represented,
um, don't have funds to go ahead
and
self litigate their case and the
workers' comp system is made to
resolution to um benefits,
resolution of benefits. If
you're an injured worker and
your medical treatments being
denied.
You want to have that resolved
quickly whether or not workers'
comp is gonna cover it and if
not, they're not gonna cover it.
You need to use your own
insurance or Medicaid or some
other uh funds to do so.
We, the system is built to try
to minimize the amount of time,
uh, in litigation spent
answering those issues. Same
goes with monetary benefits. If
your claim is being denied as an
injured worker, you are not
getting any money from the
workers' comp insurance company,
um,
And you may not be able to work
because of your injury. So while
you're fighting this out,
You don't have any income, it's
gonna be hard for you to pay a
doctor to review your medical
records and give an expert
opinion that your injury was as
a result of this work accident.
Um, it's gonna be hard for you
to um take their deposition and
and pay them most doctors want
to be paid upfront before
they're deposed. So they won't
even sit down and begin looking
at records or agree to be
deposed until they're paid. And
a a worker generally doesn't
have the funds to do that.
And so what the law allows is
the workers that uh the work the
worker's attorney could say we
want to uh take
Ex-doctor's deposition, um, on
behalf of the worker, and
there's no funds to do that. The
employer will advance those
funds and pay for that discovery
to be completed, pay for the
doctor's time, um, looking at
medical records, take, uh, being
deposed to get that quick answer
that everyone needs, and then,
um, if the worker, you know, if,
if
That money can be
Either paid back, um, if there's
Not, uh, substantial.
If you don't essentially
prevail, um, but that it just
allows the, the issues to be
resolved quickly and to level
the playing field, especially
for workers that may not even
have an attorney.
Madam Chair and committee
members, you, you are correct,
um, the, the task force
recommended $3500 and uh one big
reason why there there wasn't
much data on this. We did a big
data call as, as part of our
research and um a lot of that
information came from New Mexico
Mutual, um, which were payment
history. So the insurance
companies keep record of all
payments they make in a case,
whether it's for medical
treatment, attorney fees, uh
indemnity.
what you call, you know, money
benefits and legal costs.
that some of those legal costs
are, are categorized under legal
fees, so it was unclear whether
that was an attorney fee that
was paid or if it was a
discovery advancement, there's
just not good data on this. And
so, um, the, the attorney survey
also there was some um results
that said that they didn't feel
it was a a big issue, especially
attorneys for the employer, uh,
attorneys for the employer and
insurance companies because they
have the resources to take as
many depositions as, as they
need. So this, well, it's not
really an issue for us.
And there was commentary um by
one of the workers' attorneys
and it's correct at the time the
task force was looking at this.
There was not a proposed rule to
double the fees that are paid
under the workers' comp system
to healthcare providers.
And the time they spending and
deposition testimony and so, um,
to address the, the issue that
we're having in the state with
the lack of healthcare providers
that will treat injured workers.
We, uh, there are some talk
that, that the
fees that are given to doctors
need to be doubled. What that
will do is really um
Impact the amount, the bang for
the buck for that $3000 you're
you're gonna get that may not be
enough in a doctor may say, I
don't know, I'm, I'm not gonna
look at these records and give
you a deposition if I'm limited
to to $3000 max, um, in this
case. So the $6000 doesn't mean
it's gonna be used in every
case, but at least it's out
there, um, to try to level the
play, the playing field and to
resolve disputes in a timely
manner between workers and
insurance companies
and so the task increase.
Yeah
Thank you for the question and
Madam Chair and committee
members, that money comes from,
uh, the insurance companies and
the employers. So, uh,
And the, the attorney fee cost
though is paid 50% out of the uh
workers' recovery. So while the
attorney fee for the workers
generally 20% of the benefits
that's obtained for the worker,
and this is the the worker's
attorney.
They only pay half of that, so
they pay 10% in general of the
benefits that they receive and
so half of the feed does come
from the worker's benefits, um,
that they've received up to, up
to the cap. So under the current
cap, the maximum amount that a
worker would pay would be
11,250. That's half of 22,500.
So the cap be raised to 30,000,
which is a compromised amount
then a worker, uh, the maximum
they would be responsible for
would be $15,000 and that's even
if they.
$300,000. Um, that, that is uh
uh the, the maximum that in a uh
a worker would pay and minimally
it's much and usually it's much
less than that. Uh, but the, the
money would come from out of
their indemnity benefits or
money benefits that they're
receiving from the insurance
company, but that they're
entitled to. The other half of
the attorney fee, the other 10%
is paid directly by the employer
insurer, um, and again that's
just the other half of the 20%.
All right, so, um,
Thank you for the question,
Madam Chair and committee
members, they, they will
ultimately pay it, but half of
the fee comes from the, the
worker.
about the cost of living,
implementing something where it
was reviewed, you know.
John
Man
Uh, Madam Charity committee
members, that, that's a great
question. Uh, and yes, we, we
did look at that, um, the, there
is gonna be a a a proposed
amendment, I believe to this
bill that allows for periodic
increases, um, over the next
10-year period. Um, that is,
that is still being discussed,
uh, but we want to make it, we
don't want the legislature to
have to come and look at this
every, every year. That's very
burdensome, and we don't want
the workers' compensation
administration director or some
other uh individual to set the
amount of that.
Um,
We, uh, I think the proposal is
gonna be for, um, and, and
again, this is being worked out
but periodic increases like
every odd number of years and
then at a 10 year period, that
is sunsetted and, and it's
looked at again by the
legislature so that, you know,
every 10 years, then it's looked
at again to say is this keeping
up with inflation or not. Is it
Thank you, Madam chair and thank
you for uh thank you committee
member. Appreciate it.
Madam Chair,
Representative, expert witness
for, um.
Lot's been talked about the task
force.
Did you explain in detail to me
because I've heard people that,
yes, uh thank you for the
question and Madam Chair and
committee members, uh, the, so
the task force was made up of
various stakeholders, so they
were, for example, um there was
a general counsel of the
Workers' Comp Administration who
chaired uh the, the task force.
There were 2 attorneys that
represent only workers. There
were two attorneys that only
represent employer and insurance
companies. Uh, there were two
union member representatives.
There were two.
representatives there were 2
insurance company
representatives, one from the
self-insurance Group Builders
Trust, Randy A News here. Um,
there was also the, uh, Dan
Gulamo who's, um, the, I believe
the CEO or or main manager of
New Mexico Mutual. Um, there
were two injured workers as, as
part of the task force as well.
Um, we also had help from the
Workers' Comp Administration
economist who helped us do a lot
of the data call and uh and and
internal review of, of cases.
that reached the cap or don't
reach the cap percentages
basically gave us the
information that we need also
help prepare the uh attorney
survey that went out. And that's
another piece of that was uh
there wasn't there was a survey
that was sent to all attorneys
that have that have filed a
pleading in workers'
compensation over a given
period. Um, and we, I think it
was about 270 attorneys and
those attorneys represented both
employers and workers. So, uh,
we had and and we had a good
participation rate of so
typically, statistically.
Significant, uh, participation
rate in those survey results. So
there were, I hope that answers
your question, there were, there
were uh many different
stakeholders that were involved
in the process.
Expert witness, so.
In your opinion, we had a broad.
Task force task force
recommended.
Madam chair committee members,
yes, it is, and uh a big part of
the the reason well.
When it comes to the attorney
fee, it's, it's exactly what the
task force recommend. When it
comes to the uh discovery cost
advancement, there were
issues that were there were um
rules that were
Um, going to be promulgated by
the Workers' Comp Administration
to address healthcare providers'
fees for giving deposition
testimony and preparing for that
and testimony, medical record
review. Those proposals would
would be to double those costs,
however, um, those rules were
put on hold pending.
This bill, um, to see if there's
gonna be funds essentially to
support that and so that uh that
was those rules were not part of
the task force, um, charged. We
do not look at, look at those
bills, uh, those rules that are
gonna be changed, but that is
out there and uh should that
happen to address the the
shortage of health care
providers that are practicing in
workers' compensation, um,
The, the proposal for the bill
is that if those numbers double,
the discovery cost advancement
should also double, um, to, to
keep in line with that.
out of the chair. Thank you.
My questions
Presented, uh, Roses.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you very much, uh.
You know, we listen here and.
You know, it's, it's tough to
sit up your round chair, uh,
representative to hear the
stories and such, but I
You know, and you guys can
correct me if I'm wrong. I
remember this bill coming to us
and before and we talked about
this, Madam Chair, and we can
come to an agreement and so we
deferred to the memorial, which
Uh, if I, again, please, please.
Let me know, but from my
recollection it was we deferred
to that so that we could.
Put this out to that, uh, and it
sounded like the task force was
very balanced, Madam Chair.
Uh, representative to give good
input from all sides.
And, and come with a
recommendations and it sounds
like you had a long process.
Um
And I don't want to repeat
because I'm trying to honor the,
the, the chair's request, but
You know, I, I know that the WCA
is sitting here.
And I'd love for them to just go
through the process, just tell
us the process with your
permission, I'm sure, so I can
understand and, and hear their
process.
And then I'll get into trouble.
Yes, ma'am.
So
When you refer to.
Could you
What did
I thought, Madam Chair, if I
remember, this is what I'm
trying to remember. I thought it
was last, uh, excuse me, session
before.
Um, where we heard this in, in
the 60 day, not the last 60
days, we could be wrong, but
I've heard this before and I
remember that we did decide to
go to the, that's where we ended
up with the task force and so
forth. Now, I may not have that
exactly right, but that's just,
I'm just.
Doing that off the cuff of what
I um.
I will.
In the FIR you're referring to
that
and um we had considerable.
Um, discussion at that time, but
that has not anything to do with
what, no, madam, I think what
I'm saying is I'm just kind of
going through the timeline of
how we got to this point is
really what I was referring to
my own do that OK?
Yeah, I think we're OK. I think
what I, what I'd like to see is
the WCA give us a run through
of, of the process is what I'd
like to see if, if at all
possible, the city in here if
they could just describe the
task force process just so that
I can a little,
but also in consideration.
Of, of difficult litigation. Um,
the, if, if it's paid out
strictly on a 20% amount, um, at
30,000, that would be $150,000
recovery, um, certainly, and,
and this is something, you know,
a lot of cases that can be worth
more than $150,000 and you want
the worker's attorney to be
incentivized to fight for that
extra money above and beyond,
um, and so the the the when the
cap gets raised from 22,000.
500 again, inflation would put
it at 3 $20,750.
You need that incentive um for
Especially younger attorneys
that are thinking about getting
into workers' compensation when
they can practice in so many
different areas where they can
make more money, easier money,
you, there has to be some parrot
out there for these injured
workers, especially in rural
areas, to get presentation. And
so, um, the, the amount if
you're not talking about, uh, to
answer your question, um, part
of the reason why the, the, we
want the cap increases to really
it's an access to justice
justice issue to get attorneys
to do workers' compensation and
for
Uh um
Workers have an easier time
finding presentation.
As you, as you might have heard
once an attorney fee cap is met.
That case might still be
ongoing.
And a lot of times it is, and if
that attorney is no longer
representing that worker, it is
very hard for that worker to
find somebody to take that case
for free. They're, they're gonna
be taking it for free, um, at
that point because the cap has
already been paid out. So, um,
the amount of time it takes, I,
you know, personally speaking, I
have cases that I've been
working on for over 10 years and
That doesn't happen on every
case, of course, but I would say
cases take on average 1 to 2
years at least to reach a, a
resolution. And so that's 2
years of time, you are not
getting paid anything until the
case is over and as you
mentioned, only if you prevail.
viability
In
Madam Chair and committee
members, thank you for that
question, um, for those of you
that may not know that UEF is
the uninsured employer fund, um,
that, uh, pays benefits to
workers.
where there was no workers' comp
insurance company and there
should have been in the claim is
compensable, meaning that the
worker suffered a claim in which
they should be receiving medical
treatment and they should be
receiving money benefits and
their the employer did not have
an insurance company and the
employer may not be in a
position financially to to pay
the benefits.
So there is a public fund, the
honor your employer's fund. The
undersured employers' funds has
has a cap. The current cap is
$60,000 for uh money benefits
and $60,000 for medical. So
unfortunately for workers who
are injured.
Um, when there's no private
insurance company, they are
limited in what they can.
Recover and then what happens is
if the uninsured employer's fund
pays out benefits, they then,
and it's never proceeding in
district court go after the
employer for reimbursement.
Plus penalties plus um a fee for
that employer not having
workers' comp insurance company
when they should have.
So the idea is that the
uninsured employer fund is, is
reimbursed, uh, the funds that
they pay out on the, on the back
end we'll call it from the
employer, the UAF is also, I, I
believe, um, and I'm not.
an expert on this. I will, I
will say that, but I believe
they are, they are also, uh,
paid by the workers' comp
assessment that you might see on
your paycheck, I think it's like
$2.30. um, that you might see
every so often. They, they are
not, they are funded, uh.
With other funds, um, that I, I,
and I don't think they solvency
is, is an issue at this point
that, that I'm aware of.
fees and the
Say that because I've been
So.
But one
I don't know
of this
I, I'm going to
make it custom.
Garcia, yes.
Representative Hall.
No.
Representative Johnson.
Yes.
Representative
10th.
S
representative to us.
No
tourist Velasquez.
Yes, madam Vice Chair Chavis.
Madam Chicken
paper
Whenever you're ready.
So we're um
the next bill to be heard that
will be presented by myur
Chavez's hospital 67.
And the sponsor for this bill is
Because she's in another
committee.
instructions.
and
pass the Senate.
With me is uh
Curtis, who were witness on this
bill, and I am a little bit
deeper and get more.
Information about the
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee.
Again, my name is Steven Curtis.
I am an attorney in New Mexico.
is a very technical for all in.
Who were involved in it.
Applicant for knowing how when
to approve and deny benefit.
Even though the bill is 11 pages
long, there's only really 2
pages of changes and I'm going
to direct your attention back to
subsection C.
Which begins on page 4 of the
building.
This
One of those areas where there's
an interplay between federal and
state law.
Federal law beginning sometime
in the late um unemployment
insurance to public.
Uh, employees, including
employees in higher education.
But provided for a lot of those
exceptions, um, are carried
forward.
In subsection C.
And the number 4, but that's
not.
Impacted by this bill
Those satisfactions recognize
that in higher education, there
are tend to be terms.
And so a teacher, a professor.
or may not be
The in in between terms or in
between school years.
Um, and it
that those benefits can be
denied.
Uh, if I, if I, if I
between terms.
Between years if that employee
has reasonable assurance of
continued employment.
All this bill does is provides
it much easier to use definition
and mechanism for determining.
The question whether or not.
That employee has a reasonable
assurance.
employment.
They will not be entitled to
the.
But if they don't have
they would have they would be
permitted to apply.
subject to the normal
administrative process.
So like I said, subsections 12
and 3 of subsection C, all use
the phrase.
Um, that isn't being changed by
this bill.
All that is being changed
in subsection 5, starting on the
bottom of page 6.
I
A
substitution and how that
determination of reasonable
assurance is being made.
Question will come up to.
an applicant, do I even apply?
Do I even need to know the
answer? Do I have a reason?
will come up to the employer. Am
I going to be subject to
potential?
And also it's their
administrators are going to have
to make a.
nation.
um
under the existing law.
Um, reasonable assurance
requires that.
E.
Um, the consideration of all
relevant factors, including the
historical pattern of
re-employment in such capacity.
Reasonable I
And a reasonable notice.
understanding
individual
I was an attorney whenever you
see factors to be weighed, you
sort of inwardly groan.
Um, because the two sides of a
dispute may agree on 100.
Some of the facts that go to
that but disagree about how
factors are going to be.
Weighed and balanced. So it
doesn't give you a sense of
certainty instead.
This bill proposes 5.
Uh, it's sort of like a
checklist. So instead of having
to balance and weigh factors in
some indeterminate way the bill
offers on
The
On page 7 A through E.
are.
um, essentially yes or no
answer.
To allow the person.
Um, so again, it's a
Highly technical
But relatively simple fix the
fundamental question of whether
or not um that making the terms
because that is comes down to us
from federal law.
But instead, it gives the all
parties solutions.
much simpler mass termination.
So is there any
like
So we're gonna go Zoom.
And um
Those opposed.
If you would
um
Raise your hand at the.
And I'm just remind everybody
the video, webcasting and.
He is down but the audio.
Madam Chair, we do not have
anyone in opposition.
Right
To Zoom, uh.
a chair we have one person.
And the name is
Williams
McWilliams.
Williams
Ma
William
on the Zoom and we're gonna go
ahead and supports.
um
All right.
Uh, well, I just wanna say that
as an
Agent.
At UNM is filled with definitely
be very helpful. I, I don't know
if you can hear me.
Can you hear me?
Oh, OK. Yeah, so I was just
saying that as an adjunc at UNM
that is always not certain if
I'm gonna have a class or not,
and if my class is gonna get
canceled in the middle of uh, at
the beginning of that term, the
bill would certainly be very
helpful with that make a hardly
any money.
Being part-time adjus.
So, and it's anything, anything
that helps us our situation
would be very, very useful.
Thank you. Is that the end of
your statement?
All right. Thank you, William.
So, um, we'll go now to the
audience.
Right, there's
in support of 67.
3
Persons in the back of the room.
However we begin.
We will bring the mic to you.
Please state your name.
Uh, Madam chair members of the
committees in New Mexico. We're
here in support of this bill. We
Also in support of this bill in
2023 when this committee um
passed this legislation through.
Um, I wanted to underscore we
believe.
It's a more more.
language
is helpful to both the worker,
the employer, and those at
Workforce solutions how to make
these determinations, so we do
urge.
Your uh support today on house.
Me and chair members of the
committee, Carter Bundy.
Presenting asks me, um.
I will keep this short. We
support it for the reasons
stated. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of
committee, John loves you it's
with the New Mexico Federation
of Labor AFL CIO and on behalf
of
All of 40,000 plus of our union
members.
we stand in solidarity with our
educators.
And we didn't have
correct
So that completes the
here
I should have mentioned that I
was in that junk last semester.
School of Law.
it was a
it was not my.
Um, so what it does, yeah, the
subsection C1.
Um, that's an easy to
determinated.
For them not to have a
reasonable expectation.
I
It, uh, it would primarily
um
Not a new track professors.
But the reasonable assurance
test is the law.
But how we
Um, you would have to
the
That's
was made.
All this law does is say, OK.
We want it to be really, really
look at the hands.
That they matter.
Um
The one that you've raised is
what is not going to be
teaching.
Um
That is gonna depend, and it'll
be
a
Figure that just made it.
Something that the university
was no longer going to be made.
which is one of the 5
determining is the university is
reserving the right to make its
own decision.
limit.
That that is not this would be
available.
But
If it was outside of the
universe.
control
That would be
that
Manager, um, well, I, I was.
I do not have um
Um
And 11 thing that
You know, big differences in the
example that you gave for
example.
Um, which with the lottery
scholarship, hopefully I mean.
OK
something like that
OK
different in New Mexico
University.
Right.
whether or not it'll increase
the potential increase in the
number of claims.
And.
Whether or not it's actually an
increase right now the current
law.
is if you have that
do not have
just
Mad
I
Certainly, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, it applies to
page 4,
15.
Just talking unfortunately these
are referencing other sections
of the statute which you may or
may not have in front of you but
51.
um
So paragraph A is in
142, which includes all of
these, um.
51-1-43. And again, that's not
being changed.
benefits are currently
potentially available.
To
All contingent
All this is doing is making it.
I
because I didn't
is that OK with you?
I understand that part.
That's fine, that's fine,
that's.
represent
I
the the
One of the 5.
That's
Description of
Um
The
Longer answer would be.
If the university feels like.
They want to contest and then.
claim.
Because it wasn't in their
control.
Then it would
Um, and again, pointing to the.
So,
um, it's
representatives.
through
The a.
All the questions, but uh.
to
it's an adjunct professor.
generally full-time or
part-time.
I can tell you mine was
definitely part time.
Mine was a
Side hustle on top of a 9 to 5,
and so it was in.
I got a paycheck, but I don't.
Your, uh,
for a time that's
was
The
We're
I believe you and I.
my
give them
changed
You apply for a job, it's just
like you're in.
for a temporary job.
somewhere
Um,
This is Patrick, this position
will not be over. I'm gonna
continue employment. So you're
applying for that temporary
position.
And I think the, the problem
that I see, cause I did talk to
the University in my area,
looking at other universities
responses. I'm looking at, uh,
uh, workforce solutions
responses, workforce solutions,
um, Madam Chair, Representative
is already anticipating uptick
in in uh unemployment.
Um, claims.
And so that's, that's already
telling you that, that they're
asking to say, hey, look, uh,
this legislation, Madam Chair
Representative, expert, there's,
it's asking for, they're asking
for uh $50,000 to train people
because they know that they're
gonna have a an increase and
they're gonna have to train some
of these people to deal with
this because of the ambigu uh
because of it not being clearly.
It's not clear, it's, it's very
generalized.
And that causes some potential
problems.
Um, and so, you know, I think,
Madam Chair Representer,
uh, I, I think this is, I know
what, I know what you're trying
to do, and I think they're.
Big part. Adjuncts are a big
part of our formal education pro
uh programs throughout the
state, but at the same time, we
have to recognize that.
They're applying for a part-time
position, they're, they're,
they, they, they know that
they're gonna be working under
these conditions, and if we, if
Up, an individual knows that
you're applying for a part-time
position. If you want to have
things like that.
Um, you should apply for a
full-time position, my, my
opinion, so that you can get the
uh deal.
Do you have any um
comments to that representative?
Uh, madam.
Not knows that they're not
coming back.
That person
continued.
Unemployed and um continued
employment and under existing
law would be entitled to the
benefits.
Um
this is this is the gray area.
an adjunct is
And in my experience, you know,
there are adjuncts that do as a
community service, but
increasingly there are a lot of
adjuncts that do it year after
year after year after year.
Um, and it is.
Even though they don't have
anything saying guaranteed that
they will
continue to be employed. Um.
that would be entitled to.
The
that are in a kind of a gray
area
where they say, yeah, sure,
we'll, we'll take you back next
time, but they don't get a
Um
that person would not
have the.
And I think uh Madam Chair, uh,
Representative uh expert, I
think maybe you misunderstood
what I was saying. What I was
saying is that not that you know
that you're not coming back, but
I guess what I'm saying is they
get a basically a disclosure.
You're, you're being hired under
these conditions that these are.
may come up and they're defined
there, um.
Of how this possibly
Could affect your employment
there. So you, you're, you're
That person is applying with
those conditions upfront. I
would disagree with what what
you said, I'm your
representative, but the other
thing is, I mean, you're looking
at, I, I think.
Representative Reed brought a
very good point that
And I was just waiting to see
who would bring that up, and she
did a great job in showing that,
where does the money come from?
It's, it's always Madam Chair
representative at the end of the
day, workforce solutions is
already anticipating an
increase.
Of, of claims.
in turn
Is gonna come from the
institutions which in turn the
money has to come from somewhere
and could definitely lead to
increased uh uh premiums will,
it will lead to increased
premiums, which could then
trickle into uh um
Uh, you know, the cost of, of
educating, higher education and
so forth. So, um, that's all I
have here. Thank you.
Thank you.
Uh, representative, um, Madam
Chair, and, um.
Representative Chavez and expert
witness, would you please remind
me your name?
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Steven
Curtis. If you've been teaching
in the law school, it might be
Doctor Curtis or.
No, Mr. Curtis.
Um, and, and, and Representative
Garrett as well. I, I wish to
thank you for bringing forth the
needs of our part-time
instructors. Um, so just so you
know, I just retired on January
1st, from the University of New
Mexico.
Or I served for 31 years as an
associate professor.
Um, I served in faculty senate.
And also in the academic freedom
and tenure Committee where we
keep the faculty handbook and
review all the changes that our
faculty will undergo.
And so I thank you for bringing
this bill forward. Lots of work
to do for our part-time or
instructors.
Um, what I'd like to share is
that as I go through, I see room
for um a little bit of
improvement that might help
faculty Center and academic and
freedom and tenure academic
freedom and tenure committees in
higher education at the
universities of the four-year
institutions. I'm not as
familiar with the policylicies
for instructors at community
college, but
Just so you know, we have
different layers of people who
teach different status based on
what I'm reading has to do with
the uh roles that we call
instructors.
or lecturer, sorry, lecturers
and adjunct.
And it would be helpful because
they are two different kinds of
roles.
It would be helpful for our
universities, for our
institutions of higher of
perhaps some of that language
might be changed a little bit,
so that if we're talking about
lecturers, we would be fully
aware and I would fully support
this for lecturers. I, I
completely understand where
you're coming from. Lectures
right now are people that are
hired year by year.
The only ones that aren't hired
year by year, 10 year track or
tenured faculty. So the
lecturers, usually don't know.
Officially until the end of the
year if they and that's kind of
what I'm seeing.
On page 7.
In terms of advanced notice or
uh a contract. lecturers now we
have gotten to the point where
we actually have even status of
lectures, so we have a first,
uh, level 1, level 2 and level
3. And it's intended to be
parallel with the tenure track
faculty.
And so when you got a lecture
would be critical.
This type of support for someone
who, for whatever reason, um,
that matches what you've
provided here.
Was, was not
Uh, the contract was not
followed through on that would
be really critical for them.
For the part-time and adjunct, I
think you would want to look at,
um,
Other factors as well.
Um, for part-time and adjunct,
there, there are so many things
that we've been trying to do
through the union at UNM.
That we haven't.
To support faculty who come in
to teach for us once in a while.
And to provide benefits for them
and that's where we're really
hurting in terms of salary, and
in terms of benefit, and in
terms of what happens when they
are not hired back. So, I, I
would simply ask that.
Um, that the language be a
little more clarified.
Um, in terms of who you're
referring to and what benefits
we, we really want to fight
because I can see this being
very helpful um.
Adjunct and lecturers, but I
don't know if that's the same
language used at community
colleges.
And so all the institutions of
higher education in New Mexico.
Create their own policies.
And if we had something like
this that crossed all the
institutions of higher education
in New Mexico. I can see that
being of great support to um
To the people who do so, so much
work for us who actually do make
the money for our universities.
And so, um,
Hm
I'm a little stuck, but.
Uh, I support this and I thank
you.
bringing this forward.
representative was that um.
OK
Representative Ortez, thank you,
Madam Chair, I move to pass.
There's a motion to do
represent,
um sorry, motion to you pass by
representative chair Christina
Ortiz and seconded by Anaya.
Yes
Representative Garcia. Yes.
Representative Hall.
No.
Representative Johnson.
Representative
Right here
Representative Ortiz.
Represent
Representatives.
Representatives Velasquez.
Yes
Madam Vice Chair Chavis.
Madam Chair Royal.
Yes
Um, representative on House Bill
67, we have a dupe against.
Thank you. And um
You may
Go ahead and, and switch out.
I just wanted the committee
members to please be aware that
we'll have, we already have had
the notice. I'm hoping for
Thursday.
Uh, is that correct?
Mhm
So if they're listed, please
note that in, in, in all due
respect, because
The FIR dates.
That were provided to us and I
want to defend the notice on
House Bill 66.
The FIR was posted January 25th.
House Bill 67, the FIR was
posted January 23rd.
And house Bill 68, the FIR was
posted January 24th.
So this gives us
At least where we are right now.
Of course, it's going to get
harder as we proceed down, but
for that.
When we do reference the FIR
that we are uh referencing the
fact that we got, we got them
correctly and I want to give
credit to our staff because
oftentimes we've had the past
few years with the um FIRs and I
recognize that, but in this case
I did want to recognize that we
had them, so it would be helpful
for all of us to take note of
ours that come in, and then that
way um we can run, move more
smoothly and just.
Oh man, I'm sure thank you.
Thank you for that clarification
we do, but I can tell you that
yesterday afternoon we, we.
They weren't loaded on and we
couldn't get them. So, um, I
even mentioned it to one of your
members, and then later on that
later on in the day, uh, I don't
know exactly what time cause I
wasn't steadily looking at it,
but they weren't posted uh
earlier, so it, it's no problem.
It's our first committee. It's
not a big deal. I just wanted to
tell you, uh, even though they
were done, they weren't
supposed to
bring that to my attention as
soon as possible because if our
committee members are not
receiving what they need to.
in a timely manner, then we do
need to address that, so I
appreciate it, but just keep
cuddle. Thank you, thank you a 5
minute break, Madam Chair.
We
some of our members need a, uh,
a little break hold you to it 5
