Representative Ortez here.
Representative Rehm here.
Representative someone up.
Madam vice chair.
Madam chair.
Madam chair we had may have
reached a quorum with all
members present.
Great thank you so we have
Senate joint resolution.
Thirteen.
And.
Senator Campos welcome.
Thank you very much madam chair
members of the committee it's
great to go to be here with you
this morning as we continue of
course I just really think each
and everyone of you for all the
work that you continue to do
especially under the uncertain
conditions as we are as we deal
with our issues so in essences
Sierra resolution thirteen.
Our transfers Landon port of
entry of facilities from the
general services department and
the department of public safety
to the department of
transportation and the over the
last several years through a
memorandum of understanding of
this work has already been on
the line and so in essence we're
attempting to do is to make this
official madam chair members of
the committee if I then also
like to a different this time to
my experts and with it today is
supposed to be job the level
some within the department of
transportation and if he is with
us I'd like him to make a
statement to go through and
privative some of the points
regarding this joint resolution
thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
Thank you Mr deliver essential.
Thank you madam chair a
committee members and thank you
to Senator Campos ringing this
important legislation forward as
a senator noted since twenty
sixteen we've been operating
under the agreements with the PS
and a GST to operate and
maintain the ports of entry are
currently the others kind of a
checker board of ownership.
At the various point some of
property belonging to GST some
buildings to DPS and vice versa.
What this allows us to do is
take the funding the revenue
that's generated by the point
out to consolidate the ownership
and management and essentially
are better plans for the
improvements it also has a
companion.
Legislation that's working its
way through the C. R. session as
well as B. one eighty six and H.
B. one ninety eight which
transfer certain our duties to
the department as well those are
again things are stalled are
currently in a memorandum of
agreement so once this is all
said and done hopefully will
have improved efficiencies will
be better prepared to our own
and operate the ports of entry
across the state so with that we
thank you madam chair and
committee members and will be
happy to answer any questions.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
Great thank you so we're going
to conducted poll of folks that
would like to raise their hands
in favor or in opposition of STA
R. thirteen.
And it's currently open and will
keep it open for another ten
seconds.
Okay and
This is the.
They were in there again.
So
Okay would anyone like to speak
in favor or in opposition of the
bill.
Okay thanks committee members.
Would you pass madam chair.
Madam chair LESC at the.
Right we have a motion for the
past by Representative Ortez and
a second by Representative
Zamora is there any discussion.
Okay let's go ahead and take the
role of the technician.
Representative Chasey.
Yes.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Gallegos yes.
Representative night Burt yes.
Representative Ortez yes.
Representative Rehm yes.
Representative Zamora yes madam
vice chair.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Yes.
Madam chair we have nine in the
affirmative.
Right so that was a pretty tough
one but you do have a.
Nine of nine members in
affirmative for the past ten
thank you senator.
Madam chair members of the
committee and grateful to each
and everyone of you have a great
day thank you thanks thank you
thank you.
So that concludes that everyone
thank you and we'll just to be
in touch for the next meeting
