Basically this is a how are you
to say so today.
I want to welcome the three new
members star Committee.
Three new members everybody's
being with us since I'm being
chairman and I don't do learn
how long that's me not really.
But I know that
chairman or CEO was there before
me.
Long time before that.
So go ahead and start in on go
ahead and start with the.
Introductions and the.
Okay I don't have the ability
to.
To.
He will just start with the
first one on the list and have
that person introduce
themselves.
Go from there okay
Representative bash.
Hi I'm Karen bash I represent
house district sixty eight in
northwest Albuquerque and this
is my second term on this
committee.
Just as long as I have to.
Representative block.
The.
Thank you good afternoon Mister
chairman of I am Rachel black I
represent district fifty one
which is an Ontario county our
the the county seat and that's
where I'm from is it I second
term and I serving on this
committee and I look forward to
all the hard work that we're
going to have to do.
Thank you.
Representative Garcia.
Thank you more Sierra thank you
Mr chair
We get Garcia.
House district fourteen.
I'm going on my.
The fifth year as a state
Representative.
Some kind of an all the but on
the.
And and there's only one other
person as more ten year
and that's Majority Leader.
states.
And and then me and
Representative
Chasey.
come under under her.
it's always a I'm an honor for
me to sit on this committee I
was chair.
for eight years before
Representative
And the Eliseo.
One kind of took over from there
and I got assigned to another
committee as chair.
my district got kind of includes
Some of the more historic but
areas of early county and some
areas of the city of up will get
K..
C. old so Broadway area.
which was a community
Established
the eighteen hundreds along the
rail yards.
And a lot of prominent Afro
Americans settled there in south
Broadway.
And
And actually one of the more
famous one is the Powdrell
family from Powdrell barbecue.
There is also a lot of
politicians a lot of a educators
Dr Bennett now
Carol Bailey and double ACP
merry's exact outstanding
educator
the jokes what kind of went into
judgeships and us all very proud
of myself probably community we
cross the railroad tracks
somewhere no but and us.
But alas established on the
seventeen fifties as a B. R..
Families of all town and across
the river from a preschool.
And we crossed the Rio Grande
and we're all that work and all
that the school.
Established in the sixteen
forties by my great grandpa to
the eighth.
A power of attorney Chavez as an
estancia and then reestablished
include pueblo revolt in sixteen
ninety two by my great grandpa
to the seven power Fernando due
to any Chavez.
And then we cross the cores.
And we're kind of in a blue
collar she got no neighborhood
all nice lady on almost a
community and then I have a.
kind of some gated communities
predominantly.
His final.
Mexican American first
generation
in that sense most west central
precincts.
And and it's always an honor to
be on this committee you know I
have a background in community
organizing and labor activity
going back to my you.
And
so Mr chair it's always an honor
to be on your committee.
Thank you.
I thank you representative
Representative Hernandez.
Hello.
Joshua Hernandez districts sixty
which is the southern portion of
Rio Rancho.
I have been Representative for
what three days now so as my
first committee meetings I'm so
glad to meet all of you.
Thank you.
Thank you representative I'm
sorry about that Representative
Rubio.
Good afternoon everyone I'm
Angelica Rubio I represent
district thirty five in the city
of Los crucis I actually this is
the start of my fifty year
actually served in this
committee the first two years of
my
Here under a different chair and
so I'm really excited to be to
share space with you all as well
as a representative chairman had
gone and those of you who are on
this committee I am like
Representative Garcia I have a
long history of
community organizing
specifically related to issues
related to workers justice and
labor and so I'm I'm I'm glad to
so what I sent to chairman I'm
gonna earlier I feel like I'm
coming home so I'm really
excited to to be here with you
all and looking forward to
getting to know those of you who
are.
Just recently arrivals so thank
you.
Thank you representative
Representative Stapleton.
Hi Representative Sheryl
Williams Stapleton Majority
Leader of the house of
representatives and I represent
district nineteen.
In a chair and vice chair and
chair of vice chair on this
committee I've been in this
committee going on my twenty
seven year.
And so I am always delighted to
be on this committee because
labor is part of who I am and
I'm excited to see all of you
back in the committee I'm
excited to see the new members
of the committee I am excited to
see the staff I am excited to
see one of them was my concern.
And so I'm Mr chairman I'm
looking forward to working with
you and the members of the
committee district nineteen is
in southeast Albuquerque and a
little bit of the **** heights
which would we district in.
And
it goes it takes a and by the
airport and the big east on I
just you at the base with
Representative role metal so
I got part of the international
district in my district thank
you.
Thank you representative
Representative and forgive me
for but you're in your name
Representative.
Ten dot.
To not to.
US.
As there you go.
This
is a good job I was going to
that was me know me just wait I
was waiting to see how you thank
you I'm just having fun you know
what to a.
I'm gonna say chair Mr going
thank you so much
Representative for allowing me
to be in your in your Committee
and I have three counties that I
cover I have a large did
district up takes me about five
hours to get around my district
I live in Silver City I may have
five kids I'm a funeral
director.
And own two homes and Silvercity
and demi and monument company in
a in a a crematory I've been in.
In service all my life since I
was fifteen years old and so I
I've been in the fuel service
business since then and took a
little time off.
At one point to start my own
funeral home and opened a car
wash so I wash cars for almost
everybody here in Grant County
they knew me really well through
the fuel Business and car wash
business and I was gonna semi
retired and this is what I'm
doing with my semi retired time
is so I I'm I'm eager to work
with all of you guys it sounds
like a really great a group of
people I've met some of you in
some of our some of you I've
seen you on zooms but just so
you know my district to start
I'll start here in Silver City
it takes about half of Grant
County it goes over the mountain
all the way over to Sierra
County but I will go I only kids
goes all the way down and cross
stays on the west side of I
twenty five in the kind of it
kind of weighs in and out right
there as it gets into Los crucis
and then go goes west of Misia
all because your heels all the
way back to Grant County so
that's a big district and so I
have a large range of people
from minors to ranchers and and
farmers and restaurant you know
we love our our our Mexican food
a red and green chili and so we
have a lot of that you know
patch as part of my district so
I look forward to to
working with you and in talking
to you I do have a portion my
district that has ninety percent
poverty and so I hope to be a
positive part and and in this
conversation and I look forward
to meeting some of you I did I
did meet I ran into a
Representative Stapleton I was
like her voice is some school
you know it's just a device was
anyway rented during the other
day and and it was nice to to
drive and I'm looking forward to
meeting the rest of you god
bless you.
Thank you representative
Representative Roybal Caballero
race chair.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you members of the
committee and the welcome beyond
any of that all the new members
those that are coming back again
and those that are going to
search for the first time again
it's but the Santa Fe bond
coming it'll I represent house
district thirteen which is the
far southwest quadrant of
Albuquerque Bernalillo county
and
I think Representative a chair
on going probably will accuse me
of chasing him and following him
around because when I first was
elected I was appointed his vice
chair then the consumer and
while it's still consumer and
public affairs and so he and I
have served as chair vice chair
for many years now I guess now
we can say many years and when
he was made the transition when
I committees were restructured
and renamed a few years back and
divide it up a little he became
chair of this committee and of
course green following R. S. as
the vice chairman so it's a
pleasure to serve with him once
again.
As vice chair of this committee
and I will say that as many of
those that have already
articulated on the committee I
have are probably.
since nineteen sixty six
approximately been on a labor
organizer
and the community organizer and
in my profession on transitions
from labor community organizing
into community economic
development but continue to be a
community organizer wearing many
different hats throughout the
years and labor and it's close
to my heart however we cannot
lose sight of the other charges
of our committee and that is
Military and Veterans Affairs
and Military and Veterans
Affairs is particularly close to
my heart.
As I you will hear me often
times refer my father was a
three war veteran of World War
two eighty second airborne he
was Correa a prisoner of war in
the Korean War and then on in
Vietnam he served two tours
special forces green beret
And so I'm extremely proud of
Representative and gone and all
our veterans and those that we
have not mentioned but
particularly so because of
my father's career and he was
the first Purple Heart recipient
to ever been escorted on in his
funeral procession.
When we laid him to rest of
escorted by the patriot.
Motocycle group that escort so
I'm very proud and
Representative Saylor one have
the honor of meeting him I think
also when I first was elected
because as an IT one year old I
think he was he wanted to
accompany his daughter at my
swearing in in nineteen ninety I
mean in two thousand.
Thirteen and so we said of
course and he passed away at
ninety five so he really is a
true hero and and I.
So this committee is on very
dear to hard on both of those in
both of those areas for those
reasons so I welcome you all and
I look forward to us having a
vibrant.
Committee session once again and
feel free to question call on me
ask questions to assist in
however way I can assist you as
you move through.
Your progress as a newly elected
those of you that are newly
elected and then does that have
questions in general just always
feel free you have an open
online communications with me
thank you Mr chair and thank you
members of the committee.
You chair Alcorn.
We for a role on the windows we
have the staff introduce
themselves and everybody knows
who's dog to most of the time.
Starting with you okay
hi I'm Marcella and the to our
K. and the committee assisted my
third year at session
and this is my first time House
committee assistant on the house
labor veterans military affairs
committee and I'm very excited
to be here.
Michelle.
Hi everybody I want to say
congratulations and welcome to
all the first time
representatives and welcome back
to all of those who are back to
make legislation for the state
of New Mexico so my name is
Michelle modest and
Background in labor work in
community organizing for a
number of years
have landed myself as are the
analyst on the labor and
veterans and military affairs
committee and I'm really proud
to do this work
I was really excited when they
combined labor and military
because these are people and I
think that the legislation that
comes through this committee
involves.
The heart and soul of of working
families so I am excited to be
back again and I probably will
be calling on some of you so
thank you.
Thank you Michelle and we have
Kathleen I believe.
Yes good afternoon everybody
happy twenty twenty one we made
it.
I I I'm Catholic eighty I'm the
majority analyst and I am
honored as well to be on this
committee because I think that
work like water is life and I
will my father in law just
passed away this past year is
ninety seven years old of World
War two vet he was in Germany.
so and I am of this is my fifth
year.
On the labor side although I was
for the first two years I was
when it was labor and economic
development in the past two
years.
A lot of now this is my third
year I think with this committee
and I live in Representative
Stapleton district between the
base and the international
district and I have spent the
past year working mostly
community development program
evaluation with the design and
planning assistance center at
UNM and happy to meet new people
and see familiar faces thank
you.
Anybody else.
We should have a some analysts
are those Republican analysts
coming on board so far I haven't
been informed as to who is
coming in.
Or when we will meet the.
Are you want to be aware that
there will be some.
But no are you I am a
Representative do is the only
local on Representative the
district six which is budget
Cibola McKinley County.
It is pretty eight seven the I
think the numbers were seventy
three percent native American.
I have a lot of Navajo chapters
and I have the whole globalism
me in my district.
Show up.
For quite a few years of neonode
and older and older everyday I
still haven't caught up to some
of the other people that are on
the committee but I'm getting
close
so I just want.
Yeah no there is as a draftee I
got drafted into the military
and I was going to college and
decided that the college was not
for me I quit.
President Nixon sent me a letter
real quick and before I knew it
Close.
And then my way back home
I do my life getting drafted I
guess I.
The first time I ran for public
office a room for municipal
judge and again I was similar
losses in doing so more for a as
a county purchasing agent.
And so when the people came in
and said you're running for
municipal judge in the village
of Milan.
And.
Why listen because you are so
that was my first run for office
and I want to seventeen below
which is crazy.
Then again then I went on to
become a magistrate and serve
that serving years as municipal
judge in years as magistrate
judge.
I got disability and my
retirement from then the the
judiciary.
At home and I was not going to
do anything else I was retired
okay I got this in the
disability yes the fishing
license fees on to license I got
a date set for life.
And my son comes home in working
for a dental Georgie leader can
Martinez using that Mr hand this
is not running anymore
representing to heather said to
see that I was in should I know
that I don't know George called
me let me know he's not running
placing nearly run
hello I am.
They would they would be seen
laces and everything I'm.
We'll tell you again they take
from everywhere I DO need to do
anything well guess what.
Fifteen days before a tightly
may we were running around the
county getting petition
signatures.
And I am starting my thirteen
year.
So this is a little bit about my
background again going back to
the draft of I was working in
the uranium mine as an
underground miner.
One day I came to work on swing
shift and there's a bunch of.
Then.
More senior than myself that
were working there and I heard
him saying there some Cologne I
still ongoing news articles and
all I could think to myself was
ahead but that I do they came
running over and they said so
and so three diary in the union
stored and you're going to be
the union still.
And I said well why and other
guy wants to me and they said no
your will be it well that's it
so this started my career in
labor.
The funds different cultural
world I was twenty nine years
old this started as union
steward of the so it is all
about seven years just kind of
fun but this I want to give back
to the committee.
Most of the ones that have been
around you know pretty much how
it works.
Are you already we already have
like twelve or thirteen or
fourteen built into us.
Are you know I will try every
which way to get as much.
Of the all legislation that
comes our way out of the way as
soon as possible.
You for specially for you folks
that are new J..
this is.
Representative de las us I can
pronounce your name right
because my name is Eliseo.
The idea behind this is as we
get into the missing part of the
session most of you are going to
be running different places
we're sending your bills if we
have the majority of everything
that the speaker has assigned to
us out of the way there's a lot
more freedom for you to handle
what you need to do that myself
to.
I also serve on judiciary which
is a very very busy Committee.
So that's why I feel that the.
The more we get out of the way
the faster the better.
So those are you the new doors
are always open.
Does he even think about should
I drive him do it okay a very
predictable you know how you
will run I will run the
committee runs the same every
day no matter what it was a good
or bad mood and I'm never in a
bad mood really so.
With that in mind the whole but
do we have any questions.
Mr chair.
This is a Representative you get
Garcia and
I just wanted to kind of
Recognize
Representative Russ us.
It was probably.
At the.
At the funeral.
And I think it was the address
of mortuary that handled the
funeral for.
former vice chairman of this
committee his name was money
whenever at a.
And he was from that Baird
Silver City area.
And I want to say that I
probably did see him even though
I didn't know who he was during
the funeral services for a.
Vice chair at Anna so I just
wanted to kind of on recognize
that the in terms of our.
Representative Representative
process.
And with this major business.
Representative Garcia I I
actually am I'm gonna tell you a
little story the it if I got a
minute here about
Representative and there are
many of them a wonderful person
wonderful ma'am.
I'm I.
I.
I actually woke up and I just
had a discussion with David
months on a few noted months on
all these
he is Syria.
Lobbyist and in support for
Socorro The New Mexico tech he
and I played a ball together
will will grow up together in in
not in Silver City his
grandfather of course was.
Many of them you don't write
Center Benny economy not
wonderful person and I went up
there to ask to lobby for well I
never done that before I went
with a more when up and ask for
so for money for a small
project that was started percent
of the car they have no revenue
and it was a the business
business so right I called they
called it up
I remember anyway was a the
business a.
Area that they were trying to
open and start and so I I ended
up going up there and and and
many song we Representative
Sonney he treated me like I was
in all his grandson and it took
me in there and took me around
the capital and of course.
Senator
a communal also I went to his
office in a tree relied I used
to be a grocery secretary for
his daughter Yolanda at the
local.
Albertsons and so it's a small
town we know each other it was a
very sad thing when he passed
away Kathleen his his wife I'm
sure you know over
Representative Representative
Garcia shoes shoes I took I'm
I'm actually sitting in his seat
and she was one of our our our
supporters but they're wonderful
people reason I'm telling you
that's the treated me like
family when I went up there and
they ended up funding some of
those resources needed for that
that part that industrial park
is within it of calling but you
know it's it's it's a pleasure
to meet all of you I have a
daughter in the military she's a
she's in the Air Force she makes
dentures more force my
grandfather was a Purple Heart
all my uncles were in Vietnam my
dad was in Vietnam it's just
it's just part of our our
community here so I look forward
to serving you and yes I did
handle that you know for Mr that
I.
In or or Representative era is a
beautiful thing and I did meet
you I do remember you Sir.
Thank you Mr chair.
Thank you.
Yeah which.
I do know that the
Representative came from the
judiciary runs before he was a
Representative
role judges I served with the
amount of the same as a
municipal judge who was a
municipal judge.
Okay with that in mind we don't
have anybody else have any
questions this remember folks
like yours open.
Caller Sri.
Do whatever you need to get my
attention.
Sometimes I am already hearing.
But sometimes I pretend to be
highly hearing but anyway with
that in mind that we will
probably meet Tuesday and we'll
probably have an agenda
published by tomorrow they're
not earlier.
