The likeness or um the image of,
of, of protected uh individual,
then if you are profiting, then
you will be penalized and there,
there'll be a percentage of
that.
That, uh, um, income that you're
getting to go to uh
Madam, thank you for refreshing
my memory, and that's where that
million dollar fine comes in
that I thought was like, wow,
that's a lot of money for a fun.
OK, Madam Chair and thank you,
representative.
That concludes my questions.
You representative actor
representative block.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
and Representative and uh Miss
Stillwell, Mr. Manson. Did I get
those right? Good. So, Madam
Chair Representative, I, I have
a few questions actually.
First would be starting actually
on page one, talking about the
digital replica.
There's a definition there.
And I'm just wondering who
determines whether like a
layperson would be unable to
tell the difference between
something that could be a
simulation versus reality.
And will there be industry
standards to
To detect those kinds of methods
of false representation of that
individual.
Thank you, thank you for the
question. So we're understanding
it, you're wanting to know if
there is a standard for
Uh, for us to detect, uh, if
there is a replication out
there, and please clarify.
Sure. Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. So yeah, I just,
so with AI these days, it's so
easy to
Create
A lot of cool things and a lot
of bad things too. And so I'm
wondering, are there kinds of
industry standards available to
be able to to find what that is
and how do you distinguish
between the two, Madam Chair
Representative. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
There are
Quite, oh, I'm sorry, Madam
Chair and Representative.
Um
There are a number of cases of
litigation going on right now
that all, all across the country
that are
Uh, looking at deciding these
issues.
Um
Usually involving state laws
very similar to this that are in
places other than New Mexico. So
those cases wouldn't be binding
on New Mexico, but they would be
persuasive authority, um, and
Uh
And here if it were to get
litigated, uh, you know, the.
That's what juries are for and
judges and
They would have to determine
what would a reasonable person
think if they saw this
particular instance of AI and we
would rely on them.
Thank you.
Did that answer your question?
It did. Thank you. Uh, it sounds
a lot like we're waiting.
a lot more precedent, I suppose.
Of course, please.
Chairs representative, um, you
know, I think that uh you're
right, it, it is uh and as and
as a technology improves, it's
becoming increasingly elusive in
terms of being able to do, to,
to discern reality from fiction,
if you will, um, and in many
cases, it's um incumbent upon
the person whose rights have
been violated to bring this to
the attention of um the powers
that be or whoever has uh
created the digital re
Um, if they discover that this
is happening, but I want to be
clear that this um
These types of technologies
don't just affect, uh, like
potentially affect pop stars and
people who are
Famous and whose voices you
would instantly recognize. Um,
I'm speaking uh about recorded
um recorded uh sound um which is
my field of expertise. For
example, in my studio, I work
with artists from all over the
world. Um, and one of the things
that I'm
Very joyful about being able to
do is that I cause um local and
regional musicians and singers
to be hired.
To work on these projects and in
the decades that I've been doing
this, I'm I I don't have an
exact figure, but hundreds of
thousands of dollars in revenue
have found their ways into the
pockets of local musicians here
in Santa Fe and from Albuquerque
and elsewhere in the state, um,
and musicians tend to not save
very much money, so that that
money inevitably finds its way
into the local economy very
quickly, uh, and these come from
clients who come to work with me
from some from here and
from very far flung places. Um,
for example, there's a, uh, a
woman who I hire often to be a
background singer on people's
projects. She's not the primary
voice that you hear, but she's
very skilled at studio singing,
which is a skill set in and of
itself, apart from being able to
sing live. Um, it's a very
specific skill that some people
have to be able to
Match their phrasing to, to
blend their musical personality
with the primary artist. The
technology now exists, um, that
someone in my position could, if
I wanted to create a digital
replica of this woman's voice,
and then use that sample of her
voice, um, and then cause it to
sing whatever words I want in
whatever melody I want in
whatever phrasing I want, along
with
with every subsequent artist
comes into my studio.
Um, and if I was allowed to do
that without regulation, even
though this woman is not a
household name or a famous
artist, I would be putting her
out of work by
By using a sample of her voice
manipulating it to sing along
with other artists. So the point
I'm trying to make is that this,
this potentially, not
potentially, it does affect um
Musicians and singers and
performing artists at all levels
of the, because the vast
majority of musicians are not
rock stars. They're working.
Musicians
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Thank you experts and
Representative, you have
changed. No, just kidding. Good
to see you, Representative
Barrago. Uh, so I appreciate
that, that, that does help me a
little bit on this. I did have
some questions though when it
comes to
Where the individual
I doing this from. So I know it
says person domiciled in New
Mexico is subject to this to to
file claims. What if this
happens in another country or
another state. How would they
have recourse.
With that, Madam Chair,
Representative experts.
Madam Chair, Representative, um.
If the perpetrator were in
another state in
The United States and the victim
were.
Here in New Mexico, uh.
The victim could sue in federal
court here with uh diversity
jurisdiction.
Um
If the, if the problem were an
international one, then we would
be relying on international
intellectual property treaties
and we have relationships with
most countries where they
respect our intellectual
property and we respect theirs
and um and we tried to get them
to cooperate. It is in the
intellectual property world
difficult and copyright and
trademark and patent, sometimes
to enforce things
internationally, um.
Uh, but
Uh, but we do the best we can
and this is a start.
The representative and then just
quickly on that, um,
Miss Stillwell.
How, how would federal courts
get involved since we're making
a state law here.
I know there's already a federal
law, would that be only
determined based upon that
federal law that exists or the
state law, does it just, does it
add anything additional to that
when it comes to an out of state
potential perpetrator.
Mo
Madam Chair Representative, um,
You can have
A case in federal law for a
number of different reasons. One
is, if it's federal law like
copyright or trademark law, they
have original jurisdiction. And
so that's where you start, no
matter what state you're in. Uh,
but if you
Um
Uh, but if you
had
A perpetrator.
In a different state that
creates diversity jurisdiction,
potential uh
because they're crossing state
lines.
And if they are in Pennsylvania.
Uh
Violating these laws, it's not
going to stick to Pennsylvania.
It's not gonna stick to New
Mexico. It's gonna be all over
the place. Um, so, um, so
federal jurisdiction would
attach for that reason.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, and in the
interest of time, I
I will skip all my really
important questions and just go
to one that I find extremely
important, so.
Uh, it's on, it's on a
substitute somewhere, Madam
Chair.
And I believe it could
potentially be on.
Page 8.
Of the substitute, and I'm going
to start on line 17, go through
23, and this pretty much says
Unless the digital replica is
used to depict sexually explicit
conduct a violation of the
provisions of this act do not
occur if it's produced in a bona
fide news public affairs or
sports broadcast or account,
provided that the digital
replica is subject to
Subject of or is relevant to the
subject of the broadcast or
account. So, Madam Chair
Representative, I know that we
have fair use doctrines, and
then we also have
Just things that are newsworthy,
that is an exception usually
when it comes to that. So, Madam
Chair Representative, what if
this was some kind of news.
feature that was 10, it could be
news, but it probably was more
of a commentary piece on
somebody and they use something
that
That shed a bad light on this
individual using their likeness,
their image, and
Potentially AI, how would that
apply with this legislation,
since they are explicitly
excluded.
Madam Chair, for 4 clarification
of your question, you're asking
that if something is used on the
news.
In a news broadcast that is
Well,
I mean bona fide news here,
but it is using a false image
when you say AI is it a false
image and in bad.
favor of the of the image or
individual, is that what you're
asking? Uh, yes, and I know that
the explicitly.
Removes if it's.
Like an explicit conduct, right,
sexually explicit conduct. But
if it's not sexually explicit
conduct, but it is in a bad
light on that person that is
borderline actionable. How
would, how would we determine
that in the new, the new words
and.
translation, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair Representative,
great question. Thank you. Um,
That section carving out uh
You know, special damages for
sexually explicit, uh, deep
fixes really important. Um, that
said, the section that the other
section here that you're
referring to is analogous to
fair use doctrine in copyright
law, um, and essentially,
When
Fair use is an affirmative
defense, so, uh, so once the
violation has been shown, then,
uh, there's an opportunity for
the alleged perpetrator to say,
well, notwithstanding the fact
that I did this, I should not be
liable because
Because it was fair use. Fair
use, uh, generally,
Requires
There's a 4-factor test, and you
never know how it's gonna work
out until you get into court.
And that's the case with
copyright law as well, but
Um
But generally, in order, whether
it's
In a bad light or not in a bad
light.
The to qualify for fair use.
You, you would have to
He
Telling a story about the about
the transformation, about the
fact that AI is being used.
Um
You can't just copy for the sake
of copying and have it be fair
use. It has to be copying as
used to tell a particular story
that is bona fide newsworthy.
Does that help?
Does Madam Chair,
representative, I guess I just
Confusing to me when it comes to
newsworthy versus commentary and
Someone who is
There we have a lot of
Individuals, I'm sure who have a
lot of opinions and they, it's
not necessarily newsworthy. It
could be in a newspaper, but it
could be just a column.
And so that's kind of where I, I
wonder where we draw the line
and it sounds to me like we're
saying it depends on the case,
which, which of course, it
always does, but I just want to
make sure that we're not giving
explicit ability to
You know, continue.
Any kind of thing that could
make someone have to go to
court, file something based on
this. So,
Yeah, I do have some more
questions, but I'm gonna hold
them.
Because of the time. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Representative, Representative
Barrago.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I was
going to make a motion that we
adopt um a substitute for house
bill.
representative, we, we did adopt
that House Bill 221.
OK
As substituted.
Madam Jared, so that would be a
substitute for a do not pass.
On House Bill 221 and a due pass
on the House government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee substitute for House
Bill 221. Thank you for the
correction, Madam Leader.
Thank you. I'll go ahead and
second that.
We
Have a, uh, any opposition?
Would you like a roll call?
Roll.
Carol
Representative Aonorne yes.
Representative block.
No, with a quick explanation.
Representative Borego.
Yes.
Representative Lujan.
Representative Mea.
No.
Madam Floor leader.
Yes.
Mayor.
Oh
Madam Vice Chair,
Yes.
Madam Chair.
63.
Representatives, you have a due
pass. Thank you expert
witnesses.
OK, uh, represent a block to
explain your,
your the explanation was just
because I think there are a lot
of vagaries in the bill that I
just want some more clarity on
and we didn't really have much
time this morning, so that's why
I was in now. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
When
I, I'm, I'm happy to uh work
with and talk with the
representative after committee
to for his concerns. Thank you.
Thank you.
OK, let's move along. House Bill
291 as amended.
And we have a substitute.
Committee substitute, please
pass that out.
Representative Romero and
Senator
Steinborne.
You may begin. Thank you.
Good morning. Um, members of the
committee, Madam Chair, um,
before you is, uh, the committee
substitute for House Bill 291,
which puts into statute an
opportunity for our um
environment department to
legalize a circular economy, um,
in the way that we're talking
about doing that, um, and what
we envision here is helping
folks with their recycling, um,
and reuse arms of local
community that currently, um,
they don't have the impetus to,
to do.
Um,
What's super exciting about this
bill that was unanticipated, um,
since we've been trying to
support these processes in our
local community for years is
that a number of entrepreneurs
reached out to me about how
excited they were to start
working in rural communities to
close the loop on a number of
these waste products that are
generated that don't have an end
of life solution. Um, so really
exciting to talk about
communities like Siarron that
might have new business, um,
opening up due to this bill. So,
um, with that,
Um, Madam Chair, my co-sponsors
and experts will introduce
themselves.
Madam Chair, committee, great to
be with you all again. I'm
Senator Jeff Steinborn and
I'll distill it down from my
perspective. This is a recycling
bill, a recycling and recycling
industries bill to expand use of
the state of of of communities
main recycling fund that they
get from the state.
Uh, which is called the, uh,
raid fund, and this, we have
some old language in that fund
because of the history of it
where we were where we were
restricted 70% of the fund must
be used for uh for tires.
And when in reality, we've
cleaned up a lot of these old
tire sites and it is now that
the fund that cities go to for
ailors and other forms of
recycling infrastructure and so
we clean, we modernize the
language of the fund, but the
fund also because it's sitting
on a healthy balance, we're able
to fund several new staff
positions that are gonna also
help our communities. We create
a recycling coordinator and this
is Representative Romero was,
was talking about what's really
exciting is we're at the
department is moving into trying
to grow what we would call a
circular economy.
Actually create industries from
this recycling and get
communities working together and
look for synergistic
opportunities to create new
jobs, and that's what's known as
a circular economy. So we're
going to be able to hire a staff
person specifically to work on
that. So it's really new
services and new infrastructure
funds available for our
community and that's what this
bill does.
Uh, good morning, uh, Madam
chair. I'll just be quick. Uh,
Secretary Kenny, Environment
Department, really excited that
we're modernizing the way New
Mexico deals with, um, waste in
the state through this bill, as
Senator Steinborn, uh,
indicated, uh, creating new
jobs, creating new markets, stop
shipping, uh, all of the good
stuff out of our waste streams,
out of state, stop accepting all
uh allowing other states to stop
sending us all their bad stuff.
Um, and really have the
opportunity here to make New
Mexico thrive in the waste
market. Um, so thank you to the
sponsors and uh thank you, Madam
Chair, for hearing this bill.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
Shirlene Sitton, your solid
waste bureau chief. Um, I come
to the state in this past year
with 22 years of municipal
experience and delivering solid
waste recycling and keep it
beautiful programs and uh so I'm
really excited to be part of uh
uh keeping litter out of our
territory in many different
ways, uh, and that includes
illegal dumping. Um, they've
already covered uh a lot of the
main aspects of the bill, but um
I'd like
To let you know that since
2019/2 million dollars of
request and requested recycling
related grants have not been
able to be awarded partly
because of the 2/3 mandate to
tires, but I also want to assure
you that we are not taking our
focus off the issue of illegal
dumping or tires. The, the thing
is we can't control what grants
come in from local communities
because they're asking for
things that are there.
unique needs, so we might get.
Almost all recycling related
grant requests, and then we
still have to find a way to do
2/3 to tires. So, um, we have a
position in the environment
department solely related to
working with tires and tire
issues. So we are on it, we're
on illegal dumping. We are
concerned about tires, so, but
this just allows us to open up
the grant funds and give our
local communities the things
they need to build their
recycling infrastructure and
help start building our circular
economy in New Mexic.
Thank you.
You, do we have a motion to
discuss the committee
substitute.
OK I have Representative Little
and I'll second that and before
we move along to discuss the
committee substitute. Let's go
to the audience. Do we have any
anyone in the audience?
In support of
OK, let's do one minute
comments. Did you want us to
just describe the sub changes
from the last committee.
Oh, that's fine, um, that's,
we're, we're fine. Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Melissa Bernard and. I'm
here on behalf of the Sierra
Club Rio Grande chapter or
35,000 members and supporters in
support of HB 291, the key to
reducing waste is ensuring that
products don't end up as waste
to start.
By developing a circular economy
program and plan, we encourage
manufacturers to rethink their
product design.
The bill brings the staff needed
to support these efforts and
allows the raid fund to be used
for local recycling
infrastructure instead of
pre-designating percentages of
the fund to uses that aren't
always needed. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Marla shows
registered lobbyist for South
Central solid Waste Authority,
uh, South Central Solid Waste
Authority halls, municipal solid
waste and provides recycling
services for Donana, Otero, and
Sierra counties. Our mission has
always been to divert waste from
landfills and prioritize
recycling where possible. We
support the modernization of the
rate fund, the concept of a
circular economy is gaining
traction nationally, with many
companies looking to operate in
a way which minimized
his waist. It is a model of
production and consumption,
which involves sharing leasing
reusing, repairing,
refurbishing, and recycling
existing materials and products
as long as possible in this way,
the life cycle of products is
extended. We appreciate the
sponsor.
Uh, NED and the governor's
office for prioritizing the uh
the and recognizing the
importance of diverting waste
from our landfills and the need
to develop recycling and reuse
marketing.
Thank you. Do we have further
comments and support of the
bill.
We, we'll stay with the
audience. Do we have any
opposition?
Let's go online. Do we have any
comments online?
Anyone hoping to make public
comment, please raise your hand.
OK. So we have uh Jean Longston.
Gene, can you hear us?
Yeah. Yes, I can hear you. Um,
I, um, Madam Chair and members
of the committee. My name is
Jean Logston, and I'm a
registered lobbyist with the
League of Women Voters of New
Mexico. Uh, the League of Women
Voters strongly supports this
bill because we have waste
management positions, uh, from
many years ago to promote
policies and reduce the
generation of uh um
of waste.
And encourage recycling of all
solid and hazardous wastes. We
also note that it is important
to be able to create markets for
used products, and what this
bill seems to do is to expand
the outreach so that we can
encourage everyone in New Mexico
to be able to reuse and recycle
to the best extent that they
can. This is very good for the
environment, and it's also very
good for people to be able to
contribute if they have the
desire and um
and are encouraged to do so.
Thank you very much.
Thank you so much, Jane.
He's seeing no other comments?
We'll go back to
Discuss the committee sub. You
stand for questions, Madam
Chair. OK.
Committee members.
Or I go.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator and Representative
and your witness. Um, so,
This is really fascinating bill
to me, and I had to go back and
define what circular, um,
Your definition of circular
industry was which at first
glance, I didn't know, uh, but I
will tell you that on the west
side of Albuquerque in my
district, my former city council
district, we had a lot of
illegal dumping of tires, like a
lot because that whole area on
the, on the, on the northwest
side of Albuquerque is, is, um,
developing very fast, um,
probably one of the fastest in
Albuquerque for new housing and.
And such new communities, um,
And one of the things that we
did have in Albuquerque was an
alliance between the county and
the and the city, um, that dealt
with illegal dumping.
Um, not just on the west side,
but, uh, citywide.
So my question is the funding
that's involved with this bill.
How would that alliance utilize
that funding.
Oh, go ahead.
Um, Madam Chair Representative
Barrego, um, Berna Bernalillo
County got a raid grant and did
an amazing outreach campaign
about illegal dumping and tires,
and we actually are featuring um
images from that campaign in the
new um don't keep litter out of
our territory, Breaking Bad
habits. Uh, so the, the, these
grants are benefiting everyone
and uh it's still being aimed
at, at, at tires and of course.
Bernalillo County, and
Albuquerque can continue to
apply for grants related to
tires. We just don't always get
that many grants for tires, and
so again, it just opens it up to
be able to um evaluate all the
grants as they come in.
Madam Chair, and, and uh.
witness, um, what would that
grant look like, like what
amount?
Are we talking about?
Um, thank you for the question,
Madam Chair, um, Representative,
the, the grant amounts can be
any like we, we have generally
had about $800,000 that we give
away, um, so the grant amounts
can really vary. They can be
small or they can be large.
Bernalillo County, I don't
remember the exact amount. I
have it here in all this
paperwork, but yes, I can. I,
I'll be happy to do that, um,
but they can range from, um,
just a few $1000 200,000
dollars. It, it's possible
someone could
get most of the money if they
had a grant, uh, idea or
opportunity that would really
benefit like.
Everyone in New Mexico. So
there's no, there's no
particular amount for the grant.
OK, thank you, uh, witness and
thank you, um, Senator and, and
representative for this bill. I
think it's a really great bill.
Uh, it kind of takes away from
us, uh, painting our tires and
creating an entry into our
properties, um, I'm just a joke
now I'm sure, um, but I
honestly, I think it's a really
good um it's a really good bill
in terms of keeping
tires out of our arroyos out of,
you know, a lot of places that
we don't wanna see them, vacant
properties, um, and I just wanna
say that, you know, I'm very
supportive. Um, I also want to
say that one of the bills that I
had when I was city councilor
was to raise the fees on illegal
uh dumping and, and litter. So
I'm, I'm just really happy to
see that that you all have
brought this forward. Thank you.
Representative Zamora.
Thank you, Madam Chair and.
Thank you for bringing this bill
forward, Senator and
Representative and Secretary
Kenny, always good to see you.
Uh
So I, I'm gonna stick to the
tire questions for a second.
So, I've been to the tire store,
and I believe they charged me a
fee.
The dispose of the tires.
Does that money go into this
fund? Is that
Or, or does that money?
Stay in the store's budget and
they pay somebody else to pick
him up and, and then it goes
from there.
Or, or is that a state law that
they have to charge that fee and
it goes to this fund.
Madam Chair, Representative, um,
Samoa, that fee is not
associated with the state. So,
um, when the tire stores take
the tire back for you. Um, they
pay someone to take it away and
either dispose of it or recycle
it. So they're charging you a
fee to help offset those costs.
And, and Madam Chair.
And uh representative.
How do we know?
If this
If we, if we support this bill,
this is about, about changing
the funding of, of the fund to
say, so, so this, how do we know
that these monies are gonna be
equally distributed throughout
the state.
Madam Chair, Representative.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
the
the problem with pre um
pre-determining what percentage
of funds should go to what is
that we don't control what grant
applications we get from year to
year.
So if local governments are
putting in more applications for
tires, more tire grants will be
funded, but when we say 2/3 of
the money has to go to tire
projects, and we only get 2 tire
projects that really hamstrings
being able to grant out the rest
of the funds for other projects.
Madam Chair, let me rephrase
that question.
Once this changes in 2/3 does
not have to go to tires. How do
we know that this will go to
eastern New Mexico, northern New
Mexico, it's not all gonna go to
to the I-25 corridor to.
Cause, cause
But if we want to recycle
something in Clovis, and we need
money for this program.
How do we know that the monies
are gonna be, is there a point
system or how, how are we going
to determine where this money
goes. Great question, Madam
Chair Representative, so the,
the, the, the current raid um
Act creates the rate alliance
and um that is a committee of
stakeholders representing local
governments, tribal, uh,
businesses, stakeholders in the
solid waste industry. Um, they
are directed to uh give to about
to.
an evaluation system for the
grants, and they represent all
corners of the state and
historically they have really
looked at rural, uh,
Rural applications first. It's,
it's not a mandate, but um
knowing, knowing that they're
more in need of the funds
historically that has always
happened. Um, in the, in this,
this directs them to create a
circular economy plan and within
that plan and all and and the
rate act itself, which is
directed toward illegal dumping,
um,
They, they, they will have
historically and will continue
to focus on illegal dumping
tires and recycling.
And, and Madam Chair and
Representative, can you tell me
how old this fund is when, when
this fund was started and, and
how much money's in it.
Madam Cha.
I
Madam Chair, Representative, I
believe that this goes back to
2007, uh, and I do have the
current fund balance. I
apologize, it's not right at my
fingertips.
The current fund balance is 2.9
million, but that includes the
obligated funds for this year's
grantees.
Madam Chair and expert witnesses
you say million or billion
billion.
With the Million with an M.
Madam Chair, for the sake of
time, I think, I think I'll stop
there. I'm not sure if I missed
anything, but I might ask for a
second chance. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Representative Mejia.
I'm good. OK
Madam Chair.
Representative, um.
Just one question. Um, I said
then, uh,
done.
Um, Madam Chair Representative
Maja
Majia, thank you. I want to make
sure I pronounce your name
right. Um, there are all kinds
of different systems, granting
systems, um, uh, across the
country just by state by state,
um, I do come from Texas, don't
hold that against me, but uh
there's a robust uh grant system
there as well for uh for
recycling.
Has successful it has been.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
a very successful, um.
Recycling is an enormous
industry in Texas and Texas has
focused on it, um, and when I
was there, I, I, I helped bring
that focus um with something
called the Texas Recycling Data
Initiative. And so now the state
um pays periodically to do um
recycling studies to see the
impact on the economy, and it's
so large that now they have a
market development plan, so
that's exactly where I want to
take New Mexico. It's true that
we don't have the same um
economy.
eyes, but other states are out
there, um, building up that uh
recycling economy, and that's
what this is all about. We need
to get in the game. We need to
stop importing waste and
exporting recyclables, switch it
around and build up businesses
uh around recycling.
Thank you for that answer, Madam
chair and Representative.
Represented a block.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I would
just move to adopt the
substitute so we can talk about
the bill.
Thank you, Representative. I'll
second that.
Do we have any opposition to
adopting the committee's um.
What is it? House Bill 291 as
amended.
Seeing none, um, let's go ahead
and
Um, discuss the
Adopted committee substitute.
They bought.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
and I didn't want to ask all
those questions on the
substitute because
A lot of it was the same, so I
just want to start on page 3.
Madam Chair, Representative. So
I
I feel like my biggest problem
when it came to the
legislature's definitions of
things. Things are just
interestingly defined, and they,
they always go to different
kinds of statutes, and they
always refer and defer to
different things. So, Madam
Chair, representative, uh,
secretary, experts.
I see under circular economy, we
have something that says are a
restorative or regenerative by
design and so Madam Chair
Representative, I'm wondering,
can you be a little more
specific with me on what that
means, because I don't know what
that particularly means legally
or in this context, Madam Chair.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative.
Again, just on, on definition,
when we're talking about
recycling, it's that whole
recycle, reduce, reuse. It's
restoration of environment, of
products that are currently
being used in the marketplace
that, or that could be
regenerated as a, as a, perhaps
a new product repurposed for a
different purpose.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative, that helps.
I think that is.
A cool idea, I mean.
I like it. So, Madam Chair,
Representative, I see also on 3.
Online 16, we have the superior
design of materials.
Madam Chair, representative,
what does that mean the superior
design of materials, especially
regarding things that are
recycled, and then what, what
does that mean when it comes to
defining that for others. Does
that make anyone have to change
manufacturing processes for
certain things. How does that
work with this legislation,
Madam Chair, Representative
secretary Madam Chair,
representative, so you'll recall
that we were talking about some
of the entrepreneurship and
innovation that's coming with
the recycling industry. So, the
idea of where we're
using these materials, products
and systems and perhaps
recycling for different
components, so you've heard of
electronic waste that is where
you take the precious metals out
of them and use the other
components for other processes.
So this essentially uses um that
quote unquote superior design
model or how to be able to adapt
to utilizing the waste in
different ways.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. So does that
mean specifically the, the
original product needs to be
optimized.
Correct, Madam Chair
Representative. OK, and Madam
Chair representative, how would
that work?
For someone who's selling
something in the state of New
Mexico. Would they have to?
Prioritize things that could be
of superior designer material
and how specifically can we
define that so that people know
that they're in compliance.
Uh, so, Madam Chair
Representative, this is just the
definition to be compassing of
all of the different um
processes and opportunity to
work in the circular economy. So
going back to my original um
response, this is just about
being able to look at those
various designs and the
components of a, a waste
product. So take a tire. It,
it's rubber and, and some other
chemical compounds, um, and so
being able to look at what you
could essentially reuse from
that process. Thank you, Madam
Chair and
And then I'm wondering how does
that, how does that change
anything in the actual
Act of reclaiming these
different kinds of
Materials.
Madam Chair and Representative,
thanks for your question. This
is, this is a, I'll give you a
pretty cool example that I think
that this won't change for New
Mexico, but these kinds of bills
change things nationally, um,
and one of them was a laptop
manufacturer who, you know, in
order to reclaim the battery had
to unscrew every laptop, but
because they thought about how
to make a circular economy, they
put like a little release on the
side, so you didn't have to.
Uh
You, you could just pop the
battery out and recycle the
battery and put a new battery in
as opposed to just spend the
time to open up and redo the
laptop. Um, Madam Chair and
representative to your, to your
Question though, there's nothing
in here that would require any
New Mexico manufacturer to
actually affirmatively have to
change how they're manufacturing
anything, um, what we would do
is, uh, at some point in the
future work with stakeholders to
figure out how, if, if we were
to move with rules that would
help incentivize that outcome,
you know, we'd work with them
on, on setting up that.
That rule or that um
Practice of trying to figure out
a better design.
For better outcomes of
recycling.
There's no mandate in in here
directly in any way.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative and secretary
that, that helps me on that. And
then I think I had another
question later on in your bill.
And by the way, I'm like totally
pro recycling. I really am. I
like to recycle. I
There's this website, it's on
Urban Outfitters and they have
recycled clothes and I, I always
buy them, probably too many
clothes, so just TMI but I like
recycling, so.
First of all, so page 17.
I'm going to line 14 to 17.
We're taking out the requirement
for
Uh, and illegal dumping act to a
person who receives less than
95% recycled materials from
sources in New Mexico. So I have
a concern with that, Madam Chair
Representative. Could that
potentially mean other states
are now shipping a bunch of
stuff to New Mexico to be
recycled, and then with
recycling, I know it takes a lot
of energy and it also has a lot
of carbon dioxide that is
released through the process of
doing that. So could this
potentially have the opposite
effect of what we're looking
for, Madam Chair,
Representative.
Madam Chair Representative, uh,
to your first question, if we
had a strong recycling economy
that was essentially able to
scale, that is a business, um,
and so we would essentially be
supportive of that. I know we
have one of the largest, um,
Cardboard recycling facilities
in the nation, um, which we're
happy to support, obviously, so
it wouldn't, in our opinion, I
believe would be a bad thing to
have recycling come to New
Mexico if it's a, if it's an
economy of scale, um, to your
second point on the emissions. I
don't know if we.
We already have a, an emission
standard that's separate from
this bill that, um, any business
in business would have to be
meeting those requirements for.
And I'm chair and representative
and then is that specifically to
recycling plants or is that just
across the board with that.
Um, Madam Chair and
Representative, um, if you're
going to power your material
recycling uh center with, you
know, natural gas or solar, you
know, those are options that are
sort of dictated by where you
can get your power from, um, but
there's, there's no, uh, you,
you are potentially right that
sometimes recycling may increase
the CO2 footprint.
Um, and those are tradeoffs that
we have to make as a state, um,
but, but we have those umbrella
decarbonization of power
happening through ETA and other
places, um, but there's, there's
no emissions um standards that
directly apply unless you were,
you know,
Burning natural gas for a boiler
to power your recycling
facility, something.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative and, and interest
of time, I think that's all I
got. Appreciate you guys.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Wayanarnu.
Madam Chair, I would like to
move a do not pass on House Bill
291, but it do pass on the House
government elections in Indian
Affairs Committee substitute for
House Bill 291.
Have emotion.
For a do not pass on House Bill
291 as amended.
And they do pass on house
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee sub amended in
a second before we take roll
call.
Let's go to representative
Zamora for a 2nd time.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'll
make it quick. So, so on the
bill on the old language, it
says on the page 4.
Line 11, it talks about dispose
and it means to deposit this
part.
Deposit scrap tires or solid
waste into any land or water,
and then somewhere else in the
bill it talks about burning
tires, uh,
Why wasn't that language
stricken off this, this bill and
Why would we still have language
like that in, in, in a recycling
bill.
Um, Madam Chair Representatives,
so the original, um, design with
this bill was again with tires
in mines. We don't believe that
the definitions change what
we're trying to do today. It's
just meant to be all
encompassing, um, so I don't
think it takes away from the,
the changes that were, were made
and that's current law. OK, so,
but it's not legal to do that,
right, Madam Chair and
Representative? I think in the
definition, Madam Chair
Representative in the way that
we're using it throughout the
bill is just talking about the
contrast between the two.
Um
And what is allowed or not
allowed, so.
That I was kind of shocked to
see that even in writing in the
bill is like what? We don't, we
don't like disposing as you have
well pointed out, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for giving me a second
chance.
Thank you. Please call roll for
a due due pass.
Representative on.
No, sir.
Representative Bore. Yes.
Representative Lujan.
Represented Mia.
Yes.
Madame Flourlier.
Yes
Representative Zamora. Yes.
Madam Vice Chair. Yes.
Madam Chair. 71.
You have a due pass.
Thank you.
Have a great day.
OK, let's move along to House
Bill 260.
And we have an amendment. Please
pass out the amendment.
Good morning, uh, Madam Chera
committee.
Thank you for having us here
today. We are uh presently house
bill 260. Um, do you want us to
talk about that, that uh bill or
start with amendment.
Go ahead and introduce your bill
and then um talk about your
amendment and don't forget that.
To um
Give the 202 number or the 0.2
number. House Bill 260 will
amend law to clearly define what
restraint and seclusion both is
and is not. It also updates
requirements for school safety
plans, training requirements for
educators and reporting both
from schools to PD and to
parents.
It will prohibit seclusion,
prohibited exclusion.
Consistently with national
research, defines key terms
related to restraint and sets
curriculum rules and conditions
on when restraint can be used.
The bill requires the school
staff be properly trained, not
just in how restraint safe.
How to restrain safely, but also
in techniques for preventing
situation from escalating to the
point where stream will be
needed. And with me is my
co-sponsor, um, rep uh Chavez,
and our expert witness at um
Merit Andrews um LESE uh senior
analyst.
Mm
We introduced the amendment to.
So, uh, the amendment will
clarify what when the seclusion
is not allowed.
Uh, and we provide clarity,
clarity on a level staff
responses as a result of this
change. And also, um, an avenue
to uh uh to address for parents
who suspect restraining, the
closure may occur and how to
proceed on.
OK, thank you. I'll move to uh
discuss the amendment.
Do we have any discussion on the
amendment?
Seeing none.
Do we have a a motion to adopt
the amendment.
I'll second that, and now we'll
move on to the
Adopted
amended bill.
All right. Let's go ahead and
move to the audience, those in
support of the
Bill, please raise your hands.
OK, let's do one minute
comments.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Alice Lou McCoy. I'm the
executive director of the
Developmental Disabilities
Council here in New Mexico by
state and federal law, the
majority of council members are
New Mexicans with developmental
disabilities and family members.
Ample data and research shows
that students with disabilities
experience restraint and
seclusion in schools at far
higher rates than other
students, our own council
members have children who have
experienced restraint and
seclusion.
It's not only traumatizing to
students who experience it, but
it traumatizes the educators who
perform it.
And the students who have to
witness it. This bill not only
clarifies the use of restraint
and seclusion in schools. It
emphasizes training and use of
positive behavioral supports and
interventions, which is the
single most effective way to
avoid situations where educators
must make that tough call on
whether or not to use restraint.
The council strongly supports
this bill to protect the safety
of our educators and students
and urges the committee to
members to vote do pass. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Ellen Pines
representing the Disability
coalition, uh, several years
ago, the legislature passed
legislation limiting the use of
these traumatic experiences in
the schools and is often the
case that um time shows that
there's a need to revisit
measures that you've passed and
refined them in the light of
experience. The legislative
education Study Committee had a
hearing last year, and it was
very clear at that hearing that
everybody involved
The parents and the school
personnel felt there was a need
to refine the provisions of the
law to make it clearer what
could and could not be done to
protect both students and school
personnel. We believe that this
bill does that, and we urge your
support. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Michelle Trigembo. I'm
the special education umbed for
the state of New Mexico, and I
sat on the working group, uh,
for the committee that spoke in
July, and we had members that
included family members,
teachers, superintendents,
special education directors and
the LESC, and we worked for
almost a year and a half to
again refine definitions and
discuss how to clarify, uh,
definitions so that students and
educators do not have to
experience the trauma of these,
uh, events that occur.
House Bill 260 focuses on the
explicit training of positive
behavior supports for all levels
of public school structures,
restraint of a child is
traumatizing to the student, the
family, and school staff. This
bill clarifies existing law and
expectations, schools must be
equipped to effectively serve
and educate all students, and
that includes understanding how
to use best practices to meet
behavioral challenges. Thank you
so much.
Thank you. We, one more.
Good morning, Madam Chairman and
women and members of the
committee. Uh, my name is
Dennisa Rasas. I'm the director
of policy at the publication
department, and we stand in
strong support of this piece of
legislation. We thank the
sponsors for putting this
together. We appreciate the
collaboration, the
thoughtfulness that went into
putting this piece of
legislation together, uh, we
think that it was done, uh,
absolutely with staff and
students, uh, and their
well-being and their safety in
mind. Thank you.
Thank you will stay with the
audience. Do we have any
comments opposing the bill?
Seeing no, let's go online.
OK for public comment. Gary, can
you hear us?
OK, we'll come back.
Melissa Dale, can you hear us?
Yes, hello. Good morning, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Alisa
Dial, senior education attorney
with the New Mexico Center on
Law and Poverty.
We stand in support of HB 260 as
amended and thank the sponsors
for bringing this important
measure. Students with
disabilities deserve to attend
schools that afford them the
necessary supports, safety, and
dignity to be able to learn and
thrive in schools and beyond. A
recent review by the US
Department of Education.
Ordered PD to amend its state
plan to show how it will help
Title I schools improve student
learning by reducing bullying,
exclusionary discipline, and
other harmful interventions
affecting student safety.
HB 260 as, as amended is an
important step in responding to
this federal requirement in
creating equitable learning
environments. This builds
emphasis on proactive behavioral
support is really critical. We
urge PD to strengthen expertise,
ensure that training around this
issue are culturally and
linguistically relevant and
provide schools with the tools
to reduce and eliminate these
practices. For these reasons,
and the others given today, we
urge the committee to pass this
legislation. Thank you. Thank
you so much, Alyssa.
Elizabeth, can you hear us,
Elizabeth?
Yes, can you hear me. You have
one minute.
Thank you, um, Madam Chair and
committee. I am a parent former
teacher and advocate. I served
on the Senate Memorial 68
Working Group. And I am speaking
to you specifically in regards
to my, my family and my son's
personal experience with
restraint. My son started
kindergarten in 2018, and he has
a developmental delay. He was
restrained 8 times.
In his first year at school.
This traumatized our, our son
and our family. It left us, um,
I left my son not knowing the
difference between safe touch
and unsafe touches, like hugs.
We're no longer seen as safe.
Um
Language such as the escalation.
Um, triggers that the adults
within the room have already
failed. And so,
I see this bill is a huge
improvement. I would also, as
noted in the earlier speaker,
note that this um
And more can be done, restraint
is damaging and traumatizing for
all involved. And that is an
area where I think we can um
work.
With more effort towards that.
As, uh, noted this bill.
Does talk about positive
behavior support. I'd also like
to talk about collaborative
proactive approaches so that the
need for restraint isn't needed.
Thank you so much.
Uh,
We're only doing the 3. Thank
you everyone so much.
OK, thank you, committee
members.
It
Representative Block, Are you
sure?
I think so, Madam Chair.
Potentially, no, I think I'm
ready. So Madam Chair
Representative, I, I'm reading
the bill before you move on, uh,
I just want to clarify the.
2 number
So that we're on the same page
with the amendment. 231087.2.
For the record. Thank you. All
right, Represent a block.
OK, I'm sorry. Are we on the
bill of the amendment?
They just have questions on the
bill amended bill. Oh great.
Perfect. Thank you.
I know I missed something.
So I just am clarifying, Madam
Chair Representative, currently,
what is allowed in public
schools when it comes to
restraint, seclusion, etc. and
then how would this change that?
And I, I don't want to have 3 or
4 questions in 1 question, so
I'll just start with the 2.
Uh, Madam Chair, I'm gonna let
um um Marie explained that.
Madam Chair, Representative
Block, that's a great question.
So currently this is amending
current law to provide more
structure and clarity as well as
restrict some things that are
currently allowed. So if you go
to page 4, you'll see some of
what of the current laws
currently being amended. We are
taking out seclusion, we're
eliminating seclusion, but we're
also really adding clarity to
definitions because it's really
important the staff understand
what they are.
are allowed to and aren't
allowed to do. On the topic of
seclusion, we are eliminating
that, but if you then go to page
3, you'll see using our amended
bill as well that we're adding
this caveat for supervised
confinement with continuous line
of sight supervision in the case
of imminent serious physical
harm by the student to self of
other.
Understanding that confinement
shall end immediately once the
danger of serious physical harm
has ended. So we're, we're
adding that carve out for these
really specific situations and
eliminating seclusion. Before we
had really general language
regarding restraint. Now we're
getting really specific and
talking about what that means.
So we are prohibiting 3 types of
restraint, we're prohibiting
prone restraint, mechanical
restraint, um, and chemical
restraint, but physical
restraint will still be a.
But we're also adding training
requirements to make sure that
staff are equipped and only use
this as a measure of last
resort. We're also adding other
definitions we heard from staff
that were really important. For
example, elopement, and
explaining what you can and
cannot. I hope that answers your
question.
Madam Chair and thank you
Representative, and I, I guess
my question on that.
would be, I have a friend. They
don't live in the state, live in
California, but they, they teach
school in California. And
She has been kind of beat up by
her, by some of her uh students,
unfortunately, like really grave
injuries, broken bones, things
like that. So when it comes to
trying to
Deal with this situation. I know
right now we we have a teacher
shortage and we're all freaking
out about that. We, we don't
have enough educators as it is.
So how would a teacher go about
using this so that they don't.
Have physical harm to
themselves, because I know
there's more restrictions on how
this person can restrain
physically, but in a moment
that's just super.
Violent, where you have to
immediately react.
Is there any kind of leeway for
that educator when it comes to
something that could really harm
them or one of their students,
Madam Chair Representative.
Madam Chair Representative,
thank you and that's one of the
concerns that probably many
people have many teachers, but
um this bill actually will is
asking for a training.
So as schools are going to be
trained in the escalation
situations. And also when um
Madam Chair, when there is
imminent danger for the student
or for the adult, um,
restraining will be allowed, but
we are defining what type of
restraining to um very clear
indication. So as a teacher
myself, sometimes we were afraid
to actually intervene because we
are not, we don't know what to
do. So this bill actually is
giving us clear language. Yeah,
there is a fight. I'm gonna stop
the fight. Um, the kid is
running
In the middle of the street, I'm
gonna grab the hand of the
student, Madam Chair, to start
from the danger. So dangerous
situations in imminent
situations where it's a risk the
safety of somebody around us,
um, there is clear in the clear
path to follow. And also
strength about um training
school training for the staff
and for for the for the people
involved with students. I'm
sure.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representative and uh
so my next question on this
would be, would it just apply to
staff of the school, or could it
also apply to security.
And other staff that has to deal
with students, parents,
teachers, etc. Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, representative, um.
I, in an ideal world, everyone
in the school will be trained.
Uh, we have put in some uh here
some, uh, kind of basics of who
we want to be trained in the
school. We want to really
include administrators, Madam
Chair, uh, representative
because we heard that sometimes
um
teachers are kind of left in to
do this, but uh um in the ideal
world, we want everybody to be
prepared to, to, to respond to
this, to this, um, um.
Situations, but um we, we have
some indications that at least
Who should be trained.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. I just wouldn't
want there to be a situation
where
There was a fight, like we
talked about and a security
guard got involved, restrained a
child.
And maybe it wasn't perfect
protocol when it comes to the
the legislation and then the
school district gets sued
because of that, even though if
the kid was fighting.
You know, people, there's a lot
of lawsuits flying all the time.
And so how would the school be
protected when it comes to
something like that where it's
an immediate dangerous situation
that security guard was not
trained.
Specifically in these
guidelines, but they were
trained in in some kind of
attempting to stop whatever the
bad thing is that's happening.
So how would the schools be
protected then, Representatives,
uh, Madam Chair and Merit.
I'm gonna let A Marie add to
this, but school have a
protocols to follow safety
plans. So this will add to that,
um, but you probably have one.
Mr. Chair, Madam Chair, um,
Representative block. That's the
reason we included this language
on imminent danger of serious
physical harm for exactly.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative. So with that
imminent danger factor that
would protect the school from
litigation.
Madam Chair, Representative
Block, I'm not a lawyer, but
that is my understanding from
working with.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
representative is
I know that there are
I think
The New Mexico Children's
cabinet, it said that 15% of New
Mexico public school students
skip class for safety concerns
last year. So, Madam Chair
Representative I
I'm kind of torn on this bill. I
really am, because I see the
reason for it in these extreme
cases where kids have been
restrained for for hours or
secluded for hours or, or
something bad has happened, but
then when it comes to the actual
tools that we're giving the
teachers, yeah, we're saying you
have more training.
But you are restricted from
using certain types of
restraint, and I'm not saying
that, like, in an immediate
situation, you're not gonna
chemically
Restrain somebody, right? That
sounds like something that would
probably take a while, that
wouldn't happen. But when it
comes to actual heat of the
moment.
I just still have some concerns
when it comes to what that
teacher can and cannot do in the
moment, other than just the
training on these, these
regulations. I don't know if you
had a question or an answer to
that. Uh, Madam Chair, uh, um,
actually this bill, like we
mentioned before, actually this
bill helps teachers to
understand where we allowed to
do or not. Um, like I mentioned
before, Madam Chair, um, there
this, this bill came from a
working group, like somebody,
one of the.
People to testify here, um, and
they actually show that
expressed the case when a kid
was running into the middle of
the street, and the teacher
didn't know if you could grab
the hand of the kid to protect
him from running into the cars
being afraid of getting into
trouble. And again, as a teacher
myself, when kids are into a
fight, am I gonna get in trouble
if I stop the fight, if I grab
the kid and stop the fight, uh,
Madam Chair, so, um, this bill
actually is a tool for the
teachers and it will allow us to
say, OK, I can't do that because
I
I'm protecting my students and
protecting myself, I'm
protecting my this kid. So this
is actually a tool um that the
teachers actually ask and want
to have, so we, we understand
clearly what we, we can do and
we cannot.
And we didn't have that. It's
impressive.
Madam Chair and Representative,
and I did have one question and
one concern actually someone
emailed me about page 7, where
we're talking about physical
restraint technique.
I'm on line 19 to 21.
And it says,
The the technique employed shall
not impede the students' ability
to breathe or communicate, and
the question that I got was,
what if this student is
nonverbal and they use sign
language, and you would need to
restrain them with their arms,
for example, and the, and they
cannot technically communicate,
how would that fall under that?
Because if this individual, the
only ability they have is to
communicate with sign language
and were restraining their arms
with that violate this and how
would that how would that be
employed, Madam Chair.
and representative.
I'm gonna ask my experts to
answer, but um we're talking
about a restraining when it's in
danger and let it go as soon as
that the situation de-escalate
or stop, um, Madam Chair,
Representative Block, we're
using a lot of best practices in
terms from the US Department of
Education and my understanding
that's where this came from and
it's an attempt to ban prone
restraint as we explicitly said
earlier. Thank you for raising
the current concern about ASL
that's something that we'll
definitely look into.
But it's definitely not the
intent to, um,
Not include those.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative, I think I'll
just listen to the rest of the,
the questions, but I really
appreciate the answers. Thank
you so much and, and the
insight.
Representative Zamora.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you presenters for bringing this
bill forward. So, so on page uh
On page 3, it talks about
seclusion.
On line 9.
And it talks about a room in an
area.
Or egress is is prevented.
What kind of a rum are we
talking about? Are we talking
about a school having to now.
Uh, design.
Like a padded room and a and a,
cause I know like in jails and
stuff like that, you have to
have it up to certain specs.
And, and everything.
Or we just talking about putting
this kid in, in the principal's
office and, and watching them
there,
Madam Cha present.
Badam Chair, representatives
Zamora, I want to be clear that
these rooms already exist, and
it looks different depending on
the school district that you're
in, but I talked to a
stakeholder this week that
described a district in which
there is a seclusion room in
every room in the school, and
there is a a window for
continuous line of sight
supervision, but it hasn't been
practiced for that always to
happen. I've also heard stories
about padded rooms, from which
egress is prevented with no
windows. We're not asking for
destruction. We're asking for
limitations on something that's
already in practice to keep
staff and students safe. I hope
that answers your question.
And Madam Chen and presenter so,
so your short, short answer is
those rooms are already there.
OK.
And, and they're considered to
be safe enough.
Madam Chair, Representative, I
was reminded to say that it
could also just be any room. So
we are really trying to be
responsive to a very wide group
of stakeholders here. So an
example is, for example, if you
have a classroom with a window
in it, that room could
potentially be used for
supervised confinement with
continuous line of sight
supervision, in the case, for
example, that a secondary
student is
may be out of control and the
teacher needs to step out for a
moment. I hope that answers your
question.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair, and
I, I too have torn on this bill
for which way to go with it and
and and a lot of the questions
that have been already been
asked.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
You committee members.
Mhm
Madam Che I'd like to move a do
pass.
As amended.
I have a motion for do pass as
amended by vice chair and a
second by Representative Anya
Nonu.
Please call Ro.
No? Yes.
Representative Block.
No, sir.
Representative Borego.
Yes.
Representative Lujan.
Represented Mia.
No.
Yeah
Madam floor leader,
Representative some more.
No.
Madam Vice Chair.
Yes, Madam Chair, 43.
Thank you, you have an amended.
Do pass.
You have a due pass on House
Bill 260 as amended. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you.
OK, let's move along to House
Bill 114, Representative Chavez.
And we have an amendment, please
pass out the amendment.
Yup.
OK, Representative.
You may begin. Uh, thank you,
Madam Chair. Um, we'd like to go
ahead and um present the
amendment. I think that might
answer some questions in terms
of the what the bill does.
OK, I'll move to discuss the
amendment and if you could um go
ahead and take us through the
amendment. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I
have with me, um, the Santa Fe
County clerk and also the former
treasurer of the Bernalillo
County.
Um, and I'll ask the Santa Fe
County clerk to um speak about
the amendment.
Hello, Madam Chair, members of
the committee, uh, this
amendment is, um, was introduced
to, there were some concerns
about the original bill and this
amendment has been introduced
to, um, soften some of the
requirements in the original
bill, um,
Basically it strikes some of the
language around um gendered
language. I'm sorry?
Provide the amendment number at
the bottom
number is 0.230479.1.
You.
Um, so essentially, um, it's
striking the title, it's
striking, um, the gendered
language requirements.
Um, it's striking.
Hold on. Um, that any person
with ownership or financial
interest in the real property
may at any time re-record. There
were some concerns about that
issue, um, and so, and it's also
striking the subsection B.
Um, because that is the gendered
specific language. So we've
taken that out of the bill and
the bill now is simply um
reaffirming that um racially
restrictive covenants are not
allowed, and um,
Says that the office of the
county clerk may, but does not
have to if there are gender
restrictive covenant covenants
in the, in the bill. I mean in
the title that you were
recording.
Thank you, um, Madam Chair, did
you wanna add anything? OK,
um, thank you, Madam Chair, and,
and with that we stand for
questions.
Thank you, Representative. Let's
go ahead. Do we have any
discussion on the amendment?
Seeing none, I'll move to adopt
the amendment and
We have a 2nd and um you have an
amended House Bill 114, and now
we'll go to the audience.
OK.
Do we have any supporting
comments in the audience. OK.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Brent
Moore, and I'm a registered
lobbyist for the New Mexico
Association of Realtors. And
while the realtors had issues
with the original bill, uh, the
amended bill that you just
adopted is a bill that we can
support. The, the issues with
the first bill were not about
necessarily the substance. It
was about the, the questions,
the mechanics of how you address
these things, and we really
appreciate the sponsor for
working with us and, and coming
up with a workable solution and
with this amended bill we can
definitely support it. Thank you
very much.
Other comments in the audience.
Do we have any opposing?
now, let's go online.
Anyone hoping to make public
comment, please raise your hand.
Someone here under admin. Can
you hear us?
Thank you.
Madam Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
my name is Nadine. I'm a
disability advocate and a person
with multiple disabilities.
I remember being moved into a
unit where when I was young, my
parents needed to lie about my
age in order for me to be able
to reside with them. The fair
housing neck provides parameters
that help us look at these
issues with a clear lens and a
better focus. Thank you very
much. I apologize for my poor
quality voice.
Problem, Nat. Thank you so much
for your, for your comment.s
representative Madam Floor
leader.
Thank you, Madam Chair. um.
Uh, I just wanted to thank you,
representative for bringing
forward this bill. Um, this is a
very important bill to me
because this actually happened
to me.
Um, and, and some of the members
know, but uh 1, 13 years ago
when uh we purchased the house
that we live in now, um, you
know, we were sort of bursting
at the seams in our tiny little
house and and found a house that
we could afford. We're very
excited at closing to finally
have the sale and we're going to
sign the millions of documents
that you have, and we get to
this one that's covenants and it
says no windmills.
And no Asians.
And I said, I can't, I, I said,
and I just looked at, you know,
the individuals in the room and
I said, I'm Asian. What I can't
sign this. Um, and it was very
upsetting, honestly, it was, it
was very upsetting and um so
what I did was in that moment
because I said I can't put my
name on this document.
Um
Not only because I am Asian and
I plan to own this house, but
also because it's just, it's a
terrible practice that this
would be in these historic
documents. So I put a line
through an initial and they
said, you know, that doesn't.
It, it makes you feel better,
Madam Cha and represented, but
it doesn't do anything because
this goes with the life of the
deed. This language continues
with all of this documentation
and it's part of the record of
this home, um, and I said, well,
how do I get rid of it? And they
said, we'll look into it. So
then, you know, a couple of
weeks later, I, I called an
attorney that I knew that did
sort of land, uh, property law,
and I said, how do I get rid of
this? And they said, you have to
find all of the people
that were in the original
neighborhood because my
neighborhood is an old
neighborhood. It's not a
homeowner association
neighborhood or um even, even
really like a defined
neighborhood, you need to find
all the people that were part of
the original covenants, and you
have to get each and every one
of them to sign, saying they
would like this covenant
stricken, and then you submit
that, I believe, to the clerk's
office, and I just thought how I
don't even have a way to
reconstruct all those historical
records. My house is like from
19.
60. So, Madam Chair,
representative, I just wanted to
share that little story and um
really grateful that, you know,
people, uh, on page 10, um,
The the new section D where you
can attach this language now
that says there will be no
discrimination in the ownership
of the property. Um, and
You know, I still, there are
probably many homes, um,
A scattered across the state
where people are signing these
Documents that contain this this
really terrible language, um,
that is upsetting and serves as
a barrier to, um, feeling like
you are, uh, sort of an equal
citizen and able to own a home
just in the same way that anyone
else could. So, um, we don't
have agent, uh we don't have
windmills on my property, but we
do have an Asian living there,
and I am glad that we can attach
this language, um, to, to make
sure that everybody understands
that that's not, that's not law.
um to discriminate in that way.
So, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative.
Thank you committee members.
Representative B block.
I was just gonna move a do pass,
but
Second thought.
right? All right, we have a
motion for a do pass on House
Bill 114 as amended and a
second, do we have any
opposition?
Seeing none, you have a due
pass. Thank you. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you so many
members.
OK. Next we have House Joint
Memorial 6.
Good morning, Madam Chair. Good
morning, committee members. I
hope to be joined shortly by one
of my co-sponsors, but yes, I am
here to present House Joint
Memorial number 6. This is a
joint memorial that advocates
for the enhancement of
diplomatic and economic
relations between Taiwan and the
United States, specifically here
in New Mexico. It emphasizes the
importance of strengthening
trade, fostering educational
exchanges, supporting official
visits and promoting Taiwan's
participation in key
international organizations and
with a focus on continued
collaboration in areas such as
trade, technology and culture,
the memorial encourages the
expansion of bilateral
agreements, including those
under the US, Taiwan Initiative
on 21st century trade and
advocates for Taiwan's
meaningful involvement in global
organizations like the UN and
the WHO. So, um, the
I just want to point out that
the co-sponsor that I am hoping
to have join me is
Representative Duncan. I was,
uh, very fortunate enough last
December to travel to Taiwan
with representatives Duncan,
Pettigrew, Gurola, umnaya and
also senators
Duha and
I'm having a Cindy Nava. Thank
you. Senator Cindy, um, so with
that, Madam Chair, I will stand
for questions.
You. Let's go to the audience.
Oh, yes, um, absolutely. Thank
you, Madam Chair Representative.
We went to Taipei. We spent most
of our trip in Taipei. We were
there for about 6 days, we met
with several trade
organizations, um, we were also
joined by members of the EDD
here in New Mexico who are in
support of the memorial.
And we actually did if I may,
Madam Chair, just as a as a
really interesting point. In
Taipei, in the, in Taipei's
World Trade Center, New Mexico
has its own little EDD office
where they um highlight, there's
like lots of great different
posters and they highlight the
trade that we have between New
Mexico specifically, and Taiwan,
they import several of our goods
including wine, and I believe
capsain for the purposes of
making hot sauce and um
different food.
and we're trying to get our
green chili over there as well.
Madam Chair Representative, you,
let's go to the audience. Do we
have any supporting comments?
Any opposing, let's go online.
Anyone hoping to make public
comment, please raise your hand.
OK, committee members.
Do pass.
Representative Lujan
representative Barrago.
Yeah, I just wanted to thank the
sponsors for bringing this
forward. I was just gonna
mention some sister cities to
Albuquerque, which um
Falls right in line with this,
and I didn't see it in your
bill, but I thought I'd mention
it, uh, Spain, and I don't know
how to say this, Ashgabat.
Turkmenistan, Chihuahua, Mexico,
Guadalajara, Mexico, Helmstead,
Germany.
Who lane.
In Taiwan, and I just wanted to
mention Taiwan for, for this
bill.
Thanks.
second.
OK, we have a motion for due
passed by Representative Lujan
is seconded by Madam Vice Chair,
do we have any opposition?
Ben, you have a do pass on House
Joint Memorial 6, and we hope to
go with you next time.
Thank you, Madam Chair, if you
ever get the opportunity, please
go. It is a wonderful country.
All right. House joint
resolution 8.
Good morning, Madam Chair, uh,
representatives, uh, this.
Is something that we've all seen
before. I think I've carried.
This
uh, joint, uh,
Joint resolution.
A couple of times, um, in a row,
but I think in total, I think
I've brought this resolution.
I think this is my 5th time
bringing this resolution to the
body. Um,
Madam Chair and members, uh, all
this.
Uh, joint resolution does is it
takes our 30 day and 60 day
sessions.
Makes them both 45 day sessions,
and it opens up.
Uh, bill introduction to uh the
to the legislature without
having to go to the governor on
a budget year.
Um, I have had folks who have,
um,
Mentioned that they might want
to see this be a 60 day and 60
day.
Um, that would be, it'd be
impossible to go beyond 45 days
during an election year.
Um, just because of, uh,
If we start in January, um,
during an election year, uh,
the, we would, we would be
running into the uh
The primary
Uh, if we were to have a 60
days, so if we were to extend at
all the most we could ever do if
we wanted to go beyond.
60 and 30 would be 60 and 45,
that logistically that's all
that would work. But the reality
is one thing that this does is
Uh
Those of us who have been in
leadership and try to hire
staff.
It's much harder to hire staff
during a 60 day, in particular,
if you have people coming from
the rural part of the state, uh,
during a 30 day, it is much
easier to be able to hire folks,
and it's much easier to even get
staff in the building, uh, if
it's a if it's a 30 day, but um
the reality is if we were to go
45, 45, um, if you've served on
appropriations or if you've
served on Senate Finance.
During a 30 day session.
Both chambers send.
They're appropriating committees
a week ahead of time. So if you
sit on appropriations during a
30 day session, you're here
already.
Uh, 7 days ahead of time, so
This would have the effect of
Making this a a
52 day, 52 day session, um, in,
in, in actual effect since the
appropriators would be here 7
days ahead of time. So, uh, that
is essentially
What this bill does, it just,
it, it opens it up so that the
legislature can reclaim some of
our authority. The reality is we
do not sit on the same footing
with the, with the
administration, um, and those of
you, I, I, I was in the majority
for my 1st 2 years, and it is
still hard to get a bill that
you want passed.
To get the governor to sign off
on it during a 30-day.
Generally, during a 30 day,
you're being asked to carry
bills on behalf of the governor.
And so, um, this just in my, in
my estimation, it, it makes, it
puts the legislature back on
equal footing with the
administration, the governor's
office, no matter who it is. Um,
the last thing it does is it
makes uh um it makes it very
clear when veto overrides can
take place and it would be any
previous regular session or
special session or extraordinary
session, and you could do a veto
override.
that
Uh, during any one of those
regular sessions. Um, with that,
um, my co-sponsor.
Representative Brown has joined
me and uh we're at introduction
if you want to add to what I
just stated.
Thank you very much. Um.
Madam, who's chair, Madam Chair?
There we go.
Uh, members of the committee, so
just in brief, I see this kind
of like a Goldilocks situation.
Or maybe 60 days is too long,
but 30 days is too short.
And, um, frankly, I don't
believe that the voting public,
this gets to the ballot is gonna
really care one way or another
what we do in terms of the days
we spend here.
But I think for legislators.
And their families that uh a 45,
45 day balance would probably be
very beneficial.
And so, um,
Uh, I think this is, this is
really a good idea worth
pursuing. Thank you.
Representative Luhan.
And you
OK, sure. I'll back up. Let's go
to the audience. Do we have any
comments and support?
Do we have any opposing?
Let's go online.
OK, we have here veterans and
American families veterans and
military Families Caucus. Can
you hear us?
Yes, good morning. Good morning,
Chair Johnson and members of the
Senate of the committee. I'm
Claudia Reisner, I'm a Navy vet.
I'm speaking on behalf of our
560 members of this caucus, we
are in strong support of HJR 8,
as we are with HJR1, the changes
proposed would level the
workload over the biennium,
allowing legislators to continue
working on important bills each
year as the sponsor has
mentioned, until they're passed
without constraints on the
subject. This would make
the legislature more efficient
and effective, it would also
override executive vetoes each
year on bills that the
legislature considers important.
This improves the balance of
power between branches of the
state government. I think the
sponsors of this legislation for
being so persistent, and thank
you, Chair Johnson and committee
members for the opportunity to
speak with you and support of
HJR 8 this morning.
Thank you so much.
Thank you.
Representative Samoa.
Adam Chair, I move with Du Pas.
Man and floor leader Skipanski.
Um, Madam Chair, I just wanted
to discuss a little bit, um,
Morning Representatives. I am
this HDRE is, is almost a
duplicate of HJR1.
And I just wanted to uh flag for
you, I think this committee and
uh for me in particular, I've
been very concerned about what
the language on the ballot will
be so that voters clearly
understand what the changes are
going to be. So, uh, while I, I
very much support this concept
because I think it really
strengthens the legislature.
Um, there have been a number of
amendments to HJR one that I
think really improve. So, um, to
be clear, HDR1 and HDR8 are
almost, they, they're identical
except I think just for one
word. Um, however, there have
been some amendments made to
HJR1 that I think really make it
very clear to the voters.
What the current situation is
And what it is being changed to
and so, um, and, uh,
representative Montoya and Madam
Chair, you and I have talked
about this issue many times over
the years and um I think we have
a good common understanding of
the value of this, um, but I did
want to tell you that I
personally um prefer HJR1.
Um, and I think you uh Madam
Chair and, and representatives,
I think you could, you have a
few options you could make some
of these changes that um
That were made to HJR one
because they were just really
more explanatory, um, or, you
know, uh, Madam Chair
representatives, I would also
invite you all to sign on to HJR
one. I, I hope I'm not
overstepping Chairman McQueen by
doing so, but I think it would
be nice to have a a joint kind
of shared effort. So I feel,
please feel free to comment on
that, but I, um, for me, I, I
just wanna let you know why I
wouldn't be supporting this.
It's, and it's just a language
issue.
Thank you, um, Madam Chair, um,
uh, representative, um,
actually,
Uh
Chair McQueen and I discussed
this at the beginning of the
year, and
I decided not to sign on to his
Language just for one reason. I
didn't want to hurt his bill.
Um, the reality is, um, Madam
Chair, is, uh,
Um, this is my 11th year as it
is Chair McQueen's and did not
want
On, on behalf of Chairman Queen,
the discussion was might not
help his bill if I signed on to
it.
The reality is we are in
lockstep on this. And so if, if
this bill gets out of here,
which I would hope it would do,
I would make changes to track
with that cause I don't wanna.
And if, and if it were
appropriate,
And if it would not be harmful
to the bill, I would sign on to
it.
I think that discussion.
Probably needs to be had with
the chair.
Because it's gonna go over to
the Senate as well, and, and I,
and I, and I failed in in my
discussion earlier to mention
just two other slight things as
to why I think this is a, uh,
not only is this the right
language, but it's the right
time.
is we're coming out of 8 years,
this would go before the voters
in between.
But definitely will be a new
governor, so it could not be
that we're doing this and
targeting a governor and so from
the standpoint of the political
Timing, this is perfect and it
wouldn't even go into effect,
uh, likely until
And, and, well, it would
probably have to go into effect
the the in the middle of that,
uh.
In in the middle of that uh term
or that first.
House term for us, but um
As well as there's been
discussion, people have come to
me and asked how would this
track if legislators were to get
paid in the future.
I, I think this is also a
better, is better than going
6060.
Or 6045 because this really does
shorten this up because if, if
at some point we do get paid, I
see us having a probably a
session in the fall of the
previous year. Um, so, uh, I
think this the the language is
right, uh, Chair McQueen and I
are
I mean, matter of words
difference, but one of the
reasons that I brought the bill
forward instead of just letting
his go by itself, as I wanted to
make it very clear this is not
Partisan
This is a nonpartisan idea.
So
Um, I, I would like to pass this
out, but if between this
committee and the next
committee, it is determined that
it would be better to sign on to
that bill.
That would be
That that's acceptable to me.
That was like, as I stated
earlier, that was a thought we
already had, wasn't sure.
Just because of a colorful
career that I've had in the
legislature, that would be
hurtful or helpful.
Madam Jare representative, I
really appreciate that
explanation. Um, I would be
happy to go with you and we can
visit with uh Chair McQueen and,
and understand what the best
strategy is and um, you know, I
don't wanna, I don't want to.
Stop the um.
Stop your ability to signal
support for this concept. So I
think you've, you've convinced
me to support this, but, uh,
Madam Chair and Representative,
I would really recommend that
you make the changes that
Representative McQueen has made
to HJR1 because I think they're
very clear to the voters what
exactly they're voting on.
Thank, thank you.
Representative Brego.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representatives, uh, Madam
Chair.
Mr. Chair, floor leader, um, on
and on, and I don't know all
the, all the titles because I've
only been here 3 years, but I'm
learning. Um, but thank you for
this bill, and I'm gonna make
the same comments that I made,
um, or similar comments that I
made when uh uh Representative
McQueen, chair McQueen came
before us, um, Madam Chair, um,
And Representatives, um, good
governance calls for looking at
everything in tandem.
And um,
But since I've been here, I've
seen bills regarding whether we
get paid, whether, uh, what our
timelines are, um, veto powers,
etc. etc. and I see these things
individually, and I, I share
with you that good governance
really requires that we look at
everything in tandem, similar to
a bicycle. Uh, we don't just
look at the chain, we look at
the, whether the brakes work, we
look at whether
the, the wheels are turning and
they're full of air, um, in this
case, there's probably a lot of
air in this building, but um I
think that that it's important
and it's imperative to our
constituents and to the voters
that they know that we are
looking at all of these things
in tandem, and I just really
encourage us to do that, because
I think that promotes really
good governance, um, and I'm,
and I said the same comments.
To, uh, Representative McQueen,
Chair McQueen, um, and I, I just
repeat that, Madam Chair,
because I think it's imperative
upon us as we and I'm glad our
floor leader is here. Um,
We really need to be considering
all of these things and how they
all work together and how we go
through a year, uh, knowing that
we're doing the best job
possible, the most efficient job
possible, and the most effective
job possible for our
constituents. So, um, I just put
that out there, um, and thank
you for bringing this bill
forward. OK, I have a motion for
a do pass by representatives
Moa the second by
representatives.
of Bluehan, please call roll.
Representative on our name.
Yes.
Represented black.
Representative Borego.
Yes.
Representative Lujan,
Representative Mea.
Yes.
Madame Floor leader.
Yes.
Representative Zamora.
Yes.
Madam Vice Chair, Madam Chair.
No
You have a you pass and I, I
just wanted to let you know that
I voted no because I wanted to,
um, reiterate that you follow up
with Madam Floor leader's
recommendations. Thank you.
Move on to House Bill 293.
Hey, you may begin.
Madam chair and members of the
committee, good morning. My name
is Representative Elaine
Senna-Cortez and I represent the
beautiful people of District 62,
as you already know, uh, the per
the people here with me today
Representative Brown, who needs
no introduction. She's one of
the greats, and I'm so excited
to do this meaningful work with
her and to my left, we have
Kevin Powers, who is the analyst
for Tax and Rev in our caucus.
Before you is House Bill 293.
And in very simple terms, this
bill seeks to stop the state's
taxation of Social Security
benefits.
And I'd like to share a little
story that just shows the heart
behind this bill. Um, on a
notable trip to the grocery
store, my husband and I were
just buying our weekly groceries
and mind you, we are just a
family of 3. It's me, my
husband, and my baby girl of
just 2 years old, and we
purchased our regular grocery
items and it was not filet
mignon or caviar. It was just
what we normally buy, and to my
astonishment, that grocery bill
was 6.
$100. And as we reflected, I
told my husband how on earth are
people making it. And when I say
people, I am referring to
retirees on fixed incomes. How
are they making it? Especially
with inflation.
And the sad truth is, many
retirees are not making it, and
everyday purchases are done with
credit cards, and this is
driving us towards the debt
crisis. Uncontrolled debt
contributes to an increase in
home foreclosures, vehicle
repossessions, divorce,
substance abuse, and suicide.
Our people are drowning
financially, and now is the time
to throw them a life preserver.
Just some quick facts, um, about
credit cards in New Mexico in
January, CNBC reported that the
average credit card balance per
New Mexican is
$6000 on the low end and $10,000
on the high end and New Mexico
is near the top 10 in the United
States.
Um, a couple of weeks ago, the
Labor Department reported an
increase in inflation for the
4th consecutive month. So as of
January 2025, inflation is up by
3% from just January 2024.
Shelter costs are up by 4.4%,
and that's home prices, rent,
the core inflation which our
groceries and energy, um, 3.3%.
Meat prices are up 3.2. Beef and
ground beef, 5.5.
And as all of you know, eggs,
they're up by 52%.
Right now, 41 states do not tax
Social Security. There's only 9
states that still do and New
Mexico is one of those states.
And in stopping the taxation on
the Social Security benefits in
most cases, the money saved
would be used to buy necessary
goods, groceries, gas, rent, and
in turn it would produce more
GRTs for the state. And what I'm
asking today is, let's expand
the purchase power of New
Mexicans, which means there's
even more money flowing in our
economy, and it's a favorable
environment for other
businesses. I believe that this
would attract other businesses
to our state and
Help diversify our economy.
So in simple terms, let's
attract retirees to New Mexico.
Let's keep retirees in New
Mexico, and the way that we can
do that is to not tax Social
Security across the board. This
is money that was most likely
already taxed in their working
years. And that concludes my
remarks, Madam Chair and members
of the committee, but I'd like
to allow Representative Brown to
speak a little bit on this and
then turn it over to my expert,
Kevin Powers.
Madam chair members of the
committee, thank you for hearing
this bill, um, you may know. I
have worked with a number of
other legislators through the
years to try to stop taxing at
the state level, social and it
was uh a long battle, but
finally we had a breakthrough,
just a couple of years ago, we
decided to um.
Stop taxing for all but about
10% of the retirees. So we, we
made great progress and it's
been very beneficial, especially
for these retired people.
However, because we still do tax
some.
People who receive Social
Security income.
We're still in the category of
states that tax Social Security.
We didn't get off that bad list,
and that list matters because as
you probably know, um people
when they think about where to
retire.
They usually, uh, Madam Chair
will, you know, Google, we all
use Google now.
Uh, states, uh, best states to
retire in and then they may uh
states that tax Social Security
or that don't.
Mexico still shows up on the
list as a state that does tax.
So it's a demerit for us, and I
cannot say that.
People will for sure come here
if we stop that final bit of
taxation.
But I think it gets us off those
lists because people don't look
into the details of the tax
structure. They look at just the
headline.
So for that reason, I would just
like us to be done with it
essentially and say we're just
going to stop taxing it.
Um
Madam Chair members, this is
really truly double taxation
because these people who are
receiving these benefits were
already taxed once during their
working years.
We do not tax any other
benefits.
But here we do, and we, in fact,
we double tax. So just out of,
just fairness, those people
earned.
Earned their wages, um, their
salaries, and uh it's kind of a
hard thing for them to find out
in their retirement years that
they're gonna be taxed by the
state.
Also, um, Madam Chair and
members, I'm concerned about
grandparents who are raising
their grandchildren. We know
that children, uh, you, you have
to spend some money to raise
children or grandchildren and
last I looked, we had 55,000.
caregivers, um, raising their
grandchildren in the state. And
so just out of consideration for
them and the needs of their
families.
And his rep Santa Cortez has
mentioned, Madam Chair, uh,
fewer and fewer states are
taxing Social Security income.
Uh, when I started this, uh, I
think we had 14 or 15 that still
did, but now we have only 9 in
in Mexico is among them.
So, um, just a final little
comment, Madam Chair.
I, I think we, it's important to
know a bit of the history here
too. When did New Mexico start
taxing Social Security income.
Well, it was prior to the 9 to
1990. And what happened was we
were in a legislative session
and there was a tax bill.
And everybody was really tired.
It was toward the very end of
the session. People were very
tired.
And they weren't really reading
the bills, and someone had
Inserted into a bill that we
start taxing Social Security
income. It was not really vetted
by the legislature. It was just
kind of snuck in there.
And after that bill passed and
was signed, people realized kind
of
Jaws dropped. Like, what?
We're taxing Social Security
now, but it really hadn't been
um
debated much, if at all, truly.
So I just give you that little
bit of history as well. So with
that, I'll turn it over to Mr.
Powers.
Thank you, Madam Chairman,
members of the committee, my
name is Kevin Powers, and uh I
am the analyst for the tax and
rev committee for the uh the
Republican Party, um, and, uh,
I've been doing it for 11 years,
um.
Uh, spent
All those 11 years under uh
Representative Jason Harper. So
I guess I can
And to be considered a tax nerd.
Um, so I'm gonna spare you going
down into the weeds on this. I
know, I know the floor is about
ready to start, um, I, I would
stand for any questions you
might have on, on the detail. I
could, I would just like to
point out one thing. This is the
New Mexico pit form, uh personal
income tax form. So,
Where this
Uh, taxation of Social Security
comes in, is, it's an, it's an
adjustment.
To your, your pit income, we are
a piggybacked state, so, um, we
take the, the federal, uh
adjusted gross, and then um make
adjustments to it for our tax
system for our purposes, um,
and, and that's where we add
this back in, um, I, I would
like to point out just one thing
and the um the FIR pointed this
out that
This provision in the law
actually creates a cliff effect
where.
We have people that get this.
Benefit
Until they hit a certain income.
And then it goes away
completely.
So that that is in and of itself
a little bit of an issue. Uh, we
don't really like to do that in,
in, in the tax code where you
have it and then all of a sudden
it goes away. We have some
issues like that with some of
our, our um our benefit uh tax
credit programs where, you know,
you reach a certain income level
and it goes away completely,
that's really not a good thing.
They need to phase out, um.
By, by just eliminating this, I
think it would make it a whole
lot cleaner and, and a much
better uh uh tax situation. So I
would stand for any questions
that you might have. Thank you.
Thank you. We'll go to the
audience. Do we have any?
Supporting, opposing comments.
Let's go online.
Carla Sanag, can you hear us?
Yes, thank you, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, I'm
Carlos Sanag, president and CEO
of the New Mexico Business
Coalition. We focus a lot of our
energy on good policy and
especially diversifying the
economy and getting more people
to move here, and I think this
is a really good measure. We
strongly support the bill and
appreciate the sponsor's
attention to this. We have found
in other states that tax this
income source, they're not an
attraction.
for people to retire here.
Those states with robust
economies have really good tax
policy. We would really
encourage you to consider this.
When you look at an outside
source on the effect of uh tax
policy.
Rich states, poor states, rank
states on what they do with
taxes, and this is a big issue,
being one of only 9 that tax
Social Security is a problem for
us. In 2019, New Mexico is
ranked 29th in the nation for
being a robust economy, but by
2024 it had fallen to 38. This
is a really good measure to
take, uh, because if we stop
taxing that, we're gonna attract
more people and our ratings will
go up and that is
in and of itself a good
reflection on New Mexico, so I
encourage you to, to support
this. Thank you.
Thank you so much, Carla.
Representative Zamora.
Chamo a Dupa.
Motion for I do pass and a
second, do we have any
objection?
OK. All right. Representative,
uh, Madam Floor leader and then
representative on. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative. Um, I've been
looking through the FIR here and
um you know, the, the FIR raises
a number of concerns about the
legislation, um.
And I
You know, one of the concerns
raised in the FIR is that this
bill was not vetted through an
interim committee. Now I know
you are a new member and so you
would not have had the
opportunity to bring this bill
forward, um, uh, Madam Chair and
Representative, I would really
encourage you to, to bring the
bill to the tax stabilization
and revenue Committee.
Uh, because I think this is the
kind of policy change that
really needs to be done in
concert with a lot of the other
tax policy changes that we look
at, um, and so, so that's one of
the concerns, but there, Madam
Chair and Representative, are a
number of other concerns here
and that there's no stated
purpose, goal or target. There's
no expiration date. Um, there
are no ways to sort of measure
the effectiveness of this, um,
and I, I heard the
Um, I, I think I heard a little
bit of a difference between some
of the public comment versus um
the presentation, so it.
Uh, maybe you could clarify,
representative, is the goal of
this legislation to attract
More retirees to the state of
New Mexico.
Madam Chair, Madam floor leader,
thank you so much for the
question. It's to attract and to
keep, um, when people think
about places to retire, it's not
always New Mexico because our,
we don't have a very favorable
tax structure here. Um, and
Madam Chair, Madam Flo later,
thank you so much for the
recommendation about taking it
to interim committee. Um, I'm
not sure about the work that has
been done prior, perhaps, Madam
Chair, Madam Floor leader that
representative Brown could speak
to. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative. So I'm, I'm
happy
to talk about that. Um, so this
really has been vetted in the
legislature.
Uh, for a number of years now,
and as I said earlier, we saw a
shift in policy of
Instead of absolutely not, we're
just gonna keep taxing it to
actually a big breakthrough.
And um I think for me it's, it's
a matter of wanting to treat
retirees right, they've been
taxed already.
And um so for me, it's a
fairness issue as well and uh I,
I think it's a pretty simple
decision to make here. Um, and,
uh, I would hope that, uh, you
know, I, I believe in the value,
Madam Chair, um, representative
of the interim committee
process, but again, this has
already been through, um,
Both houses of this legislature
and the governor did sign when
we made the, uh the last uh
effort to improve things. Thank
you. Madam Chair, Madam floor
leader, if passed, it would also
go to Thaksin Revex for
additional betting.
Madam Chair, uh, and
Representative, thank you for
that and um I am familiar with
the discussions on the uh Social
Security taxation issue, and I
I think the existing law really
landed on a good compromise, um,
and I am very sympathetic to
rising costs, um,
And I looked at sort of what is
a real living income or uh
adults and what I found, Madam
Chair is, is after you factor in
sort of the cost of
Food in New Mexico.
Medical expenses, housing,
transportation.
Uh, civic expenses, internet,
mobile.
Uh, phone costs other, um, that
a that a living wage.
Uh, sort of annual income for
Two adults with only one earning
income.
is 63, 64, about $64,000. Um,
now, we can all debate whether
that truly is adequate or not,
um,
But I don't see that reflected
here. Um, you know, you've got
$75,000 for.
Married individuals filing
separate returns the current
limit or a single head of
household who may be raising
grandchildren, as was noted as
$150,000. Um, so it's only when
you hit that income of $150,000
that
Any um taxation occurs and I'm
not aware of any Social Security
benefit that would you've ever
reached $150,000 per year. Um,
so in that sense, these are
individuals that have additional
sources of income, retirement
income, investment income and so
I, you know, maybe your expert,
uh, Mr. Powers could
Illuminate me on how
Um, could, do we have
Circumstances where just Social
Security income would, would get
an individual to $150,000. I,
I'm not.
I'm not sure.
Madam Chair, um,
Uh floor leader um.
No, I, uh, so there is, I don't
think there's any way that, uh,
you know, two people that maxed
out Social Security benefits
would, would get to 150,000 so
that these people would be folks
that have, um, you know,
additional sources of income.
But I believe the, the, the idea
here is that we want to attract
those kinds of people here that
have
Assets
uh, you know, spendable income
to, to expand those resources in
this state as opposed to some
other state, so, um, that would
be the, the reason for um
Removing this cap and as well as
the just the, the policy.
Uh, of
kind of cleaning up this.
This exemption where where we
have this exemption with this
cliff effect in the middle of
it. Um, we, we give benefits to
this group and not to this group
and so we're making a judgment
call as to who's deservant of
the benefit and who isn't and um
in, in tax policy, we try not to
make those kinds of choices.
Thank thank you for that, Madam
Chair. You know, and I, I really
do want our retirees to be
secure. I want them to have.
And in, uh, an income that is
adequate for all of the expenses
they may face, which includes,
you know, high health care
costs.
I think there's it.
I, I would be more comfortable
with this if it
If it did, out of a phase-in
approach or it did have
Um
You know, tax brackets that
applied, um,
Just to
Eliminate completely.
The tax on anyone.
Receiving Social Security income
just seems, um,
I don't know, it, it just seems
like maybe not the best.
Investment of roughly $34
million a year approaching 41
million, uh, in the out years.
Um, you know, I'm gonna listen
to the discussion, but I
It, it just gives me pause when,
you know, I really have
Feel very strongly that we
should have a sense of fairness
in the tax code and that those
that are making the least.
receive the greatest sort of
benefits and that, you know, the
folks that have worked hard and,
and really earned.
That Social Security income and
and just are living just on that
Social Security income that we
capture that and we do not tax
that, and I think the existing
law does that and so I just have
a, uh, a bit of concern about
extending this to um individuals
that are making these high,
high.
Salaries, um, or, or, or earning
these these high benefits,
whether it be from retirement or
investment income, etc. So, so
I'm gonna listen to the debate,
Madam Chair, but um I do have a,
a few concerns about this. Thank
you, Madam Chair, Madam Floor
Leader, thank you so much for
sharing your concerns. Um, if
it's OK, Representative Brown
would like to speak to that.
Yeah, thank you, Representative,
um, Madam floor leader and Madam
Chair and members.
Uh, yeah, I, I recall these
discussions in previous, uh,
previous bills and I guess what
I really come down to is
However successful people are,
I'm pleased for them, and I, I,
I am not comfortable telling
people you make too much money,
we're gonna start grabbing some
of it.
They earned it, they've been
taxed already, and so I just, I
just believe if we're gonna
really
Become a prosperous state, we
have to let people have the
fruits of their labor, and in
this case,
Um, Madam Chair.
Um, we know that a lot of our
retirees are some of our best
community volunteers.
Um, they, they spend money on
travel. They come to Santa Fe,
for example, and shop in our, in
our stores and um, you know, uh,
do, uh, tourist activities and
things, so there, whatever money
they do have, and again, I
somehow by the grace of God,
perhaps they, they've done well.
Um, I would just want them to
have a good retirement in their,
in their, uh, later years, be
able to have um the benefit of
all their hard work.
And um I look at just the
volunteer group in my community,
it's
Mostly retirees who.
Who now have the time, and
sometimes they're busier than
they were when they were
working.
Uh, but we value that too, and I
think we should be a mecca for
retirees. We have a beautiful
state, uh, physically, it is
just amazing.
And uh I don't even have to
mention chili, but that's one of
the reasons I think people come
and stay here. We have a lot to
offer. Let's open up the doors
with a a welcome sign.
And I believe that this little
change in tax policy would,
would, would really help to do
that. And then also I think
about
And I'm sure our state budget is
um sprinting towards $11
billion. Uh, we'll probably see
that next, uh, next time we
meet.
And um 30 $40 million
difference. Honestly, I think
we're getting a lot of um
We say bang for the buck if we
let um
this tax, sunset.
Completely, that would be my
hope. Thank you. Madam Chair,
may I, I just say one more
thing. I, I agree, I have, we
have a lot of retirees, Madam
Chair and representative in
Santa Fe and they're amazing
part of our community, but it's
also at the same time, having a,
an increasing retiree population
means by necessity that you also
have to invest because of the
other utilization of public
dollars for healthcare.
And so that is something that
Santa Fe County is really
looking at, um, and the city as
well, but, you know, ideally, we
are trying to strike a balance
between all of the increased
investments that we need to make
in our healthcare system because
an aging population also and
rightfully so, deserves access
to great healthcare. And so that
also requires us as um state and
local government to make those
investments as well. And so I
think really trying to strike
the balance here is what
what we need to do. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Barrigo.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, and
representatives and your
witness, um.
I have a little different
opinion, um, from our floor
leader and respectfully, I, I
hear what she has to say, but I
also think about.
My mother, who was married to a
firefighter who does not receive
anything but his Social
Security, and she lives on that
and it's very minimal, um, but
her and my father worked hard
all their lives to have a home
and a family and um, you know,
she, and, and it is kind of a
special situation with police
and fire because they do not
receive Social Security.
And um many of those
individuals, and I am a retiree.
I'm also a recipient of the PERA
and I think about, I retired at
50 years old.
And I was really young when I
retired, so I had to go on and
do something else, um, you know,
I've worked hard for everything
that I have, um, and I think
about the retirees, especially
the PERA retirees were not
receiving their colas right now
and have not for many years, um,
and many of them go on to work a
second job, and, you know, they,
they make what they make and
they some of them do well, um.
Some of them live on what they
have.
And um,
You know, I just, I'm concerned
that um
You know
Social Security does some
somewhat limit the ability to go
on and make more money. It's
kind of an interesting concept,
um, that we do have those caps.
And, and kind of where they
fall, um, depending on your
income.
And, you know, I, so I, I'm torn
on this legislation. I would
like to see a lot more
discussion about this, because I
think not only does it attract
people from other places to come
and retire in New Mexico, but it
addresses in part.
And depending on how it goes
forward, um,
A situation that we have with
retirees, especially government
retirees, um, that are not
receiving.
You know,
Sort of
Inflation and, and their colas
and all of these things that are
not.
And and then the price of
everything going up with the
cost of living, um,
So
You know, I really want to see
more discussion about this bill.
Um, and for that reason, Madam
Chair, I'm probably going to
support this bill because I
think that it begs the question.
of all of these other factors.
And probably no one has talked
with you guys about the retirees
and the para situation that
we're dealing with right now.
Um, I'm hearing from my
constituents that are retirees
that are uh pair of retirees and
we want our colas. We want
something we want.
You guys need to help us out
here because eggs are $10 a
dozen and, you know, um,
I mean, everything is going up.
Our cars, our homes, our.
Everything, and there's not a
lot of
Cushion
Unless you've saved a lot of
money over the years, so, um,
Madam Chair and Madam Floor
leader.
You know, I
I want this to be discussed.
I think it's an important issue,
and it's something that our tax
committee really needs to.
Not just
Not just take a look at this,
but take a look at how
The majority of our retirees are
being affected, and I am a
retiree, I say that with, you
know, great pleasure because I
worked hard for, like I said,
everything that I have. I'm
proud of it. I'm not embarrassed
that I made, you know, that I am
where I am, um, there's a lot of
people in the in my same
situation.
So for that reason, I will
support it.
Hey, I had representative block
next, but he said his his
questions were answered, so we
have a motion by
Representative Zamora for
DuPass.
And the second by block.
Please call role.
Represented by Yarne.
Um, but I'd like a brief
explanation at the end.
Presented block? Yes.
Represented Borego.
Yes, with my explanation that I
just gave.
Representative Lujan.
Represented Mejia
Yes. Madam Floor leader.
Oh
Representative Zamora.
Yes
Madam Vice Chair.
Yes, Madam chair.
53, you have a you pass?
Thank you. And we have a uh.
Yes, explain your vote,
representative.
Um, yeah, I
I appreciate and I thank you for
bringing the bill, and I
appreciate what you're trying to
do with it. Um, I just see.
I would be more comfortable with
maybe raising the cap rather
than a full stop elimination,
um, because on average, Social
Security pays out about it, so,
and for those reasons, I do
consider it income, but, um, if
adjustments need to be made, I
would be happy to make
adjustments. I'm just not
comfortable with the full stop
elimination, Madam Chair,
representatives, but thank you.
Exam block, he explained. Did
you want to explain your vote?
No, OK, all right, thank you.
You have a new pass. Oh,
represent Barrego, did you want
to explain your work? No, OK,
I'm hearing things. I just
wanted to say thank you, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee for a meaningful
conversation. Thank you. Thank
you.
OK, we are adjourned.
