B. O. Y..
So we did.
Help help me remember we we you
did introduced the bill but we
did not go to public comment is
that correct.
Thank you madam chair we
actually did do public comment
we needed to we need to adopt
the amendment okay we now have
the amendment and then also just
so that Alison knows I believe
that the experts Brent more.
Jason Weaks and then to my gonna
go are in the audience as
they'll be speaking to the
amendment okay so we'll give
will give Allison a second to
let them in.
Right.
Jason Weaks Brent more and
Amanda I'm not gonna go thank
you.
Hey do you have let's see I see.
Are your other.
Experts on there's Brandt okay
we're waiting for men that.
And let me say hi to Leo there.
Is the baby.
Thank you.
And madam chair I believe if
we've got both Mr Weaks and Mr
more we can go ahead and start
and I see that my other co
sponsor Representative Rehm is
also on okay okay I'm sorry
about that Representative bring
it didn't show up on my.
On my phone.
Agenda okay looking to many
places so just go ahead and kind
of give us a.
A snapshot again and then we
will go ahead and and the
amendments and then we will go
to the committee for question.
Thank you madam chair house bill
one forty four relates to cop
metal theft and so at this point
I would like to turn it to me
at first Mister Moore and then
Mr weeks to describe the
amendment thank.
Representative Dixon can you
move the amendment for
discussion yes I move the
amendment for discussion okay
all right go ahead experts.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee once again my name
is Brent war I'm a registered
lobbyist for the New Mexico
association of realtors and they
have worked on this piece of
legislation in conjunction with
the the.
Metal recyclers and for the
purposes of the amendment that
you have before you there are
some amendments that will occur
in the first part of it and I'm
going to address the section two
amendments that are there so
this should be at the bottom of
the amendment and one three
pages two and three.
What you'll see in section two
our amendments or or changes to
the current law that relates to
the sale of recycled metals Act
that they both make changes to
section two point four of that
act and they relate to the
requirements that are placed on
metal recyclers as they are in
the business of recycling metal
and I've seen people come in
with different types of recycled
metal and making those purchases
on the first of the changes is
in the Hey what in what CYFD
subsection eighteen and that
really relates to the
documentation are the the metal
recycler has to take in.
Where they are going afternoon
you.
Before they receive the the
material so really focuses in on
that the documentation that
there are receiving that second
amendment which is the new what
would be the news subsection C.
probably the most impactful
piece of it and that is a clear
prohibition that the secondhand
metal dealer shall not purchase
or otherwise receive the
regulated material if the dealer
knows that it's not lawfully
owned by the person offering to
sell or provide the regular your
really that's the the
prohibition you can't take it in
if you have knowledge that the
person bring it to you doesn't
on the materials
those are both civil provisions
they relate to the what the
metal recyclers have to do and I
would say just as a general
matter the realtors work closely
with the metal recyclers to try
to include those provisions and
are they stepped forward and
said yes we need to do something
in Syria to do our part in the
realtors are very thankful that
they were willing to to come
forward and do that for the most
part there are lots of folks out
there doing things the right way
we're really trying to do is get
after the bad actors and we
realize that the additional
burden that the metal recyclers
are taking on we appreciate
their cooperation so that
section two or the civil
provisions that are subject to
the civil penalties provision of
the sale of recycled materials
act and I'll be happy to answer
any questions related to that
piece of believe Jason Weaks is
your expert on the criminal
provisions and there are some
changes in the amendment that
relate to the criminal proposals
that are in here as well so I'll
pass it to chase.
Thank you Brian yes Mr chair
representative many so I've got
the language that was already in
the bill we're making some
changes to the criminal
provisions the first is just to
change the title it's to add the
civil provisions in their we
need to do and then the title
little bit to have the title
reflect with the bills actually
trying to do the second
amendment is on page one line
twenty three we're just really
inserting one where there were
inserting the word in after
anything that's a technical
change
doesn't really have a any
substantial impact on the bill
just getting the the group
medics of the bill correct and
then the next three really deal
with the penalty provisions in
the bill so page one line twenty
four strike the one twenty five
through the period and then
amendment number four page to
strike lying to and replace it
with some modified penalty
provisions so it was aptly
pointed out that what if the
well initially the bill said
anything above a thousand
dollars is gonna be a felony
there are values all throughout
the criminal code that are kind
of all over the place and we did
not feel like moving forward
with the one thousand dollar
plus well for family was very
wanted to keep it more in line
with a larceny statute and
larceny statute says anything
about twenty five hundred twenty
five hundred above is actually a
felony so we wanted to change
that does go through these
that's kind of the thinking
behind that but the first is the
language is just adding a petty
misdemeanor for value that is
one dollar to one thousand.
and then anything from one
thousand to below twenty five
hundred is going to be a for
misdemeanor petty misdemeanors
carry six months of
incarceration.
Angel and then for misdemeanors
carry when your last one day and
then anything above twenty five
hundred is going to end up being
a felony offense and we do not
create graduated felony offenses
above that you know again we
don't want to wait criminal and
create the significant criminal
penalties for property crimes we
do feel like including a felony
provision in there gives the
actual offense some teeth and so
that was the thinking behind
creating that graduated penalty
scheme
you know I would say with with
this bill now including the
civil provisions we are really
creating sort of a preventive
measure that that seeks to
criminalize behavior that quite
frankly is not really cut all
right now because there's no you
have to have some requisite
intent to commit the damage this
is very hard to determine at
this point and are proving for
and and so we have these civil
provisions we create away sort
of dry that relative market up
right try to dry the criminal
market up and then create a fair
criminal penalty to both prevent
and then punished and so I I
feel it is much more complete
bill with the language of Mister
Moore on the researchers wanted
to add and I think we're also
getting to a point closer point
of fairness as it relates to the
the the penalty provisions
there's more equitable and make
more sense with that I turn it
back to Representative Dixon.
Thank you and madam chair
We would like to ask the
committee to accept the
amendment set.
Yes I have a motion to approve
the amendment I move to approve
the amendment madam chair
second.
I will second is there any
opposition.
Okay seeing none you have an
amended bill and now
You can proceed.
Did you want to thank you madam
chair did you want for us to.
Make any comments I don't think
we need to.
Okay then we will go okay I see
them.
Okay so I see
One interesting.
And just a reminder that we we
have already done public comment
on this bill on Tuesday we just
rolled over to to get the
amendment
so I'm seeing it says two hands
raised but I only see one so
that's Representative Romero.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Dixon and and for
all of your advocates say it how
to a chance to speak to you
to Mr weeks on some of my hang
ups and this really does help
the amendment really does help
inform in particular as we
talked about with your chops up
bill where the problem really
lies was with with cutting down
on the market availability for
that crime to persist and so
this really helps me understand
that we talked about some of the
ways in which we could perhaps
improve that pipeline and maybe
that is more educational in its
scope we talked about contact
tracing you know folks coming
through and site you know being
able to to when there is someone
suspicious and folks that might
be able to identify a person
perhaps in criminal activity
that there is a mechanism for
checks and balances for being
able to inform on Forsman if
something like that is happening
so I just want to thank you and
your advocates for the time
being able to to clarify some of
that tied it up and and further
improve upon how this works and
and like I said I think this is
an important issue to resolve
and I I support your amendment
and your bill thank you madam
chair.
Okay any other questions I'm not
seeing any so I will actually
this is kind of a curiosity
thing so with the amendment it
says if they metals dealer no
was that that that material do
not belong to to the person
who's trying to sell I'm I'm I'm
outside of it saying in a
property of General Electric or
you know something stamped on
the outside how how how do you
how do you foresee that that
might be.
Might be proven in court or or
or even and just how how would
we how would you say that a
dealer should have known that
something didn't belong to a
person.
Thank you madam chair
Would it Mr.
Okay I'll try to handle that one
Representative madam chair I
think it's a pretty high
standard in even in this context
we're looking at the amendment
we're talking about in the
context of the civil proceeding
but you're gonna have to have
some knowledge some some piece
of evidence that the regulator
is going to have to point to to
say thank you knew that they
they didn't they didn't write
fully own it and that's even
though it's within a civil
context it's still hard to to
have that type of evidence is
going to be in pretty blatant
situations I would think you'd
have to be something that's
fairly clear in a criminal
context that burden is even
higher but it does give it does
give the regulator the ability
to address situations where you
have repetitive behavior you
have situations where you may
you may not have known the first
time in the second time but it
keeps occurring you know you're
going there's going to be that
evidence that the regulator will
point to but it's a high
standard I think you're trying
to show what the the person knew
at the time they receive the
materials and I I think that's
appropriately you know what a
higher burden for the the
enforcer.
Okay thank you for that I was
just curious so I will entertain
a motion on house bill one forty
four as amended.
Madam chair would you pass okay
Representative Garratt asked for
a due pass do I hear second.
That madam chair Representative
Romero Allison will you call the
roll.
Representative Barreras yes.
Representative Lord.
Sorry I think yes.
Representative Pettigrew.
Yes.
Thanks chair Mero.
Yes.
Madam chair Thompson.
Yes so congratulations
Representative Dixon said
Representative right not
Representative Dixon's
representatives Dixon and redeem
you have a unanimous do pass so
good luck in your next committee
and thank you for for working
with folks that now and agreeing
to roll this over I think it
made it a little cleaner it
slowed you down by two days but
but now you're rolling so okay
thank you madam chair to
committee you are most welcome
okay so we will go just just the
The sponsor has asked that H. B.
eighty one be rolled over
because it's going to have a
substitute bill that was not in
within the twenty four hours so
if you are here or H. B. eighty
one and you can go to one of
your other ten thousand things
you may have at this time so we
will go ahead with HB sixty two
prosecution time limit for
certain felonies and that's this
is going to be the bill Rehm our
I think so and so take it away
Representative right.
Madam chair if you would move in
Diana loose L. U. C. one.
Well.
She will be an expert on all the
legislation today there we go
Gezer okay did you have any
other ones Representative Rehm
but not for this bill I will
have one later on okay all right
go ahead.
The second degree murder what I
want to start with is we are the
only state in the union that has
a statute of limitations on
second degree murder.
Our our statue limitations is
six years meaning from the time
it's committed to the time a
person is arrested that must
occur within six years.
But there's a very thin line
between first degree murder and
second degree murder.
And when we're talking about
murder we're talking about
something that was planned and
it is the planning that is the
thin line between first and
second.
If we look at the west mesa
murders that occurred those more
likely will all go down to
second degree murders and
unfortunately the statute of
limitations has run on that.
There are many murders that are
not solved in the short period
of time.
If we just look at the murders
that occurred in Albuquerque
last year we're aware of a lot
of unsolved murders that the
police department still working
on.
We had one in my district Ellen
spider had killed her husband
she had her
son help very.
Of the has been in the backyard
and then put it Dr way over the
top of the.
When the sun finally turned
eighteen he told a friend about
it and it ended up being
discovered it was actually
outside the time period of the
six years.
We have a lot of examples all
across the state we could go to
any county and find one.
I've noticed in the FIR they're
critical of the language of how
this bill is written.
This bill the way it's written
was the language that the house
Judiciary change to to several
years ago and I have no problem
if we want to go in amended and
change the language but I left
it that way just strictly
because that was the way that
the house Judiciary I'd written
that.
There is also comments that
you're gonna see in the FIR
about faded memories and long
time and all there's prosecution
problems.
You can't prosecute someone
simply on a statement of another
you need much more than that you
need physical evidence and Miss
loose whose with the it was a
district attorney is going to
speak to that now and comments.
Madam chair members of the
committee I'm good afternoon
thank opportunity to speak I'm.
Specifically R. Y. and I think
concerns in the past and been
with changing the statute of
limitations for second degree
murder is the amount of time
that it passed on for someone
being charged and then how would
they be able to defend against
it I'm in twenty twenty one
we're certainly in a different
world for prosecution of crimes
I'm the days are gone and where
it's simply one eye witness you
would be able to make a case we
are in the days of DNA.
Requests juries expect from
having years of television shows
I have on CSI very seven true
crime that there will be
physical evidence that
corroborates we know there are
always issues sometimes with our
witness or memories of our
witnesses are identification
religiously some of this
committee and others occurred in
the past regarding that very
issue.
What I'd like for you to also
consider not just that I and
second degree crime murder
should not be charged after the
passage of time essential
stations as it is today.
If we charge someone on first
degree murder that way to to
housing or whatever it bought
from.
We go to trial.
We are not allowed to cement a
lesser included jury instruction
for consideration to second
degree we are more students
first degree or nothing.
Often times we hear concerns on
that prosecutors over charge all
right now with only having first
degree after the statute of
limitations has passed and
second often times investigators
prosecutors are looking for that
very thing.
Is there a means to charge first
degree do we have sufficient
evidence to establish those
elements because otherwise we
have to tell a family of it of
the deceased vixen at W. no
justice no justice for this
crime.
We're simply asking to align
with other states I'm giving the
prosecution the opportunity
doesn't mean that necessarily
there we all charge I'm at least
for not prohibited by statute
limitations.
Special education for more so
that we don't sit on our hands
and not file charges certainly
murder cases our priority for
district attorneys on it in in
not only our state but others hi
I'd be glad to stand for any
question thank you.
Okay thank you and I was asked
to just announced that the the a
link on the goldenrod has been
corrected so if you know people
who are trying desperately to
get in that should be working
now so we will go to the
audience.
Your if I may one of the thing I
forgot to mention is there is
also moving second offense drug
dealing to a six year statute of
limitations currently it does
not have a statute of
limitations on second offense
Drug declaring and that was kind
of but that was brought up in
the house judiciary and if you
will it's part of the compromise
package thank you madam chair
okay thank you so we will go to
the audience and we will do a
poll so at that will pop up in
the second I think or maybe I
I'm let's see.
Okay there you go so you can
market your in favor or in
opposition to this bill.
Okay it looks like okay it looks
like people are still.
Making up their minds.
Okay
so right now we have seven in
opposition and six what the
numbers eight in opposition and
six in favor and I'm gonna and
the polling now because it's
probably gonna change again.
so.
But I will now go to the
audience for comment so we will
start with people who are
against this bill again there is
a a participant
Click on the bottom of your
screen so click that and that
there is a place to raise your
hand so if you want to speak out
in opposition to this bill
please raise your hand and then
we will go to in support so.
we will go to Kim Chavez Cook
please.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Kim Chavez Cook in
with the law offices of the
public defender and we have
spoken on this bill many times
so I am sorry for those of you
in the rural poor hearing the
same thing you've heard me say
before as the sponsor
anticipated one of our primary
concerns is the ability to
defend a case after the passage
of time when the availability of
defense witnesses the ability to
impeach States witnesses in the
ability to challenge physical
evidence has really become
nearly impossible and so we
believe that the six year
limitation is appropriate six
years is actually quite a long
time to have passed between a
crime and the initiation of
prosecution already and while I
understand the seriousness of I
murder crime there is a
significant difference between
first degree murder and second
degree murder and so I think it
is appropriate that the line be
drawn between the two so that
deliberate intent murder you
know allow for a longer time to
prosecute but second degree
murder can include a what we
call oftentimes heat of passion
of killings or reckless killings
that you know it just might not
under that you know there is a
view of the policy the existing
law that it just doesn't justify
the same risks of the passage of
time that first degree murder
does I want to very quickly
before I wrap up also just
clarified that I understand the
the proponents position that
there is a preference for having
physical evidence to prove a
crime after the passage of time
but I want to clarify it is
absolutely not required it is
something that they want you
know that juries like to see but
that is not a requirement to
prove up their case and just I
witness testimony would be
enough and that again is what is
so difficult to challenge from
the defense perspective where I
witness testimony has proven.
Very inaccurate in cases time
and time again so those are
primary concerns I support you
know that the intent behind the
bill I understand the desire to
give closure to victims families
and and issues like that but I
do think that the law as it
stands is doing is doing just
fine and we would recommend that
this that the committee members
oppose this bill thank you.
Thank you Kim now we have Diane
MCAT.
good afternoon and thank you I
die and the cash even after
listening to the explanation of
the bill I still have serious
doubts as years pass a believe
that of course would become more
difficult mountain robust
defense so this legislation
looks like a solution because of
some anecdotal instances where
charge of second degree murder
might reasonably have been
expected to be proved beyond a
reasonable doubt after the six
year statute of limitations had
passed but doesn't actually make
this a reasonable piece of let's
put legislation in general or
for the long haul thank you.
Thank you and now we have Rikki
Lee Chavis.
And Rikki Lee before you start I
have to thank you for up for
pointing out our our mismatched
numbers for them and we're we're
we're a community here and we
also support each other so we
appreciate you pointing that out
and helping us get it fixed so
go ahead.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee and anytime I'm
always happy to help I was
having some difficulties and a
different meeting and people
help fortunately assisted me so
I agree we're all in this
together madam chair members of
the committee my name is Rikki
Lee Chavez I'm speaking to you
today on behalf of the New
Mexico Kamal defense lawyers
association thank you so much
want to thank the sponsor and
his advocate I recognize that
many people are trying to make
our state he Stephen welcoming
place to live and to and to let
and to reside in to welcome
other people into however as you
have heard me speak on this bill
before like ms Chavez Cook
extending the statute of
limitations for prosecution of
of crimes is not necessarily
guarantee that eight eight of of
conviction will be rendered we
did agree with many of the
points made in the FIR
prohibited by the law office of
the public defender I don't want
to belabor those points so we
would respectfully request that
you oppose this legislation and
we appreciate your time.
Thank you
Lose health Campos.
Members of the committee my name
is Lucy let them pause I'm a
policy associate apple futures
in New Mexico nonprofit
organization.
We stand in opposition of HB
sixty two
to us it's unfortunate that a
health care issue such as
substance dependence and
anything related to it continues
to be addressed criminally
instead of being recognized as a
health care issue expanding the
statute of limitation would
simply keep people in a state of
anxiety where they await the
prolong statute of limitation of
the case it would also cost us
more money as we go through
these lengthy investigations
which would also allow time for
evidence to be deteriorated or
tampered with Furthermore and
most importantly it would
violate our sixth amendment a
constitutional right to a speedy
trial we ask that you stand in
opposition and voted against HB
sixty two thank you.
Thank you I'm gonna try really
hard to learn how to pronounce
your name is as beautifully as
it comes out of your mouth
because that doesn't come out of
my mouth that way but I love I
love your name so we are going
to go to to people who are in
support so I think thing raise
your hand under the participants
list if you want to
I speak in support of this bill.
Give them another couple seconds
I don't see any hands.
So I'm going to close that close
off public comment and we will
go to the committee for
questions.
Okay let me get right to the
okay so we have okay.
I'm not sure to reset.
I don't know how to pronounce
your last name who is the
panelists tester hand raised
I'm not even sure.
Madam chair the thank you pardon
the interruption Theresa signs
is actually new lords are
legislative assistant we did she
was having problems with links
also.
It was Santa Theresa and so
comes in as for now okay okay
got it so so it's Representative
Lord and Gabby I don't know if
it I know you are doing more
than one job so if you if you
can Kate but if you can change
the name on the or do whatever
magic you need to do so we will
start with Representative bark I
know it's a right yes madam
chair and members of the
committee I was able to update
Representative boards name to
show
whose yes we is very easy for
costs to do that so anytime that
happens just let us know thank
you okay okay thank you so much
Gabby I I know you are juggling
even more things than the rest
of us are juggling and I truly
appreciate that how how well you
do everything so go ahead
Representative Lord thank you
madam chair yes it's it's always
a fun time to figure out what is
going to happen today and soon.
Okay so madam chair I
Representative I do have a
question the question is so
first degree and second degree
murder have one thing in common
and that's going to be very
obvious question the person is
dead correct.
Representative a board that's
correct.
Did he answer.
Madam chair and representative
of lord yes that is correct.
Good point because a lot of
times when we finally have a
witness that comes forward the
leaders to where the body is
which is physical evidence.
Thank you thank you for that
madam chair my next question is
going to be other this question
for the Representative then
chair so.
A grieving mother is a grieving
mother whether it's first degree
or second degree murder that
correct.
Madam chair representative lord
yes and they are in contact with
the DA's office because there is
a victim advocate who is
assigned to them to help them
through the process and keep
them updated.
Thank you Representative madam
chair
my other question is do you know
about how many coal basis or
because I did call the sheriff's
department I know they have
twelve at least twelve act hold
basis do you know how many cold
cases are are by any chance of
top your head and bring the
county or any county or the
state.
Madam chair representative lord
no I don't okay I I will just
tell you that I did call and I
know there's twelve act right
now that they're working on cold
cases I'm gonna say this it and
thank you madam chair
Representative.
I'm.
I understand that there is a
difference between first and
second degree murder but I
cannot imagine what it would be
like if somebody murdered my
husband and it was we missed the
deadline and right before that
because we've all watched cold
cases and it's always miraculous
how they provide these things at
the last minute and I cannot
imagine how heartbroken I would
be if nothing was going to be
done to that person so I just
wanted to point out that it end
of the day murder is murder and
grieving parents agreement
spouses agreement spouses and on
that note I want to briefly just
say a I thoughts and condolences
go out today to a state police
officer that was just killed in
Deming thank you that's all I
have.
Representative lark that some
sad news that you.
Left us with I hadn't seen act
next we have Representative
thank you for sharing.
Representative Romero thank you
for that chairwoman and and
Representative ward if you have
we've just been sharing texts
between family this always.
Intense when you have family or
law enforcement so I appreciate
you taking the moment to do that
Back to the bill thank you
Representative cream for a
presenting this I just have some
technical questions
and my concerns are many that
have been stated I think by some
of the folks in opposition but I
did just want to touch on the
first degree felony trafficking
of controlled substances when we
look at the analysis from both
the Attorney General and the
administrative office of the
courts there's a discrepancy
there between what their
interpretation of the bill would
would be the OAG has said that
it at subsection a as a first
degree felony trafficking
controlled substances to the
list of offenses which there is
no time limitation for
commencing prosecution while the
AOC and the office of the of the
district attorneys as well as
the New Mexico sentencing
commission and the New Mexico
crime victims reparation
commission interpret the bill
differently basically saying
that there's a time limitation
for commencing prosecution for
first degree felony for
trafficking controlled
substances as six years from the
time of the crime was committed
can you just clarify for us what
was but the intention was for
the bill to clarify that
description discrepancy thank
you madam chair thank you madam
chair and Representative Romero
and white the chairman and I
discussed these FIR Sir coming
out.
Really wait and I have never
seen this discrepancy in the
language in the previous years
it's been introduced I have no
problem if we want to roll over
and go and get a different
language but I just kept the
same language which House
Judiciary obeyed several years
ago.
But in the intent is to make the
drug trafficking six years.
Thank you madam chair
Representative if we do want to
roll the bill I mean if it is
going to change it does that
what you want to do just Madam
chair representative is that.
What you're suggesting.
Madam chair it's up to the
committee if they want to have
Judiciary clarify it or if you
want to clarify it here it
doesn't matter to me.
Madam chair I think that maybe
rolling it over it would be a
good suggestion just so that I
can personally have better
clarification on that because I
also have the same questions.
Okay yeah and we have seen that
in the in the analysis and we
are we are all struggling with
the analysis coming to us so not
well with the information that
the analyst need to do their
analysis coming in so late and
therefore making the analysis
weight but I am seeing that that
to two of the agencies to thank
Dan comment but it did one thing
and for thought it did something
else so and so it I think that
much discrepancy it shows that
people are at the very least can
you.
So I'm.
I think it's probably best if
you roll it over and and I'm and
now that you have the analysis
perhaps reach out to the folks
who did who did the the agency
reports and and see where
they're getting their where
they're getting hung up and if
there's a simple amendment that
you could do that would clarify
that I think that may be our
best bet at this point.
Thank you madam chair we have to
get a measurement for you okay
okay yeah we're we're we're all
are learning as we go so this
that are in some ways this is
working well in some ways we
have some struggles so we will
we will move we won't just roll
about one over until our next
Tuesday so you have a few days
probably well you have probably
tomorrow maybe and Monday
morning to please get that
amendment to our to our analysts
and and if you can get the the
HSD folks to our to redo their
men reduce their their data
there I'm I'm struggling for
words their report so that so
that we do not have that kind of
confusion so we will move on
next to house bill sixty three
and again it's Representative
Rehm so you can go ahead.
This will be our to our Diana
loose and also if you would move
of retired judge Kevin fits
water in I would appreciate it.
Okay well wait for a few seconds
tell.
The judge gets okay I see M.
okay whenever you're ready
Representative Rehm.
Thank you madam chair
So and I will have the judge in
Diana lose speak to this
specifically but what occurred
in our statutes it says that we
can only draw blood for a felony
DWI.
And so we do not allow a blood
draw for a misdemeanor DWI so a
misdemeanor DWI his first
offense second offense or
defense.
There are the are in the only
way to test for drugs is by a
blood draw.
So the Supreme Court in
Birchfield versus North Dakota
went all the way to the U. S.
supreme court and the Supreme
Court decided I don't care if
you have a consent either verbal
or when you obtain your driver's
license.
You cannot you have to take
blood for DWI pursuant to a
search warrant.
Okay New Mexico doesn't allow
that to occur right now.
Then in the state versus Vargas
case are those the New Mexico
Supreme Court reaffirmed the new
Burchfield case and said the
legislature will need to change
the statute so that police
officers can teach are acquire a
search warrant to take blood in
DWI first second third cases.
I'm.
We.
This is also a another problem
in here that we want to address
and we're allowing of.
One tax to go ahead and take
this take blood we're expanding
who can but they're all blood
tact our technicians but if
you're in Clovis to Roswell in
here in a year you know you're
in a a trauma one situation
you're flown to what it if
you're down in the Los crucis
Alamogordo you're flown to el
Paso Silver City you're going
over to Arizona and the officers
do not have the authority to go
out of state and obtained a
blood test and so that's why
we're expanding the officers
will still have to get a search
warrant
but they can they can take one
before they are flown out.
And with that all remove it
first to Mr loose and then next
to.
The retired judge thank you.
Madam chair and members of the
committee I'm let me first talk
about the need for the change
the statute right now the
statute specifically says for a
blood draw that on the search
warrant is only allowed FOR
felony I'm we have in the years
passed a bill is being brought
on and gone through several
committees I in order to make
this change I'm there has to be
probable cause search warrant
has to be reviewed by a judge on
it before that can be done we're
simply asking for that statutory
change based on our supreme
court's I'm rolling that they've
accepted have Burchfield I right
now if it's a misdemeanor hi and
it's not a breath test for blood
drives needed I it's not done
that means that we don't have
evidence that we could legally
obtain with that simply having
the authority to do a search
warrant.
The next portion is who can draw
the blood.
Right now there is a very
litigated issue on its raised
are routinely hi and our
geographic basis are we are
having to establish who drew the
blood
and it has to fit the specific
definitions that are currently
in the statute due to the
limited number of.
Trained medical personnel that
that the current definition in
rural areas of the state this is
a continuing problem I for the
for the blood drop in so we are
asking that that simply make
that for people who are trying
to do the blood draw on it to
get that broader scope to allow
that to to occur we all know the
needs for medical professionals
to our state especially in rural
areas are extremely limited in
all categories and certainly an
issue as important as preventing
someone from driving into the
employment in our state I'm we
certainly want to make that
technical change to the language
to allow other trained medical
technicians to be able to drop
one on and without I would pass
for the other experts.
Madam chair members of the
committee if I may my name is
Kevin Fitzwater as a retired
judge and still seeing is pro
tem I need to make a little bit
of clarification I was asked by
Representative reading to test
fine in fact I approached him
about it as a judge I make no
lobbying efforts before on
behalf or against a criminal
provisions and so forth but I am
the state judicial outreach
liaison.
That has been retained by New
Mexico department of
transportation and the
administrative office of the
court through the national
highway traffic safety
administration and the American
Bar Association my task for the
state of New Mexico is to.
Forth best practices and best
evidence based matters for
impaired driving cases both for
pre trial matters and should
there be a conviction.
On our education addressing that
issue the birch field case.
Comes out of our session coming
down to want to Pierce the skin
it's a Fourth Amendment issue
and there needs to be a search
warrant.
I give a little bit of history
if you indulge me back when I
was with the.
District attorney's office and
the nineties I worked with
Nadine Milford and revising the
D. W. I. statutes the reason
that a misdemeanor is not in
there for allowing a blood draw
was because the same as New
Mexico and the other fifty
states implied consent
envisioned breath and or blood
there is no need to allow a
misdemeanor warrant for search
and seizure because the implied
consent was the intent of the
legislature to be lightly
coercive in enhancing penalties
for refusing a blood test if
there happen to be a conviction.
Now the Burchfield is come down
it says that there needs to be
afforded a greater protection of
having a warrant since that that
The New Mexico statute at its
time did not anticipate that
being a problem because it was
implied consent the Supreme
Court taking the blood draw off
the table under implied consent
what the representatives as us
and the national highway traffic
safety administration in New
Mexico department of
transportation's us is to put
the provision in the New Mexico
statutes to allow a magistrate
or other judge to grant a search
warrant just like any other
Fourth Amendment search warrant
based on probable cause an
affidavit from an officer to
draw that blood a drug
recognition experts that's the
last step in their protocols is
have toxicology and to have the
most evidence available in front
of the court the national
highway traffic safety
administration strongly urges
that the passage of that part of
this bill to correct implied
consent to reflect the supreme
court's opinion and to allow a
magistrate judge to issue a
search warrant if approached on
it with
the necessary probable costs and
so I stand in support of that
part of the bill for those
reasons and I would stand for
questions thank you madam chair.
Okay thank you I'm
Representative rain did you have
anything else you wanted to add
before we go to the public
comment
I think we're ready for for
okay.
Thank you and I have a
granddaughter who woke up from a
nap cranky so and excuse me
while I'm trying to make her
happy so we will go to the poll
first.
So.
Maybe.
Senator.
And.
And we will do that first and
then we'll go to public comments
so
Gabby if you can put the pull
up.
Okay so there's a either support
or opposition.
Okay so we have we have I in
fact are.
Six in favor and six in
opposition so we will end up
holding and we will go to the
audience for comment.
and it will be first the
audience who was in opposition
to this bill.
So we will start with the Kim
Chavez Cook.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Kim Chavez Cook
with the law offices of the
public defender and I you know I
understands the where the
proponents are coming from on
this I think it's completely
understandable to want to get a
warrant for these cases I wanted
to provide a little bit of
clarification the first is that
the Supreme Court opinion that
pointed out that the legislature
would have to make a change to
allow that to happen was not
taking a position on whether it
this body should and so I don't
think that anyone needs to take
it as a mandate from the Supreme
Court that it be changed it is
ultimately that the up to that
to the legislature whether to
expand the warrants to
misdemeanor crimes there are
some policy reasons not to the I
mean but the simplest and most
practical being that the warrant
process is
time consuming it involves a lot
of different players that often
happens in the middle of the
night it means waking up the
judge to get a signature and so
it could be it would not be a an
unreasonable decision to say
that they it we don't want to
expand that process to
misdemeanor crimes when it's
typically a felony a situation
that leads to warrants I also
wanted to point out that the
need for that warrant is to get
certainly to get the blood
evidence but to clarify that
that's not the only evidence
available in these cases and it
is possible to prosecute and get
a conviction in these cases
without the blood evidence it
does require a calling in you
know an officer who's familiar
and been trained in drug
recognition evidence and able to
testify these are the things I
observed and that means that
this person was intoxicated and
the evidence of bad driving if
there was swerving or an
accident or anything like that
would certainly be enough to get
a conviction for do you why
without the blood evidence so I
just wanted to make sure the
committee members were aware of
that as a just sort of a legal
court room matter and.
Then finally I wanted to just
address the expansion of who
drugs who would be allowed to
draw blood and I agree with miss
lose that this is an issue that
has been litigated in the past
and part of the route
the analysis that the courts
have done to limit it to only
the folks that have been listed
in the statute thus far is the
fact that that list was sort of
chosen for a reason the people
who are authorized to do the
blood draws have have training
that others do not and so I just
wanted to to make sure that that
was an issue that was actually
being considered and that we
want to be careful that we're
not expanding the list without
taking into consideration who
should be actually allowed to to
do these draws when we're
keeping in mind that there are
pursuant to a warrant and
against the person's wishes much
of the time and that that is an
invasive procedure so we want to
make sure that people who are
properly trained to do it in a
way that would not be overly
invasive so those those are my
comments on the bill and I think
you the committee for their
time.
Thank thank you we have.
Thank you you brought.
Thank you very much.
Chair and.
Legislators here in this
committee I'm speaking I'm a
public defender but I'm speaking
on behalf of the New Mexico
criminal defense lawyers
association of which I'm on the
board but you know I as I've
spoken before this committee
before I believe I am I am a
former prosecutor and former
District Court judge so I have
a.
Wide variety of experience in
this topic I've prosecuted these
cases in including in front of
my friend.
Judge Fitzwater back when I was
a young prosecutor I prosecuted
these cases without.
Without blood evidence in them
probably more often than I had
blood evidence and those types
of cases so I I have to echo
what Kim Chavez Cook sent about
how these cases can and are
absolutely prosecuted without
this evidence I do think it's
problematic to be getting really
time sensitive for search
warrants on misdemeanor cases I
just find that to be a problem.
I'm speaking as a former judge
you know getting woken up in the
middle of the night for murder
cases one thing getting woke up
in the middle of the night for a
misdemeanor is something else
and and that's not to diminish
the importance of the W. Y. in
in the state because I I know
obviously it's a very big
problem but it's it is a
misdemeanor charge that we're
talking about and so there's a
reason why we already have that
limit in the law I think it's an
appropriate limits already have
in the law you know this this or
this committee a number of times
before it.
That's I think all I have thank
you very much chair and members
of the committee.
Thank you that's all we have in
opposition so
if you want to speak in support.
Please raise your hand.
It looks like we just have our
work remote from go ahead when
you're ready Barbara.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee yeah my
name is Barbara model I'm the
district attorney for the
thirteenth judicial district
career prosecutor there's a
couple of things that I think
are important for the committee
to to understand first of all we
do allies are different than
normal felonies and getting
search when warrants in that in
the field it's often difficult
to tell whether or not it's a
felony or misdemeanor because
the the priors that are listed
in NCIC are not always accurate
and so you run the risk of
either allowing a felon.
That should be subject to search
warrant anyway to go free or you
run the risk of having the
officers over charged so that
they can get the blood.
And I would also say that as far
as the the training or excuse me
the the blood draw issue you
know I I think that that could
fairly be looked at as an issue
that should go to the weight of
that testimony much like it
already does for other experts
where the judge allows experts
to testify as an expert if they
have the proper training and and
resources I'm I'm sorry proper
training or and or experience so
to me I think that that the the
fact that the weight of the
testimony could be would be left
up to the fact finder and
certainly if the defense feels
like the person who drew the
blood was not adequately
qualified that something that
they can raise to cross examine
an argument to the jury so I
really don't I think it's it's
difficult.
We and and as far as and I
understand Mr a bodice concerns
but you know we do have on call
prosecutors in every district
attorney's office we also have
on call judges in every district
and people that are in this
business understand that if it's
in existence are comes stances
we're gonna get woken up in the
middle of the night so I don't
really think that that should be
a concern that should
necessarily
Inhibit or prevent this bill
from going forward thank you for
listening to me madam chair and
committee members.
Okay I see judge Fitzwater's
hand raised did you have
something to add.
Your muted.
My apologies madam chair S. as
requested expert more respond
briefly to Google the comments
yes.
First off Benham chair
representatives of the United
States Supreme Court didn't deem
that a misdemeanor made it any
less important to risen to their
level and to address that issue
because it does affect all fifty
states with their implied
consent laws so to saying that
it's a legislative prerogative
to fix this means that they felt
it important enough to give
direction as to where they
thought such a fix may lie so
whether it's some misdemeanor
felony I think
Doesn't bear on whether or not
it's proper thing to do secondly
as a retired judge and I still
serve the war processes so
expedited we now have you
warrants through the approval of
the Supreme Court that the judge
gets the request for the warrant
by written and if they have
questions they can call up the
Senate back and forth and you
shoot emails back and forth and
you approve a warrant or you
disapprove the warrant on it.
Whether or not you wake up the
judge or not I have to say doing
this since last century comes
with the turf.
If you don't want to get woke up
the middle of the night then
don't take the taxpayers money
to do the job so I'd find both
of those I understand the
concerns but not one that should
defeat the purpose of this fix
that the representative is
pressing before this committee
thank you madam chair.
Okay thank you Representative
war for questions.
Your muted.
Thank you for getting this new
fund thank you madam chair thank
you representative.
So I'm I'd like to ask some
questions based on this so I saw
on one of the house committee
analysis.
It surprised other states
Usually are it seems to be
easier to get a blood test but I
I just want to know is it
currently warrants can be
obtained after such a refusal
for the breath Representative
test when there is evidence of
death or great bodily injury of
another person there is a
problem because the person has
committed a felony.
And that is from the influence
of alcohol and crowd control
substance that was a bill that
was recently passed in turn to a
lark is that correct.
and Representative I'm going to
have this loose and the judge
comment on it.
That is our vehicular homicide
the felony but all have them
comment on.
And for clarification executive
chair representative what I'm
trying to find out is.
When did this alright come about
is this in the recent and what
did it look like before so
before before this was passed.
Madam chair and Representative
I'd have to look at sixty six
dash eight one oh two or one to
one to find out what it was
enacted but it's been enacted
for.
Center for the for decades right
now but I'll ask Miss will you
Sir judge Fitzwater if they
could clarify that.
Madam chair representative ward
I'm there was a change to I'm
the B. occur or homicide statute
it wasn't this provision I if we
were working I am in changing
this sentence I not I whether
not avoid jocular Corona felony
and so I believe the blood drawn
the filling the was part of our.
How to modern hi D. W. I.
statute but I'll defer to I'm
judge Fitzwater.
Thank you and.
Madam chair representative yes
are in about nineteen ninety
four of the Gordon house case
that provision was put in there
my understanding not to speak
for the legislature but at the
time was put in there because
there was a need for CPAS
specificity for vehicular
homicide cases and so forth
where.
There may not have been the
immediate indicia.
That alcohol or drugs were
participating in the accident
but to find out later on whether
or not they did cause vehicular
homicide that is one of the
elements that can be pursued so
of the misdemeanor side the
implied consent statute was
deemed to have taken care of
that on the phone the side they
wanted to have the ability to do
that with the warrant so that
they could see whether or not
behavior homicide was born out
or not so it all came in at the
same time of the reforms in the
mid nineties thank you when this
this came about thank you
president that you madam chair
Representative you currently
have the right to refuse a
breathalyzer is that correct.
Senator and Representative Lord
that is correct.
so to get.
So we we just went through madam
chair and had to.
With these under the
circumstances you could get that
warrants possibly.
But if somebody refuses so to
get another to get the blood
tests they would have to agree
to and say yes I agree to the
blood test is that correct.
Chair and Representative board.
Even if they agreed today to
have a blood test.
The officer could not do that
because he has to have a warrant
right right get that thank you
so I do have a question on this
so if somebody I I know one of
the difficulties is and I'll
just use marijuana for example I
know it's hard for the officers
to determine whether somebody's
under the influence of marijuana
too high to be driving because
they have to look at it I
believe for visual there's
something visual the light
turned red to green they're
sitting there they have to have
like a probable cause but
there's no real testing right
now is there I mean I I'm I'm
when you're out in the field
there's no breathalyzer there's
no way to test of somebody's too
high to be driving their car New
Mexico is that correct.
Madam chair and Representative
board at support correct so what
we have and what judge since
water looted produce we have
drug recognition experts so
again the officer is found some
errant behavior is made a
contact with the driver.
He believes the drivers under an
influence of so either drugs or
alcohol.
And now he's requested a field
sobriety test which they can
refuse and then expand of it
then you know at the end of that
test which could occur with a
drug recognition expert now
these are specially trained
officers there is a water
training that goes into B. one
and there are very few in the
state.
So it's difficult to find that
what we're also finding in this
started kind of back when I was
a police officer in the mid
nineties we started seeing more
of the drug and alcohol mixtures
and combining different drugs or
combining alcohol with drugs
you it really creates a cocktail
for impairment.
So I hope that's answered it or
maybe judge Fitzwater as more to
add on that.
Yeah and I have more questions
on that too if you want me to go
ahead ask those thank you please
thank you madam chair what I
what I'm trying to get it to is
I stand here says controlled
substance so let's say an
officer pulled somebody over
there high on I don't know
they're down on opioid I don't
know what you call that.
If you were to do this blood
test with the blood tests you
suspected they were taking a
certain drug or put the part do
a panel I would imagine is that
how you would substantiate that
somebody is to I don't know what
the correct word is not hikes to
impaired on drugs to drive.
Madam chair that is and just
Representative Lord that is
correct.
Act what led me to understand
what will be looking at later
today is drug driving I actually
have that case I reconstruct
traffic crashes and.
In the south valley of
Albuquerque a man who admitted
to and we at the time could
obtain blood tests because
that's the only way to find
drugs admitted to using heroin
right before you began to drive
the drive went off the road in
through a parking lot and hit a
man that was changing the spare
tire or changes tire on his car
and killed it.
When the case went to the DA's
office there was a reckless
driving and while there's heroin
or metabolize terror one that we
found in the squad they didn't
feel the prosecution for
vehicular homicide could
proceed.
And so there's not a breath test
there's nothing other than a
blood test that New Mexico
recognized some states recognize
urine tests New Mexico does not.
Thank you Madam chair
representative is going to be my
next test my next question
It's so I guess what I'm trying
to get at is.
I see this more as a budget
because if you have I keep
trying to think of your police
off to pull somebody over you
could tell the impaired you
don't technically know what it
is I would feel horrible if I
gave that field tested it wasn't
maybe borderline I'm not quite
sure and I let them go and they
go and kill somebody I don't
think I could live with myself
after that but I look is this is
a great way to see if somebody's
on a controlled substance
because what's going to happen
is going to do that blood test
and it's going to show a panel
they're going to check for
certain drugs in the system and
then you'll have that so when
you do go to court you have that
evidence of lab work there to
support the evidence I just want
to say in closing on this that
you know I read a motorcycle and
it's danger not dangerous enough
as it is and every time I get on
my bike I am scared to death
because New Mexico has the
highest.
Rates of drunk driving with
mortality and the nation and we
have such a horrific drunk
driving for problem and we have
drug issues and you know many
times how many times I've almost
been killed and had to go to so
many funerals of my friends to
been murdered on motorcycles and
that person ended up being
impaired on some level or
another and I think wow what a
great tool that if officer saw
somebody had the ability to pull
them over and take the blood
work and see well this person
you know it's too impaired to be
driving that actually would be a
budget and so that's all I have
to stand that thank you friends
my questions thank you
representative and madam chair.
Thank you Representative lord I
have Representative Romero.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you representative I have some
questions regarding a lot of
that technical issues and
thinking through some of the
process sees on why it still
remains a felony level for it
what's happening I wish we had a
system that worked for quickly
aiding I think if there are no
so the thing we might all be
able to do a bunch if you know
that reference polities the.
Field start up but
that said Representative at
Madam chair representative I
just wanted to know why there
wasn't an appropriation attached
when the FIR does talk about the
amount of money that would be
because basically increase the
amount of capacity for the
testing that would be involved
for all misdemeanor crimes that
could possibly need this kind of
test Madam chair representative.
And Representative Romero I
would disagree with the
cost analysis our right now that
you know in the past we always
did drop blood and send that in
the first test that the
scientific lab does is alcohol
and if it comes up at point zero
eight or higher even though you
may of requests tell me if
there's hair when they stop
because you have what's for her
se dared DWI so the I I disagree
with that the person's already
under arrest and it could go to
show.
not impairment on the part of
the driver that there are no
drugs so it could also cut the
other way
you know we see that with
individuals that have diabetic
reactions that they appear
intoxicated at in their actions.
So madam chair representative so
you're just saying that with the
additional increase capacity
that's necessary for those kinds
of tests we're just gonna.
Hope that we can pay for it
somehow is what I'm hearing
Madam chair representative.
And and Representative when the
scientific lab you know does a
budget review in mid year they
can ask for more money as well
and we have money to go ahead
and move around in the state to
take care of those of additional
costs like that.
Thank you madam chair
Representative that leads me
kind of into my next point as to
why we've had this standard so
long I know this bill has seen
it it's a you know been many
many years why do you why I mean
with the ability to refuse a
breath test at a felony level
and what we're trying to tax and
with the ability to refuse that
tests and how and then of course
You know on that point of
refusal of blood drawn can't
even be done without consent so
in the sense of how we go
through that process Madam chair
representative walked me through
how that makes how that how
that's meant to play out in
these circumstances with law
enforcement.
Madam chair and representative
even if you consent to.
You cannot draw blood you have
to have a warrant I mean have
judge Fitzwater comment on this.
Madam chair representative if I
may.
The reason it is bifurcated
between felony and misdemeanor
is because the legislature
intended that there be
consequence for refusal of a
breath test.
Yes the enhanced penalty if
you're convicted of a DWI and
you would refuse a breath
testers mandatory jail even on a
first offense which would not be
there if you had not refused
implied on again they relied on
the implied consent statuesque
did every other state in the
country.
Blood make no difference in
breast both were deemed too you
get implied your consent when
you had your driver's license
the Supreme Court says now.
Eight a little bit more invasive
that should take a warrant and
they said then it goes back to
the legislature to a gesture
laws as you see fit to do so so
the difference between a
misdemeanor or felony was only
that distinction at the time
there was no need to put that in
because the implied consent act
covered misdemeanors and the
legislative intent was a portion
to make the cooperation so this
just allows law enforcement to
be able to get that blood draw
if a judge finds probable costs
me Sir has to be more than just
a hunch.
To do so also the national
highway traffic safety
administration has asked me to
impress upon the legislature's
as New Mexico seems to lean more
towards legalizing recreational
marijuana these cases are going
to begin to hit in a court
systems and to be able to
accurately identify with this
and somebody system.
Is going to be a paramount issue
which is why the support.
This legislation over that
answers to Representative
questions chair.
Thank you Madam chair
representative and
at justice Fitzwater I guess
that kind of I'm sponsoring part
of the cannabis legislation so I
want to see how this all does
work together and my while we're
trying to understand you know
what we're dealing with in in in
addiction and thinking about
some of the misdemeanors I'm
looking up you know some of the
misdemeanors are looking at
could be anything from speeding
vandalism public intoxication
already possession of marijuana
and of course already do you I
and D. W. Y. offenses so I'm
under that umbrella I I'm I'm
concerned that this is very very
far reaching in scope and why
we've limited it to felonies
already hearing some of the
testimony I just don't see how
it plays out in in in
considering some of the things
that we're looking at
Madam chair representative I
just I appreciate your response
I'm just not able to to get to
that point where where we're
ready to do that but thank you
madam chair representative for
your presentation thank you
Representative Romero I have
Representative pedigree.
Thank you madam chair
Representative.
This is for you can be for all
the DA or the judge retired
judge on the line
So I am pulled over on.
But by a police officer for
whatever reason whatever the
reasonable causes to be pulled
over.
And this police officers wells
alcohol on my breath.
And the police officer asked me
to step out.
And what's to perform.
I don't know some level of
sobriety test.
I can refuse that.
Madam chair and Representative
pedigree you're absolutely right
but let me take you back a step
is a kind of clarifies the last
statement.
I'd if I stop you for speeding.
I can't draw your blood.
If I stop you for speeding.
And then I threw my contact I
realize that you are impaired.
And then I go ahead and say I
think that you're impaired I
want to give you a field
sobriety test.
In in to your point you can go
ahead reviews that field
sobriety test
but to get the blood test I have
to have or to do bold facts.
That I can put in a warrant that
the judge is going to review and
agree with me that there's
probable cause to issue a
warrant to draw your blood
because you are under arrest for
DWI.
Thank you Representative thank
you madam chair what what's
what's good for the work piece
of this later if you if you
wouldn't mind and and just kind
of.
Follow my follow my thinking
because I I'm I'm highly
confused especially after
reading this in in hearing
testimony.
So so madam chair
representative.
I refuse the still sobriety
test.
And
I guess the next step would be
the officer.
request me to do a breathalyzer
in the field with that being the
next probable step
representative madam chair.
Madam chair I have judge
Fitzwater answer this because he
heard a lot of those cases.
Madam chair Representative
Pettigrew
yes not to step on just
returning looses toes on this
and speak out of turn if you
want to correct my experience on
it but the way it works is if a
person is stopped.
And they are.
Detained from being able to
travel on Yasser then does
investigation if they have a
reasonable suspicion that there
is impairment they can request a
field sobriety test the
practicality is you can't make
somebody want kids to tell you
can't make somebody do those
things you can't hold their arms
and make them do it but it can
be argued in court that the
refusal to do so is an indicator
of their fear of how they would
do on that test.
When it comes separately to that
the officer then can argue in
court or the prosecutor they
refused a field sobriety test
they better have a good reason
because I'm arguing and the
judge or jury can consider that
that means that they're afraid
of how they would do on the test
so there is that.
As far as a breath test he also
has some issue that there's
alcohol present on a drug test
yes you may have an issue that
they're impaired by something
and they would like to know what
it is and as Representative Rehm
said yes it's some budget
resented diabetic response some
other medical issue than the
blood test
precludes that and so so if I
may go back to yeah the
representative Romero's question
the recent Supreme Court says
there needs to be of a warrant
is exactly for that protection.
A judge would have to be
persuaded there is something to
indicate drugs it's not just a
wide sweeping fishnet of looking
for something on every
misdemeanor traffic stop there
has to be in addition to that
there is some impairment another
to persuade a judge that okay I.
Test or I'm sorry blood test is
appropriate and I will issue a
warrant just like in any other
search.
Any time alongside you can't
have just a wide sweeping
dragnet of people so
Representative Romero I may come
back to that that is why the war
is in there to a put that
additional.
Stopgap of a judge's approval
before you do that blood draw so
we would not be anything and by
putting it in the statute is
clearly intended only for
impaired driving cases health
answer the questions thank you
madam chair representative.
Thank you thank you madam chair
and so I think I'm just going to
cut to the chase because I'm I'm
concerned and I'm trying to
build to a certain point and
then you guys are just
Making such good points as we go
the.
I I have this concern that from
what I've heard to date that I
could be pulled over.
Madam chair representative I
could be pulled over for
whatever reason.
Your relatives at this point.
An officer spells alcohol on my
breath.
I could either refuse the field
sobriety or I could do it and
pass it.
And the officer still feels
like.
There's a level of concern there
and
And for public safety purposes
are
arrest me thanks man I refuse
you and then I have had just
enough for.
but not so much that by the time
we get the blood drawn my my
blood alcohol levels now below
and and
But.
I still should have been on the
road.
I get and so I fight it how do
you know when.
Pardon me Madam chair
representative explain to me I
am.
In my mind since the nineteen
early nineteen nineties the
state of New Mexico has spent a
significant amount of of funds
and energy.
On D. W. I. training from kids
in elementary school all the way
through.
Signs all over the state
D. W. I. laws making.
More stringent and more
stringent every time I see a new
law it's it's more stringent
than the last and the penalties
go up as you continue on and
your challenge and the way I'm
hearing you is
We're making we're we're doing
all this for trying to train the
public we're trying to do all
this for trying to change
attitudes we've we've we've
determined that this is not a
good action but we're then
turning around and hamstringing
law enforcement.
And.
Prosecutors from actually
keeping me from going to do it
and get.
And and and Madam chair
representative and and and my.
Am I getting to the final point
on this.
Madam chair and representative
pedigree you've asked go
multitude of questions but I'm
gonna try to answer some and
then I'm gonna have.
Retired judge Fitzwater Madam
let's back up to all right I
stopped you are I smelled
alcohol on you we gave you a of
field sobriety test and you pass
that.
I have been involved in about
fifteen hundred DWI arrests as a
traffic officer.
And so.
I had individuals passed field
sobriety tests.
Which means I did not have the
elements to arrest them for DWI.
Meaning they are let go they
continue to drive.
Now sometimes I've had someone
else in the car who hasn't been
drinking go ahead and drive
their car but they did not show
a level of impairment that would
justify an arrest.
I hope that clears that portion
up
The
It you know if if he fails the
DWI test.
And we're looking for some
particular errors that people
make while doing those test.
They've given us if you will a
score.
That then means that there's a
high probability that they are
D. W. all right then they're
arrested.
And I'm gonna have judge
Fitzwater comment on it as well
thank you.
Madam chair Representative
Pettigrew
Representative Rehm is correct
what what this.
What does is not in some way
change what is happening out in
the field with officers today is
the prosecution's burden to show
this it is not illegal to drink
and drive.
It's not illegal to use
prescription drugs and so forth
and driving it may not be
illegal in the state to have
ingested marijuana and drive if
you're impaired by it.
That's what the officer needs to
make that determination the user
training education experience in
the field they make an arrest
and then to try to confirm that
arrest with a breath or blood
test to make a determination and
then they have that person has
the defense in court to show
that they in fact beyond a
reasonable doubt repairs so we
don't have people who are just
had the classic one drink.
Or.
Whatever the COVID might be so
that's the prosecution's burden
and it's a legitimate one it is
as it needs to be.
your concern Representative
that.
We are not doing anything as far
as changing the ability to take
those people off the road.
I think what this bill does is
give.
The courts.
The opportunity to see if
somebody is.
Acting I am driving in a radic
concerning matter confirmation
that it is by a particular
substance.
If it's eight point zero five or
less it's deemed.
Zoom they're not impaired.
One zero seven above that they
are is a gray area there that
falls to the folks but as I've
heard in court many times
this standard is not the per se
limit is whether they are
impaired and has to be proven
and a prosecutor will often say
that they don't care if it's a
ballerina or a long project that
per se limit is enough and do
the everybody seen actually at
thanksgiving recess after one
glass of wine I should be to you
know look at me it's gone
straight to my hat well and
truly could be on the road or a
lumberjack could be on the road
but all these tests are trying
to assist.
Law enforcement in Trier of fact
to determine whether or not the
person truly was impaired what
this law addresses
Representative yes the Supreme
US state supreme court's concern
that a blood draw is unique from
a breath test because you have
to invade the body to get it we
in New Mexico did not anticipate
that need because of the implied
consent laws now that they have
deemed that blood doesn't fall
under implied consent now it is
needed and that's the view of
the national highway traffic
safety administration.
And that's why they stand in
support of this there are enough
safeguards all the way around to
make sure that no one's rights
are violated but that the safety
of the community.
Is preserved.
Thank you madam chair
Representative.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you representative thank you
judge
Well right now I just feel like
we're going backwards.
We're.
What this perfect world out
there where
Everybody does what they're
supposed to do and we don't need
laws and
that we don't need to protect
the rest of the community and
and and I've seen it just in the
short period that I've been here
the the we're actually giving
more more.
Taking more and more
capabilities away from for more
law enforcement from our our.
DA's offices are judges for them
to be able to to caring.
Out their duty and at I don't
know if the purpose is to where
we just get to a point where
nobody wants to do that job
anymore we have a purge society
and so I do appreciate your time
I I.
Thank you.
Stopped there thank you madam
chair for the top.
You.
A couple of questions.
We watch TV and that you know
things happen really quickly on
the crime dramas but in reality
what is the time a lapse it just
a general time frame from when
we and you decide that you are
at and you
and where you use it.
Madam chair what we end up
having is we end up having
Let me give you a couple
examples of why this is also
needed we're seventeenth in the
nation on DWI fatalities.
But.
I may have a minor traffic
crash.
And the driver is impaired.
Okay the the if you will the
suspect driver who called cros
the crash is impaired.
The driver or passenger in his
car that are if you will the
victims are at the hospital.
The screen minor at the time but
when they arrived at the
hospital they determined that
they have closed head injuries
they have
internal injuries and I've even
have these cases where an
individual is up walking around
he arrives at the hospital and
needs an trauma one with some
serious problems.
So we need to be able to draw
the blood to protect those cases
that now we've become felonies.
Had we not done that.
And I know judge Fitzwater wants
to comment on this as well.
madam chair Representative Rehm
apparently I do this.
What this does Representative
Pettigrew is and it is not I
need a actually clear it is not
my job to a prosecution I am for
being from doing so and I I
won't do so but allowing the
blood draw.
In fact aids the prosecution I'm
not advocating it for it for
that reason but it does allow.
Law enforcement and ultimately
however the Trier of fact is to
have all the facts in front of
them to make that determination
all this does is fix the
distinction between implied
consent acts and what the U. S.
Supreme Court deems is more of a
Fourth Amendment as far as
getting a warrant quickly the
warrant process if it's a well
done warrant and that's up to
law enforcement then you can be
a fairly quick process.
The only drawback is being able
to get somebody to actually draw
the blood and I don't get to
comment on that for the reasons
I just stated that
Representative Rehm was talking
about that in his bill also and
I will leave it to that but the
time frame between the incident
getting a warrant
can be very short and we've done
that I've done it for decades.
It is like trying to cage thank
you madam all just following up
with that okay so I I didn't
really get an answer about how
long it would take but okay
let's say you get the warrant.
Okay let me just ask it this way
you decide that you want a blood
draw what it is there and.
What you can test would be an
average time span between when
you say okay I needed a war I
need to get a warrant for a
blood draw what is the time
elapsed between the moment that
that happens and the moment that
the blood is taken out of the
persons are.
Madam chair of course is going
to be quicker in urban
environment in a more rural one.
but in Oregon firemen's that
could happen within the hour.
That on call judge is notified
the review the warrant if it's a
well drafted warning image
problem because they granted
we're talking minutes for that
process.
And then it's up to one forced
me to have the good resources
available to them to get the
blood drop in an urban
environment I can't imagine
would take an hour.
Course in rural it depends on
where the location of it is the
availabilities.
Hopefully that answers your
question madam chair okay and
then back to someone of one of
the public comment folks have
talked about people who are
allowed to drop blood in this
type of instance have special
training and that was all it was
I I don't remember who was
allowed to but I think the bill
also includes lobotomized and
now one other categories so
could you talk a little bit
about what that what who who can
do it now what training they
need and then who will be
allowed to do it under under
this if we make this change.
Madam chair on your last
question the warrants are
electronic and so the it is a
form filled for the officer in
the field I would like miss
loose to begin and then judge
Fitzwater to finish off on on
that discussion.
And.
Madam chair I'm you asked who
currently can drop one I
currently the changes being made
is to go to the term laboratory
technician so right now it's a
position a licensed professional
or a practical nurse so you're
thinking your physician's
assistant or nurse practitioner
and nurse a doctor.
It has a laboratory technician
the changes to the definition
laboratory technician you have
to think about rural and clinics
our rural areas I'm may not have
a person designated as a
laboratory technician to draw
blood like we need to go into
the from at a blood draw and lab
tests to doctor orders labs you
walk into the lab and they have
a person here that's a lab
technician drugs or what.
That's that's what it says now
so that's what I'm saying
emergency medical technician or
certified phlebotomist or
technologist employed by a
hospital or a physician so it's
a water category still and
medical personnel trained to
draw so it simply recognizing
that the larger urban areas
going to have that laboratory
technician but you're rural
areas are not if you're asking
about how much time to get the
warrant these officers have as
we stand on it form search
warrants that they then fill in
the specifics for this case
those are electronically sent to
judges all over the states
whether it's a magistrate and
metro a district judge those are
sent electronically getting the
warrant is a pretty fast process
I would expect in our that maybe
being confused with the
difference between when the
warrants approved to get this
legislation driver to an area
where the blood can be drawn
major protection in the statute
that if we don't have from time
and driving to when the blood is
drawn on it that three hour
window if that's not Matt being
I'm.
The prosecution is limited in
how that evidence can be years
so those are those are
completely separate issues and
we're not addressing that second
one today we're only looking at
being able to do this for drop I
think it's really important to
remember New Mexico maybe GW are
a special felony remember to
treated like other felony crimes
you can only use prior DWI
convictions to enhanced to make
it a fourth or above as a felony
that probable cause for the
facts of the offense of driving
under the influence are the same
whether it's a felony or a
misdemeanor the only difference
is in the statute that we were
allowing implied consent so let
us ask for the person to consent
to the blood draw we can no
longer do that it's so that
means we can no longer do a
blood draw in an officer in the
field as a GA Romeo and pointed
out often doesn't know if it's a
misdemeanor.
G. W. R. or a felony and that's
that's the difference is often
times it becomes a if they think
it's a mistake I can't do
anything else thank you.
And madam chair if I may thank
you back on what the district
attorney said
the legislature deemed that
three hour window between the
time driving the type of testing
so they deem three hours to be a
very reasonable period of time
you wish to make the
determination and we're talking
minutes to get a warrant to get
that done so that the time frame
out of the field I don't find
would be the concern for the
legislature they deemed within
three hours of time of driving
to be sufficient for a per se
violation so the time limit I
from my experience in twenty
some years on the court that
warrant if it's well written.
Can be done very quickly and
that's not a holding up issue
for the officer.
Okay so so someone as I said
someone said something about
needing special training to be
able to do it what is that trade
and is that something that think
that general that just happens
when you become trained as a
phlebotomist for instance or is
there something more that they
need to be trained on.
all what the D. A. loose answer
that it's it's their medical
training but.
I don't know she has a comment.
Madam chair I'm in I I certainly
I'm going to defer to
legislators who were around when
this legislation was originally
drafted that I believe the
concerned and listing the
specific people at that time the
regional what it states that our
current law position losses
professional practical nurse a
laboratory technician was
because they didn't want just
any one to draw your blood for a
criminal case so that's why it
was noted who could draw that
line all the changes being
proposed by this piece of
legislation is to to take out
that limiting laboratory
technician in the state
emergency medical technician.
For certified phlebotomist yes
Sir Pompeo brought is has to
have specialized training in the
state of New Mexico to be
recognized as a certified
phlebotomist an emergency
medical technician is going to
be a person designated by the
state of New Mexico defenders
qualifications they have to have
specialized training so it's no
different than we designate I I
in T. in the state that to be
Indian team you have to have
certain training testing to be
an EMG it's the same sort of
thing and so basically if you if
you want to like come down to it
I think in this is maybe
speculation on my part but if
you've got an officer who's out
with someone you wouldn't want
just another officer coming
saying Hey let me just drop one.
And so it had to be listed who
would be allowed to draw the
blood this is evidence in the
criminal case with the state has
the burden EMTs being intrusive
that is why it is so specific
but to limit it to a laboratory
technician only in modern day
we've made such advances with
who is medically trained in who
was allowed to do blood draws
that's one of the expansion I is
is that it doesn't just say any
person who their blood draw it
is an emergency medical
technician or a certified
phlebotomist or technologist
employed by a hospital or a
physician so they're already
under working under a medical
providers and they're already
trained and allow to drop what.
Thank you just.
But let's say there's an
accident and an EMT happens to
be driving by and pulled over to
help and the police arrived
could that EMTV being you're
prone to the to the officer that
you know that you are a
certified EMT would end and they
say okay we've got the warrant
would that person be allowed to
do that or is there going to be
like a pool of people you have
to call on or how is that going
to work.
Madam chair I have judge
Fitzwater comment on that.
Madam chair yes ma'am if the
representatives bill passes as
you as a written that EMT would
qualify in the past the law
enforcement would retain.
Lab technicians and that was
held to be too restrictive that
it should be available to us for
ranger are far wider range of
medical you couldn't have
somebody who worked for the
police department draw the blood
that was seen as being
One sided.
Are the prosecutorial team so
they wind it up and didn't allow
that it would only be the law
enforcement's.
Crusoe your reference to a
certain pool of people the
course of our is always ready
said you can't limit it that way
but under the Representative the
anti the same person that can do
hi vis they're trained in doing
those things would be in his
bill I don't get to advocate on
this that was just explanatory
thank you madam chair and then
if there was some concern about
cost does anyone have an idea of
what what the cost for just like
a basic
alcohol blood.
Screening for lack of a better
word and then I'm sure it goes
up the more substances you're
looking for so I'm
Representative Rehm I think I
heard you say if they say they
start with alcohol and if they
get to point oh eight then they
stop is that correct.
Two years when we begin first
with the the cost of drawing the
blood is borne by the police
agency who's asking at.
Okay so that's borne by them
then we then the blood is sent
to the state lab scientific lab
and it is a scientific lab that
does the testing the first test
they do on it is to determine
the alcohol content and if it's
forty zero eight or higher than
they have what they term per se
DWI and they won't do any other
screening on.
So it's our state scientific lab
that it's under their part one
of health that does that
testing.
But even even even with that it
costs I mean it you know what
when we say when we see our
medical bills we we are shocked
at how much things cost so does
anybody have a sense of what it
will cost the police department
for the just let the blood draw
essentially and then any costs
that for the our alcohol
screening and then you know the
other panels that will have to
be done does anyone have a sense
of what that cost is
is going to be borne by the
state essentially from from the
lab.
Madam chair I don't perhaps
judge this water or D. eight
eight two.
Madam chair at this time I don't
think it would be it would be
are your guests were to say how
many of these blood draws would
occur if this legislation goes
into effect usually it's a one
July effective date by that time
the scientific lab revision the
law enforcement so of course
would be able to come up with an
estimate I my guess would be I
asked you what they think the
cost of building can apply for
those additional funds or for
additional probation or to
reallocate within the resources
but two guests now how many that
would be would I my guess would
just be I've I've shot in the
dark especially not knowing
where we stand as far as the
future of legalization or
decriminalization of any
substances that that would only
be borne out in hindsight and
hard to do proves proactively.
Okay thank you for that and
usually that's your is the last
question but I saw
Representative but S. raise your
hand so we'll go ahead
Representative but address thank
you for your answers.
Thank you madam chair I it's
just a really quick question I'm
like information overload right
now but just to clear up
something that I may have heard
or may not of heard if an
individual is giving consent to
the blood drive do you still
have to get a warrant.
Madam chair of Representative
Barreras.
The current way it is and when
this what if this what law were
passed you still would have to
get a warrant.
There's no way around the
warrant even if you consent.
Thank you Representative thank
you madam chair that was my only
question.
Okay who are but okay
all right I'm not seeing any
other questions so I will be
open for a motion.
Madam chair.
Okay go ahead Representative
Romero I I.
Two people starting so I wasn't
sure who.
I move a do not pass for House
Bill is it sixty three I want to
make sure that the number
correct.
Okay do I have a second on a do
not pass.
I second the past.
Okay.
Okay I'm sorry thank you for
Allison it's it's Gabby Gabby we
take the role please yes madam
chair the motion for do not pass
on hospital sixty three roll
call vote Representative about
us.
Yes.
Representative Lord.
Okay ever really dumb question I
apologize this is a first time
effort do not pass use its vote
to pass so if I want this to
pass in my saying yes Sir my
saying no you are saying no.
Okay double negative okay.
What this research no.
That's correct thank you thank
you representative are
Representative Pettigrew.
Now with explanation.
Thank you madam.
Yes.
Chair
chair Thompson I will be in no.
So that motion fails.
I'm Representative Pettigrew did
you want that did you want to
explain your answer do you want
to go on to the next motion and
then maybe explain it all at
once it's up to you.
I am sure I make a motion to
thank you madam chair I make a
motion to pass.
You are here second.
Okay I will make
a.
I will make an alternate motion
to table.
Is there a second.
I'll second that madam chair
okay so we have a motion on the
table to table
and so I will ask you to call
the roll on a table a motion.
Motion to table house bill sixty
three roll call votes
Representative about us yes.
Representative Lord.
For one second.
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative at.
Vice chairman of.
Yes to table.
And madam chair to wait for the
member who had passed
Representative Lord.
The noted.
Sorry but and I'm no to table.
Representative Pettigrew.
Hold on one second he's having
issues with this computer let me
run down and see if I can figure
out what's going on one second
please thank you Representative
lord.
Okay.
This was our system currently I
loaded noted table.
Chair madam chair Thompson.
Yes.
The motion to table does passed
three to two I believe
Representative Pettigrew had
wanted to explain his vote.
Thank you get thank you Gary I'm
glad someone is trying to keep
my memory banks that are
somewhat functioning so go ahead
Representative at a group.
Sure thank you very much.
Strange and comments thank you.
All right thank you.
So we will move on to
House Bill sixty four
Representative thank you.
And I'm sorry did you have did
you have other experts you
needed a minute or down the DA
and I just want to thank judge
Fitzwater is a system.
Thank thank you judge.
Yes what what I need to explain
about body armor is when it was
first if you will within the
military's had flak jackets but
when in the seventies they
finally designed body armor
where it is.
Wide enough in practical enough
that it could be worn by law
enforcement and military the
manufacturers at the time would
only sell it to law enforcement
or military.
That is changed and now we go
ahead we see that it is.
Are being used by the criminals
out in the world and so what I
want to do and I I I sent you
all you should have three news
articles on this in the one
article it is November
fifteenth.
And it is dealing about drug.
Drug dealing and this is the
group town queen.
Who is been under investigation
for over ten years and her son.
And when they did the search
warrant they and their convicted
felons they seized auto right
semiautomatic rifles and guns
and bullet proof vests.
Then we have another one that is
October second of last year here
in Albuquerque.
And Samuel Chavis kidnaps I'm
sorry this is actually Los
crucis kidnaps a person.
The manager to return fifty
thousand dollar ransom he's
arrested the as a pistol with
the serial number removed a
silencer for it in a bullet
proof vest.
When we look at the third
article it is the mom roles
which is a motorcycle gang and
this one is from April sixteenth
of twenty twenty.
And they note that they're
stockpiling weapons for war with
the Bandidos motorcycle came.
Our on page two you'll notice
that they're bragging about
using
it a car to run a Bandidos
member off the road we're that
member died.
Top of page three you'll see
that if the
That if a public member a member
of the public disrespects them
that they will go ahead and
assault that member the public
so we have no bounds on this.
This group
directs hate towards the.
Or racial groups and they brag
gone up on the last page of the
article about New Mexico doesn't
have a law against this when
they were when the search
warrant was of.
One on their place they had
weapons and they had bullet
proof vests.
And now manager I'd like forward
this leads to commented she has
a comment on it as well.
The the other thing madam chair
and this came up in an FIR that
the of the definition of body
armor may be too vague so if we
need to roll this over to go
ahead and go and change the
definition I'm fine with that as
well.
Madam chair that would be my
preference.
Representative ring
I'm actually I'm seeing some I'm
not a kid so unfortunately I
think we're going to ask that
you do that again we're gonna
ask you just want to have the
bill reads show every week and
the committee correct.
You know the problem is so
sapphires are coming out so
late.
Role as well.
Okay okay and we we know that
and we are the the it the yeah
the FIR is our slow what you're
making everything else hello and
we are all just doing the best
we can and I apologize to
everyone but we are we're doing
the best we can so with that we
will Here okay we will go to
house bill eighty one.
At madam chair that's the one
where the committee subs come
and so what let okay okay so
then so Representative ream.
I do where is Representative a
Representative.
Is Representative Dixon and
Senator Kernan on if they are we
will kind of put you at the back
of the line I'm sorry and if
they're not
and and Representative lane so
our our Dixon and Kernan on.
I don't see Dixon or Kernan on
madam chair under the attendees
Representative Lane is here.
Okay so why don't we go ahead
then with the with house bill
one sixty one since he gets here
and
I'm sorry trying to watch a
popular well during this is that
is tricky so we will go ahead
with if you couldn't put
Representative Representative
playing in as a panelists we
will go ahead with house bill
one sixty one.
And I'm sorry I'm madam chair
representative claimed I do you
have.
At any expert witnesses you need
me to pull over.
Thank you madam chair I am lone
rider today that's just me.
Madam chair I'm ready okay.
We got going chair.
Is it up to into present for.
A committee this morning or this
afternoon on house bill one
sixty one this is a very
important topic and and I know
it's a topic that is near and
dear and familiar to.
Madam chair as hard as well
because I know that you have
have a bill that actually
addresses many of the same
concept that's H. P. fifty six.
For those who maybe aren't aware
of that and and I did study that
bill prior to today and and I
appreciate you madam chair for
bring that bill I think it makes
a lot of important much needed
changes to New Mexico law let me
just maybe provide a kind of a
summary of where we're at with
regard to human trafficking and
and specifically in the context
of a victim being prosecuted for
prostitution I think that kind
of helps frame the the
discussion so currently if you
are a victim of human
trafficking and and you actually
end up getting prosecuted for
prostitution
there is no defense available to
you to a certain at least not
base and statutory law to assert
that look judge I I was
essentially a slave I I was a
victim of human trafficking and
that's why I participate in this
act prosecution unfortunate that
that the fence not available to
the victim and so so what could
very well happen what does
happen is the victim ends up
being found of of prostitution
and so then the question becomes
a what's what's the victims
remedy what do I do if now I
have this district this
conviction on my record I'm
trying to say human trafficking
what I want to do.
and what are law currently
provides there there is some
relief but I would submit that
it's not enough and so what the
release is is I can actually
petition the District Court to
have Miner records sealed okay
have expunged but I I can have
it sealed and so there is some
remedy available but I don't
think it's enough and and
specifically so for example if I
go to seek a job with a future
employer for example and they
asked me have you ever been
convicted of a crime of moral
turpitude.
I think that puts the victim in
a very awkward position even
though maybe their off their
record is sealed
you know then you're sorted get
in semantics those those
prostitution constitute a you
know
A crime of moral turpitude so
what this bill one six one is
designed to do.
Yes if I get to that point where
I've been charged with
prostitution it's designed to to
put another tool if you will in
the pool basket of a victim of
human trafficking to allow them
to assert what in law in the law
is called in the permanent
defense.
And essentially
the mechanics of how it works is
the the prosecution puts on its
evidence.
for the crime prostitution and
then when it's time for the
defendant to put on his or her
case they can then assert to the
judge to say.
Here your job your or jury in
the case may be
maybe I was involved in the act
prosecution but here's why you
cannot find me guilty of it
because in fact I was a victim
of human trafficking at the time
now interviewing and preparing
for this committee I did like I
said I looked at HB fifty six
and specifically in the chair
ladies bill
on page eighteen.
there is a specific provision as
language that says you can even
be charged for prostitution if
you are a victim of human
trafficking and so in in
preparing for today I you know I
I went through the thought
process involved there even any
point in bringing issue one
sixty one.
In light of the language found
in H. B. fifty six.
and I I I settled on the
conclusion I I think it still is
work pursuing for for a couple
reasons.
The the one is I guess maybe
more practical in that we don't
know what's going to happen with
HB fifty six I'd like to pretend
that politics don't get involved
when it comes to human
trafficking but it but you can
still sneak and so if for some
reason HB fifty six didn't ask
both
houses of the legislature to get
signed law by the governor we
need to still provide are
victims of something but but
beyond that let's assume the H.
B. fifty six does get signed
into law become statutory
here's still I think why we need
something like H. B. one sixty
one
because let's say I get charged
with prostitution.
And I and I spoke also in
preparation for today and let me
make sure I I have her name.
Out of the lost public
defender's office.
And I I believe she's going to.
speak today as well during
public comment.
Mr Kim Chavez Cook so she's the
public defender with loss the
public defender's office and so
we kind of talked through the
mechanics of this and I
appreciate her class I found to
be a very helpful conversation.
So again why it why would we
want it to be one fifty one if
we have this other bill HB fifty
six that that so you can be
charged in the first place of
prostitution so if I do actually
get charged to his mechanic of
how it works
I would file bit essentially a
motion with the judge to say
look judge hears the statute
that that can be charged for
prostitution from a victim of
human trafficking and I would
get a hearing before the judge
and if the judge agrees then the
cases messed it goes away and
it's no longer an issue but and
here's why I think it's
important we have simplified
issue one sixty one is if the
judge disagrees and says you
know what I don't think you were
a victim of human trafficking at
the time and so I'm allowed the
prosecution to move forward.
Then if we don't have something
like an affirmative defense in
our tool bag then that means
that again the prosecution is
going to proceed with the
prosecution charge and I and I
was a victim of human
trafficking I can't serve as a
defense any longer that I was
instructed to move of human.
Trafficking so what what would
happen then if the judge says no
then we have a jury trial
essentially we would be in most
cases you requested jury so we
would have a jury trial and
again the the prosecutor would
put on is there evidence of
proof of prosecution of
prosecution but then I would
have an opportunity then to
convince a jury of my peers to
say look.
I was a victim of human
trafficking at the time and this
is why you know the facts are as
they are and so I don't think
that one sixty one is to put it
of of our.
HB fifty six I think it provides
that at a state guard if you
will back up in a in a perfect
world of our justice
institutions were were
performing perfectly would need
eight three one six one but I
think it provides another Avenue
of defense.
for someone who is a victim of
human trafficking.
so I does I know it's it's a
long day for the committee so I
won't belabor the point but
really what I'm trying to do
here and and I believe the same
thing that you're ladies doing
if you look at sort of these
You know these these oppressed
segments of our society that
struggle with.
you know what what really we
don't call it slavery but that's
essentially what it is and so
what are some ways that we can
help these people
and not end up with that with a
criminal record that's going to
just continue to pile on them so
with that I would I would be
happy to hear comments from the
public and then stand for
questions at the discretion of
the chair thank you.
Thank you Representative lane so
we will go to the committee I'm
no I'm sorry we will go to the
public first and we will do we
will
thank the full.
And so if you weren't in the
there's if call will pop up on
your screen and you can vote if
you are for again Madam I'm so
sorry internet there was one
other comment that I think is
important if you would be okay
if I knew Jack.
Yes please give me thank you
madam chair so part of my
discussion with the loss of
public defenders was if you look
at the bill one six one on the
first page.
Paragraph a.
So it it talks about
if you were a victim of human
trafficking when the fence was
committed as a direct result.
Of the actions of a person
charged with human trafficking
and in my discussions with the
LAPD I think I.
I did something that is
certainly didn't intend to do
which was to to really narrow
who it was that good of a circus
Environment fence.
Because of what the point
language of this bill would mean
is that I can only assert an
affirmative defense if my.
My handler or the person who and
who is trafficking me is equally
charged at the same time and the
reality and I think that
presents a problem in the
language that was not my intent
and so I you I think the short
of it is is.
What I would probably request is
we come back at another time let
me just eliminate that language
or we can even limit that went
limited that one today at the
discretion of the chair but
again the idea is not to make it
more difficult for victims of
human trafficking to be able to
the service department offense
it's actually again to provide
another tool will tell the tool
in their tool belts so with that
are I would you'll port thank
you.
Okay with with that said I'm do
people have to cook committee
members have a strong.
Me personally I mean since you
said he has found it and he
knows that it's an issue and
that
that I would I would be I will
be open to hearing what what the
come if the committee feels like
we have an I mean when we finish
this if we will have enough
information to move forward with
the past or a table or a do not
pass given what but and the
representative has stated or if
if people would rather roll this
over until Tuesday.
Madam chair I I would say I'm
you know this is at I think that
maybe Representative Romero
might know more just because of
like the legalities but I would
say that if it's going to affect
our decision on the bill we
should roll it over I you know
Representative Lane I I also got
involved to help people and I
feel a hundred percent like
that's why you brought this
forward so I really like this
bill so I think that you know if
it's going to affect the way
that we're voting on it we
should we should give them the
opportunity to to fix what is
wrong with that this is how I
feel about it.
I think what I'm gonna do is I'm
going to go ahead with the whole
and with public comment and then
at that point I'll kind of check
in with the committee and see if
you it but you know what what
what the tax is essentially
about whether people feel like
we have enough information with
with the sponsor statement
number what he intends to do or
not so I'm so with that we will
go with the polls so please
vote in support or opposition.
Okay so we have eight in support
and one in opposition so we will
start with the opposition go to
the panelists area and raise
your hand if you would like to
speak first we're going to do an
opposition so if there's anyone
who wants to speak in opposition
I'll give you a second to locate
things and now.
Okay I'm not seeing any hands
raised to speak in opposition
okay if you would like to speak
in support please raise your
hand.
Okay.
Okay I'm seeing two hands at
this moment so we will go with
Kim Chavez Cook.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I'm apparently
very quick it clicking that hand
I keep going first I wanted to
thank the sponsor for bringing
this legislation and for being
willing to talk to me earlier
today as he mentioned in his
initial presentation I will
recap some of the points we
discussed just for the record so
I can make the rest of the
members aware that and you know
I agree the first first and
foremost all all pick up where
Representative Lane stopped
which is the limitation on that
only qualifying basically for
this defense if your abuser was
charged as well and so I I
definitely support the idea of
taking that language out of the
bill before
going forward the other aspect
that we talked about fairly
extensively was that different
sort of between the
version of this defense in house
bill fifty six and one sixty one
of the importance I think of
having something equivalent to
what is in house bill fifty six
that makes it possible for a
judge to dismiss the case before
trial but I also think that
there would be a way for
Representative lane and I to
talk about how to make sure both
of those options might make it
into the build so that that
backstop he described is there
if a judge were denied the
motion so that the you know the
the defendant would be able to
then make the argument as well
to the jury and put on
potentially different or or
stronger evidence at that point
that they were a victim with
that being said I think the the
bills this limitation to
government documentation is
another thing that I hope to
work with the sponsor on because
I think there's probably a non
governmental documentation that
people are and evidence that
people would want to be able to
put on to support that that
defense so with some of those
technicalities flags for the
committee's consideration I do I
am hopeful that Representative
the sponsor and I will be able
to work on some amendments that.
It would make this a a truly
useful defense for people who
are charged with crimes that are
committed because of their
victim status so I think the
sponsor I think the committee
and hopefully we will with this
into shape and and it can move
forward thank you so much.
Thank thank you Kaman I'm
thinking maybe you should try
out for jeopardy or something
with your trigger finger on the
button maybe maybe you're
gasping for a game show win or
something so Rikki Lee Chavez.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I do try to
alleviate some of the first
person speaking for Mr Chavez
Cook but I'm also really the
fortunate to play second fiddle
to a very eloquent speaker my
name is Rikki Lee Chavez again
for members of the committee on
behalf of the New Mexico will
defense lawyers association we
appreciate that Sanchez
willingness to work on some of
the language our members had
some similar concerns Mister
miss cook informed me that there
is an opportunity to work on
amendments and so we do
appreciate that and hope we can
all collaborate on criminal
justice policy moving forward
thank you.
Thank you very much so I will go
back to the committee
I'm just going to ask a question
so Representative Lane white and
I'm not a lawyer I did stay at a
Holiday Inn none of that so you
may have to really walk me
through this but why did you
decide to make it make it a
difference further down along
the road of prosecution where it
will add more trauma more.
Pain for lack of a better word
for people who are trafficked
what was your thinking in in
making it that they have to go
in front of a judge.
Thank you madam chair you know I
I and I will say that this is
part of the beauty of lawmaking
is is there a group of people
getting together and and trying
to work through these difficult
concepts and and going back and
forth I think it's an important
process and and gets to a more
refined product at the end of it
and so just frankly madam chair
I I just look at the existing
lawn thought why is there not an
affirmative answer this it seems
like there should be affirmed
offense to it and my mind is not
thank there should also be like
the language that's in that's in
your bill that there should
there should also be part of
prosecution period so I I just
saw a gap in the law and I
thought this is the way that we
can fill that gap in a way that
actually makes a difference in
someone's life but my my will
work thinking and in terms of of
of how you did madam chair so
yeah that's that's the short
answer thank Representative Lane
I can't take credit we're
working with the AG's office on
our so so I I as I said I do not
have that find the ten legal
mind give me give me medicine
not that not but
so I would I'm not sure what the
committee what is the pleasure
of the committee do we want.
Go I'm sorry who I did.
I think I think question
probably would be best I
personally I'm I'm I'm at a
point where I would offered do
passed motion and allow the the
interested parties to continue
to negotiate before it gets to
House Judiciary which is next
and I say that madam chair
because.
Language is been used in a few
of our last meetings you know do
we agree with the do we agree
with the intent and so let's let
them work on it between now and
the next committee and that
would be the purpose of my do
pass thank you.
So I think with that we will go
ahead with the with
member questions and I know that
Representative but events have
had her hand raised before so I
will go to her first if she did
have questions.
Madam chair I appreciate that my
hand was actually still up from
our last bill I I lowered the I
thank you okay okay for once I
was ahead of the game and it got
me in trouble.
I'm so and madam chair may I
just interject I'm sorry yes.
I I just want to put the
committee it at ease
regards what the committee does
today I do intend to strike on
page one subparagraph eight
everything after the word
committed it committed in line
twenty two
that like I said it just with
the weather my ten I don't want
to make it more restrictive are
narrowing for for human
trafficking victims and then to
the second public comment the
only reason why put
language in there about official
documentation I was trying to
think through like okay if if I
don't know the legal system how
do I prove that I was a victim
of human trafficking and and so
like if I could get a letter may
be from the law enforcement
agency that said Hey I I'm a
detective and I investigated
this and I can affirm that that
this person was a victim human
trafficking so I'm happy to work
on what what that means official
documentation or maybe some
other areas as well but again
the idea is to try to put some
more tools and in these first
peoples the trouble to not make
it overly restrictive thank you
madam chair thank you for that
explanation Representative
pedigree you have the floor and
then we have Representative
Romero for questions afterwards
did you have anything else
Representative pepper.
Thank you madam chair no
thank you okay okay so we'll go
to Representative Romero.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you representative welcome to
our committee
I did want to I I I just wanted
to recognize are you was the
testimony that you provided your
personal testimony just when I
did hear that the beginning I
just wanted to
recommend recognize that Madam
chair representative.
Madam chair
I I'm not sure I follow my
personal testimony.
Madam chair representative I
don't know if that was a
hypothetical or if that was so
three okay budget thank you
madam chair thank you pressure
more for for clarify no I I
would just putting for the
hypothetical thank you
appreciate the question thank
you madam chair thank you
Representative we do hear a lot
of very personal testimony just
wanted to recognize that as well
but I do appreciate the
hypothetical it is of a
harrowing tale a tale that you
do tell and I did want to
to recognize the that that that
said Madam chair representative
I I was wondering too because we
do refer to fifty six and a one
sixty one in the same context of
the sort of bigger picture of
what needs to what we want to
happen I absolutely support the
initiative of this bill Madam
chair representative I think
it's absolutely needed and then
that way that you have described
wanting to strike out that
language Madam chair
representative I wonder if we
could even do that at least now
and accept that friendly
amendment
Madam chair representative and
then I think with what we heard
from because that motions
already on the table and with
the commitment to make those
changes I think I would be okay
to to vote on it today with the
proactive sort of response that
we're hearing as well in support
of the bill
I'm just going through my notes
really quickly to make sure that
I don't have the questions
apologize apologies
I guess yes so on the question
madam chair representative on
the affirmative defense as far
as the assertion
Good why is this going to make
it more difficult as far as like
the process of
the assertion that's already
available for affirmative
defenses or is this like brand
new
law as far as what we have on
the books Madam chair
representative.
Thank you madam chair and vice
chair later more of this this
would
this part of fence would would
operate like many of our others
that that currently exist in
criminal law so like one that
we're all familiar with and in
fact Mr chair creek and I
discussed with was the self
defense for reductions that may
we hear started often or or
familiar with more commonly and
so the prosecution would put on
the evidence say you know that
they're dumb structure I'm sorry
the defendant struck the victim
in the face with with his fists
for example and then I can get
up and and insert as a self
defense to for affirmative
consent look actually the the
victim had a knife at the time
and and was willing that me and
so I struck the victim in the
face with my fists and that's
why I use the fourth but I did
and so you cannot find me guilty
as a matter of longer serving an
affirmative defense of self
defense so it would work similar
to that thank you madam chair
Madam chair representative so
that we don't have an
affirmative for defense for any
sort of human trafficking
violation at this time is that
what you're I just want to for
the confirm that thank you madam
chair representative.
Thank you madam chair and I gave
a a long winded Lauren lawyerly
response when the short answer
would suffice there there is
currently no part of the funds
available for for victims of
human trafficking thank you
madam chair.
Thank you madam chair
representative with that I'm
happy to second the motion that
Representative Pettigrew had on
the table and be willing to this
for pending the promise that we
do get this looked at and I hope
that you will work with uh
representative Thompson on
perhaps even combining a bill
that we all can vote on on the
floor thank you madam chair
representative.
Thank you Representative Romero
so we do have a motion on the
table
for a do passed from
Representative Pettigrew with
the second from Representative
Romero what with the stipulation
that there will be some some
improvements made to the bill
and that I as someone who's that
in front of Judiciary more times
than I care to and I have no
doubt if it's not right they
will they will let the sponsor
know that so I'm it is there any
opposition to a do pass motion
on house bill one sixty one.
Okay seeing that you happen to
pass thank you Representative
Lane.
Thank you madam chair I
appreciate the the vote of
confidence and I do also just
want to briefly say to the
committee if you haven't looked
at madam chairs HB two to three
take a look at that I think
that's and also important check
engine are lost so look forward
to seeing that rolled out thank
you.
Thank you thank you for being a
cheerleader.
So we will now go I see that
Representative Dixon is on I'm
not sure if Senator Kernan will
be joining her or
so we will go ahead with one to
one forty three
and representative Dick thank
you have anyone that you need to
be made at panelists.
Yes please madam chair Katie
Ford is on the attendee list and
she needs to be moved into the
panelists otherwise Mr Grayson
and ms McConnell are already on
the panelists last.
In you can start whenever you're
ready okay if you say if you if
you notice that any of your
experts are not on just just let
us know okay thank you madam
chair madam chair and members of
the committee I'm here this
afternoon to present house bill
one forty three also joining us
virtually are my co sponsors
Senator Leo Hermio Senator again
Kernan and senator Linda Lopez.
I'd like to begin by sharing
with you why this legislation is
important and then I will
introduce you to my expert
witnesses.
Article two section twenty four
Hey The New Mexico constitution
provides a victim shall have the
following rights as provided by
law.
The right to be treated with
fairness and respect for the
victims dignity and privacy
throughout the criminal justice
process.
And simultaneously the sixth
amendment of the US constitution
guarantees the accused the right
to confront and cross examine
witnesses.
And so our role here in the
legislature is to ensure that
both the rights of the victims
and the rights of the accused
are protected.
Our criminal justice system has
an obligation to provide to the
truth while limiting the trauma
imposed on victims particularly
our child victims.
Unfortunately we're here today
because New Mexico is not
meeting its obligation to
victims.
As things stand now victims of
violent crime suffer not only
the trauma of the event itself
but they are often subjected to
re traumatize ation by being
forced to recount their
experiences multiple times even
before setting foot in a court
room.
Such re traumatize ation can
cause significant psychological
harm to victims especially
children that not only
interferes with their ability to
fully participate in the
criminal justice system but
he'll.
We have decades of research that
have shown that that reach
monetization can also increase
anxiety depression and
post traumatic stress disorder
long after the case concludes.
Furthermore the effects of
trauma on victims have economic
consequences for our state
because re traumatize ation can
interfere with the victims
ability to continue education
and hold employment.
The state has a compelling
interest in protecting the
health privacy and dignity of
victims through the criminal
justice process and especially
for children.
House bill one forty three
limits and mitigate re
traumatize ation of victims of
crime by providing more rigorous
guidelines for pre trial
interviews and age appropriate
trial testimony and it develops
a framework to provide complete
truthful and accurate
information while also balancing
the due process rights of
criminal defendants.
If we do not act more victims of
crime will suffer additional
trauma some will choose to forgo
criminal justice proceedings and
the cost to our society will
continue to grow.
So at this time I would like to
introduce my three experts with
expert witnesses who will then
each make remarks first will be
shin I am McConnell should I and
was fifteen years old at the
time of her assault after going
through several intimidating and
debilitating pre trial
interviews she's ready to speak
out to support this bill to
reduce the trauma that the
criminal justice system imposes
on victims second will be
Kristina Ford the CEO at all
face children advocacy center in
Albuquerque Christina is also
speaking today on behalf of the
New Mexico children's alliance a
statewide coalition of eleven
children's advocacy centers and
the third expert will be James
Grayson James is an expert in
constitutional law and criminal
procedure and has both trial and
appellate experience James is
the legal expert for house bill
one forty three thank you.
Whichever ordered Mrs want to go
in is fine mission I McConnell
please.
Sorry excuse me hello madam
chair steams members of the
committee many mission I'm
gonna.
And I do apologize I might need
to hire a moment.
Just take your time take a deep
breath we just are there the
model what this committee is
being gentle on ourselves and be
gentle on others so we will we
will be patient with you so take
the time you need thank you.
Due to my pre trial interviews
in the trauma they have caused I
wanted to write down my thoughts
uh size emotionally prepared to
speak today and I hope that's
okay
Part of me is proud to be here
speaking about this bill and
another part of me is extremely
nervous.
I'm not.
I'm has a ten because I use
because I'm used to being
belittled humiliated and
ridiculed throughout this entire
process I know that this is not
the intention for today but it
is something that I've grown
accustomed to since the
beginning of this process I knew
going to this would be difficult
but I never thought it would
tear me down the way it has.
My first pre trial interview I
walked in nervous but ready by
the time I walked out I was
ready to give up and quit I
never wanted to go through that
humiliation again.
Not only was I alone in a room
with multiple defense attorneys
in their co counsels but I was
also being ripped apart by them
as well.
I thought I was there to answer
their questions about the
incident but instead they
basically are asking for three
to four hours one attorney was
constantly calling me a liar in
using their and using air quotes
every time I spoke another
attorney was chuckling well
another person was putting me
down.
It was awful and I wish I.
I wish I could have at least
have my mom there even just
older and.
I left that day sad humiliated
and just felt broken I told
myself not to go.
I told myself not to go back
that it wasn't worth my time or
self esteem being torn down I
would rather have dropped the
case then be put through that
every time the defense attorney
felt they were missing
information.
After some time I picked myself
up once again and said I wanted
to finish this hoping it be
better even after that I had
three more pre trial interviews
to go through.
When the day came from my next
interview I will go up that
morning and the heavy defensive
mode it affected my whole day
before and after the interview.
It puts you in this mood that
I've learned how to pull myself
out of not just reliving the
incident but also be leaving the
hardship of going to this
process.
But there are still times that I
want to quit like today for
example the rest of the motions
that I woke up with knowing that
I'm going to speak about this
with people who might not
understand the reality.
Of the entire process or instant
instant itself.
Maybe you all are fortunate
enough to never have been in my
shoes are have had a loved one
in my situation and hopefully
you never are everyone thinks
that this only happens in movies
or in the news to people they
don't know but unfortunately
this is a very real.
This is very real and can happen
to anyone at any time said I
just urge you to please think of
yourselves your loved ones and
any other innocent person when
you vote on this.
Thank you should I ask you did
you did very well and
Thank thank you for your bravery
for for doing it I I think at
with me at your age
I would have been so together so
thank you you did great we will
go to the to the next witness.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Kristen four I am the CEO of
all states judges and children's
advocacy center in Albuquerque
New Mexico.
And of the agency is a member of
the New Mexico children's
alliance a group of eleven child
advocacy centers across the
state so we conduct forensic
interviews for for children and
young clients and like the
lection I we just heard from and
I want to thank her for stepping
forward because it takes such
greatness to to to speak about
this experience we can drive
about seventeen hundred
interviews like hers at a year
and a across the state the
eleven advocacy test centers
conduct about forty five hundred
interviews a year where we
record children's disclosure in
a professional setting now this
bill is here to address and at
the problems in the system which
as that Representative Dixon
already outlined include at
attentional.
We did revert to musician of
children by asking them to do
more in purchased and retired
trial interviews we know from
our perspective not just because
we are running interviews but
also because we are taking care
of many of these children after
the after the fact after the
crime happened to them after the
schools what happened to them
what it means to have this kind
of exposure in the criminal
justice system what it means to
their healing about it needs to
be sent back on this path toward
healing if they are not just
able to focus on their on their
behavior health and mental
health needs what are exposed
justice and I are described to
us so we are I'm here at as a
representative of all face and
also I'm here as a
representative of the New Mexico
children's alliance in support
of this bill and I would
encourage you to really consider
looking at what happens if we
don't changed law thank you so
much.
Thank you Christine.
Mr grace and I think you are
next.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
Afternoon.
My name is James Grayson
interview district attorney of
Bernalillo county I've been an
attorney in a public service
public servant for close to
twenty five years now.
Most of my career was spent in
appeals and I worked on a number
of appeals concerning the
confrontation clause in the New
Mexico appellate courts and also
written a brief and to search
for our officials filed in the
United States Supreme Court.
For the last six years the trial
prosecutor and I've also been a
member of the rules of criminal
procedure Committee.
One of the goals of the victims
of crime act as stated in
section thirty one dash twenty
six there's two.
Is to protect the rights of
victims to the same extent as
the right of rights of
defendants.
And this is important because
the goal is not to take away
rights of the defendant the
right of the goal is only to
balance the two.
In the trauma experienced by
victims in New Mexico as well as
the laws in other jurisdictions
show that we're not meeting that
goal.
This bill would protect victims
while also protecting the rights
of defendants.
I'd like to talk about the three
major components in the bill.
Summarize those but mainly focus
on the constitutionality of the
bill.
Those three components are
protecting victim identifying
information.
Protecting victims from compel
pre trial interviews and
allowing the admission of child
victims statements.
The first amendment my opinion
easiest issue is with protecting
victim identifying information.
This is something that is done
across the country everyone
knows the social security
numbers and dates of birth when
the full numbers are disclosed
can result in identity theft in
the criminal process it can also
result in other are.
That kind of information is
protected by the legislature and
the the inspection of public
records act it's also protected
in court documents by court.
But it's not protected in
discovery.
The reason this is a problem is
that police reports typically
have witnesses social security
numbers and dates of birth.
So even though there's not a
rule of criminal procedure that
requires the prosecution to
provide the defense with social
security number or date of
birth.
We are required to disclose
police reports to the defense
and so by virtue of that
disclosure that information goes
to the defendant not only goes
to the defense attorney but to
the defendant personally
sometimes that's when the
defendant is in jail and that
information is disseminated in
the jails so there's a very real
threat to victims from for
identity theft and for other
arm.
As I mentioned there's not a
constitutional right or rule or
statute that requires the
disclosure of this information.
And
the problem though is that
without authorization by law by
the legislature judges have an
issue with prosecutors redacting
that information from police
reports and we've had judges
sanction our office we're trying
to do so in trying to protect
victims information our argument
has been that that information
is protected as part of the
protection of privacy in the
victims of crime act but judges
don't see it the same way and so
part of this bill the importance
of this bill is articulating
that by statute.
One other aspect of this I want
to talk about in terms of
identifying information is there
but also protect addresses.
It's important to note that the
defense and the defense the
defendant and the defense
attorney have a right of access
to witnesses in general.
That's something the prosecution
can interfere with that some in
the courts and the legislature
can interfere with that's part
of their due process rights.
But at the same time the courts
and
Consistent with the constitution
have an active rules to protect
vulnerable victims so for
example I'd like to point out
rule seven dash five oh four
which is a rule of the
metropolitan court.
That rule sets out what the
state must provide into
discovery but it says in cases
involving charges of domestic
violence the prosecution may use
the district attorney's office
as the address for the alleged
victim.
That recognizes the danger that
victims are put in when their
addresses disclose to the Senate
and is that the legislature
recognized the exact same thing
two years ago and acting the
intimate partner violence
survivors suffrage Act in the
lecture.
So this bill would apply that
same rationale to victims of
violent crime and the victims of
crime victims of crime act
applies principally to violent
crime so what we're talking
about is victims of violent
crime.
Other states have taken steps to
protect somewhere identifying
information and I'd like to
point out at least one provision
here is Arizona statute which is
section thirteen dash forty four
thirty four and has almost order
or it has very similar language
to what's in the bill.
So this is not breaking new
ground this is something
breaking bringing New Mexico in
line with the protection of
identifying information across
the country.
There's been a concern from the
public defender department about
having that this information to
run background in conflict
checks.
I run background checks on
witnesses and other people based
on data excuse me your first and
has.
Almost uniform success in doing
so.
Ninety nine percent of the time
those conflict in background
checks can be performed with the
last four digits of social
security number or would be your
first which is the information
that would be provided to the
defense.
In that one percent of time that
that information which would not
be sufficient for the defense to
do their job.
this bill includes a provision
in this amendment section to
see.
It provides for the defense to
petition the court and show a
compelling need for the
information and so they can show
the court they tried to warn the
background check conflict
checked with the information
they had and it's resulted in
for example to individuals that
have come up and they can't
distinguish between the two so
now they need to month of
bursting addition to figure I
would be very simple but at the
same time it would be very
meaningful for victims to have
their information protected.
I want to move on to the second
major part of this bill which is
allowing the admission of child
victim prior statements.
This is in section three of the
bill.
And.
I apologize
So this part of the bill what
this part of the bill does is
it allows safehouse interviews
you just heard testimony about
safe house interviews it would
allow state hasn't used to come
into court when the trial
testifies and is subject to
cross examination.
It would also allow statements
to for example parents were
teachers in subsection B. when
the court finds that there are
circumstantial guarantees of
trustworthiness and the
statement as non testimonial.
Now that's important because
it's consistent with the United
States Supreme Court opinion
Crawford versus Washington which
establishes a confrontation
clause right only for
testimonial statements so
subsection a requires the trial
to testify because that's what's
required by the constitution
costs subsection B. would allow
judges to admit this information
if it's trustworthy even if the
child doesn't testify because
it's considered to be non
testimony.
So there is what's important
here is that this is effectively
a hearsay exception section
three is effectively assures
exception and hearsay rules
provide that your stay is not
admissible except as provided by
rule or by statute so here's the
rural sites self allows the
legislature to create your six
options.
and also want to mention that
thirty one other states have
provisions that allow for
Children statements to come in
so New Mexico is in the minority
and not allowances statements to
be admitted.
And I'd like to present an
example of how that we come in
and that's in the United States
Supreme Court opinion in Ohio
first Clark in that case of
three yearolds.
Was it at the preschool and the
teacher noticed red marks on the
child's face in the future ask
the child about how those to
help he got those remarks.
and he said that I should do the
person that was taking care of
them inflicted those marks on
her.
United States Supreme Court that
was admitted in Ohio under
similar provision to what's in
section three of this bill and
United States Supreme Court so
that was permissible under the
constitution calls.
I'd like to move on to the third
part of this bill which is pre
trial interviews.
It's important to note that
what's what's discussed in
section two.
Is compelled statements.
Forty two states and the federal
government do not compel
witnesses to give statements to
the defense.
New Mexico is in a very small
group of states that compels
witnesses to give statements and
also does not offer protection
for children or for children or
for victims.
Arizona for example.
Is one of those forty two states
and based Pacific we have a
provision.
That provides the right to use
in your.
And so what this bill would do
is give witnesses the right to
refuse an interview it doesn't
prevent all interviews it
doesn't say that defense counsel
can't contact the victim
impacted to the bills requires
the prosecution to pass along
any attempt to contact by the
defense attorney and so it's
still allows the defense
attorney to have access to the
victim but with the buffer of
going through the prosecutor and
placing an affirmative duty on
the prosecutor the cost along
any contact from the defense
straight to the victim the
victim can choose to give an
interview.
but the victim doesn't have to
and that's what we're talking
about here is being compelled to
do so and again forty two states
and the federal government don't
compel victims to provide an
interview to the defense.
The important part here is that
this doesn't interfere with the
defense's ability to prepare for
trial because this section
requires that there are ready be
a state.
And so this statement could be
for example preliminary hearing
testimony the statement could be
a safe house in review but that
allows the defense attorney to
know what the child's
allegations are and to be able
to prepare for trial.
You've heard testimony that
there can be a number of
different pre trial interviews
beyond that.
Victims are traumatized by just
the number issue number of times
to have to repeat their story
they might tell a teacher think
about a five year old child who
sexually abused my tele teacher
what happened then why told
police officer what happened
with the re examined by a nurse.
Senator be.
Go to our preliminary
examination where they're
examined by the to the
prosecutor and the cross
examined by the defense attorney
now they have to go to a pre
trial interview even though
they've already given all the
testimony as preliminary
examination and finally try
again examination and cross
examination so it's over and
over and over and over and every
time re traumatize the victim.
So the question for this bill.
is not a constitutional because
every provision in this bill.
Satisfies the constitutional
requirements for protecting the
rights of criminal defendants.
Sessions one of policy.
And as a matter of policy in the
victims of crimes crime act it's
important for victims in New
Mexico to have the same
protection as victims in other
states.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
Thank you all Representative
Dixon did you have anything else
are you ready for us to go to
public.
Believe that we're ready to go
to the public thank you madam
chair okay thank you so I do see
that Allison is back Allison can
we are can we get the whole lot
and our audience hold on to
raising your hands because that
we're going to do it
against and forced out so don't
raise your hand yet so when the
ball comes up you'll have a
chance to what to weigh in that
way.
So it looks like.
As soon as I start talking the
numbers change I'm so we have
nineteen and support and I in
opposition okay so the poll was
closed so we will first go to
opposition so if you want to
speak in opposition to this bill
please raise your hands.
It's under participants if you
click on that it should pop up
and give you an opportunity to
raise your hand.
Okay so I have Kim Chavez Cook.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Kim Chavez Cook
with the law offices of the
public defender
so I'm.
Well if I if it's helpful I will
be sending to the committee
after this and I'm sorry I
didn't get it to you in advance
an op ed that that addresses a
lot of these issues that was
submitted to the journal
previously but for today I want
to.
First you know express my
sincere sympathies for that
difficulties that
that victims who need to testify
go through miss McConnell story
was of course very moving to me
as well I am quite shocked to
hear that she was sent to a pre
trial interview alone in a room
full of attorneys for the
opposing counsel I. E. have
never heard of a case for that
happened frankly she should have
been entitled to have both a
prosecutor and a victims
advocate present for that
interview and I have no idea why
that did not happen for her and
I'm sorry for her.
I have no real disagreement with
the concept of this bill I think
that we should all be trying to
protect victims from undue
trauma but I also have to make
this committee
make clear to this committee
that some traumatizing
experience is unfortunately I
part of the adversarial process
that is our criminal justice
system we do require witnesses
to tell their story and we have
to allow for due process to to
happen which is what our system
has decided is the way to get to
the truth of things we have to
allow for the defense to test
the accuracy of the various
parts of witnesses testimony and
the process we have is to it is
designed to accomplish that.
My primary legal concern with
this bill is that most of these
matters are matters of procedure
that are usually left to the
point I think there's an actual
separation of powers problem
with legislating what is very
classically matters for
procedural court rule and so
that you know what flag after
the committee and that might be
more of a house Judiciary issue
but it is definitely sort of an
underlying theme for me in
looking at this legislation
and I understand some of the the
points that Mr Grayson has made
in terms of what is currently in
the the rules but I think adding
some of these provisions to the
rules the court rules instead of
statute is actually the more
appropriate way to go I will say
we have I'm think a couple other
commenters who will get into
some of the.
access to identifying
information details but I will
say I know that we already see
as common practice DA's offices
blacking out you know private
information like social security
numbers on police reports before
disclosing them and that's never
really been an issue and that we
already see district attorneys
to say declined to give contact
information and say you can only
contact this person through our
office and that already is
common practice so I'm not
really sure I see the need for
some of the provisions in this
bill and that brings me to that
to section three of the bill
which relates to using pre trial
statements that have already
been given and again I don't
think we need to legislate this
that's already possible under
the rules of evidence that's
already something that's done
frankly in cases all the time I
have cases on my own docket in
which a state house interview
was admitted at trial and
alongside the testimony of the
of the alleged victim so I just
don't know that these things are
already available
and I will all lastly flag you
you know Mr Grayson says with
such confidence that this bill
is absolutely constitutional but
Pennsylvania has already found a
similar the limitation on access
to pre trial interviews to be
unconstitutional so I have to
disagree with that that and I'm
going to end on this point
because limiting a pre trial
interviews is the most
concerning part of this bill
I have almost never seen repeat
interviews of a vulnerable
victim by defense counsel they
do one interview typically and
that repeat interview trauma is
not usually the result of a
defense interview and it is so
crucial to provide effective
assistance of counsel and due
process to be able to actually
interview a witness not just
rely on their statements given
to law enforcement already so I
do think that that is actually.
Due process violation to to give
the the victim the right to
decline that so I understand
it's a difficult topic and the
difficult issue but we really do
ask this committee to oppose
this bill as it's written thank
you so much for your time.
Okay thank you we have Rikki Lee
Chavez.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee reviewed the
Chavez again on behalf of the
New Mexico from all defense
lawyers associate and.
I'm I think do you want to.
Recognize the sponsor the
sponsor stirs excuse me and on
their work we appreciate our
legislative body and the work
that they do to to affect our
policy and and and criminal
justice reform in our system
however we do respect we stand
in opposition I would also note
for the committee that are
comments with regard to
opposition of the legislation
are not meant to becomes
experiences that they have to
carry with them we are
sympathetic to the fact that
there there are victims of crime
unfortunately with the
legislation at it as it is
written I will focus my comments
on the due process concerns our
constitution does four all of it
all of the citizens of our state
to to Sir and all rights and to
certain protections and that the
system should not be I'm done
with regard to what is you know
presented in this bill
our adversarial system does have
a search for truth component
that is at its core and that
search only really works when
both sides have an opportunity
to speak to witnesses even in a
very difficult settings and
about very difficult topics so I
would also encourages Committee
to oppose this legislation as
work in thank you.
Thank you and we have a chance
than you thought and I'm going
to ask if people can keep that a
little bit break for I know this
is a complicated issue but.
Thank you.
Thank you chair and members of
the committee again my name's
Jonathan about I'm a public
defender and trial attorney here
but I was also a prosecutor for
longer than I've been a public
defender and I was a District
Court judge
I'm very sorry about what
happened with miss McConnell and
I can't imagine something like
that ever having happened when I
was a prosecutor I would never
ever have left the alleged
victim alone with attorneys that
I didn't implicitly trust and
frankly probably not even that
this that doing multiple
interviews I and twenty years of
practice on all three sides of
this I've never seen multiple
interviews with the same alleged
victim on a case it just doesn't
it almost never happens and I'm
not saying it didn't happen and
in that case because obviously
it did but it's such an unusual
circumstance like I don't think
we should be.
Acting legislation to deal with
a particular issue like that a
particular one instance of
something like that happening I
think it's relevant to note
things like on the identifiers
the way the bill is written it
doesn't say that the defense
will get the last for the year
of birth or the last for the
social security number it says
no identifying information
personal identifying information
so that means we get needs that
that's it according to the way
the statute is written and
that's not sufficient to do our
ethical duty to conflict check
cases it's very important for us
to be able to do we have to do
and there's a reason why
essentially every time the DA's
offices try to do this they've
been shut down on the bench that
down by District Court judges
they've been shut down by the
Supreme Court when they appeal
to the Supreme Court on this
issue because they're wrong we
we have to have the information
I agree with Mr chairman that
there separation of.
Powers issues I think this is a
a Supreme Court issue not a
legislative issue
And we are talking about
exceptions to hearsay and things
that's classically a judicial
issue not a legislative issue
the you know the I understand
that there is an argument that
we still might be able to get
pre trial interviews but it says
we can't contact alleged victims
except to that.
Through the district attorney's
office and the DA's office has
to tell the alleged victims that
they have a right to say no I
just think that everything about
this bill is problematic I
understand the reason why they
want to do it and I I would
never want to be abusive and a
pre trial interview or see that
I've shut that down when I was a
a district attorney and and it
shut down properly you know you
can go to a judge to get it shut
down if you have to and I've
done that as an attorney on both
sides and so this this bill is
problematic in essentially every
single way pre trial interviews
are a very important part of the
system it helps both sides know
the strengths and weaknesses of
the case to determine whether or
not he should plead or go to
trial and we want that to happen
we need that to happen where the
system is going to break down
thank you very much.
Thank you and I have yok Olu Mr
I have no idea I got anywhere
near that but job.
Thank you madam chair you got it
perfectly right thank you
I just wanna give a quick I'm a
third year law student at UNM
and I participated in the come
along practice course last
semester I and.
Very little substantive to add
to what mystery about a and the
other speakers about it I just
wanna give a quick anecdote that
illustrates one holes in this
bill which is that it only
applies to contact initiated by
the defendants and.
One of the cases I took part in
without giving away too much
information.
The prosecution and prosecution
was actually able to compel pre
trial interviews up to the point
of having bench warrants issued
for witnesses and victims they
wish to testify those victims
would not have been protected
under this bill those victims
would only have been protected
if the defendants in those cases
had attempted to conduct pre
trial interviews with those kids
with those particular witnesses
so I think it just illustrates
how this bill raises pre series
equal protection and due process
concerns and kind of lends
credence to the idea that it
treats defendants on equally and
gives the prosecution advantage
that it otherwise wouldn't have
thank you I urge the committee
to vote and opposition of this
bill.
Sorry.
Too many clicks I'm we will go
to people who are in support of
this bill so if you are in
support please raise your hand.
Okay we will start with Barbara
Barbara role model.
Thank you madam chair committee
members again I am the district
attorney for the thirteenth
judicial district I'm also
career prosecutor and I
specialize in my career of doing
these very difficult cases and
while I appreciate Mr ipada and
I can say that the majority of
defense attorneys do not
mistreat victims I can tell you
many score stories with that
it's happened and I I would say
to miss McConnell that the
prosecutor should have protected
you and I'm really sorry that
that didn't happen but you know
when I stepped in like Jonathan
like mystery but I said I I knew
I had a sympathetic judge to go
to that's not always the case
that's not always the case and
unfortunately judges like a lot
of laypeople.
Judges are lay people but judges
in addition to lay people they
share some of the same
misconceptions which is that.
You know that that the victims
always have to be able to to to
speak their mind and it's going
to it's gonna in it's going to
improve the process I just want
to say one more thing and kind
of so I am tired today but you
know everybody's talking about
the search for truth well guess
what I can promise you.
I'm doing this for twenty five
years kids do not want to talk
about this period and they sure
won't talk about it to strangers
and so if you're talking about a
search for truth you're not
going to get that the pre trial
interview with the defense
attorney they're still a
stranger successful prosecutors
in this field spend multiple
hours just getting to know the
victim so they feel comfortable
with them and that's why
forensic interviewers are so
important because they take the
time to build the report there's
no billing of reporting pre
trial interviews.
And you know as far as the due
process in confrontation clause
I think it's you know I I I have
to agree with Mr Grayson you
know the cross examination is
the crucible and that's been I
think I'm quoting several U. S.
Supreme Court justices cross
examination is the crucible of
finding the truth for the
defense.
And you know if we want to
provide if we want to find out
the truth.
Making victims go through these
pre trial interviews is is not
the way to do that so I urge the
committee to pass to to to go to
pass this bill thank you for
your time.
We have Tiffany corn.
Yes are you able to see we will
not will not work.
But we can hear you okay thank
you madam chairman honorable
members of the committee before
I begin I would like to make it
clear to every person that is
present
from my personal experience and
knowledge miss McConnell was not
left alone without a prosecutor
and happy can't believe she
meant by being alone that she
had nobody from our family or
personal support there for her
and I also disagree that.
Child victims are minor victims
only partake in one pre trial
interview
and this is why.
But my name is Tiffany corn and
I'm currently the senior victim
witness specialist within the
office of the district attorney
second judicial district here in
Albuquerque New Mexico.
I have worked within the
district attorney's office for
ten years and I'm the twenty
nineteen recipient of the State
Farm New Mexico's Distinguished
Service Award for my work excuse
me in over six thousand five
hundred cases more than five
hundred of those cases having
been to trial by jury.
I worked every type of victim of
crime you can imagine but by far
my preference and expertise as
crimes against children for
children are always our troops
victims.
My job is very hard on the soul
and I carry every single faced a
motion family member and chair
of the survivors I have worked
with.
The crime scene photos forensic
interviews terrors and their
memories hot my heart and soul
and their abuses and never
leave.
In the words I use or how
explicitly you're eloquently and
we speak I could never
communicate to you the
degradation humility the horror
and the suffering a child
experiences during the criminal
justice process specifically pre
trial interviews and testifying
in trial.
I do not want to participate any
of you my purpose here however
because this is about me I would
like actually to ask you a
personal question when I would
like to know about the most
gratifying sexual experience all
of you have ever had.
Just kidding if you felt that
question was inappropriate or
asked that you made you feel a
bit violated I would like you to
imagine that your child being
asked to describe to me probably
the worst experience of your
life and the feelings of shame
and embarrassment fear you may
have felt just now in describing
the positive personal experience
to me a complete stranger.
Asked to recount those details
over and over and over again.
As we all know home is the
number one Gately drug linked to
further reductions in ongoing at
first used in all.
But also has we know how a
child's healing and their
recovery after incidents of
abuse neglect exploitation is a
vastly facilitated by the
responses and actions of the
adults around them there after.
I am an enormous support of this
bill and ask your favorite
because as adults we think the
common mistake in children as
they are just little adults
quote unquote in which they are
not by any means physically
cognitively emotionally
biologically they're not to be
compared or treat it as such
they're innocent they are
blameless and their precious it
is our duty and our
responsibility to protect them
especially after we were not
able to protect them from their
abusers thank you.
Thank you.
Just a reminder and I know that
these are these are really
emotional but if we can keep
trying keep it a little bit
briefer will go to the circus.
Hello Representative hello term
can you hear me we can hear you
we think things.
Hi everyone my name is Lisa
Curtis I'm an attorney but I
don't work I don't work in the
criminal world I'm child
advocate and and I represent
children who are harmed by
others might the entry into the
criminal realm is that when a
child has been harmed and
there's a criminal case
that and I have a civil matter I
it sometimes are I'm in these
interviews of with the child and
I can tell you I cannot protect
them.
All right the the reality of the
way that this is conducted I'm
is so violative of a child's
anything that we would think it
was protection for children in
the state you know we're trying
really hard and I think it the
legislature's doing an amazing
job of the last several years
changing laws that have been on
the books and in enforcing in
putting laws in place that now
protect our children I'm we are
this law is a law that protects
children and and for this
reason.
it's very important that it
passed this law is not
unconstitutional we have a we
have a case directly on point in
our state Transylvania is
another state we have a
something in our state regarding
the constitutionality of this of
this concept of confrontation
these children's cases don't
start until they've had things
like safe house interviews where
people who are trained to talk
to them who are neutral
find their statements find the
truth and in these children go
through a process so that they
will not be traumatized the
regional process
is the exact opposite of that
Is advocate that in fact
unfortunately already fail to
protect once so let's not bill
to protect them again I hope you
pass this bill thank you very
much for your time.
Thank you Lisa now we have been
thank galbi jadi.
Thank you madam chair can you
hear me yes we can hear you.
Thank you for the opportunity
members of the of the committee
my name is Vincent Gallo B. R.
E. I am the executive director
for the domestic violence
resource center in Albuquerque
and we rise and support of the
bill
I cannot provide a legal
argument for the support of this
but I can provide a very human
argument for this is that
anything that we can do to
provide less intimidation for
anybody that's providing
testimony is a step in the right
direction for the sake of the
victims and for the sake of the
state thank you very much.
Thank you I'm Mary Ellen merry
Ellen Garcia.
Thank you madam chair and
members.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee and also like to
thank the sponsors of this bill
I'm gonna take a brief moment to
acknowledge Mr Connell and I
stand in awe of her courage
today and I'm standing witness
to fierce leader in our movement
of advocacy my name is Mary
Ellen Garcia I am the grants
bureau chief of The New Mexico
twelve separation Commission
I've also been a victim advocate
in the state of New Mexico
working the survivors of crime
for over twenty years I just a
brief I had talking what
predictive generation it
commission is we are the victim
compensation division for the
state of New Mexico so if you're
a victim of a violent crime we
reimburse you for expenses
related to that victimization in
addition to being the largest
funder the state of New Mexico
for victims service providers
both governmental and non
governmental service providers
the New Mexico Canada generation
commission stands in full
support of this legislation as
Mr recent outlined there several
key components in this bill that
addressed it comes in survivors
writes and you've heard from
many experts regarding the needs
of these measures and it's
unfortunate being the largest
funder in the state of New
Mexico and providing services to
victims compensation survivors
that Mr McConnell's experience.
is what we hear in the advocacy
community as the normal that is
what our survivors are
experiencing and I want to pause
for just a moment to say that
even if it is not the normal one
survivor is one too many but I
do want to take a brief moment
to address one component of the
of this very important
legislation the right for a
survivors personally identifying
information to be protected our
criminal justice system month
fiercely protect the right of
survivors with the same ferocity
that we protect the rights of
the accused our current
practices are feeling survivors
and protecting the rights to
privacy and safety and this
legislation works to begin to
right those wrongs current
practice in the criminal justice
system to release personal
identifying information to
offenders I'm working with
numerous victim service agencies
and directly with survivors of
crime we know that offenders are
using personally identifying
information to access banking
financial records to further arm
their server farms survivors and
is also creating an economic
instability for survivors in
addition to offenders using that
information to prevent them from
participating in the criminal
justice system for fear of
retaliation as the violence
against women act administrative
work for the state of New Mexico
in addition to the victims of
crime act administrative we must
fiercely protect the rights of
personally identifying
information to ensure safety and
privacy and it's imperative that
our criminal justice system
after the media C. to ensure
that personally identifying
information cannot be shared and
used by offenders and then it's
imperative that we act on to
support victims rights and act
with conviction so again we
stand in support of this
legislation thank you madam
chair and members of the
committee.
Thank you Mary Ellen we have
when Hey this.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee our
going in Kate is director of
policy for the New Mexico
coalition against domestic
violence organization that
represents the thirty domestic
violence agencies operate
throughout the state of New
Mexico we are here today in
support of house bill one forty
three and I just want to start
recognizing should I as bravery
many people wonder why victims
do not participate in the
prosecution of their accuser
Gen I is brave testimony really
answers that question.
So.
Facing the perpetrator in court
recalling horrifying and
personal details of the crime
forces child an adult victims to
relive one of the most traumatic
events in their lives in a room
full of strangers additionally
there is fear victims have of
having the credibility memory
and choices leading up to the
crime attacked I am an attorney
those fears have a really
chilling the fact and criminal
prosecutions of domestic
violence victims victims often
fear the criminal justice system
so much that often they do not
pursue justice in their cases I
want to drop charges or declined
to participate in the
prosecution of the offender out
of fear of what what will
happen.
Allowing material from previous
interviews to be submitted in
place of in person testimony in
pre trial can reduce at least
some of the secondary trauma and
retirement cessation of victims
of violent crime they will have
to testify numerous times this
will at least reduce some of
that chairman cessation access
to just tested should not
require any victims to suffer
needless additional trauma the
coalition against domestic
violence encourages your do you
pass vote on this bill thank you
very much.
Okay thank you that we have for
us I'm sorry was that there are.
There is no.
Okay okay I'm sorry I got the
one above didn't go away and I
couldn't my short term memory is
failing me some therapists
thank you madam chair members of
the committee thank you for the
opportunity to speak today my
name is Sarah fitzgerald I'm
senior vice president of the
greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce in the chamber strongly
supports this bill first of all
we see this as a public safety
measure it is no secret that
crime is a problem for our state
and when witnesses might be
uncooperative because they've
been re traumatized by the
system that's supposed to give
them justice it just leads to
more unprosecuted crime which of
course only emboldens the
criminal element in New Mexico.
No opponents of this legislation
might have you believe that
defendants will get a fair shake
unless defense attorneys get a
chance to aggressively
interrogate children and
developmentally disabled victims
prior to trial that's just not
true victims of certain violent
crimes child Adams
developmentally disabled in
short our most vulnerable
victims should be protected and
supported during the criminal
justice process.
They should be further
victimized by unnecessary and
frankly traumatic a pre trial
interviews it's worth pointing
out to these victims aren't
subjected to pre trial
interviews and most other states
it makes no sense that we do it
in New Mexico.
So we urge you to support
victims allow state house
interviews to be admissible stop
pre trial interviews of
honorable witnesses and protect
witness information from release
we are the committee to move
this bill forward thank you.
And finally we have Stephanie
Villalobos.
Madam chair members of the
committee I am here my name is
Stephanie Villalobos I am the
executive director of the last
stations or services as well as
a trainer for interviewer for
child abuse crimes.
I'm here to talk in support of
this bill I am here to talk
about this forensic interview
process.
Our friends are gay process is
highly accredited and is one
that we follow to the letter we
come to it as neutral
individuals and ask questions of
kiddos that is in trauma
informed and is age appropriate
or for each child.
The interview process something
that we take very seriously as
we are seeking the truth.
My fear is a forensic
interviewer that mall old.
Pre trial interviews.
Of the truce what the child is
really speaking to tell us.
I'm here to say that I am in
support of this bill I'm in the
support of all victims who come
forced to talk tell their story
and I urge the committee to
answer their calls and I think
Mr Connell for being so brave
today and I pray that we are
able to pass this bill thank you
so much.
Thank you very much so I'm just
gonna do are.
Commercial I guess that
Representative Rehm has stated
that he's going to need to do
some amendments for house bill
one eighty seven so that is
going to be rolled so if you
were waiting to hear back
they'll you you can come back on
Tuesday.
I'm sorry about that but that's
kind of the way things still
here so what that public service
announcement are there questions
from the committee.
Okay Representative Romero.
Thank you madam chair and and
thank you to miss McConnell that
You know we hear again just such
horrible stories and I'm so
sorry for what you experienced
in our in the system of things
and I think that's where this is
a real challenge for us is a
legislature and a legislative
body
with I think somebody said in
testimony that there's no really
good legal answers but there's
really good people answers and I
think that's what where we have
where the real crux of the
problem is that why and how we
craft the law and and these
these different rules and and
even norms and and how we
process these challenges Madam
chair representative I think
when we're talking about due
process and will believe me
I'm still learning so much about
of our constitutional rights and
it steers say parameters and how
that all plays out but I think
the technical challenges that
you're faced with our
significant from a legal
perspective and for us to make
these pause and to see them play
out you know among the the
courts you know Madam chair
representative I'm super super
sympathetic and empathetic to
the folks who have to
go through that process and a
hundred percent we should have
prevented any sort of situation
from happening all but there are
just so many technical
challenges with this bill from
those legal perspectives that I
you know have to unfortunately
not support because of the
inability to
To be able to to look at those
due process rights all the way
through what we've seen through
the Supreme Court and to I think
one of the big things that we've
seen in some of the analysis and
some of the things that do exist
are the protections that aren't
being followed properly the ways
in which we can strengthen the
rules to ensure that there are
victims protections for me and
what we've heard both through
testimony and for the folks that
have spoken up it seems that
there's a huge break down and
and what the availability is for
the tools to protect those folks
in the process so madam chair
representative and and the folks
that are that are there for
expertise our next response
do we know how essentially in
the data from we heard that we
heard the testimonies today
you know we're the breakdowns
are in that process in
particular from following the
rules and being able to in state
you know some of the victims
protections as far as the
protective order dissemination
of of information which is
already available through the
AG's office wait the ways in
which we're already recognizing
the tools that we do have in our
toolbox to evaluate what works
and what doesn't madam chair
representative.
Thank you madam chair and
representative I would turn to
Mr Gracin our legal expert.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Romero thank you
for your question.
There are.
Actions available those
protections are are
unfortunately sorely inadequate
as I mentioned earlier we tried
to redact from police reports I
did identifying information and
we were section for that
and.
You have to have a unit that
basically there are
The the with a pre trial
interviews for example the rule
right now requires to statements
be given and and allows the
defense to subpoena the
witnesses and so if the
prosecution doesn't get the
witness there and this is
something the lawsuit discussed
is the prosecution will subpoena
these witnesses and the reason
for that is if we don't get them
to the interview the way the
rules right now their
testimonies to drugs sometimes
those charges are dismissed and
so that's why this bill is is
very much necessary in order to
protect victims rights.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative and Mr Grayson
for that response I'm still not
following some of the at least
Justice where we can improve and
most of this like we said with
with the court rules I'm in the
Vale ability you know one of the
things that we had that was
proposed as why not do this
through court procedure and
propose this to of being able to
improve that process and why is
it that the legislature is
seeking to do that here Madam
chair representative.
Thank you madam chair and
representative Mr Grayson.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Romero yes the
rules of procedure are available
in some ways but do victims
rights act is a statute for
reason the constitution gives
the legislature the authority to
protect victims rights and this
is a question of victim privacy
and protecting the victim from
that used in only the
legislature can do that so the
courts are not going to enact
the probe a rural that's
protective of victims rights
absent a statute that already
does so that's against the
constitution grants the power to
the legislature.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representative
I'm eight this is very
challenging vote in this
circumstance because of the fact
of again just the the we do
process works in the way that
the the Supreme Court has
designated in the way that the
courts go through the process
for
To be able to look at this
procedurally and to be able to
support it
Madam chair representative I
just want to thank you for for
bringing it forward and for the
intent on the protections that
are here but I think with the
legal challenges the eight
states it's it's it's
inconsistent with I think what
we're actually seeking to do and
with that I would love to
find of a better way of doing
this I just don't think that
this is the way right now thank
you madam chair thank you
Representative thank you
Representative Romero I have
Representative Lord.
Thank you madam chair and
representative
Representative Romero brought up
some really good points and it's
always hard right because we're
taking an emotional bill and
we're trying to look at it
logically and it's very painful
because we're trying to make
decisions based on logic and not
emotions and having been a
survivor of domestic violence
myself I do totally understand
what it is you're trying to do I
also know that
you know.
It.
Twenty something real quick
because that.
I talked to share earlier.
Who said indelicate situations
like this are you she is a safe
house for children where the
psychologist asked some
questions and that's something
that's in play right now.
Thank you madam chair and
representative lord if miss Ford
could provide an answer for that
that would be wonderful.
Thank you thank you
Representative and at thank you
madam chair so there are eleven
so called children's advocacy
centers across the state that
conduct what's called a forensic
interview so if there is a
criminal investigation attached
a child's name because a child
has been alleged victim or
witness to a crime the police or
civilian the brings them to
those safe houses the call right
they are not to be mixed up with
the state houses that are to
women's shelter to the state has
a children the children do not
stay there overnight they just
come for a friend.
This process has been at and
first at implemented in New
Mexico in nineteen eighty nine
so since then there have been
thousands of these friends could
use conducted by staff members
who are highly trained and to
ask at drama informed and age
appropriate questions of these
victims and what we can disclose
what happened to them and the
idea is that this gets recorded
a voice of camera and then that
recording goes on B. as B. to be
part of the investigation
process so that the idea
originally was so that the child
does not have to repeat their
story because we know that that
they are already traumatized and
that then multiple interviews I
other players in the system can
re traumatize them right so
there is already a safe house
forensic interview process again
between the eleven at child
advocacy centers across the
state we can drive over forty
five hundred interviews that
years so they're already a lot
of those interviews happening.
I'm and I would also add before
it I'd like to have fun Mr grace
and also chime in but it's
important to recognize that over
forty states in this nation as
well as federal cases do not
compel pre trial interviews and
in all of those circumstances
the defense are able to
sufficiently prepare and at and
president basis on behalf of
their defense at their
defendants and New Mexico is
only one of three states that do
not restrict up pre trial
interviews for child victims Mr
grace and did you have want to
add anything.
Thank you read Representative
madam chair Representative Lord
thank you for the question I'm I
and.
The safe house it's important
understand say fast as a core
disciplines are going to be
doesn't occur but that doesn't
prevent pre trial interviews
down the line and the child
might have to testify at a
probable cause hearing that a
preliminary examination where a
child is cross examined by the
defense attorney to get a
complete and full statement from
the child for which with which
they can prepare for trial and
then they subjected again to
another pre trial interview so
the process again it's it's over
and over and over and each time
it re traumatize is so the state
house is in place but it doesn't
prevent the pre trial interview
trauma that's because later and
I think it's important to know
that the other states that are
doing this they're protecting
children they do it by statute
that mention Arizona they do a
by statute mistrust quick
mention that it was held
unconstitutional Transylvanians
to disagree I think she's
mistaken consulting has to help
the victims have the right to
refuse an interview since
nineteen sixty nine and I can
give you the case I if the
committee members madam chair
would like that site but that's
since nineteen sixty nine and
what happened in Pennsylvania as
they struck down the
constitutional provision only
based on a requirement that a
constitutional amendment only
address one subject so it had
nothing to do with the process
issue.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair
representative and and thank you
Mr grace and I do have another
question that I just want
clarification is so hard to hear
on these things so I apologize
did you just say that in
nineteen sixty nine it has been.
Sorry that does it a person that
is victimized has a right to
refuse a second interview.
Madam chair and representative
Jim that's in Pennsylvania
Pennsylvania state restaurants
by by Mr Chavez Cook and in
Pennsylvania in nineteen sixty
nine and a case called blue
versus Lebanon court of common
pleas the court said this the
Pennsylvania Supreme Court said
very clearly that victims have
the right to refuse and enter.
Thank you.
Madam chair representative and
do you have then just one more
question so.
When a person is victimized and
then about the age when the
victimized they give the initial
interview and.
What we're talking about is.
Follow up interviews by.
The defense correct.
That is correct the.
So if by chance the defense.
Had legitimate questions that
actually generate questions the
case because.
So they.
They're unable to do a
deposition.
So I'm just curious how how does
that play out when they go to
court as so what let me asking
two questions please the first
one is.
So the defense can not ask
legitimate questions would there
be an option to submit questions
and then the person to decide if
they want to answer them.
And madam chair and
Representative Lord yes and if
Mr Grayson could walk through
section one D. because it does
account for several different
considerations including if the
victim agrees to a pre trial
interview so Mr Grayson if you
could explained that.
Yes thank you Representative
Dixon Madam chair representative
will work that is correct and in
right now and as I mentioned
before right now witnesses can
be compelled to give a pre trial
interview and that's highly
unusual across the nation
witnesses almost always have the
right to refuse an interview in
most other states especially
victims
and in for victims in particular
I believe it's forty five states
and the federal government to
provide victims the right to
refuse interview so this is not
a due process question
defendants still have the
ability to prepare for trial
with other statements given by
the children if they have
questions of the trial.
Ask those questions through
cross examination at trial in
the process that's here for
example is more protective of
defendant's rights done in
Arizona because in Arizona they
say victims have the right to
refuse an interview sure it.
What this bill does and this is
an subsection three of section
two what this bill does is it
says for adult victims the
defense can still do a pre trial
interview they just can't
examined the victim directly
into rural and and and and and
for trauma what they do is they
propound interrogatories
then asked why neutral party and
so it doesn't prevent them at
all from being able to prepare
for trial thank you.
Thank you for that explanation
Madam chair representative at
can't this question is directed
more towards Mr gracing can you
please define compelled when you
said that they can be compelled
you define that word for me
please.
Yes madam chair representative
lord compelled means by order of
the court and the subpoena is an
order of the court and.
The parties can subpoena a trial
witness to go to a pre trial
interview the defense can
subpoena any victim to go to a
pre trial interview and compel
them to give a statement subject
to sanction by the court.
Okay thank you madam chair
representative
So going back to that question
so if you so compelled is
basically the quarters given
your order and you're there by
force at that point you can't
say I don't want to do this so
the next additional right okay
S. U. nineteen had okay so on
that part.
Then with this if if if how it
stands now if they're compelled
and they must go and be
interviewed.
Is that done.
By a neutral third party or is
that done by attorneys how how
is that done.
Madam chair representative lord
that's the way that's done right
now is it's done I mean we're
we're now in a pandemic and so
is done by still more by Google
meet for the most part but
before the pandemic what is what
happens is that the child is
brought in usually to the
district attorney's office and
goes into a room with the
prosecutor and with the defense
attorney and the defense
attorney asked the trial
questions and has essentially
there are very few limits on the
questions that can be accessed
the the questions don't even
have to be
Eliciting admissible information
in court it can just be
questions designed to lead to
admissible evidence and so you
can be very intrusive action and
concern for example with sexual
assault victims concurrent
concern prior sexual activity
can concern very private matters
very sensitive matters that they
can for trump.
Thank you France and to the
question chair representative I
I think it will more question on
this
so I can get a better
understanding of this so as it
stands right now they can be
compelled to go into this
interview they don't have they
have to say no.
and then they can be asked
intrusive questions and then on
the flip side if we were to pass
this.
The defendant really doesn't
have an opportunity to get into
position is that is that what
I'm understanding.
I guess maybe the better
question sure let me
Answer first and then Mr Grayson
may need to clean up here but
right now so under this
legislation
a child's testimony we could do
at the forensic interview
and it would be introduced it
could be introduced as evidence
The defense would have that
information.
That the interview and then the
the bill does provide for the
written into interrogatories of
victims as well and so there is
a method for and.
Cross examination or you know
sort of eliciting that
information before the trial
however I think it's important
as someone who's not an attorney
for me learning that the six
amendment applies to when you're
in court there's nothing in the
constitution that says that the
defense has the right to cross
examine a witness outside of the
courtroom.
Mr grace and did I leave
anything out miss speak.
I don't believe so
Representative Dixon and madam
chair Representative ward I
think
If you that's that's what I
talked about at the very
beginning of the hearing today
is is this balance between
victims rights and defendants
rights and other states
recognize that balance and they
say victims have the right to
refuse the interview that
doesn't prevent the defense from
being able to prepare for trial
doesn't prevent the defense from
being able to cross examine them
at trial it just gives them that
right to be able to say no.
I I don't want to give you an
interview I don't want to be
examined by you three different
times to in court to under oath
and two subject to cross
examination and a third time
without even a judge to to
monitor the activity.
that that's really what this
bill is.
Thank you for answering my
questions at all that I have
been chair representative Ms
aggression thank you.
Thank you Representative
Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative for this and.
Well.
The storage.
Thanks Stephanie Representative
wardens was reading my mind and
I.
But I'm still a little confused
on something.
To the things that were brought
up by
people who spoke in opposition
of the US.
We're that was.
That we're violating due process
this bill violates due process.
And create creates a
constitutional separations of
power issue.
And I'm going back and forth
trying to go to get my nose
right
I'm confused as to why they
would argue that if I understand
correctly.
There is no constitutional
right.
For the defense.
Pre interview a witness they're
only the only time that can
happen if I understand.
When I heard correctly is some
court.
I'm madam chair Representative
Pettigrew that's correct could
Mr J. Gracin elaborate perhaps
on the.
Due process and separation of
powers.
Yes thank you representative
madam chair Representative
Pettigrew that is correct
there's no constitutional right
to a pre trial interview and
that's what other states
recognize that's what that's not
what New Mexico does though New
Mexico right now compels
witnesses to give statements and
it's important to recognize that
this bill would only protect
victims to all other witnesses
would still be interviewed by
the defense which is another
Avenue for the defense to
prepare for trial but this bill
would prevent
accord from compelling the
victim interview difficulty
could still choose to give an
interview or the victim could
have to testify at a preliminary
examination to establish
probable cause at which they
would be under oath and subject
to for cross examination by the
defense so we're trying to do is
just limit that trauma just
reduce it as much as possible
because they're traumatized so
many times in our system and
with respect to the sub
separation of powers issue as I
mentioned
the the the you're saying role
actually provides that
exceptions to hearsay can be
created by statute expressly
says that in the court rule so
thank spring court says the
legislature can do this the
Supreme Court thinks this is not
a separation of powers issue
with respect to pre trial
interviews that rights are
specifically within the
legislative problems I virtue of
the constitution that's article
two section twenty four of the
constitution any requests
victims the right to privacy the
legislature is the only body
that can define what that
privacy.
Thank you Representative thank
you Mr Kirsten
well.
I think we've all figured out
that we're relying on the
Supreme Court to make a lot of
decisions for the state right
now so if we say that their
decision for good one where they
got a few years now correct.
I think I'm good with this
right.
I don't see.
With the with the past that this
bill is on
I think it's going to be correct
need to be corrected will be
corrected in the next committee
with people what smarter than
the need
Madam chair a I would from the
last speaker I would make a
motion to.
For the past.
Do I have a second.
Madam chair I move to table.
Okay tabling motion does take
precedence over a move to pass
so do I madam chair Disney does
a role
take take precedence over
tables.
I'm.
A role as.
Let me start an opportunity to
roll the bill.
actually we have a table the
motion on the on the floor so
that essentially that takes
precedence
but so do we have a second on
the table the motion.
Yes.
Okay so we have a we have a
motion and a second to table the
bill so I guess it's back to
Allison what you take the role.
Representative Barreras.
Note to tables.
Representative Lord yes.
Representative Pettigrew.
Noted table.
I share more.
Yes the table.
Your Thomson no.
So we have a three to do three
two two this motion fails so
then we did have a motion on the
table for a two passed from
representative at a grew I
believe and is there a second on
that motion a second okay so we
have a a second Representative
but I.
So we this is now a motion for a
do pass.
So we take the role.
Representative Ferreira's yes.
Representative Lord.
For a minute.
Representative Pettigrew.
Yes.
Mr Mehra.
No.
Madam Thompson.
Could you go back to
Representative
lord please Representative Lord.
I pounced.
Representative Lord it's it's
come back to you.
So we have if I can ask for
clarification we have reacted
and knows that correct.
We have we have yes one now yes
one no and there's you when I
left.
Thank Nico no pressure.
Hold on one sec.
You know I will I will make the
decision easier for her I will
vote to pass
it to pass I will vote yes.
Yes.
Okay I'm just going to explain
my vote I'm.
I see there are issues on both
sides that that we we heard it
and and I personally don't feel
qualified in a legal way to make
the decisions on whether it's
eight it's up to the Supreme
Court it's up to us it's
constitutional it's
unconstitutional I have heard
experts on both sides who I
really respect and so I I I I
like what the idea of this bill
is I'm not sure this is the
right way to do it but I'm I'm
essentially punting to the to
the Judiciary Committee so what
that legal money decide if this
is it this is the right way to
go.
So I'm with a four to one vote
you have a two passed and and
probably eighty
On Long.
You are if it took this long
here and we only have we only
have about one baby lawyer on
our committee that committee is
all of all grown.
A lawyer so.
Representative step before your
hearing because it's going to be
a long one so with that I
believe we are recessed for the
day and less and I will make an
announcement here it I believe
what's going to happen next week
as we will meet on Tuesday.
The speaker has tentatively
asked us to not meet on Thursday
so we can have a full day of
floor session so with that with
the number we have we probably
will be meeting not tomorrow
Saturday but the following
Saturday we will be needing to
make up for the day that we're
missing on Thursday okay.
Okay thank you for your
wonderful plans for the next
Saturday and work will be
meeting probably in the
afternoon but well we'll all
look at the schedule with that
with members and see what we can
do so with that thank you all
thank you public for hanging
with us thank you all the expert
witnesses and now we will be
back here on Tuesday afternoon.
So we are in recess thank you
thank you madam chair.
