Representative Terrazas.
Madam chair Roybal Caballero.
President.
Representative Oaklawn.
Excuse.
I think Representative New
Mexico on is trying to connect
via his some.
I see him.
Representative one I see a okay
we got it thank.
Thank you we got it.
Thank so I'm madam secretary
what's the on we have I we have
court ma'am.
Thank you thank you everyone and
thank you for your patience
everyone.
For waiting for us today.
So we have one item on the
agenda today and that is House
Bill twenty.
Representative Chandler are you
ready Representative.
You have to on the.
We're gonna get this eventually
madam chair we will ma'am yes
yes yes I am I just want to
confirm that Representative
Rubio is with us.
Yeah hold on a second hold on.
Yes I do one ounce that we have
language interpretation hello.
It's just Spanish and from
Spanish to English.
Thank you and I will explain how
that works for folks if you
like.
Would you please.
Sure yeah.
Panelists and attendees should
be able to see the
interpretation by and on the
bottom row of icons there looks
like a little.
When you put that you have three
options the first says off which
would just give you on a filter
from the committee.
Then there's an English Channel
which if you're not channel
you'll hear at the committee
filter for the most part and so
we have somebody speaking in
Spanish then we will hear the
interpretive and translate that
and then if you are in the
Spanish language channels you
will hear and Spanish language
interpretation of most of the
committee proceedings that.
So that's how that would work.
Thank you thank you Devin.
Are there any questions the
committee
and panelists on how that will
work.
No questions okay that's great
and Representative Chandler you
were asking of Representative
Rubio was on yes ma'am yes madam
chair I just don't see here and
I just wanna make sure we're on
the team is here all all ready
to go so would you would you
like us to wait a few more
minutes and while you
communicate with Representative
Rubio sure I thought I thought
thought she was going to be in
there so my apologies madam
chair okay just remember to me a
while you do that thank you all
up.
You madam chair I just got a
text from Representative Rubio
saying I lost my internet
working on getting back on line
So
madam chair I I'm hoping that
Representative Rubio won't mind
if we proceed and we'll just
give an overview I know she has
some comments that you would
like to make an perhaps if you
were at your indulgence we could
all our to do that when she gets
our internet back I it is so
frustrating and yet another
reason why we need to be working
on the broadband across the
state ensuring everybody has
great access
all right absolutely so what
we'll do then is we will go
ahead.
And have you begin and then
we'll invite Representative
Rubio center she's connected to
join you thank you.
Very good madam chair thank you
again for allowing us to present
we have a committee substitute
that we that is the combined
work of the teams that were on
house bill twenty and house bill
thirty seven I hope I got the
number right but that's and I I
would think that your pleasure
madam chair I how would you like
to handle that should I
introduce the are present the
subset to.
Tell you what the two oh two
number is and and how what's the
process that you would like to
follow madam chair.
So
Yes speaking Marcella and other
interim head would you like me
to take role again because we
have a few member yes yes yeah I
was about to get there I just
noticed I'm sorry and switching
back between screens and I just
noticed that we had several
members join us so could you do
that again please for the record
and Representative candle would
just hold on just a moment to we
retake.
Okay Representative bash.
Representative Black.
Madam chair
representative Garcia said.
Representative Hernandez there
Representative Rubio.
Representative Stapleton.
Representative Terrazas.
Representative Representative
madam chair Roybal Caballero.
President.
Representative.
Chair one.
We have four ma'am.
Thank you madam secretary we do
have a quorum I appreciate that
so
We have
Let's see.
You have a committee substitute.
And that committee substitute
is.
It's called house labor veterans
and military affairs committee
substitute for house bill twenty
and the two oh two number madam
chair is I'm looking at it on my
screen here is
With me.
Two one nine four seven nine
point two.
And I look to the team to make
sure I got that right two one
nine four seven nine two.
I need to entertain a motion
from the committee Madam chair
of I move that we entertain the
substitute bill for discussion
purposes.
This their second.
Thank you.
So it's been moved and seconded
that we move the substitute bill
for discussion purposes.
Thank you you may proceed
Representative January much
madam chair I want to thank the
committee for a your guidance
last week in in terms of
encouraging us to confer and
develop a combined bill that
effort was successful the team
work both teams worked pretty
much day and night over the
weekend and we're able to
address various issues and we're
able to agree on a combined to
build and that combined bill is
represented in this committee
substitute and we have to
experts with us online chain
units and Stephanie Welch they
were part of the team that
negotiated the the the
combination and are available to
answer any detailed questions
that you may have we believe
that the combined bill
represents the intent of both
both bills and offers
strong strong earned.
Paid sick leave program for all
New Mexicans which we think all
New Mexicans deserve and also
that of course is supports
businesses and public health and
with that madam chair we're
happy to entertain questions.
And thank you representative
before we do that in managing
all these texts that are going
back and forth I failed to go
back to the motion and just make
sure that we had no opposition
to accepting the motion for
discussion purposes.
No opposition.
No opposition all right thank
you I just needed to move that
with the record or the record
would I'm sorry and I I was
having yes connecting the motion
was for what I'm sorry.
M..
One moment Representative
Representative and
Representative are you checking
in as being present now in the
yes ma'am I'm sorry it was it
would funding to yes.
Just a moment that's fine
Representative myself
madam secretary can you go ahead
and add Representative least of
us is as being present thank you
all right now Representative
losses were moving a committee
substitute.
and I don't have the number now
and that is the committee
substitute that is merging both
house bill twenty and thirty
seven as per the instructions of
last week's meeting.
Okay.
So what this will involve wasn't
normal bill we're just going to
hear it get discussions from
growing against.
We're going to hear about this
morning.
Representative this is a
committee substitute so we will
be hearing on testimony and have
discussion as we would with any
Committee substitute bill.
Thank you madam.
Thank you very much.
All right Representative
Chandler would you like your
experts to make a statement or
would you like to go straight
into questions madam chair I
think were amenable to going
straight into questions.
So before we do that let's see.
Would you.
Hold on I see a hand.
Representative leader Stapleton
you have your hand up.
Thank you madam chair
and members of the committee and
Representative Chandler and your
team consists of wells on this
bill Representative Rubio and
a to a chairwoman Patricia robot
Cavaleiro Representative Daymon
Ely Lou and we mentioned
Representative Rubio did we not
so I and Senator Mimi Stewart is
our Senate cosponsored so I
think I have touched on everyone
then
Madam floor leader.
I I'm not gonna ask any well now
I wouldn't say that yet I'm.
I'm.
The question detail to the to
the bill.
I'm the intimate details of the
bill but I do have to have acts
and service professionals and
and that is at the last meeting
we had I said madam chair what a
water madam chair Matt.
In order.
If your point.
Representative madam chair are
you at the point of of a couple
of Madam okay
yes yes Representative I need to
go back you need to go back I'm
so okay
now but she had another issue to
raise up or or something we
hadn't gotten to that point yet
no thank you for your thank you
representative both of you.
Tell.
The only thing I would ask
Representative Chandler is if
you would for the sake of the
committee and for the sake of
following through on what we
agreed to do last week could you
highlight are the key points of
the agreement that were reached
between House twenty house bill
twenty eight and house bill
thirty seven before we proceed
with public comment.
Yes madam chair we can do that I
would ask one of my experts and
they can decide between
themselves who would who would
like to do to do that we have
Stephanie Welch and Shane used
to he can review kind of high
level
points thank you madam chair
thank you.
I would like to go on
Don't be shy.
Thank you Mr chair at she needs
a.
Members and members of the
committee the at the at bill is
essentially taking what we
believe to be the best
components of both bills and
incorporating them into a single
bill the bill contemplates a
sick leave for all New Mexicans
for all employees in the state
of New Mexico and the I think
the original house bill twenty
with more narrow than that and
the renewable incorporates the
principles of house bill thirty
eight to include protection for
all New Mexicans I think
secondarily the bill provides
what what I would say is the
most appropriate an expanded use
of the sick leave for employees
in the state of New Mexico it
provides a sick leave for used
by employees who are who are
sick or whose family members are
sick but also for domestic abuse
and for other limited purposes
which we believe would be
appropriate under the law and
finally I think the third
component that is important to
mention is that the enforcement
mechanisms have been beefed up
they have been strengthened as
compared to House Bill twenty
originally they've been
strengthened because.
Labour laws both in the state of
the state of New Mexico and
nationally even though they have
enforcement mechanisms they are
often not followed by employers
and we have essentially work
together to create a enforcement
system which will allow for we
believe hi complaints in the
state of New Mexico and so those
are the modifications that are
consistent with Representative
Chandler's explanation of the
bill initially and I I think
that covers sort of the that the
manner in which the bills were
merged.
Thank you.
And on this once you have
anything to add.
Thank you madam chair mysteries
covered everything thank you.
Thank you Representative
Chandler do you have anything
else you'd like to add no thank
you madam chair.
Madam chair I have
Representative Rubio who's
called in so I'm going to allow
her to talk if you could not be
promoted to panelists so I'm
going to.
Do that right now okay thank you
I hadn't noticed thank you very
much for that.
Thank you everyone for your
patience there been a a huge
amount of text going back and
forth about this meeting and
in proceeding at the beginning
with delayed roll call and all
of the details so thank you for
your patience in helping us
manage through this so we have
Representative Rubio on the line
can
would go ahead Representative
Rubio yes can you all can you
hear me yes we're.
My apologies my technology just
suddenly all collapse so I
apologize
I I I just want to take a few
minutes I don't I know that all
of the intro have already been
made but I just wanted to I just
illustrate how how important
this legislation and for workers
all across the state of New
Mexico Representative Chandler
and I have been working on the
issue for weeks now trying to
figure out the best way to bring
both built together and we feel
that this is the the right the
right way to move forward we
have the support of the
statewide coalition been working
on the issue for years as well
as labor and so I am I'm very
encouraged by by all of that one
more thing that I did want to
share if they haven't been
shared already at the fact that
there have been a lot of folks
from the community who have
great concerns about this
legislation I just want to
remind folks that.
There are about forty six other
people in the legislation that
have been introduced I'm in the
legislative session year to
address all recovery for small
businesses public comment and
addition to seven hundred
million dollars that are being
considered to help small
businesses this is the one bill
that a for workers and should
continue to date for workers and
impact and it worked in
combination with all of the
other things that we're trying
to do to help small businesses
and so I apple for listening
folks who are unclear as to
whether or not they should
support this legislation this
is.
One thing that workers need
right now particularly because
of what they're exposed to on
the from line and and I would I
would urge both on the committee
to please support this
legislation allow for it move
forward and and and allow for
this one bill that work to
support workers to
The move ahead and and we'll
have it and and continue that
the conversation around thank
you.
Representative Chandler are we
moving now to.
Are you are you done yet yes yes
madam chair thank you.
Thank you representative so at
this point I'm gonna go ahead
and move to the list of
activities that we have when the
water madam chair yes.
Madam chair
is our committee equipped to
utilize the poll.
In terms of taking up all of the
audience in terms of their
opposition or their support.
And and and the ball then allows
us to see who in the attending
column is in support and then
who is in opposition and then
after we do the poll then you go
into the specific.
Individuals that are not
positioned and and support to
raise their hand if they wish to
speak but that Paul gives an
understanding not only the
committee but also those people
in attendance as to where
the support for the opposition
nice we have that mechanism
madam chair.
Representative to answer your
question yes we DO and I was
afforded that recommendation
earlier and I opted to operate
without it but if that is the
will it's up to the committee
but I was given to me as a
choice to make
I I did not want to give the
perception at all
Representative and members of
the committee that my taking the
poll that we would another in
any way.
Be intending to imply that they
still could not speak and so I
opted on as the managing chair
of the meeting today not to
exercise the poll.
We're at the mercy of the chair
in terms of how to proceed with
that point so that's your
decision and I apologize to
session.
Thank you Representative I
appreciate that.
So at this time I'd like to go
ahead and open up the attendees.
And if we could have everyone
who wishes to speak in
opposition to this bill to raise
your hand now.
In opposition this is for
everybody wishing to speak in
opposition.
Okay so the first on the list
that I have speaking in
opposition is and could you when
you come on please say your last
name we're only showing a first
name for the record please.
The first speaker in opposition
I'm recognizing this time will
you come on and say your last
name please.
One there's money morning this
time but I mean it and
supporting it.
All right so you took a hand
down thank you on I appreciate
you waiting for the support the
next person we have on that is
showing in opposition is Mr Jack
bent.
Thank you madam chair.
You can hear me at this point.
Yes we can.
Thank you madam chair unchecked
aunt of with New Mexico business
coalition we were sent hundreds
of businesses and thousands of
New Mexicans our focus is to
help New Mexico a better place
to do business so that.
The New Mexicans all of us have
jobs to provide for their
families.
we appreciate the passion in the
extra work that the bill sponsor
should put on this with the
substrate but we respectfully
oppose.
The bill these types of
government they send up reducing
job opportunities and hurting
hardworking new Mexicans so
we're trying to provide for
their families healthy workplace
Act is very similar to one voted
down.
In twenty seventeen by
Albuquerque residents are in the
largest city in the state this
proposed rate time of mandate
comes at a time statewide
minimum wage increase just one
up to ten fifty an hour this
year that's a twelve percent
increase well if you have any
local businesses have been lucky
enough to achieve any revenue.
Increases your whatsoever.
In fact the list of local
businesses closures in recent
months due mostly COVID nineteen
is long and still growing each
week so the New Mexico business
coalition opposes blanket
mandates like those proposed in
this bill there are necessary
growing burden of small business
owners we're trying to maintain
or grow their operations.
These mandates and up hurting
not helping New Mexico families
wages and benefits should be
negotiated between the employer
and employee with respect to
unique situations constraints
for every business that they
experienced government attempts
to micromanage this process the
sisters problems and reduces the
opportunities for growth in
employment for business
employees alike so we urge you
to oppose this bill.
Thank you.
And before we proceed I just
want to remind everyone who's
speaking today in opposition and
in favor I'll repeat the the
rules of the committee as per
the chair article on that we ask
you to please be three minutes
or less and that you'll be
succinct and not repetitive in
your presentations thank you
very much and next in opposition
we have
only the listing that states
information technology when you
come on would you please state
your name and last name for the
record.
In termination technology
whoever's listed as information
technology in opposition.
All right we're gonna move on
then on the next person on the
list is Randy madam chair to
speak in opposition.
Yeah.
Yes you may proceed thank you
madam chair members of the
committee my name is Randi
Valverde I'm a registered
lobbyist for the New Mexico
association of realtors that
represents filters all across
the state of New Mexico we don't
have an issue with paid sick
leave programs however we can't
support the committee substitute
as it was described we would
like to see more balance in the
bill including more
consideration for smaller
businesses that may not be able
to afford the program as it's
constructed now
a reduction of civil painted
entities such that there are
more in line with other labor
laws and removal of the criminal
penalties thank you madam chair
for the time.
Thank you know.
And next we have.
Mr Robert black.
You may proceed.
Good morning or good afternoon
madam chair members of the
committee my name is rob black
thank you for the opportunity to
speak today I apologize for the
the background noise
I I can't really speak to the
bill itself we were not able to
have access to the bill until
about an hour ago so
understanding kind of what the
changes are unfortunately we
just we don't know and so it's
hard for me to see to those
specifics we certainly have a
broader general concern about
the approaching what was
described.
earlier or one of the speakers
spoke to the fact that labor
laws often are not followed by
employers I.
That's very disappointing to
hear from the expert witness
that's just frankly not true
it's the anomaly that labor laws
are not followed and the the.
The punitive nature.
In the enforcement side does not
create a balance increase risk
and it creates a challenge for
employers to be able to properly
mitigate that risk whether it's
with insurance or other types of
things when if if the bill
itself creates private right of
action the ability to create
class actions triple damages
minimum payments of a thousand
dollars those sorts of things
become extremely challenging and
encourage frankly drive by
lawsuits to extort employers the
state you can settle for this.
Or you can pay or we can take
you to court and and that's just
a really challenging place there
should be a process where
there's an administrative
hearing there's process to go
forward where there's an
opportunity to eight to remedy
mistakes if that's an
intentional violation of the law
that's a whole different story
that sort of punishment is fine
where there's an honest mistake
for a small employer we need to
be able to accommodate for that
and as well there is a real
challenge from the business
community side again we have not
had a chance to really review
this legislation before as being
heard today in committee we did
have efforts to meet over the
weekend we at the request so we
would wait until was unified
bill to have that conversation
but that is still not happened
prior to the hearing.
So we look forward to doing that
and we need to do that since
this is a very consequential
piece of legislation to every
business in the state of New
Mexico and is to the comment
that this is the only piece of
legislation that somehow is
impacting businesses that
doesn't take into consideration
the paid family medical leave
act private right of action a
variety of other measures that
are being considered through
this legislative session that is
very truncated very difficult to
engage in as part of our
democratic process that are very
challenging for the business
community and we just we we we
yes Representative Chandler did
make the commitment to us to
meet and I look forward to doing
that we have very great concerns
about where this that this bill
is headed.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr black.
Next we have Jason Espinoza in
opposition.
Madam chair members the
committee Jason Espinoza state
director with the national
federation of independent
business I hear New Mexico and
we do respectfully stand in
opposition similar to other
comments I have had the
opportunity to fully review a
substitute bill but just in a
broad sense you know just want
to talk about the costs
specifically to certain small
businesses you know within our
membership we do represent child
care centers assisted living
centers home health care
agencies a lot of the most of
those companies rely on either
Medicaid reimbursements from the
states or childcare supplemental
assistance from the states where
the state sets the right that
they will be in reimbursed this
bill does increase the costs of
doing business and so we would
like hopefully in consideration
as this bill does move forward
after this businesses that rely
on state contracts and state
revenue for their to be
appropriate increased in those
reimbursement rates to offset
the costs of that they can
continue providing the central
services moving forward
additionally I just want to
mention that we have seen other
pieces of legislation both in
the house and the Senate that
would provide either a tax
credit to small businesses that
provide similar items or or at
risk financial reimbursement we
hope that the Sanchez we
consider that four as well we
are really concerned about the
financial impacts to small
businesses across the state as
we move out so what we hope to
the finish line of this pandemic
and look towards economic
recovery
thank you for your time madam
chair we do stand in opposition.
Next we have in opposition
Martha McDaniel.
Mantegna you're on.
Can you on mute yourself.
All right we'll move on next I
hand up for opposition is
Barbara tendril.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Barbara federal and I am a
business owner of child care
centers up in Farmington and
while I'm a business owner I am
not opposed to that the at the
bill itself if there could be
amendments that could be done as
the others I have not had a
chance to see the committee
substitute and look forward to
that as a small business owner
and especially childcare we have
to understand that
childcare head in high quality
has come a long way and we are
so thankful that the new
Department early childhood and
education care department has
come up and running because it
has helped to see and help the
legislative bodies in the people
of New Mexico to value childcare
and early childhood education
however we are still very small
business owners primarily most
of us are women and women
minority women what this bill
would do is that we are right
now we're dealing with the
impact of just minimum wage as
we stated before most of us
operate with that we've
contracts for child care
assistance and those are to help
low income families pay for
their child care however with
mandates like this when the
state is instilling higher
levels of quality and mandate
they are not lifting up the
reimbursement there is no parity
and I understand that
Representative Dow today dropped
a bill for pay parity which is
great because we can one hundred
percent support of that but they
have to be done hand in hand and
I I just like to point out that
one an unforeseen consequence
could be that for small
businesses every other benefit
will be taken away there is no
way that we can keep up with
minimum wage and they cation and
vision dental retirement
retirement all of that if this
is mandated the way that this
bill as written we.
We are afraid that those will
all of that will be gone and the
only thing available will be
sick pay
thank you very much for to
listening and am hearing the
input that I have today thank
you madam chair members of the
committee.
Thank you Mr are there any other
hands up or in opposition.
Any other.
In opposition Mexico don't
forget to take your hand on that
thank you.
All right so now we're gonna go
ahead and move on to everyone
who'd like to speak in support
if you would raise your hands.
Please now began to take them in
order.
So let's let's get CENIC E. we
have put forward so when the man
on.
I just repeated that in Spanish
thank you.
Okay and again just to reiterate
we appreciate three minutes or
less and just to the point so I
will begin with first hand that
is Charlotte mother when you.
Your your.
You madam chair and members of
the committee my name is
Charlotte mother when you work
with Julian a clue and I'm here
on behalf of New Mexico
coalition of sexual assault
programs we're here today to ask
for your support of house bill
twenty thank you.
Thank you very much.
Next we have Mr Eric could be
able.
Thank you madam chair I
I see this opportunity speaker
in the committee call me so soon
but I that I raise my hand
before let's go back to long
I'm with Mexico working families
representing thousands of
members across the state who
believe that this is a very fair
compromise as the sponsors of
said we support the several
hundred million.
Dollars in transition funds and
Justin funds have been allocated
through the local economic
development act the through
various other funding mechanisms
to help small businesses through
this very difficult time many of
us are are and work for or have
been small business owners so we
support that does it as a
Sanchez said this is a very
different this is the way this
is a proposal that is about
workers and about public health
and we want to make sure that we
do not try to burden this bill
which is about protecting
workers frontline workers
essential workers
with all of the other with all
the other
Provisions that you've heard
from some of the business
lobbyists that have spoken today
I want to see is a former
elected official Senator and
city councilman for the twenty
years of my career I heard every
time that we proposed an
increase in the protections are
our standards for workers
whether was minimum wage you're
protecting work with workplace
safety or fair work week or paid
sick leave over the last twenty
years the arguments are always
the same this is not a good time
this is this isn't gonna work in
this is going to destroy our
economy and inevitably every
time in history that we've tried
to improve stand for workers
whether it's protecting for
trout from against child labor.
Promoting workplace safety
eliminating discrimination
unfortunately some voices some
voices in the in the business
community have has said that
this is not the right thing to
do and this is not the right
time I ask members the committee
respectfully that you have the
courage to stand with workers
with essential workers and with
the minute mid with the with the
many many members of our
community who say.
They should be allowed to
protect themselves their
families from illness and should
have the time to take care of
themselves their loved ones if
they are ill the workplace thank
you madam chair to the
committee.
Thank you on thank you Senator
it's nice to hear from you know
and and just to let everybody
know what I'm doing is I'm
taking the order have the hands
as they're listed as they come
up so there's no rhyme or reason
other than just the order from
top down so the next person on
the list is Marshall rustiness.
Thank you so much madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Marshall Martinez and I'm the
executive director of equality
New Mexico the statewide LGBTQ
civil rights organization.
Basically that's an LGBTQ issue
worker justice is queer and
trans justice we are on the
verge of a radic hating HIV and
aids in this generation because
we now know that when someone is
HIV positive if they are in
treatment and on medication
they've successfully manage
their virus they can no longer
transmit the HIV virus to new
individuals but we can't be in
treatment we can't manage our
virus if we can't afford to take
time off to see a doctor.
Queer and trans individuals are
forty percent more likely to
have attempted suicide because
we often suffer severe traumas
when coming out in our
communities but we cannot see a
mental health care provider if
we can't afford the unpaid time
off for counseling.
Transferable already face
incredible barriers to health
care systemic barriers struggles
to find a provider who will
treat us with respect and
dignity as LGBTQ New Mexicans
all New Mexicans deserve access
to quality individualized health
care reproductive health care
mental health care preventive
health care and providing hourly
workers queer and trans workers
paid sick leave is a necessary
step toward the ultimate
liberation for all LGBTQ New
Mexicans I want to applaud and
thank the two sponsors of the
bill especially for creating
definitions that are most
inclusive of our community and
urged the committee to support
the legislation thank you.
You thank you next we have
Jacquelyn Rosetti yes.
Jacquelyn Rodriguez.
Madam chair it looks like
tackling that have that zoom.
Okay.
So if if that improves will come
back to Jacqueline right then
we'll move on to Joseph hill.
You're on Joseph hello can you
hear me yes.
Right thank you madam chair
members of the committee I am
Joseph L. and I'm here in
partnership with cafe actually
on I'm the pastor of Lordsburg
assembly and Dogo county I'm the
director of community health and
education for the national
center for frontier communities
in the immediate past president
of the New Mexico Public Health
Association.
In both my roles as pastor and
program director I work with
families in rural and frontier
communities that are
disproportionately affected by
the lack of paid sick leave
because of geographical distance
distance many who live in from
here rural communities have to
take off an entire day of work
from the most basic medical
treatments for checkups due to
living an hour or more away from
their closest medical provider
I've witnessed people in my own
community avoid COVID testing or
wait days to take their sick
children in for treatment for
fear of losing their jobs.
Public health worker I
understand the power of social
determinants of health they are
the economic and social
conditions that influence
individuals and groups
differences and health status
paid sick leave what I'm able to
twenty percent of all New
Mexicans who live in poverty to
not have to prioritize putting
food on the table for their
families over their family's
health as a pastor I agree with
people who are too afraid to
seek medical attention for fear
that they would lose their jobs.
It is generally accepted that
accounts of prevention equals a
pound of cure paid sick leave is
a preventative measure that
would give many the ability to
seek treatment for themselves
and their families before more
significant health changes
develop this puts less pressure
on our state's health care
system in requests dignity to
those hard working families that
we all Sir thank you for your
time.
Thank you Mr hell.
Next we have Robert Scott.
Robert Scott.
Yes madam chair thank you so
much I am a workers compensation
attorney and I Representative
engine work injured workers
focus close to thirty years in
New Mexico I support this bill
and asked that the past I know
through my clients the
devastating effect on workers
and their families when wages
are interrupted because of a
work injury
this bill although not
addressing work injury
specifically will provide what
the work comp Act does for
injured workers
to workers who may have
interruption in their wages for
illness or other medical reasons
or as we want to comment because
a COVID they just can't go to
work and therefore I support
this thank you so much.
Thank you Mr Scott next we have
Jennifer Santini.
I'm getting the same error
message madam chair.
All right thank you next we have
someone on from civic policy if
you come on could you please
state your name for the record.
Good afternoon madam chair and
thank you members of the
committee my name is James pull
the wind I'm the policy director
for the center for civic policy
we support this legislation and
thank you for the opportunity to
speak since it was brought up
earlier I wanted to also say
that like rob black I am also
disappointed to hear that
employers do not follow labor
law it is unfortunate that
business advocacy an affinity
groups of.
Have to be forced into
advocating for workers rather
than doing it of their own
accord I invite employer
advocacy and affinity groups to
become better partners in
efforts to ensure that all
workers can thrive alongside the
businesses they serve to
conclude my remarks madam chair
center for civic policy supports
this with legislation without
reservation we think both the
Sanchez Representative Chandler
and Representative Rubio for
their work to combine the
legislation to get to a bill
that addresses the needs of all
workers throughout the state
their work is testament to the
fact that when you put women in
charge they get the job done
Irish committee members to vote
yes for do pass on HB twenty
thank you.
Thank you next we have Mr John
Lipschutz.
Thank you very much madam chair
members of the committee John
Lipschutz with The New Mexico
federation of labor hi so we are
actually Act came before this
committee last week are
supporting both House Bills
twenty and thirty seven and we
were very happy to be part of
the negotiations to merge these
two great pieces of legislation
so for all the reasons stated
previously and on behalf of the
tens of thousands of workers
that we represent we stand in
strong support of this new
version of house bill twenty
thank you very much.
Thank you.
And next we have hall
Paul Gibson.
How Gibson your next to speak.
You may want to meet yourself.
Yes you are okay thank you very
much.
chairwoman
my date at a chair and committee
members and I especially want to
thank our bill sponsors for
introducing this important
legislation.
My name is Paul Gibson and I am
the co founder retake Our
Democracy an all volunteer
organization that has been
advocating at the roundhouse for
Senator year five years now I
ate sorry I was monitoring
another hearing and so I wanted
to shut that off I'm.
This year we work we work with
our allies from across the state
to identify twenty bills that
we're supporting recalling those
transformational bills and our
HB twenty thirty seven is one of
those bills now what now one of
those bills you will hear from
others about the benefits of
this bills I'd like to focus on
something else you and what New
Mexico voters are looking to to
you you I want to focus on you
and that is the U. the
representatives of the
electorates of New Mexico I
would attending hearings for
five years I so appreciate all
you do all you must decide human
sacrifice to serve the state
today you face an important vote
over the past year we have all
experienced the importance of
the role of government in our
lives we've experienced the
devastating deadly consequences
Arribo Representative resulting
from a government that abdicates
its responsibilities we've seen
states compete with each other
for PPE COVID tasks and now
vaccines we've seen what happens
when we left Lee are realize at
the discretion of big business
and the market the last two
weeks we've experienced a
glimmer of the difference when
leaders lead and one vote
government governs in June and
then again in November Mexicans
made their priorities very clear
they want full decipher the size
of action not complacency in
delay they want government to
govern in the people's interests
certainly we need to protect the
viability of our small business
community but there is abundant
research that demonstrates that
small businesses can actually
benefit from offering paid sick
leave with their that research
indicating that small businesses
offering such leave experienced
greater staff productivity
retention and even more business
stability so while it is
important to protect.
The interests of small business
we also need to protect the
interests of those essential
workers will been stocking our
shelves caring for our children
delivering our food and
medicines and caring for our
sick we take her to mock Chrissy
and it's twenty five hundred
well informed highly engaged in
very active members strongly
encouraged a yes vote on H. B.
twenty and HB thirty seven thank
you very much.
Thank you Mr Gibson and next we
have marked the month annual.
My mom thank you.
All right
So when I understand is
happening on in many of these
cases Committee and audiences
that we have
individuals who are trying to
enter into the soon within a
slightly older version of zoom
and as a result the two versions
are not
eight are not talking to each
other and so that's the
difficulty we're having so.
Just wanted to mention that next
on in support we have in mind.
The legislature's my name is the
money thank you for giving me
the opportunity to speak.
So I was going to talk about my
experience as a frontline worker
in the retail environment I
believe that having access to
PTO is essential because it'll
literally save lives.
The virus has because of my
workplace and I don't know a
better way to describe it one
third one around one of.
We are low we are largely
getting cases.
Even though we're taking the
precautions we're doing anything
that we can we're still open but
we're still we are still getting
case we are still getting cases
left and right.
I have known people to lose
relatives just passed away
because you know they kako that
desires is bill it is not fake
it is not a hoax people are
literally dying and the new mind
you I work one on one one on one
with one on one with the public
and.
The wires because elastomer for
hours so I am exposed to the
virus on the daily.
I'm.
So please vote yes for H. B.
thirty seven.
Thank you very much next we have
on the list Eric she my model.
Can you hear me yes.
Thank you madam chair and and
and committee members I am here
tomorrow.
I am a member of a at a late and
I stand in support of HB twenty
in its current form because all
New Mexican workers need access
to sick leave regardless of the
size of their workplace and and
of particular relevance during
this pandemic we know because
the CDC studies this things we
know that sixty percent of food
service workers report working
while they have been sick and it
and if you ask why when they do
surveys the overwhelming
majority say it's because there
is no sick leave at by at my job
and as someone who has spent
decades working in food service
myself I can personally testify
that makes perfect sense almost
no one in food service has
sickly so almost everyone winds
up at some point working mother
sack and that is crazy these are
the last people we want having
to choose between their paycheck
and staying home to care for
themselves or to care for their
loved ones were to care for all
of us because if this pandemic
has taught us anything it's that
staying home when you're sick is
taking care of everyone so what
we're dealing with and what this
bill is about is a massive
failure of public health policy
but it is also a massive failure
of racial justice because if
you've been in restaurant
kitchens as much as I can you
might not.
I then you would know you know
that kitchens are full of people
of color just like the service
and hospitality industries
generally and COVID nineteen is
disproportionately affecting
people of color and this is not
a coincidence.
It it actually is what we have
built we have built an economy
that spreads disease and denies
basic workplace dignity to the
same people who have the least
access to opportunities
generally.
We have a chance today to
address both of these issues by
adopting HB twenty which
protects all working New
Mexicans so I'm asking you to
advantage B. twenty as it is
because we need to level the
economic playing field by
providing a small measure of
dignity to all workers and we
need to stop the spread of
infectious disease so that we
have a chance to rebuild our
whole economy when we eventually
emerge from this pandemic.
Thank you I urge you to pass.
Thank you and next we have me if
not Lazcano.
We have not Lazcano.
When the agency which.
Yes good jungle yep with the
president that.
The agency would.
The last time was when the
president what followed.
Well then we when this that this
thank you.
Thank you to president the
members of the committee so the
may remember Espanol mud in need
and think that they success in
member of this entry was dated a
chill the tobacco to the left in
Texas so at the espy goes but
impairments that.
What's good what was genocidal
musical so S. Census them
received by then Mr media.
Agency for so at the at the
local into rescue to Seattle's a
million women the forum Y.
limpio.
I'm gonna name though to simply
look Weston LFC is that was a
little engine one though
estimated active yet but I want.
We see this young this was time
in common so most most that I've
seen some of the COVID is
seen waving all the impact of
what the army for media.
John then disposal noted during
the access for the S. by those
but have been made that and what
do running back to Financiero
you Mr settlement that second
amendment mostly success ET
let's get by that.
Assistance yet but also the need
is the sentiment that but I DSME
estate even the ticket checking
yes what the number ending I
don't given the left media must
our own set up over the summer
is this sentiment the last I'm
yes in order to see the most I
leave your Financiero.
You're just program as apple
you'll the rent that funding.
What our system but it's in
Seattle I should be thank the
but a from media scrum let me in
is necessary to get total
stockholders in rural Mexico
thing then nexus for the test
but I was pointing me that.
Decadence from Elizabeth but so
is the majestic S. ticket in
which of this is on a motion it
is going to stress a little but
as Polis so it'd be getting
meant that I missed us this what
then see in this unit twenty set
of the activate bank the but I
get that I have is a lot more
you'll be that much for the rest
of the I'd rather than a medical
thank god nexus.
Yes yes.
Next we have Jake up the hill.
Hello good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee.
My name's Jacob Vigil on the
research and policy analyst New
Mexico voices for children.
And we sentenced on support of
this bill we would like to
commend and thank the sponsors
of the previous bills for really
in good faith and with a strong
commitment to this issue having
worked together compromise that
we think is is really strong for
workers and their families we
support this is part.
Along with.
The abundant aid for businesses
of all sizes that is
that is moving through the
legislature this is part along
with that of a robust recovery
for New Mexico and and we in
particular voices for children
support.
This is something that's so
critical for child well being in
the sense that the children of
workers lost income who are
experiencing housing instability
food
shooting stability are really
Experiencing the brunt and and
and and equitably with regard to
to race and ethnicity so this is
something that's good for
children it's good for workers
enter that reason we are
standing strong support thank
you.
Thank you.
And next we have Chris.
You can go ahead and mute
yourself please.
Hello can you hear me yes go
ahead thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Christopher
Martin lives of a teamster with
the I. B. T. local four nine two
are working at U. P. S. my job
is allowed me the benefits of
paid sick leave however most of
my co workers have family who
work jobs that don't have paid
sick leaves this means that the
wives and husbands the sons and
daughters and mothers and
fathers of almost all workers
are still putting me and my
family at risk whatever they
have to go and make the decision
to go to work sick or possibly
lose work Representative pei to
possibly lose their jobs.
This is why we must make sure to
pass a set of paid sick leave
bill now for the health and
safety of all people that's why
please urge you to vote yes on
house bill twenty thank you
madam chair and members of the
committee.
Thank you.
And I'm next we have the now and
I'm gonna mask your last name so
I'll let you stay at the.
No problem chair hi chair and
committee my name's at the neck
Christodoulou and on the
political director for the
Adelante progressive caucus as
well as being a veteran an
entrepreneur and a friend of gig
workers and part timers I agree
to everything that everybody
said and in the for me and I
want to also point out that this
is an opportunity to start
putting people above profits
instead of profits instead of
people and also start and begin
to right the wrong of labor
unions not including
housekeepers and caretakers
because of their color I
remember when I was raising my
own children and I had and was
afforded the ability to stay at
home and take care of them but
my neighbor was not and she
would put them in a
in child care and they would get
sick constantly with your
infections and everything and
she would have to take sick
leave to take them to take care
of them but wouldn't it have
been better if those other
parents had been able to stay
home with their children the
caretakers had been able to stay
home when they were sick it
would have been better all
around so I'm stand in and I'll
under progressive caucus stands
in full support of H. B. twenty
committee substitute and thank
you for all your work.
Thank you very much.
Next we have J. Wilson.
Yes good afternoon.
so gonna buy us this.
How can we have.
A system for child care.
When child care workers
themselves do not protect.
And how can you have a healthy
business environment here in our
state when the workers who work
in those very same businesses
are not able to put their health
and prioritize their health.
It is not it doesn't it doesn't
make sense doesn't go to get
the.
Unfortunately I have the
distinction of being one of two
siblings.
Who has not contracted COVID.
And it's not because my mother
the two siblings whatever rowdy
and try to enjoy the nightlife
it's because they were working
class folks and four percent we
they did not meet the Economic
litmus test to enjoy a safety.
Without opening I'd like to
let's say getting so what my
organization catalyst freshman
streets and in the folks
who Representative want to stand
by and we want to push forward
of this policy today.
You see.
When we actually look at the
folks who have suffered from
this is the working class is the
folks who don't get a fair shake
it's the folks who are
considered at the bottom.
You see as of today we lost over
thirty three hundred folks I
think to myself how many of
those thirty two hundred deaths
how many of the over one hundred
and seventy five thousand
confirmed cases come from
working class people and how
could we as a state have done
better.
How do we have protected them
and given them the ability no
the right to live a safe decent
and healthy life in light of
this pandemic and it's because
we didn't have policies such as
these which put our working
class families at the forefront.
What I like to say is this I'm
I'm I'm a business owner and I
just need to understand we
opposition is coming from but.
Nonetheless I have to knowledge
I'm a black business owners
wanted to do it one of the did
not demographics which is
suffering the most from this
pandemic not just health wise
but also economically but none
the less I stand for this policy
because any business owner would
tell you the investment that you
put in to your employees that
you put into your workers you
get back.
And so I ask you this no I do
that.
I demand that we invest in our
wickets that we invest in our
working class families.
That we allow them that we to to
have the rights to be healthy
and to be safe and that we
remove the Economic litmus test
to determine who stay safe and
who doesn't.
You see.
And I like to I like to think it
back you know I think to it to
the craze of toilet paper I
think of the people who made us
all the country food I think of
the folks who who gave us the
semblance of normality and again
this this idea that you know
even in perilous times we can
still have a sense of normality
as a sense of something to look
forward to.
It was working class wait these
families no New Mexicans working
class New Mexicans that made
that happen.
And so I I come today just just
to ask you this modest requests.
Let us give them what they do
and what is finally put them at
the forefront.
We owe it to the folks who got
sick we owe it to the folks who
got.
Let's make our state more
interacted more reciprocal and
let's address the inequalities
of race and of wealth they're
currently plaguing our state.
Let's make it happen.
Thank you Mr Wilson.
If I could just remind everyone
I know this is a very
And degrading and necessary
conversation that we need to
have but just please try to keep
it within the three minutes that
way we can work we have several
more presenters thank you so
much next we have Representative
Carolyn Wilkins I'm sorry I'm
sorry and misspoke.
Oh wait you are on okay go ahead
thank you reference thank you.
Thank you this is chair
chairwoman I'm so appreciative
of being able to speak on this
subject and I'm here to
represent cafe Axum.
I'm calling and I represent in
organization called racial
ministries in Los crucis New
Mexico.
Of the congregation is.
Our elderly and mostly white and
I am not.
However they are interacting and
needing to go to hospitals and
get services and have caretakers
all of whom fall into this
category.
As well as people in the
congregation who are skilled
labor is interested workers so I
speak on their behalf that right
now we're in a place that people
have been left out in the past
but I want to focus really on
the pandemic unfortunately lost
a sister to Kovic she doesn't
live in the state however my
heart is still broken.
And six members of a family cook
so I'm really touched by what's
happening with the pandemic
right now and I know many
working families or ready just
to pay to.
A paycheck away from financial
ruin.
And they've been forced to
continue to work and sacrifices
others have sent.
With this pandemic because they
don't have paid sick leave.
But I want to approach it from a
different perspective that this
is the health crisis.
And that when families and
communities are not spreading
illness and disease when they go
to work they can help prevent
the spreading of the illness in
other people I can't tell you
how my sister.
Contracted the COVID virus or
help your children actually
attracted a and then brought it
home.
But I know that as people are
going to work who is sick it is
not in our best favor and we've
already mentioned that black and
brown workers sent hi is this
right so contracting COVID.
And they also are the highest in
line as the workers who are
doing the grocery work and the
skilled laborers so I invite us
to really look at this from a
place of dignity.
Equity and justice.
I testing this bill.
That we are bringing that level
of dignity to people to stay
home and take care of their
families that this the equity of
having paid leave with other
people who are working and have
that benefit I've always had
that benefit and I'm really
surprised that we don't know for
that now and then that there be
a place of health justice
economic justice racial justice.
I thank you for the time and
strongly urge you to pass this
bill.
Thank you.
Representative Logan's next we
have a money and a lot right
there.
Yeah you're on I need to sell.
The fact that.
What are
you.
Backing.
I'm
not.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you.
You know I don't think your.
Yes.
Yes local.
You will not win.
Well
we're working with limited.
One thank Nico our we look at
another.
Then you'll.
In a little.
With one partner.
Illegal you have nothing better
than that.
You.
There are.
You're going back to the.
that.
You will it work.
But Canadian.
The legal.
Was this the mono.
The next we have a.
Zab the NMFA.
Thank you for name for the
record.
Hi good afternoon
members of the committee my name
is abstain planets and then.
Live in Deming New Mexico and
I'm a leader with cafe New
Mexico.
and I stand here in support of
this bill I think it's been
said.
A lot of points are made already
how this is the best thing for
the community as well as like
this is the best time.
And honestly.
Hard to believe that this
doesn't exist already.
During the time of the pandemic
I think we've seen.
we've come to realize.
You dropped off.
Sandy you dropped off.
I'm gonna have to move on.
So that we can make up time next
we have Nicole would you step
forward Nicole and please stay
turning.
Yes madam chair members of the
committee my name is Nicole a
lot of H. and I'm a disabled
veteran domestic abuse survivor
and on the board of the beauty
way foundation I think madam
chair for camping additional I
also think Representative Rubio
for pointing out the robust
built for small businesses in
this year's legislative session.
I however am here humbly ask
that you pass house bill twenty
I hope you remember my testimony
from last week because this week
I'm going to speak on behalf of
the rural indigenous communities
I volunteer for we heard a lot
of testimony against this bill
because of the monetary cost
businesses will incur especially
in rural communities forgiving
and basic safety net to
employees if you Google my
foundation you will see we have
been gifted a beautiful donation
of the hundred thousand dollars
worth of PP that we have been
distributing to our rural
communities of New Mexico our
community is composed of folks
who lacked electricity paved
roads and running water these
folks are full forced to drive
up to a hundred plus miles to
get food water in essentials
when they get to their local
grocery stores gas stations and
Comercial like they should be
able to do so without fear of
the employees working through a
contagious illness this bill is
not just about paid time off
this bill is about addressing
social and racial inequities
have dire impacts on the rural
indigenous communities hi Sir we
all know that my community has
built the death toll of COVID
nineteen more than any other
combine this with my community
of disabled humans and we make
up almost the whole COVID dax
value this bill may be seen as
fiduciary red tape for the
businesses bottom line but what
it's really about is giving
basic rights to our human
capital on behalf of disabled
folks like myself the indigenous
communities that the beauty way
service I humbly request that
you vote yes on house bill
twenty and I thank you for
hearing me today.
Thank you very much and I'm I'm
gonna just ask that everybody
please try to keep it as close
to three minutes if not last and
please not be repetitive would
like to hear from everyone but
we also need to have some
rigorous Committee discussion on
that so next we have Blanca.
See what the status.
Thank in members of the
committee we know what so but I
think that's your so.
The local M. so yes Paul Simon
miles equals.
Thank you for us in our mission
to.
Eight in that and I must your
than what the meditation
etcetera etcetera but that most
of the holidays and cumple.
Still the number one of my most.
What what is that
if I may thank you all this is
the most Griego Metallica was
of it this year and that mother
and I let them know that it just
doesn't make any so trying us
this is a set of.
And this this company as well
this the committee that this.
You may request that does
combine yes so I'm looking they
hold it I don't know that is
that it's just going home with
your question and make your what
it for most of our meeting.
You'll get a most believe.
This April late at the bank
that.
The lotus and then yes what.
You yes those pharmacy it is as
the style the numbers is that
Miss Vigil.
Some staff.
Our next we have Brian
Gillespie.
Brian Gillespie and please and
mute yourself.
Lou.
Yes you're on please all right
thank you so much
Madam chair for for taking my
Committee here I'm the.
Ins live in Albuquerque I'm a
member of the eight and if
you're familiar with the lay you
know that we've been trying to
get this passed in Albuquerque
and I have.
Say June from the last time the
city was thinking about this.
There are currently ten states
in twenty three other
jurisdictions that have passed
paid sick leave ordinances
granting basic a cruel rights to
more than forty six million.
Private sector workers dating
back upwards of ten years.
Opponents of paid sick leave are
stalling by asking for more
studies were saying that the sky
is falling but I I don't have
confidence that they've actually
read any of the numerous studies
that have been conducted.
Locally notably the UNM hero of
Business and Economic Research
impact study conducted for the
city less than two years ago at
no small feat taxpayers found
that not one business any paid
leave mandated jurisdiction has
been shown to have closed
because of these laws.
And that only a small number of
even have even registered an
effect on their bottom lines.
I'm at its most damning the.
B. B. E. R. study claims the
effects of mandatory paid leave
on businesses are inconclusive.
The study also acknowledges
keenly that employees least
likely to have Lee are likely to
be low income ninety percent
with incomes below fifteen
thousand per year and either a
second or third or sole income
earner in the household.
In other words the people who
are on the edge.
Who are supposedly incapable of
pulling hard enough on their
bootstraps who are most
exploitable.
Mr brown and black and who have
historically built twelfth
through the leads that grants us
are dazzling first world
lifestyles excuse me one second
sweetie I'm talking to be honest
for just a second.
Can you ask me.
My wife is teaching right now
but my child who Bill care for
right now needs my assistance so
please bear with me.
Even though the the B. B. E. R.
study failed to identify a
business that was closed by the
implementation of paid leave
what this legislation let's
assume that there is a cost to
implement even a basic paid
leave system and currently that
cost does not rest on the
business owner or the consumer
in any meaningful way but on the
workers and their families on
social service programs and of
course in the age of COVID
nineteen you don't have to look
hard for data showing poor black
people are dying and right
disproportionate to their
populations.
You don't have to look hard to
find staggering numbers related
to corporate bailouts.
Opponents also like to point out
the T. Lee has quote unquote
failed in Albuquerque at the
ballot and in previous
councilman motions as if this
means we're not in need of
change.
You know what other workers
rights campaigns also failed
before they were rightly written
into law.
Legality of unions in eighteen
forty two the abolition of
slavery in eighteen sixty five.
Minimum age requirements for
leaders in nineteen thirty eight
equal pay based on sex in
nineteen sixty three.
The illegality of racial
discrimination in sixty four the
illegality of age discrimination
sixty seven occupational safety
requirements in nineteen seventy
the illegality of sex
discrimination based on
pregnancy in nineteen seventy
eight.
Are you seeing a pattern.
If it were up to businesses to
grant these rights we would not
have them.
It is incumbent upon the people
who work the hardest for the
lease to demands them and to
defend them.
Please support this Hey Lee.
Legislation
And thank you thank you we
commend you for taking care of
your child thank you.
Next we have Northman Grumman
law.
Martha what.
I'm gonna play a record that at
one of our members that left for
us for you here.
It
was what is and will make you
go.
Melinda's implement those around
want to thank them thank what
else on.
Does
it does look look is to see that
yeah I'm not rusted associate
was.
The status of that is that the
National Guard was here on I do
that I haven't seen an impact on
model on the federal but those
young.
What is contained in this young
going to Clemente yes and then
it goes.
Or simply.
Next we have the remedy and when
you come on would you please
state your name.
For the record.
Hi I'm sorry I logged in with
the my employer's account
instead of my name is Erin hands
grow apologize for the
confusion.
so as I said my name is Erin and
I am a constituent here in
Albuquerque I'm a single mom of
two kids and I am a yoga teacher
a personal trainer and a fitness
educator.
I'm.
I am also a member of the Ole
and the working families party
and I deeply appreciate their
work and standing up for paid
sick leave.
My entire adult work life has
been spent working in some form
the service industry or as a
contract worker and in both
situations if I wasn't able to
make it to work because I a or
one of my kids were sick it
meant that I didn't get paid
that day.
As a member of a late A.
participated in phone banking in
support of the previous sickly
belts the conversations that I
had with workers throughout the
city throughout Albuquerque made
it clear even before the
pandemic that much many families
likely most families in our city
experience significant stress
and impossible decisions as a
result of not having a paid
leave option this was before the
pandemic and now in the midst of
this deadly and highly
contagious virus the six
literally couldn't be higher.
So though I'm now very fortunate
to have recently gotten a
position as a full time salaried
employee rather than a contract
worker most people in my
industry are not so lucky so
many people like me I have to
make daily decisions about
whether to protect ourselves our
families and our community or
paying rent and put food on the
table.
Other cities have successfully
demonstrated that we don't have
to make that choice paid sick
leave has been successfully
implemented in numerous places
without damaging the bottom line
of small businesses.
I ask that you are
representatives do everything in
your power to protect our
state's workers without us we
have no businesses no local
economy and no community I
sincerely hope that you'll
consider our value and vote in
support of this bill thank you
very much.
Thank you.
And actually your name the name
of the business has a lot of
significance thank you
so next we have on the money and
all.
Good afternoon.
Good afternoon my name is Anna
Maria doll and a member of the
working families party as a
survivor of domestic violence I
can say that simply leaving ones
of users not the end of the road
it is only the beginning in a
very long journey to healing as
an individual who needs ongoing
physical treatments for my neck
and back injuries inflicted by
my ex husband I can honestly say
that I have had to skip
countless treatments as a result
of not having no paid sick leave
protections and not being
allowed by my employers to
obtain such treatment as a
result I am in pain daily and
have been since my ex husband
strangled then conscious over
ten years ago as a single parent
such as myself for often faced
with the choice of going to work
or not getting paid to stay home
to care for sick children.
There been times in the past
which I've gotten written about
work because they chose to put
my son first and remain home
with him when he was sick as a
past employer of mine refused to
even allow unpaid days off.
Essential workers who face
repeated exposure to COVID
nineteen have a very high chance
of contracting the illness as
we've seen around the world so
they have an auto immune disease
like I do they're having to
weigh their life for death
options before every single
shifts accordingly many of us
myself included have had to
leave careers benefits and
pensions to find something that
was a better fit due to being
without paid sick leave
protections inflexible employers
and federal emergency leave
loopholes COVID nineteen did not
create these issues that simply
amplify them I know many of you
have seen the long wait lines in
the new step team the COVID
vaccine there are New Mexicans
who are faced with the option of
not paying a bill or receiving
their vaccine as such the
individual is the one who needs
to be considered first as we are
the only ones left without
protection left without grants
or loans from the city or state
well yes to house bill twenty
thank you.
Thank you very much next we have
Jean Gen pardon Gen Matthews.
Good afternoon chairwoman and
members of the committee my
name's Jennifer Matthews and I
and and organizing the building
New Mexico and I'm going to play
a recording from one of our
members who unfortunately was
unable to be here today.
That my name is Alexander and
Menemen resident physician here
in Albuquerque New Mexico and
family in primary care I just
wanted to voice my support and
paid sick leave for New Mexicans
as a position it is
unfortunately common that
patients have to leave the
hospital or whatever care
facility they're being treated
at early because they can't
afford to miss work they often
also sometimes forgo care all
together for the same reason and
what that means for us what that
means for patients is that they
often get sicker it often costs
more money and it often takes
longer to treat them which
doesn't truly benefit anybody
least of all the patients and
their families but neither the
employers that employ them and
in the communities in which they
exist I also want to say as a
one man I think it's abysmal the
impact that this pandemic has
had on women and the loss of
careers in the loss of jobs in
no small part because of the
role of caregiver that they
often occupy both in their
families and their communities
at large
I think when women are supported
as mothers as nurses as teachers
as doctors as daughters as
grandmothers as T. as that
whatever it is that they
they do.
That's all it was thank you.
Thank you.
Dr Torrez Lawrence.
Okay I'm sorry I missed sorry.
Lucila low sodium please.
When I went to miss school term.
What when I started listening to
proceed then staying in the
local May Day May yeah most C.
level so yeah so you're not
gonna have a sincere the little
guy that we know the Nino my
dad that I see holes in your
building centrally ones are a.
Lab on them yeah I in fact alarm
system yes hello there are four
reports social media.
Is this young man thank enquest
deliver this fellow yes WFAN and
Sierra I'm sentiment they won
brought that they call with the
S. eleven with that I hope you
liked this post I mean you know
what I know for a lot most of
the while I'm on your one though
must assist the wheels.
This that the implement spend
your Randall got proportionally
Espial sporting admit that for
the analysis I see in the our
monthly fee seeing as This Is
your Michelin Mr sandals people
there element that on was just
for me yes another man thank
this is the no one would also
awful the little with the Polis
castle the one thank you yes a
mast what can be the this is the
that one estimate when I see the
kia Rio de suddenly settled the
locust alleged on the contract
comes.
System we are we also I said I
built the whole discussing
jealous again establishment that
they stop funding you yeah I'm
gonna miss this WTF and Sierra I
see the the feces State Farm was
going to begin the like one man
most stubble Italy wants to give
me from media.
No collie Fegan for loss of use
finance Seattle's the same level
the Los Altos program are you
that can move towards I mean yes
well young the staff.
No with this also put the
imposed the next the table
tennis yet I'm in the committee
stand you
know for the most gold.
The the only way may so that he
settling for funds yeah it is
just Fund bicycles woman most
come with access for the test
but also what impediment Act.
Is necessary okay will then see
a lot of Representative zoom up
on the Sava that should be being
the this is a dumb also see that
list but a program monthly Alice
in we will make sure yes yes.
Thank.
Next we have doctor Tasha
Barnes.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the community can
committee my name is Dr Tasha
Barnes today I speak as a
representative of the primary
care advocates for healthy
communities we are a group of
about twenty primary care
practitioners in New Mexico at
the last hearing I suppose spoke
in support of house bill thirty
seven and I would like to
commend the sponsors on the hard
work and presenting an excellent
renewable and I speak in support
of now house bill twenty please
don't make our patients choose
between their health and their
jobs allow them to X. and cute
their human right to care for
themselves and their families
thank you.
Thank you next we have actually
bail.
Yes thank you madam chair in the
committee I appreciate your
advocacy for our workers and
their families I spoken for last
week.
only speak and support again you
know one bank this center
Pacific policy and review their
call urging my fellow business
owners to do better but
importantly right now I want to
remind the committee that
sometimes the government needs
to stand up to protect the
people from forces to Johnson
and I on our own and this is one
of those times your constituents
need you to correct this failure
and guarantee their rights to
paid sick leave thank you for
your time.
Thank you very much next we have
a great to Frazier.
And your fellow representatives
my name is Greg Frazier
president of the United food and
commercial workers of New Mexico
Representative over forty two
hundred grocery workers I want
to thank each of you for your
time your service to our state
I may have saved us all our
today without doing so
intentionally thinking that no
comment would be hard
I do speak on behalf of of those
four thousand workers who do
show up to work sick.
Let's ask ourselves what why do
workers show up SEC two reasons
one these workers have no other
option
most workers would work with
symptoms rather than use the day
they're saving to spend with the
family or friend maybe on a trip
or vacation.
Day after day workers without
paid sick leave choose the work
over missing rent or buying
food.
I'd like to ask each of you just
a couple quick questions you
could ask yourself one.
Do we believe that a worker not
feeling well is going to give up
one fifth of the weekly income.
What each of you get about
twenty percent of your weekly
income because you're not sure
if your fever means anything.
Do you believe New Mexicans are
not living week to week
workers without CAFé.
Our place you mean the tire
community at risk H. bill twenty
is good for everyone the result
and help your community.
Health your classrooms and more
productive businesses this bill
is good for New Mexico it is not
free it does require working
reduce training costs for
businesses increase longer
employment thank you so much for
your time and I do ask that you
pass house bill twenty.
Thank you.
Next we have Jacqueline Rudy S..
When you're on mute yourself
please.
When incentives when it.
When.
The number this jacket into
this.
Yes hello and are proceeding the
members of the committee did.
so you member of this almost six
year noting this organises
we're going to Senator Monday so
most importantly you should
thing going into in Santa Fe
drink Daniels it that how the
king St use in in the city ever
stolen data each catering said
bees June guided receive me if
they need to and benefits to the
test in fit me that but I was
not just a little slow progress
in meeting and this I'm good
about how most of the little.
Mr swelled on on a second Sir
but the lesson this issue that
is best because in the at the at
use one main thing none us get
another part of what that would
look one when the man had my
you'll want one member of the
from media estimate that I am
not sure but by zoom seven
economic and study up on our
list we list the mace open about
it Brooks seem waste in the act
of a how to move to the
employees there but I'm not
dressed said many struggles all
you story I keep it in the list
given what they know how
orderliness at the rally
activity thank jacket is still
significant are highly
successful school you'll know it
and most of it on it and the
city that the school had
indicated that are hiding
federal what Senator singles I
which is less.
Next we have Tom.
Yes my name is father Tom Smith
I am the director I'm also with
with Kathy on axiom coffee axion
and I'm also the director of the
Franciscan director The Holy
Cross retreat center in the C.
part so I am employer in the
sense of that we have twelve
employees and we've chosen to
pay them.
The minimum wage even though we
didn't have to with every part
of us crucis we also put.
Part time positions into full
time position so that we can pay
them benefits I'm good to see
that this bill it appears gonna
be eight affecting part times
people as well I think that's
important most especially that
this is a faith issue it's not
just an economic issue such as
houses affect our finances but I
think we have to use is a
justice issue that affects our
faith and our ability to express
ourselves as those who are
compassionate and caring for
those who are the most need of
sick pay and sick thank take
that time off to care for
themselves thank you very much
for your time to this by.
Thank you thank you for that
next we have actually long.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is actually along with the
American federation of teachers
New Mexico for the sake of time
I'll keep it short we all know
we're seeing a shift across our
country and across New Mexico on
the air the era of respecting
the American worker is upon us
and it's past time that we
passed measures like this with
all we ask you to support the
bill thanks so much.
Thank you.
And next we have more someone
Daniel.
Go ahead mark Mantegna.
We having the same issue
excellent now.
With that one Daniel.
You can go on.
All right let's move on and hope
that she can come on later then
at David Abbey this.
Good afternoon Madam chair
person Representative
Representative that asos my name
is line up and it be this I'm a
community organizer with cafe ox
you on from Grant County I'm a
member of a community that
relies heavily on mineral
extraction jobs that offer good
but their employees.
However the other large majority
of this community is a service
industry economy that goals
without the advantage of
benefits like paid sick leave
with those in the industrial
jobs are afforded as mentioned
previously our community is one
hundred miles from most medical
specialists this requires
workers and their families to
travel to receive advanced
medical care without paid work
leave summer unable to leave
Grant County to seek the needed
care for example are nearest
trauma center or make you is two
to four hours away many families
must be separated during these
times of crisis simply because
they are unable to have unpaid
work days I would invite the
committee to take rural
communities into consideration
when considering H. B. twenty
and some of the challenges faced
here that did not exist in the
metro areas I ask members
especially my own Representative
that access to advance this bill
thank you.
Thank you.
Next we have a phone number of
five zero five.
Two zero eight eight two five
one when you come on would you
please state your full name.
Number ending in eight to five
one.
All right we're gonna go ahead
and move on to Fauset fina.
All right.
Let.
We're we're the second time I
don't see anybody clicking on so
it would be next would be J. D.
Matthews.
Hi you madam chair and committee
members my name is Judy Matthews
on with the New Mexico School
working families party I just
want to
I know long ago we heard from
some in opposition to this bill
a few of them had mentioned on
foreseen and unintended
consequences of passing a
minimum standards for paid sick
leave and I would argue that we
have a lot of foreseen and
intentional consequences if we
don't pass this we will have
more sick people we will have
sick people who get more sick
and it'll continue to be a
strain on our state resources we
need to think about the Human
Aspect of this and the public
health aspect of this also I
know madam chair and members of
the committee we didn't do an
official poll today but I think
from the public testimony we've
seen many many many people who
are in support of this bill that
brought together both the sides
of this issue and came together
in a great compromise that will
help workers in our state I want
to thank and highlight the
decision to provide this virtual
access to this committee and to
the house in the legislature as
a whole and thank you madam
chair into the house leadership
who made that decision because
we see more activity in more
participation than I think ever
before and we've heard that in
the testimony on this bill and
paid sick leave directly from
workers with real lived
experiences that would have been
heard otherwise and so I think
it's port important to highlight
that and really thank you
because I think it's powerful to
hear from people who care about
the legislative process they've
always cared about it but
haven't always gotten the
opportunity to drive up to Santa
Fe in the two months of the year
that we get to hear from the
legislature so thank you on
thank you madam chair and I urge
you to support this bill that
really brought the sides
together for for workers and for
public health have a great day.
Thank you.
We have Jennifer Santini.
Jennifer Santini.
Yes thank you thank you madam
chair and members of the
committee for allowing me to
speak today my name is Jennifer
thanking I am speaking at the
grant street Representative of
the New Mexico working families
party as a mother of three
children I can tell you the
countless times that I had to
choose between staying home with
my child would bring a hundred
six degree fever and projectile
vomiting first is going to work
because I didn't I with my job
and the ability to provide for
my children the most difficult
choice that you make with the
time I had to leave my child who
was extremely ill at the
hospital just like to go back to
work but I didn't lose my job
and the countless times that
I've had to force myself to go
to work when I would tell this
is inequity paid sick leave
provide economic security for
workers who otherwise income
from market they must take time
off due to illness paid sick
leave also reduces the
transmission of illnesses and of
be many workers including myself
do not have the luxury of
working from home uptick or
tending to our children or
family members we have to choose
between caring for them in
ourselves or risk losing our
hours are income and
conditionally our job.
In our current state would be
based on for into due to the
ongoing COVID nineteen pandemic
we have no reliable information
or data available to be for an
when the pandemic will provide
very hard quality and how the
pandemic impact New Mexicans
economically pandemic are not
paid sick leave has been long
overdue we need you to make the
right choice time I urge you to
pass H. B. twenty healthy
workplaces Act that will
guarantee paid sick leave for
all workers The New Mexico
limits for the crown.
Thank you we have a leading up
Martinez.
Hi.
These.
Yes you we can hear you okay
then gonna have that is the the
one of them on but I know it the
phone also knows is a member of
the Medicaid with a
participating in.
Representative member of the.
The one guy and ensure you get a
little better yes but yet that
the events want to see you see
action in a very active Michael.
Thank
you very much this one yes yes.
At the end and the federal nine
to me and some people think.
A more equal stuff but I guess
maybe the
mile state thank you thank okay
elected most goals hello thank.
Thank you to the end of it.
That you see on yeah.
I mean what can you do that.
This and this so must meet.
Media it is.
It may.
Yes but not with.
Next.
Yes yes.
Next we have Is ASMP.
Yes thank you madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Is is empty the the lobbyist
for the sheet metal workers
local forty nine here in New
Mexico we stand in strong
support of this measure and hope
that every committee member
considers the working people the
put of do the work of the no one
else is willing to do so we hope
that you are both to support
this thank you.
Thank you and I'm we have our
subpoena.
Next.
Hi fina.
All right I'm I believe a
subpoena had issues earlier so
for the second time I'm gonna go
ahead and
will on and I I just want to
make a quick comment before we
we move on we receive some very
sad news moments ago.
about a shooting that occurred
that took the lives of
Law enforcement and the victim
in Law slowness so it's an act
it just occurred so I wanted to
make sure that everyone.
New Mexico state police officer
was shot and killed in Luna
county and several officers were
injured and the suspect is
deceased so just take a few
moments
Your cells and
Keep them in your thoughts and
prayers thank you and it's
pretty evident before I go to
the committee that the poll was
pretty self evident so I hope
everyone appreciates that we
entertained a good discussion
today and I will now turn it
over to committee and I see on
one hand Representative Garcia.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you Chandler.
Or bringing this legislation
forward
You know.
Basically this worker right.
And
Just like other worker rights
I think minimum wage.
wage that.
Workman's comp.
Unemployment insurance.
Over time.
Collective bargaining.
Workforce development.
Worker health and safety.
And
You know it's always been.
The will of this committee to.
We've invested with the.
Kind of tasked with upholding
workers rights to the fullest.
And in that same mindset.
being mindful of Business.
But.
We historically have been
passed.
With a folding worker rights to
the fullest.
And we've done a darn good job
on minimum wage.
We've done a darn good job on
wage theft.
New Mexico ranks in the top.
One.
It in terms of the the most
comprehensive weight staff loss
in the country.
And we passed that line two
thousand nine out of this
committee.
You know
We basically cooked that bill.
We season the.
We stopped there with the
stuffing.
We put it in the oven.
And let it cook a good twelve
hours before that Turkey was
ready.
You know and that's what this
committee is tasked to do.
Whenever it comes to worker
rights.
This is the first time in the
last stop in terms of how this
legislation should pan out.
We don't have that
responsibility to the prior to
the following committee.
If it's the commerce committee
if it's the judiciary now.
This committee is tasked.
With the only worker rights to
the fullest.
And whatever comes in the this
committee in regards to these
worker rights is what we expect
to be signed by the governor.
And
and this issue before us.
Is no different.
And
I want to kind of address some
things on the legislation.
And
Many issues of clarity because I
basically.
Support the substitute in its
entirety.
for your information madam chair
Representative Chandler.
section two.
Is called the purpose clause.
I can guarantee you.
That in in rolling and grossing.
They're going to take that out.
Because purpose clause has no
purpose.
In that just.
You know it does just the
Committee.
You know so keep that in mind it
should never done in eight up to
begin with so I don't know why
you have it in there because
it's going to come out invention
you.
The madam chair.
And
Also madam chair and
representative
let's go to page five madam
chair section for.
my question is
The highlight of this section
he.
Perspective item eight is
employees shall not creating a
minimum of one hour of earned
sick leave for every thirty
hours worked.
And.
The the the cake on that is.
The use of sixty hours in a
twelve month period in terms of
the basically so my question to
you I'm sure Representative
Chandler is how standard is
this.
Senator is this policy in terms
of what other states have
adopted
where are we on that scale.
What has been implemented in
terms of basically throughout
our country.
Madam chair representative.
Representative
I will defer to our labor
attorney on that I know that in
preparing this this bill there
was a scan of the comparable
sorts of legislation that exists
so I defer to my expert if I may
madam chair and representative.
Okay thank you.
Madam chair representative
Garcia she needs the at the
short answer is that there are
few other states notably
California and and a few other
states who have a similar amount
of lead time at sixty four hours
which is the equivalent of eight
sick days per year.
Okay thank you for that the
madam chair
And the Representative Chandler.
Also
On page nine.
I'm gonna ask you madam chair
resident Chandler to summarize.
Not necessarily go point point
point four point verbatim on
section five.
Thanks line starting on section
section five
H. nine which is supplemental
Lee.
During a.
Public health emergency.
So if you could summarize for
the committee.
What we are doing in this
section which runs from eight
nine page thirteen.
Why do we have this in their
what what is the benefit what is
the purpose.
Why is it needed.
how is it related in terms of
our our.
No objective of
of providing paid sick leave.
You have a specific section in
here that deals with.
supplemental leave.
During a public health
emergency.
Madam chair Representative thank
you very much for that question
and like to point out that was
an original provision in the the
bill that was merged into House
Bill twenty and we all thought
it was a very important part of
provision and it was well
thought out and in terms of
additional benefits and madam
chair and representative I think
it's almost self evident having
gone through this in credible
hardship of the pandemic in the
disproportionate impact the
pandemic has has had on average
working people who have who have
not had the benefit of being
able to leave the workplace when
they've been exposed or in or
actually even infected with the
illness that we've been
suffering from right now so this
is I think a very forward
thinking provision that
recognizes there may be it's a
exigences come stances in the
future as well as now that will
require us to ensure that
workers safety public safety by
allowing and encouraging workers
to stay home when they've been
exposed or are suffering from a
disease of the nature that we
are suffering from now thank you
for that question madam chair
and representative.
Thank you Representative
Gender for that summary
And
And also the the need to kind of
incorporate that element and in
this legislation overall.
Madam chair of section six.
H. thirteen.
More generous earned sick leave.
That's a term that you you would
use like in that game show.
On TV.
And we also have a more generous
earned sick leave the
Whatever got the now anyway.
Summarize that.
That the title might might seem
it misleading to me in terms of
you just got you got you not
only other four for regular see
the but you can get generous
sick leave if you hit the target
you know.
Well my colleagues could my
experts can weigh in but in a
nutshell a madam chair and
representative it knowledge is
the fact that
Many employers and offer
leave policies and sick leave
policies that are more than
eight days for every twelve
months and we are not intending
that this bill or any of the
provision that the provisions in
this bill impact that more
generously and there's anything
that I miss madam chair I'm sure
my.
And incredibly intelligent
experts can help me.
Okay but there you go I I guess
I got I got I got that one thank
you representative madam chair
thank you for that for that
verification and and and the
definition and I really
What's that title to rest in
terms of but I understand you
know that this legislation does
not set a minimum.
If there's another an initiative
out there that goes over and
beyond in that other initiative
basically trump's this
legislation.
So.
That's good because we have
businesses that definitely
provide over and beyond you know
and and there are those people
out there it's just that the
overwhelming majority kind of a
and see no need.
To basically address the issue
updates that eight sick leave
and have no intention I really
addressing those needs and
concerns.
From the workforce
also madam chair in terms of
section eight.
Fifteen
Notice and posting requirements.
You know these these are raining
really meaningful madam chair.
And the the one that kinda
really stands out is number four
that retaliation against
employees or the use of sickly
it sickly.
Is.
And so right off the bat.
You know we the employer.
As the basically given notice to
the employee that this is the
policy of this business this
company.
this worksite etcetera etcetera
and and that is really
important.
You know that we're up front in
terms of what these workers
rights are and
And how this company business
corporation cetera
looking for.
To this law.
And and giving public notice
that that is the case.
also on the section ten page
sixteen.
Exercise of rights protected
that retaliation provided that
at.
Again you have language that
Really protects the employee.
In terms of any action or that
of the employee to seek.
Eight sick leave or
any action contrary.
On the employer who does not
wish to pursue providing.
Those conditions of paid sick
leave.
And
You know I heard
Also
Madam chair
I heard that some of the
testimony.
That the the legislation was.
Thanks to the.
Ordinary.
Towards the.
The employer.
In in terms of of
basically
Enforcement.
Of the legislation and Madam
chair representative and our
Section thirteen.
Employer liability.
Can you give an example of item
one.
Madam chair representative bear
with me I'm scrolling down my
document.
Okay thank you item one.
For instance of paid family.
Of paid sick leave taken by an
employee but unlawfully not
compensated by the employer okay
thank you madam chair
representative that's the that
is the trouble what people would
refer to as the treble damages
provision I think and
I would point out to you that is
not an uncommon provision in
these kinds of laws Madam chair
representative that I believe
our minimum wage laws have
similar kinds of provisions the
federal
over time the acronym for which
I don't recall has a treble
damages provision to and the
reason we have these kinds of
provisions madam chair
representative is
We the employer has the is and
has the advantage in that they
administer the program and if an
employee is not given the
benefits for which they are
entitled in this case the sickly
for which they are entitled.
They have to go somewhere and
complain and they have to go
through this long potentially
somewhat lengthy administrative
costs process and if the damn if
if the employee only work to get
the damages that they were owed
meaning simply the hours that
they were not given and sick
leave there would be no
disincentive for the employer to
comply with the law now I say
that so they we triple them so
that there is actually a penalty
and it dissuades the employer
from at the you know acting
badly if you want to put it that
way to the M. M. employee madam
chair and representative I will
and I do want to say this.
It's rare that this provision
needs to be used because almost
all employers ninety eight
percent of employers it follow
law and do what's right by their
employees these kinds of work
but provisions are put into
statute Madam chair
representative for the back the
few bad actors but those bad
actors can have a big impact on
their workforce and so we must
have strong penalties to
dissuade employers from doing
the wrong thing towards their
employees thank you madam chair
Representative thank you for the
clarity that explanation madam
chair of Senate Chandler and all
of section thirteen items one
two three four five.
Six basically are in tune with
that summary that you just
shared.
In terms of elaborating on item
one.
And
and I can I can of a you know
with confidence.
Tell the committee.
That that the trouble trouble
damage.
Concept.
Was a component part of the two
thousand and nine.
Thanks that.
Legislation that we did.
And
and that piece of legislation in
two thousand and nine was
nonpartisan.
It passed unanimously in the
Senate.
There are some dissenting votes
on the house but it had
Republican bipartisan support.
And
So it's not uncommon that we
apply a high standard when it
comes to the main violation.
Our.
Los.
Especially when it comes to
worker rights.
Madam chair Representative
Chandler.
And you're right.
Madam chair sent Chandler.
There are those few.
For the most part the employers.
In this section or the the the
the.
This legislation in terms of its
back on employers I can
guarantee you it will be what
you just stated.
The ninety five ninety eight
percent well without hesitation
implement the law to its fullest
but they're still at two
percent.
It to present on the wage that
legislation.
Was the holding of ten thousand
dollars of an employee in Gallup
New Mexico.
By the employer.
Ten thousand dollars.
Okay wages that this employer
what his blood and sweat into
and legally earned and was not
being compensated.
That's the kind of two percent
that we're talking about here
and chair.
And
Yes all the questions that I had
and.
I wish.
The best for the.
Representative in terms of.
Moving this legislation forward
hopefully in its entirety
and seen it come to fruition you
know at the end of the session.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative.
Thank you Representative next we
have on the list Representative
the process.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative for a.
Along with your.
For the discussion
I was actually quite
disappointed not.
Well.
With the with this committee
our.
That we pass just roll over.
We we we roll this over
basically so that we could find
result.
Between the two the two what
legislators.
The business community.
And and so.
You know we all have concerns.
About their ability to your.
Representative you froze up
enough you can hear this.
I'm not quite sure anyone if
he's in the building I don't
know.
Representative you might want to
take off take out down your
video stop your video.
If you can hear.
I guess.
Chair maybe someone could text
him yes Representative black
could you or someone please
committee chair as secretary.
I'm on it ma'am thank you.
I should announce who was
already on it thank you.
If he's not able to come on in
the next few minutes perhaps we
can move on to the next hand
that we have.
And
That would be our chair
representative I've gone are you
on Representative and con.
Thank you you won't be last
Representative divided gone
because we're Representative
law says somehow
Got knocked out of
the system.
For expediency time please go
forward.
Not not that of the.
And I'm sorry madam chair.
I got my job.
And then a place where I can get
internet service and the only
place I can find this
McDonald's.
Some of the MacDonnells parking
lot.
Trying to think that.
What's by.
What is that about why even now
by cameras would stir up to
where I'm seeing the other side
of my side anyway want to see me
anyway but let me explain
something okay and I just heard
the I just heard the beginning
part of what Representative the
doctor says that.
And I said and when I.
Both of the.
Of the sponsors of the bills out
I stand them and I did this I
have to analysis of my hand I
want to get out there and make
that one bill I did not say
anything about business I did
not say anything about bringing
in the governor I just said
thank those two bills bring them
back make a more one B. L..
That's all I said I've got
nothing else.
But
let me just say.
In support of legislation okay I
can't I mean everything that I
was going to talk about
Representative next to get
involved in the best way
possible okay I have no
questions about the legislation
after he wouldn't through.
But.
Once.
I got a lot of calls from this.
Business wants now one part of
this.
Now this I want to be here I
want to be part of this.
And in all my thoughts on this
very simple business you're
being around forever.
Business you have had the
opportunity to do so.
Why is it that government has to
step in and do what you should
be doing voluntarily.
That is my thought completely so
one business calls me and they
say you didn't include you were
never part of the deal we were
we were just left out totally
guess what.
Concerned businesses being here
a long long time.
And then they say the pandemic
the pandemic is going to kill us
now we get to for to do this
because none of the pandemic yes
it's just really going to hurt
us.
We did the minimum wage bill
Representative.
Garcia remember very seriously
everybody was going to go broke
and they were going to have to
be the state of New Mexico
because they would not be able
to pay that other what did.
We end up in our more whatever
it was we so.
We hear this every business
comes in they have their
lobbyist they pay big money to
their lobbyists and they call
and they call in the call.
In my only comment is why is
that we have to proposed
legislation like this when the
business was really ready to do
this it would have been done.
A long long time ago so with
that in mind madam chair all of
the kids with that and I see a
Representative device that.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative us us yes sorry
about that.
dries it I don't know what
happens last up.
I don't know who's Cherry is
that going to be I'm
Representative.
Madam chair and and
C. chair
going.
And Representative chair I you
know now.
What I was going to say is this
okay yes said bring both sides
together.
Mr chair
My understanding of brought my
name into this into this
conversation well I was just
gonna be brought to the
conversation you'd specifically
told me that I was going to
Representative I don't get any
of that opportunity it's fine
it's one it's not I was just a
it was disappointing to me
because I just wanted to have a
conversation it wasn't so much
for anything else now back to.
Shares up comments about
business.
Yes right
you know I'm a business man I've
been a business man since I was
twenty seven years old okay and
I
I grew up in a in a in a in a in
a business that run construction
company
and I that's all I've ever done
and I as a as a best starting
business when I'll get.
You better than if I wanted to
retain my employees and I want
to take care of my employees
even on a small scale when I was
really really small and I only
had one employee I would always
take care of that employing and
then two three and four as I
could as I could grow and so
to you know our share of going
has madam chair up you have some
merit in saying that that there
should be have been addressed by
certain businessmen but also say
that
chair of.
Are you gonna chair but
Representative sure a Chandler
mentioned that there was ninety
eight percent of the businesses
are doing good except for two
percent are ones that are the
problem.
So I would agree with that I
would agree that there's a lot
of good businesses out there
doing the right thing.
My I guess.
You know to me it was more of a.
Of a.
One expression of respect.
If you ask me to do that and be
part of something which which
was what whatever was when there
was just preparation or
something I would appreciate it
just to be of a conversation
which I tried I tried
I will also tell you that before
this legislation came on.
I had a I have zero.
Anybody contact me about this no
no this column you hated you got
to support this you gotta you or
go against it or whatever I have
nothing nothing none of that.
and so you know I think the
problem here is more that I'm
expressing it because I was as
as a businessman I'm not just
talking about just all about
business and I think I was
labeled that the last committee
meeting and I and I kind of take
take up a fence in that because
I can tell you whole heartedly
that I've worked very hard to to
try to take care of the small
person whether to my company or
the people that we serve and I I
can speak for a lot of companies
that do that so you know even
though I've been providing are
destructive sick leave and this
is an all about me I just I just
resent anybody just saying all
it's just all about business in
there the feel left out of there
they're not being included or
you know what they have a voice
and they should have a voice in
it it in in respect that you're
madly mandating them you madam
dating them to follow the rules
that the state now is in an
imposing on them and so the
problem the problem that I
really see is that we have one
size fits all.
What what what what are of hurt
for us to have a conversation
and find some some ways because
I agree with with some of what's
on there I agree I think
everybody should venture I'm one
of those I'm a leader in that in
that asked in the in that
respect.
What.
Also one size does not fit all
you have you have you have
things in here think about what
we're seeing your the some of
the the the mandates that are
there placed here.
Think about the small
businessman the mechanic that's
working in is in the shop.
You really believe that man's up
is is is the skill may not be so
good when it comes to paperwork
and what what I mean by that
there's language in here that
instead of saying you know what
because I mean I'm sure every
person in this panel.
Has not been able to balance
their checkbook and so this will
say that the mechanic or plumber
or some small business then
turns around in agency calculate
something doesn't account for
something all those all the
sudden now he's being dragged
into into
analyzing instead of having some
sort of some sort of letter
stating Hey that's up we have
what we have what we have
something that you need to the
forty five days to to to resolve
this want to
account for this for this this
this our complaint and so I
don't see any of that and so you
know it wasn't so much I was
just
If you've never run a business
if you've never started the
business I don't think we
understand.
And I know what it was or what
it what it was and what it is to
be able an employee making
minimum wage at three thirty
five and I know what it is to
start a business when you you go
out there and you risk
everything you have to borrow
enough money to start a business
and one you're all.
And those in that fragile
moment.
Very difficult to mandate what
you're mandating here the same
at your you're asking large
corporations you're asking that
start up guy.
Yes yes Sir but not not only are
are are you required to to you
know you put everything on the
on the on the table to try to
better yourself and your family
you're you're saying Hey you
have to be clever to what
they're doing up at it in in a
in a corporate style
environment.
I'm sorry that's going to I
honestly believe that that's
going to create barriers.
Between I would consider argue
all day and I have a list I
looked at that that that that
have problems and and issues
that I could sit here and go you
know what this page on page nine
fourteen page thirteen this that
another general what I'm being
completely.
Totally sincere I truly believe
that we do not sit down and have
a real conversation because
there cannot be one size fits
all legislation that that that
that
That that is going to be
implemented the same as that
little guy that runs up the food
of food out stand that has
The the little mechanic shop he
doesn't have a he doesn't have
the access to what account does
I'm telling you what I'm gonna
do it's that simple like I
always do have my CPA PM IBM are
to take your my pier on I I in
us to make sure that
everything's accounted for use
responsible for that not every
business can do that I know when
I started I could not afford
that.
And so and I know that I was
fragile at that moment and so
the barrier that I'm talking
about is if we're not careful we
don't find some some compromise
again Madam chair representative
chamber sure I want.
I don't mean any disrespect at
all I'm not you know I I always
ask questions because as we I I
I I learned that's where I'm
since you're in what I do and I
truly care about everything
that's being done here and so
sometimes I have to dig a little
deeper to to to find it in in
not only my heart but in my mind
to see this is going to really
work but I can tell you know all
I all I would like to see is I I
challenge I challenge the the
the.
The sponsors of this bill I I
challenge you to please
take a moment to think about
some of that stuff I just
brought up and some of these
employers because the employee
employer relationship the you
said that ninety percent of the
of the of of New Mexico
businesses are following.
Have a wonderful relationship
your unit you stated that two
percent are the are the of the
troubles of the troublemakers
the that the ones that that
there are bad actors there's bad
actors on both sides.
Sometimes sometimes there's
there's there's ways that you
can manage the employer
sometimes there's there's
employee employer to take
advantage of their employees and
that will with we we and and and
yes we should address that.
But I think this is just one
size fits all that is
detrimental to that small that
small business guide this was a
all my gosh there's all kinds of
regulation tions in this bill
now I'm not gonna I'm gonna have
to hire somebody yeah I'm gonna
cut down some of these are I
don't know if I can afford
to to do that.
And so should be scaled.
No I mean so these people you're
you're asking for them to take
looking extrication you got
other any other PTO and then
your holiday pay and then now
you have stacked sick leave and
then and then you say imagine
the little guy that has we two
employees of the employees the
sale by the way I'm gonna be
gone for two weeks just took a
half of his workforce oh wait a
third of his workforce wait and
and so that has to be balance in
that we're not talking about a
place that has three hundred
employees you know we're gonna
cover for Johnny you're just
gonna be done next week what
what will bring somebody in
you're talking about some small
people small tiny.
Importers that have been tasked
with the same responsibilities
as as a as a large corporation
you know I can tell you this
this this week you know I know
that we have again where debates
over what we should and and what
we what we all feel is best but
I can tell you truthfully our
fifty dollar an hour yeah we can
say all.
There's no there's not a lot of
this bill no and then on top of
that let's say we have the sick
leave and we have this we have
this we're staff and all the
stuff and you know.
Some one but I'm gonna tell you
the truth it is very stressful
when you have to make it real
there are some businesses that
struggle to pay their spider
insurance struggle to pay that
make the payroll they really do.
Payroll is normally the largest
expense that a business curse.
The real test my payment is what
my payment on on on some of my
buildings are a fraction and
your present my big buildings
there's something something
something to ten twenty percent
of our total sales generally.
Generally the rule is the
largest expense if it's made to
our they have to survive I'm
just I'm gonna finish with this
I was going to go through and
ask both through a lot of things
I'm gonna I'm it but I'm gonna
tell you what what I told my son
and I really miss
Some of these things that could
go through and so you know we we
we we have an issue here sure
there I I would I would
I would love to have a
conversation and truly you know
no matter what with the madam
chair with the Representative
Chandler and Representative
Rubio and often some of these
people.
It's it's again I feel that
something needs to be done there
needs to be reformed I agree
with that a hundred percent what
we has to be done in a in a way
that we can move forward and not
cripple some of the smaller
guys.
To my son sometimes I'll tell me
I'm gonna tell you something
funny I sometimes get called out
as a few of director we called
up twenty four seven and
sometimes I'll go out to see me
out at two in the morning three
in the morning some of this is a
way to go to their home that's
what I'm I stood out of respect
and show up to the wrong.
I'm telling you this because
this is important.
Go Reese.
Representative people can do
this Representative borders one.
Can work to all right of course
before that I'm gonna a
wonderful staff so I'm just
doing my part.
And I tell my son wondering that
we're working with the sun.
Your first to help our families
the people we serve in order for
us to keep costs down the best
of our ability the more we work
something the less we have we
have to expand this payroll
because we do it too much we
have to pass on for customer.
And some of our customers you
know in our business we have to
have a lot of people there needs
people cannot pay their bill
people that cannot cannot cannot
be what what what to take care
of their loved ones or whatever
to provide a a monument and I've
worked in offices would so
Thomas on remember son.
Don't be selfish the only ones
that's just want something that
takes up your part as much as
you can to try to help that that
poor person if you do that
you'll be able to you know it
will just just a little bit son
to help that family to keeping
our custom
I'm gonna leave it with that
because I I just I don't want to
go on and on over the all the
things I wanted to ask you
questions I'm again I'm gonna
I'm gonna challenge out the the
the the two reps and the
sponsors of the bill to have a
friendly conversation and see
how we can move forward
published you thank you for
entertaining my my thoughts in
their sincere and I'm you know
from my heart.
Thank you representative and I
just saw hand come up and that's
Representative Black.
Representative Black you're on.
Thank you madam chair I'm.
Trying to get everything on I'm.
Madam chair representative.
I'm sorry you know what we will
talk about that we we heard
these two bills the other day
that we got the committee
substitute and so some of those
are still working out the old
sorry little confusion here so I
guess my question is.
The substitute.
Can you can you reference where
is.
Is there somewhere in the bill
that says an employer that has
one employee or two employees
are are they still required to
to do this as every other
employee Madam chair
representative.
Madam chair representative all
employers are subject to this
legislation regardless of size.
Thank you Representative madam
chair so madam I guess I kind of
have a hard time with with that
concept
that's one of my issues
only because I I can't imagine
that we've got at a construction
crew or something that has you
know three guys that are built
the house
framers and.
They're paid very well.
They they don't earn sick leave
So that is going to increase the
cost of.
You know that that cost is going
to be shared to that to the
consumer it's it's going to cost
you more and then those
employers in those there are
some employers that that will
not be able to E. two at do that
so they have twelve in our or
how many employees there they're
probably gonna lose some we're
gonna lose some jobs at this I'm
so madam chair at Representative
I guess those are just my two
cents thank you so much.
Thank you representative I don't
see any more hands and I do want
to just call attention to
everyone that and this and
particularly to the comments
that Representative Miguel
Garcia made and that is that
this is the house labor
veterans and military affairs
committee so we are charged.
Principally to listen to
legislation that is
particularly in line with our
labor and workforce and and also
I would mention that in
Representative channelers
introduction she did mentioned
on several occasions as this was
on coming together that they had
had conversations with the
representatives of the business
community has had in what the
intention was so I just want to
make sure that we pay attention
closely to on the commentaries
that are that are being offered
by our representatives in an
attempt to be able to inform us
as we move along in making on
our decisions so I'm going to
ask Miss Representative Chandler
and Representative will be if
they'd like to have any closing
remarks.
I would if you if you don't mind
madam chair I will do my very
best to brief a brief I love
privative just on the point of
the business community I have
worked with the business
community all summer on a number
of initiatives including the
unemployment insurance fund or I
met with a number of the
speakers frequently and spoke
about the issues that we're
facing the businesses I'm very
sensitive to that and I am
sponsoring a bill that will it
proposes to inject three hundred
million dollars into the
unemployment fund from the state
coffers that is one thing we are
doing in support of businesses I
am also carrying a leader bill
which will provide monies to
businesses who are have been
severely impacted by the COVID
crisis and and that bill
provides two hundred million
dollars that we hope to get out
quickly to businesses to support
them so I see talk a lot to the
business community I was
thinking well we were talking
madam chair that I I think I've
been to ice had more
conversations with rob black in
the last two weeks that I have
with my own husband so I've
gotten to know him very well we
have a very good relationship
and we talk a lot about what we
can do to work together and I
will I plan on continuing to do
that as we move forward on this
bill on and on and many other
matters related to this these
kinds of issues.
I has been spending a lot of
time thinking about.
The sick leave employee benefits
how do we treat people a whole
litany of things in these last
few months partly because I've
been working on these bills but
partly because of all the
horrible things we've been
seeing in society and the lack
of kindness and caring that I
ate I think has been accelerated
in our country and it disturbs
me greatly are
we there are countries in this
world who provide benefits like
this to their employees on a
routine basis routine across the
board and businesses embrace
those programs Germany England
France I'm sure there are many
others and they are very
productive countries very
productive they they produce
goods and services that the
whole world benefits from and
I've been puzzled why we as a
society in the United States of
America reject that as our
fundamental belief that we
should all be in it together
that businesses benefit when
they support workers and workers
benefit when they support
businesses we that is not part
of our culture and I don't
understand it I've been trying
to understand that these last
few weeks as I've been hearing
all the complaints about this
bill a bill that encourages
people not to come into work
sick to infect other workers
those workers who will become
CENIC and I think it's very
short sighted for businesses not
to realize it hurts them when
there's a cycle of illness
within their business it hurts
them.
And why we can all come together
and agree that these are minimum
standards that other countries
do this on a routine basis and
they have a very healthy
coherent societies and I'd like
to all encourage us to focus on
that as we move forward I'd love
to work with the business
community more and I'm going to.
I'm certain of that and thank
you very much madam chair.
Thank you Representative and I
couldn't make notice
representative will be able
would like to say a few words.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representative no I don't think
I could have set it as as I.
Representative.
again I mention this early on is
that
This issue should not be an
either or should it should be
able to and we should be working
to support workers just as much
as people passionately fight for
and stand up for small business
and
and and I believe that that's
what Representative Christine
and I are Christine Chandler and
I are trying to do and and and
we welcome folks to be just as
supportive and as me again
Representative Garcia mentioned
earlier
that this legislation say just
as intact as it as it is today
and moving forward so with that
thank you.
Representative and I do concur
when you have a healthy and safe
workforce you have a productive
workforce thank you very much
what is the will of the
committee.
Madam chair a I'd like to make a
motion.
Go ahead.
Madam chair I move do not pass
on house bill twenty but a do
pass on health labor veterans
and military affairs committee
substitute for house bill
twenty.
Thank you and do I have a
second.
Is there a second I will
seconded.
Thank you so we have a proper
motion and we have a second.
Madam secretary will you call of
the wrong place Representative
bash.
Yes Representative Black.
Now Representative Garcia yes
Representative Hernandez no like
to explain more about.
Representative Rubio yes
Representative Stapleton.
Representative Terrazas.
No I'd like to expand my vote.
Madam chair Roybal Caballero.
Yes.
Representative Alcorn all yes.
Yes.
We have do you want to do.
And you read the the we have
five in the affirmative and
three in the negative.
Thank you very much and I'll go
ahead and Colin Representative
Mondays to explain his belt.
Thank you so much chairwoman.
I I can't vote for this build
strictly for the fact that I
have thousands of businesses in
my district that have one or two
employees and and this
legislation is going to
essentially get out.
Them in out of business and and
for that for that reason I I
have to go now thank you madam
chair.
Representative Representative
assets to explain your vote.
Thank you madam chair you know
even though I I agree that up
and and I think and I will.
My hat to the two
representatives will bring this
conversation to the table I I
sincerely
Wish that we would have a little
bit more thought in in in in
finding some ideas to progress
this.
To start with that new business
that for that business that is a
small find a
although I myself personally
feel very strongly about
supporting your employees and
three that.
Having of the a good look at
that one of my working down that
place the more time with them
than I do at home well as as
much as I I I believe that we
should always support that in
not relationships would be
really really solid and
respectful I I unfortunately I'm
and
very concerned about the small
business a little bit guide a
mom and pop that is being
leveraged and and mandated to be
up and forced to to to
have these mandates on them at
the same pace as as a as a large
corporation
I'm also afraid of the twenty
dollar to offer a little heat
that goes out on on on Sundays
up to go eat and and she can you
know they they're on a fixed
income they're not going to get
the the there.
Press is going to go up it's
just the way it works when when
these mandates come on in the
staff on costs costs of business
more it passed under customer
number I'm super worried about
school security reception that
only has that much and they're
not gonna get a rates yet our
our.
As a creep maybe going out to
Senator have lunch after church
thank you for that like the day
before thank you so much and and
and I appreciate the
conversation and may god bless
all of us and in our in our
efforts to look for and
hopefully come together to have.
Balance and respect one another
application.
Madam chair of point of order.
Yes I'm Representative the state
your point and madam chair you
have to declare the vote I was
about to do that
Okay I was about to do that
Representative thank you so on a
vote of I two three
Representative do have a due
pass on the committee
substitute.
And our.
Do not pass on house bill twenty
I said it reversed and do not
pass on house bill twenty and a
companion to pass on the
committee substitute.
Thank you madam chair thank you
for your attention and great
conversation members of the
committee.
Thank you and as mentioned at
the beginning of the meeting we
only have this one built to
entertain today so if there's no
other hands up and no other
business
will during the meeting.
Thank you thank you everybody
thank you everybody in the
audience ending today thank you.
Thank you.
