that are the habitat for
Humanities across the state are
one of the, the bigger users.
Uh, the main one that I'll
mention here in this area is the
New Mexico Housing Trust Fund.
Uh, I mentioned that a little
bit later, um, in this, uh, $122
million that we recently
received over the last 18
months. We've been able to
assist uh close to 5000 families
across the state, uh, with those
monies, and they really vary,
they are more flexible,
obviously than the federal funds
that we receive. Some examples
uh where we've used those monies
that we're real proud of is uh
we have an innovation.
Program, uh, that is a
catch-all, if you will, if uh
somebody has a need in their
community, but is it being met
by one of the other 40 programs
that we have that are specific
to an activity. They can come to
us and request money under the
housing innovations program.
Some of the examples of what
we've done there is we've uh
recently funded, um, a Forgive
me not park which is uh building
some uh tiny homes if you will,
uh, just south of uh Socorro for
uh veterans, homeless veterans.
Another example is that we just
funded our last year ramps, uh,
for New Mexico elderly folks,
uh, so New Mexico Rams was
funded. We recently celebrated a
groundbreaking in Las Cruces for
a permanent supportive housing
development of 50 units, which
is uh
Uh, housing, if you will, rental
housing, uh, apartment complex
for those that are homeless with
the supportive services on site.
Uh, you might have seen a little
bit of press around that. Uh,
another one is we uh funded a
mobile home replacement program
for the uh north central New
Mexico economic development
district that is going very well
and I know there's interest to
continue to do more of that
across the state. We are one of
the states that has a higher
percentage of manufactured
housing, I think it's 15% across
the state compared to uh
National average I think is less
than 5%.
Uh, one other program there is
the also with the same agency as
the WIN program, Workforce
integration program, uh, and
that is where folks that come
out of the uh correctional
facilities being integrated back
into the workforce and
providing. If you look on the
right hand side, we have
programs to preserve and improve
existing affordable housing, uh,
two programs that I'll mention
here is we have a uh home rehab
program where we go and we look
at the folks that are uh very
low income and a lot of cases.
Uh, they live in the colonials
on tribal land or elderly, and
we bring their uh homes up to
the HUD home rehab standards or
occupancy standards. Uh, another
one here that is very popular is
our weatherization program, uh,
we go in there and we weatherize
and make the homes more energy
efficient and it's not just uh
putting uh plastic or weather
stripping on the doors. It's a
very technical program run by
DOE, uh, with a computerized
system to assess uh.
The best measures to make that
house more efficient and then a
lot of cases, the average uh
folks are saving at least 15% on
their utility bills, um.
Uh, the last one that I'll
mention in this category is uh
fairly new to us, is uh
restoring our communities, uh,
program, the rockC program we
call it under this program, uh,
we have uh agencies that we
contract with, they will go out
and purchase uh uh homes that
are foreclosed or abandoned,
rehab them and put them for sale
for low income families and so
it helps bring up the
neighborhood, uh, cuts down on
crime and people going in there
and vandalizing those songs, so
that's kind of getting off the
ground, fairly new to us.
Um, building home ownership and
wealth. Uh, this is the last
area that I'll cover here before
uh taking some questions from
you. Uh, we have a program I
mentioned earlier, first-time
homebuyer program, generally our
interest rates are below market
right now they are 0.75 below
marks at 3 75%. And as you know,
with the high interest rates
that we currently have, that
saves a lot of folks.
A lot of money over a 30 year
mortgage period. Um.
In addition to that, we have a
down payment assistance program
or several down payment
assistance programs, um, so
funded through our general fund,
the uh borrower can take a 4% of
the sales price of the house as
a down payment assistance, so on
a $300,000 house, they would get
$12,000 in down payment
assistance, uh, in addition to
that, uh, and this is funded
through the Housing Trust Fund
that I mentioned earlier, uh,
they get $10,000 of additional
down payment assistance.
So this particular example with
a $300,000 house, uh, family can
get $22,000 in down payment
assistance.
Excuse me.
Uh, the other program here is a
partner's program. This is a
long-standing program where we
partner with the Habitats for
Humanity. Uh, they build homes
and generally have to wait 30
years to receive payments at a
0% interest from the folks that
uh purchase those homes. We go
in there and provide liquidity.
We purchase those loans from
them upfront, give them the
money so they can continue to
build and we wait as an agency
for those 30 years to receive
the monthly payments. Um,
I'd lie to you. I have the, the
back page of this, I'll just
real quickly uh programs to
create uh stable housing
environments. We have a lot of
programs for, uh, for homeless,
if you will, some of them funded
for the federal, federal
government, uh, and some of them
from state funding as well. Uh
the one that I'll mention here
is the uh
We have the linkages program
with the healthcare authority,
we receive funds to do that.
It's vouchers for people that
have severe mental illnesses or
behavioral health illnesses. Get
him a rental voucher and then
the supportive services that are
provided by uh a supportive uh
agency to help them maintain
their housing and uh develop
those life skills that they need
and Madam Chair, with that, I'm
open to taking any questions
that you might have, and I do
apologize for flying over many
of these programs.
No, thank you, Mr. Hernandez.
That was fantastic. Um,
wonderful overview. Are there
any questions from the
committee? right? Uh, let's
begin with, uh, Representative
Gonzalez.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair. No
it's just the same question, um.
It's a lot to digest here, lots
of great information, um, is
there, uh, the same, if, if
you'd be willing and able to
share your contact information
for, for the rest of about some
of these programs. Madam Chair,
definitely, and I think uh Robin
might have put my uh contact
information there, so you're uh
you're, and we have more extras
here if your packet didn't get
one. So uh please feel free to
give me a call and uh I don't
know the answer, I'll direct you
to the, the smart people that
do.
Thank you for that. It was just
a little tucked in the folder.
Thank you, Representative Lord.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I just
want to say thank you. That was
a lot of we've got a lot of
information this morning.
I need more coffee.
No, thank you. I'll be reaching
out to you there's a lot of
information and I've Torrance
County and there's a lot of
things that are applicable to
that area, but because I, I, I
have.
Very distinct area of these
mountains that don't have these
issues. I have Albuquerque that
doesn't have these issues and
then Torrance County has a lot
of these issues. Representative
McCullen.
I just want that but this is a.
Representative Mason. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Uh, just to say
also thank you.
Thank you for the information,
you know, housing is gonna be
one of the forefront issues I
believe during this session. I
mean, it's.
It's a lot talked about and we
like.
Stephanie said there's each
area, each of our
Uh, constituent areas, you know,
with, uh, have.
Different scenarios, you know,
we have our.
Rural, we have our towns, you
know, the main towns in my
district.
You know, are, are pretty well,
but we have our, our small hopes
like Arthur's and, you know,
little small communities and
stuff that really struggle with,
you know, with housing for their
residents and, and especially
For keeping their housing up.
But thank you, we're looking
forward to seeing what y'all
bring forward. Thank you. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Vice to Sanchez. Thank you,
Madam. I just want to say thank
you for your support for that uh
mobile home project, uh.
For those of you that, that
aren't aware of that program,
uh, they find senior citizens
that live in homes that are
almost unlivable. If you go
there, you, you'd be surprised
people who live there and uh if
they can't rehab them, they
basically uh replace them with a
mobile home and that's been
Hugely successful and uh one of
my priorities is to increase the
funding for that. So, um,
I just wanna say thank you and I
look forward to hopefully
getting you more money for that.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Vice Chair. Um, I did
have a couple of questions as
well. Um, thank you first of all
for presenting, um, you know, as
we've said a few times, this is
a lot to digest. If you were to
hone in, especially for, you
know, all of our reps have rural
communities. What did, what in
particular, what programs in
particular do rural communities
utilize more you feel than some
of our urban areas.
Uh, Madam Chair, thank you for
the question, uh.
Like I say, every community, as
you all have mentioned uh is uh
is different on what their needs
are. There's some common
threads, um, we are, uh, very
grateful for our partners and
that uh we've been able to this
last year we touched every
single county, uh, and I think,
uh, we're on the homeownership
side, obviously in the majority
of the loans while we cover the
entire state, you know, the more
populous areas uh tend to have
more, more building. So, uh,
we'll, we'll see, uh,
You know, the Albuquerque, Santa
Fe, Las Cruces with the majority
of the, the loans, although it's
pretty good, well spread across
the state. We have some new
development and some high cost
areas like Taos we uh uh awarded
some funds for some single
family development there. Uh,
we've done some here in, uh, in
Santa Fe, um, some in uh in Las
Cruces, so, uh.
You know, there's a big need on
tribal land and some of the
colonial areas, some of the
rural areas where some of the uh
the rehab program that we have,
a lot of homes that are uh very
old and uh maybe need a, uh, a
lot of rehab in some cases they
don't have, especially on tribal
lands and colonia, full kitchens
or uh restroom facilities. Well,
that's a big need there. Um, I
think there's a over 200 homes,
uh, just based on the age and
when they were uh they were
built that uh need some
weatherization.
energy efficiency measures.
Um
I could probably go on and on
with the various counties and
what the needs are, uh, out
there and uh.
You know, we
One of the things that I failed
to mention, and I'll mention
here at the end if you give me
an opportunity of some bills
that we're proposing, uh, here
at, uh, that'll be introduced
here shortly.
Yes, please, would you please go
through those. That would be
great. Uh, thank you, Madam
Chair. So we, we have two bills,
uh, one of them is for the
housing trust fund, but we get
recurring funds there, there's a
huge need and the amount of
money we're getting uh on the
recurring uh site which was 34
million this last year does not
go far enough to meet all of the
need out there, so uh we have uh
Senator Gonzalez that is gonna
be sponsoring a bill for us for
$500 million for uh the housing
trust fund that'll let us uh do
a lot more across these
activities.
uh, just as a, uh, something to
keep in the back of your mind
with the needs analysis or
assessment that we did a couple
of years ago, uh, the need is
about $42 billion to address all
of those needs so you can tell
that, uh, you know, $37 million
doesn't meet the need there, so
we're hopeful to uh uh get some
additional money this year. Last
year we received $50 million
from the legislature that's been
not to put to good use.
The second bill is the um
One for the Affordable Housing
Act that I did not mention the
we oversee the Affordable
Housing Act that was created in
2007, I believe. Uh, that is a
way for municipalities, school
districts to donate towards
affordable housing without
violating the anti-donation
clause. We have uh 39 different
local governments that meet the
criteria right now with housing
plans and an ordinance that
they've passed, um, and so
there's about a dozen of those
that have donated about $93
million towards affordable
housing.
over the this uh inception of
that act, and we're looking to
get the remaining uh that are
eligible uh getting some
training and technical
assistance so that they can
implement uh their uh affordable
housing plans as well and uh get
some additional local
governments to do that, so
500,000 for that and then 500
million for the housing trust
fund. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Anne, uh, one
more question for you, um, I'm
curious if you have any data on
how quickly you're able to move
the funding that comes to your
uh agency or your uh your, yeah,
agency. Um and the reason I ask
is that, I mean, in our recent
history, we've just seen the
supply chain costs go up and
down and it it can be very
difficult. We experienced that
with our capital outlay. I'm
just kind of curious if you
doubt how quickly your projects
move, um, and if there's
anything on our end that we can
do to support, uh, you know,
more rapid movement of those of
that.
Thank you for the question, uh,
Madam Chair, I, I mentioned some
statistics a little earlier on
the housing trust one so there's
a huge need out there and the
money does get out the door
pretty quick. Uh, you'll see in
the uh uh FIR and uh some of
the, uh, we didn't put any of
the materials in here, but some
of our uh uh materials for the,
that uh
For the housing trust fund in
the Affordable Housing Act under
the housing Trust Fund, you'll
see a table that indicates that
we believe that in the first
year if we were awarded $500
million we can uh put about 240
million, I believe, uh, that
would get allocated uh in the
first year. Uh, I will say that
some of these and, and you knew
this as, as well as I do the,
uh, if you're gonna develop a
multi-family development
project, you can award the
funds, uh, you know, uh, let's
say next month, but it takes
a couple of years to go through
the process and actually get
them built. So the expenditure
tends tends to lag a little bit,
but we can do the procurement
and the awards and get that
money out the door, uh, you
know, with the, when the
development is completed uh at
the end of the 18 or 24 months.
Uh, that's one example on the
long end, on the short end with
the down payment assistance that
we do, that uh money that gets
allocated there within the 60 to
70 days uh that money gets
expended, um, so I don't know if
that gives you an indication,
but
uh, you know, the $84 million
that we received in the last six
months, uh, 100% of that is
procured, uh, and, uh, I believe
it's like uh 88% awarded on
those funds, so it, it does go
out the door pretty quick. Some
of the challenges that we face
are obviously on the uh supply
chain issues, a high cost with
interest rates, uh, labor, um,
and some of the entitlement
processes where it takes some
time and uh some communities to
get through the planning and.
in, uh, getting the permits done
and the inspection. So those are
some challenges that we're
facing statewide and actually
nationwide, uh, that uh could be
uh worked on, um, to, to help
relieve some of that pressure
and maybe expedite um those
developments getting built both
on the single family and a
multi-family site.
Thank you, Mr. Hernandez, and I,
I hope you do look at this
committee as partners. I know
you have, you said you have
nearly 400 partners in the
communities and the good thing
of folks in rural communities is
everyone's volunteer and
everyone knows each other. So
I'm sure if you're someone's not
out of touch so much someone
here might be able to help.
So thank you so much. Thank you.
Next up, we have, uh, from
Mexico Economic Development
Department. I believe we have a
presentation from Shawnee
Harvey.
Miss Harpy, we're ready
Uh, good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, thank
you for having us today. Um,
division director for the
creative industries division,
and I'm here representing, uh,
Economic Development department
today.
And what I've prepared for you
all is, um, as opposed to an
overview of the agency. It is
mostly looking at rural
resources that we have
throughout the agency, and
that's kind of what we're gonna
go through today and similarly
to the other presentations, I am
gonna push a ton of information
on you all in a very short
amount of time, so bear with me,
we call it um the fire hose at
EDD is how we bring new folks in
and we just tell them everything
upfront in a very short period
of time, and then we say, don't
worry, you'll get it. So, um, if
there's any questions, happy to
those at the end. Um, moving on
to slide two, we recently
brought in a new cabinet
leadership back in about.
August, September, and our new
cabinet secretary is Rob Black
and our deputy secretary, Isaac
Romero, is who is now leading
the charge for economic
development department moving.
On slide 3, you'll see an
overview of the mission of the
economic development department,
and that is that we are work
families and trying to increase
economic opportunity and
providing a place for business
to thrive and our vision is that
New Mexico will have a diverse
and robust economy that engages
local talent, um, cultivates
innovation and
prosperity for all new. So
before I go into a ton of the
different programs, I like to
show this slide number 4 that
kind of shows an umbrella of the
different administratively
attached programs that are
within EDD. A lot of times when
we hear economic development, we
talk solely about LEA and GTI
and film and outdoor rec, but it
is a very robust agency. I think
we're about 74 staff right now,
um, but under economic
development, you have other
organizations like the film
Office, uh, Main Street, New
Mexico, the partnership.
Border authority out. So on
slide 5, you'll see a list of
about 18 different programs. I'm
not gonna go through all of
them. I'm gonna do my best to
keep it brief, but the ones that
are highlighted in yellow are
the ones that I'm gonna talk
about different opportunities
that we have.
So first off, because I'm a
little biased and I'm a new
division director, I'm going to
talk about creative industries,
um, and our customers in the
creative industries division,
our entrepreneurs and small
business areas that are on the
right-hand side of the slide.
It's about 6 industry clusters
that make up a productive
economy, and then we'll also be
doing work to support or workers
in those areas, um, as well as
working with local governments
and municipalities to work on,
um,
Helping establish and support
public infrastructure projects
that will develop the
So the two resources that are
really useful for our
industries, our, our new asset
map. We've just launched a
creative resource directory that
shows different amounts of
studios, venues, creative
business, more, uh, throughout
the state, and that's available
on our creative industries
webpage, which is still living.
So that's a really great place
for creatives throughout the
entire state to go to their
community if they're looking to
build, um, build the creative
economy if they're looking for
co-working spaces, maker spaces.
places that they can share um
their craft and their trades.
We've done our best to, um, pull
all those resources together,
and right now I think we're
sitting at about probably 430 of
them. Uh, the other program that
I want to mention, January 17th
as we've launched our second
grant application for creative
industries, and it's gonna be,
um, last year, our contractor,
creative startups, and their
subcontractors did a really
great job from across the state
and over 30 hours of information
and content on the creative
economy throughout New Mexico.
um, different partnerships with
state libraries and rural
libraries, and a ton of other
projects like that. So we are
doing that again this, and we've
launched a grant application to
support, um, rural communities
in all of our regions across the
state, and we're looking at
grants of up to $5000 that are
looking for a match requirement,
um, to host creative economy
conferences, convenings and
workshops that are gonna uplift
the talent and creatives that we
have the state.
So those are just, um, two of
the programs that we've launched
recently, um, and we're gonna
move on to another great
resource, which is our CAP
program, and that's on slide 7.
That's our collateral assistance
program. Um, this program, I
think has been in ongoing
program in EDD since about 2010
when the first state small
business credit initiative was
established. So this is one of
our programs where if we have
small businesses who are looking
for a loan or trying to grow
their business, we can
work with the local financial
institution to help, um, that
would otherwise make the loan
unavailable. So if you have a
business owner that's looking to
buy more inventory on their own,
we're able to match, um, up to
50% of a principal loan amount
for a cap of about $250,000 in
rural communities, and this is
one of the programs we have that
gives uh preference to rural
communities. So whether it's a
loan or they're looking to
increase the line of credit.
This helps so that they don't
have to put their own assets on
the line when they're trying to.
to work towards accessing that
capital and we're, um, really
proud to say that we have pushed
out. I think all the money from
the our first tranche program
from Treasury. Um, it's one of
our lesser known programs, but
it is one of the more.
Widely used in
On the following page, you'll
see just a partial list of the
different lenders that we work
with throughout CAP, um, that
includes the Lee County State
Bank, uh, Pioneer Bank, Summers
and Western Heritage and several
other lenders that if I tried to
fit all the logos on that slide,
it would look really
uncomfortable. So we've just
kept it.
Um, moving on to slide 9, this
is a couple of the really great
programs from our Justice
Equity, diversity and inclusion
Office, um, in the two programs
that are really great for rural
communities that we have
available right now are our
SSBCI technical assistance
program, and that is actually a
free program for very small
businesses with 10 or less
employees who are looking again
to access maybe a line of
credit, um, accessing bigger
credit cards, loans, capital,
inventory, that kind of stuff.
we're able to set them up with a
financial advisor, a CPA, an
attorney, um, for free at no
cost and no charge to the
business, and that is to help
them get ready to access
capital. So traditionally what
we saw in COVID was that small
business, the paperwork and
expectations that were required
by some of the federal
opportunities in this program
directly addresses, um, a lot of
those gay with professionals and
experts in those fields to help
them access funding that would
otherwise, um,
be difficult to access, and we
also work to help them navigate,
um, on the right-hand side of
that slide, you'll see a
resource map and directory. This
is our sec, uh, this was our
first resource directory that
was made by the department um
recently updated in
In the last, I think, 2 or 3
years. And what's nice about
this resource map is the way
it's designed is actually by
region, so you can click a
different region of the state to
find resources that are around
also includes um different
stages of business, so folks can
figure out for what they need
for their business support,
whether that is, um, a startup
or someone who's looking to grow
and expand and access one of our
bigger incentives.
Um
This one is focused on small
businesses and community
organizations throughout the
state, so you'll chambers of
commerce and also community
development programs and several
of the programs that were
mentioned by New Mexico.
Um, moving on to slide 10.
This is kind of like these are
our boots on the ground, these
are our folks in the field. So
when it comes to rural
communities and rural community
contacts are regional
representative team or the
community business and rural
development, regional reps for
short. Um, we have, I think we
just are down to 10 regional
reps across the state, and we
have multiple in each region,
and they are very familiar with
the LEDA and GTIP programs and
the other economic division
programs that are offered. So
they're kind of the first points
of contact with.
in those communities, um, within
our rural communities, and they
No, most of the state and the
department like the back of
their hands. So with them first,
and then they have a, an easier
time um connecting them with
small business development
resource um offices explaining
the different incentives that
they have within our agency and
then getting them routed the
right direction.
On slide 11.
Um, these are about 5 of the
main programs that economic
division, um, hosts out of their
office that I wanted to talk
about that are specific for
rural communities. So are funded
program is
gone uh gone under a little bit
of a makeover right now, but
what we do is we bring together
federal agencies and state
agencies that do investment into
community development projects,
and that can include things like
infrastructure, strategic
planning, community development,
as well as other economic
development projects and
planning projects, and we kind
of bring those projects together
in a pitch meeting. So if there
is a public private partnership,
um, fund it is a great
opportunity for those projects,
and we bring all
those bodies together to discuss
the different funding mechanisms
that are throughout the federal
and state agencies to try to get
those projects closer to
completion. The next one on the
list is our healthy food
financing fund. Um, this has
been a big winner, uh, in the
New Mexico legislature, we've
been options for state residents
across the state, and they do a
grant programs for food retail,
processing, value added
agriculture, um, distribution
and transportation, and they
work on New Mexico.
own
products and production to make
them more widely available. Um,
this has been a really
successful program and also I
think one of the governor's
initiatives and, you know,
healthy food is important for
all of our communities,
especially our rural
communities, and we are a huge,
um, agricultural state.
Um, our job training incentive
program, or JTIP is the next one
on the list, and this is a
pretty popular EDD program and
the way that it works is that we
work with eligible employers who
are in manufacturing or
non-retail e-commerce based,
which means that they're
expected of their product or
service outside of the state of
New Mexico. And if there is
eligible businesses that are
staff that they have on hand, we
work with them, um, for up to 6
months of their salary in any of
the new employee wages can be
covered.
um, under this program, and it's
a very popular program and it's
been utilized widely across.
The next one leads. It's our
local economic assistance and
development support program,
which is a little bit different
than Lita, um, just move some of
the letters around and you'll
have very similar programs, but
the way that Leeds works is that
it's a funding program for
economic development projects
across the state that can show
that they produce sustainable
outcomes. So, oftentimes it's a
lot of economic development
organizations that apply for
these grants and the
is that what typically happens
is they'll end up being a
certified economic development.
So the leads is kind of like
leading into becoming a
certified EDO and you have a
list of our awardees for FY.
Um, our most exciting program
that legislators know quite a
bit about is LEDA, our local
economic development Act, and
that is a partnership with local
government and municipalities
and the economic development
department projects, and it's
more of a discretionary fund and
what I always tell businesses is
this is on the back end.
Sometimes we paint Lita like a
grant, but what we do is, if
you're looking at expanding and
creating more jobs, we work with
you to make sure you have that
capital, um, secured upfront. We
start to lead.
Process, um, there's steps that
happen there, so businesses have
to be ready kind of for like the
long councils and commissions
and passing an ordinance, and on
the back end, once those steps
are completed and they've hired
the jobs, um, spent the money to
do their expansion project. We
run that as a discretionary fund
and a huge, um, one of our
Flagship.
Those are some of the programs
in the economic division. And
next, I'm going to talk about
our New Mexico Main Street. So,
New Mexico, Main Street has 32
different districts across the
entire state and we recently
welcomed both uh Lordsburg, Main
Street, and revitalized San
Pedro Partnership, which is
based in Albuquerque, but on the
right hand side, you'll see a
small graphic of the state with
those little dots all over the
place, and those are 32 Main
Street districts. That team has
done an absolutely
Absolutely fantastic job, um,
working in our local downtown
districts to help folks
revitalize and build up
hospitality and retail
opportunities and the Main
Street folks of every office
that I visited around the state,
including folks like Silver City
are just really excited for the
work that that program has done,
and it's usually a really big
step on helping folks build
around their downtown spaces and
bring more tourism and economic
development. We also represent
through New Mexico, Main Street,
13 different arts and cultural.
districts, and those are spaces
that have been designated
through New Mexico Arts and with
New Mexico Main Street to help,
um, provide a designation and a
space for our arts and cultural
districts. So it really uplifts
the opportunities and activities
that
Um, Lucas and Daniel who work,
who are the
Daniel, who's the director of
New Mexico Main Street, is a
great partner, um, in, in this
work, and I've also worked very
closely with him for creative
industries, division as we
started to get that going, as
there's a lot of over the
support that they need, and I
think what's unique about the
creative industries division is
because we aren't necessarily
tied to the Main Street
districts. We get to work in
services in similar support
mechanisms outside of those
districts.
Um, on slide 13, you'll see our
a slide for outdoor recreation
division. And I've listed 4
different programs that the ORD
has worked on, um, since its
inception, but also the one at
the top, which is the active OR
outdoor recreation business
accelerator is a new program
that was partnered with for
outdoor recreation division, and
it's a 14-week business
accelerator that's free for
outdoor recreation businesses.
That's, um, a really been a
great step for them over in that
department. And
That's also followed by the
outdoor equity fund, which is a
popular program that works to
get more kids in youth in New
Mexico outdoors, um, especially
in the age of screens, we know
that it's a little bit harder
for a lot of us to get outside,
especially our children, so the
outdoor equity fund works to get
more children outside and it's
been a great partnership with
REI. Sometimes we feel like the
outdoors aren't for us,
depending on the community we're
coming from, and I, um, outdoor
recreation and trails plus grant
is also another awesome
opportunity for our rural
community.
It helps.
Local municipalities and
governments improved trails and
infrastructure for outdoor
recreation in their communities.
So, whether that's signage and
wayfinding or building out more
pathways to make sure folks are
safe, that trails Plus program
is a really good option out of
our central areas like
Albuquerque and Santa Fe and
showing.
And the last one on that page is
the outdoor marketing grant,
which works on helping marketing
efforts.
Um, slide 14 has
4 different resources kind of in
there. We've got a couple in the
clouds and then a couple off to
the side. Um, the first I want
to talk about is our certified
incubator program. That is a
program that was established in
2005 by the legislature, and we
currently have 8 certified
facilities. Many of these are in
our rural communities. We have
the Navajo Tech Innovation
Center, which is outside of
Gallup, as well as the
Enterprise Center at San Juan
College, and what those
incubators are doing on a daily
basis is providing workshops and
opportunities for business.
owners and folks who are
interested in entrepreneurship.
That kind of training and 1 to 1
assistants, but also space, so
if they're not ready to move
into a full retail brick and
mortar space on their own,
incubators often, often offer a
tiered rent option where folks
can move in and incubate and
start their business
full-fledged brick and mortar
and having their own space. That
is a program that has been
funded by the legislature in the
past and there is a special
appropriation on the.
Executive recommendation for
that program, and we've been
really
Brown, um, in and across the st
ground where they get to connect
with business owners and
entrepreneurs and folks who are
thinking about entering in that
field.
We also, um, I wanted to talk
about two opportunities from the
America program. There are 2
grants going on right now that
are sponsored through NMSU and
one of them is to help with
environmental impact assessments
who might be having very high
energy costs, so especially as
we're seeing the weather start
to get a lot colder, um, and
folks are gonna be increasing
that electricity bill, NMSU is
looking to help businesses
conduct those assessments for
free and help them lower their
energy costs.
And then they're also helping
businesses with assistance in
that area.
Um, and those are just two
really good to help them kind of
cut.
Costs down that, um,
sustainability um and energy
costs.
The two that I have over in the
clouds, um, which, you know,
sometimes we like to try and
make presentations why that's
built that way. Um, the first is
our newsletter and wrap up. We
send out a biweekly newsletter
that includes a ton of business
and small business as well as
local governments, and
That comes out on a biweekly
basis, so you have the link
there to sign up. And then we
also have our EDD and in print,
which I brought with me today,
and this has all of our
resources and incentives across
the state and here, and then I
also brought a few in Spanish
cause we have those um available
in Spanish as well.
I think about probably
development department and on
the lap for creative industries
and my contact information and
for the creative industries
newsletter we send includes our,
um, grant opportunities as well
as relevant funding and I think
that was about 20 minutes.
So
Sorry to talk totally through
it, but I'm sorry for that
overview. Are there any
questions, uh, for economic
development department.
That.
Well, I, I do want to thank you
and I want to remind the
committee again, there's going
to be, there's no quiz.
This time,
but I think that it's important
to remember that if you heard
tidbits that might have struck
you this reminds you of this
business or reminds you of this
project of any of the
presenters, um, you know, please
follow up with them and ask them
questions. Um, you know, I have
a, I have one question for you
and one thing to point out, um,
just quickly, are there any
bills that we should keep an eye
out for that your department is
looking forward to that may in
particular affect our rural
communities.
I believe that there is some
site selection legislation that
is supposed to be coming down,
um, that will potentially affect
rural communities. I think the
department is working with our
new leadership very closely to
figure out how we can have a
more transparent and readily
available site selection process
for folks who are looking to
move their businesses to New
Mexico and too often, um, you
know, bigger cities have the
resources to build out the kind
of databases that rural
communities might not have
access to. So I believe that in
that legislation and ask for the
special appropriation. I think
there's a bill that goes along
with it that would need to pass
in order to see the funding, um,
but doing site selection, that's
well to get business interests
outside of our larger populous
areas is the goal for, for that
one. So that one would
definitely affect our rural
communities. I also think
there's an ask for, it's not
legislation, so would you rather
me stick to bills specifically
or a special appropriation asks.
Go ahead, uh, go ahead.
Um, outdoor recreation division
has an ask to increase the
outdoor equity fund. I've seen a
ton of these projects go to, um,
rural communities and small
schools who are doing really
great things with their kids
just to get them outside and
engaged and learn about
stewardship and like working
with the land. That's another
really great one. there's an ask
in there for marketing and trade
show funding, um, as I've been
in the position for creative
industries about.
Where are we? 3 to 5 months. Um,
there's been a lot of asks
around trade shows, and I think
trade shows are a unique
opportunity to suppliers to be
able to connect and see what we
have to offer in our communities
and for the department as well.
I, I could, I could go on.
There's definitely a handful
there, but I will, I will yield
there. The, the other one is we
do have another ask for our
incubator program is really
important and critical because
even though they do a ton of
great work. A lot of them are
not just a handful of them, many
a requests that are wrapped up
in our ask. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Ms. Harvey.
And, um, the other question I
had was, um, you know, a lot,
you really have a a broad
support for a lot of our
businesses, but clearly
artificial intelligence, machine
learning has transformed small
businesses.
In a lot of ways, you know,
You are now a graphic designer,
a proposal writer, and
everything, and it kind of
supports that, um, AI and
machine learning can be a little
bit foreign to some of our, our
communities's uh rural and
urban. I'm just curious if you
have any tools, uh, in
particular that help uh our
folks navigate some of those new
technologies. Um, I would say in
the creative industries division
and also the Jedi office. We've
had some discussions around
creating workshops around
intellectual property and using
AI and how, how to kind of use
those tools to help promote and
grow business. So we've
definitely had conversations
around that. I know the Office
of Science, Strategy and
Technology is also deeply um in
that realm as well. So they've
been looking a lot at quantum um
and emerging tech as well as AI.
So there's definitely been a lot
of discussions. I wouldn't say
that there's a direct tool. I
would say right now it's coming
in the form of like a webinar or
a round table and us coming into
community to have those
conversations, um, and then
partnering to do trainings
around, how do you use this? How
do we prime ourselves for
protection, um, when it comes to
of privacy and other
considerations like that. But as
a maybe not a formal tool, more
so communities to make that
happen and workers' chambers,
EDOs.
Great. Thank you, Ms. Harvey.
Thank you for your presentation
today. Um, before we wrap up, I
just want to make sure we have a
chance to uh introduce our staff
uh from across the way and
Great thank you all for all your
help. The committee staff has
been, I mean, rapidly, we have
bills that are assigned to us,
they're getting some
information. So thank you all.
Thank you to all of our
presenters. I know we put out
this ask yesterday, uh, for you
all to come here and the
presentations were phenomenal.
So we really appreciate that
dedication. So soon we'll be
having bills come out here and
uh we'll get to that, but until
then, uh, uh,
We're adjourned. Thank you.
