Um, so we'll be in touch with
that change. Uh, I do want to
give a moment to our newest
member, Martha Garcia. She is
from House District 6, if I
remember correctly. Do you want
to say a brief introduction
since you just joined our
committee?
OK, thank you, County. I cover
both uh Sila and McKinley
County, out of the fact that
so much, um, oh,
we have our first bill up, House
Bill 265, um, uh, creative
industries fund, uh, I believe
you want to come back with the
presentation again. Um, so I
just wanted to go ahead and do
that. And we've heard this bill.
Um, I don't believe we need
public comment on it, but we
can't have a committee
discussion on it. Um, that's why
Ripley will be.
Uh, representative.
Thank you,
Madam Chair
excuse me, members of the
committee, um, House Bill 265
proposes a crucial investment
for New Mexico's future. Um,
this legislation appropriates $4
million to the creative
industries Fund for FY 2026 and
subsequent years to continue
it's extremely successful
economic development grants, um,
so the creative industries
division is fairly new. It was
established in 2023 and, and its
very first year it awarded 18.
grants of $100,000 each all over
the state, um, and that totaled
$1.8 million.01 of the reasons
why we wanted to bring this
legislation forward, um, is
because there was more than
twice the amount of demand for
those grants and at that time,
this was a brand new program,
uh, local governments had 5
weeks to respond, and there were
twice as many local governments
that were interested in um this
creative industries funding.
So, um, with that, I would stand
for.
Bring it over to the committee.
Are there questions for the
representative?
Uh, no, because we've heard
public comment before on this.
This is a rolled bill. Um, so
we'll go ahead and go to. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you, uh,
Representative.
Uh
First, is there any amendments
to this or is it the same exact?
Madam Chair and Representative
Mason, it's the exact same bill.
It, uh
So, uh, what is the application
process? I mean,
What
What does it look like?
Um, Madam Chair and
Representative Mason, so, um,
this has to go through a local
government or uh native nation
tribe or pueblo, and they have
to, uh, uh.
they have to apply with stats on
how many jobs they think this
will support, who they're trying
to serve, um, how many
partnerships will be initiated
in the community as a result,
um, and basically the grants
fall into one of three
categories. One is, um, physical
infrastructure kinds of
improvements, like if you had a
um second would be business
entrepreneurship, development,
how, you know, helping our
just really formulate a business
plan, and then third is
educational, so educating um the
community could be young people.
There was a very successful
program around um museum staff
that was uh funded out of this
project training people to be
future museum staff. So those
are the three categories.
Thank you, uh, Representative
Madam Chair, Madam Chair
Representative, uh.
How much?
Um, Madam Chair and
Representative Mason, the first
set of grants were $100,000 each
because they wanted to maximize
the spread. There's nothing set
in this legislation that
specifies the amount, um, but
the majority of the funding has
to be spent in rural
communities, so I would expect
that the grants would be around
the same size to maximize. So,
Madam, there's no.
4 million
There's nothing it wouldn't
grant a million of it to one
project on the mount.
Madam Chair and Representative
Mason in the uh enabling statute
for the creative industries
division. It does specify that
they, the grants need to
maximize geographic reach.
Um, and that they have to
prioritize rural communities,
um, but Madam Chair,
Representative, if there was a
game changing project, say in
Clovis, I know they're um
looking at uh how they can
restore. There's a historic
recording studio in Clovis, for
example, and how could if they
could turn that into a museum,
that might end up being a larger
grant than maybe some of the
other communities, but, um, you
know, I think they're trying to
maximize what can you get done
in
one year and not overfund a
project either. Thank you.
Madam Chair Representative, uh,
who?
Who approved
Adam Charon representatives of
the creative industries division
at the Economic Development
department has a director and a
program manager, and so it goes
through their competitive, uh,
Thank you, Representative.
they
He position.
Adam Chair and Representative,
that is a good question. I
believe that because this is a
division, the director was an
appointed position and the pro,
but the program manager is uh
classified.
Thank you Madam Chair, uh.
Who appoints the director.
To the government, a governor
appointed position.
Um, we were very lucky, Madam
Chair, and Representative Mason
that the uh division director
ended up being an individual who
had begun in a classified
position at is an artist herself
and a creative person herself
and had actually been working on
creative projects throughout the
community, so she was kind of
the perfect find and fit, so,
um, it wasn't some, it, uh, so
she had been working at the
department for a number of years
and actually, um, many years
previous to that had been a, a
house.
analyst, um, she's a, she's a
wonderful person, so we're very
lucky in that.
We still don't know who and who
appointed her.
Madam Chair and representative,
um, the governor is responsible
for all the exempt appointments.
Reading it.
On one of them anyway donation
clause in this.
Oh, maybe I got, I got the
wrong.
Got too many bills going here.
Need to put them on uh.
What uh
Madam Chair Representative.
You stated we've had and Mason.
It was founded in 2023.
So we've had it
Two separate years we get you
that Madam Chair Representative,
yes,
Madam Chair, representative, do
we have any uh
Yes, Madam Chair Representative
and bring that with me.
Uh
So
Thank you. Uh, Representative
Gonzalez.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair. I
just wanted to say thank you for
that. I know after our last,
after the last presentation, um
we did deliver, um,
When, in talking about economic
development, um, you know, this,
this is a development, um, how
have you seen this leading to
economic development specific,
you know, in the areas and
especially in the small rural
areas.
Um, maybe what are some of those
benefits and what have you seen
with the projects that you've
awarded so far?
Um, Madam Chair, Representative
Gonzalez, um, thank you for that
question. I have a few examples.
Um, so, for example, one of the
grants went to More County, um,
they partnered with their Main
Street Arts and cultural
compound to boost the weekly
Mora market, which hosted
hundreds of attendees, and they
also did 8 workshops for
creative businesses, and I think
that's one of the things that I
learned, um, in, uh, going
through this process is
That a lot of these artisans
have been doing their art on the
side or at night or on the
weekend, they have day jobs or
part-time jobs to make ends
meet. And so they need support
to build out those business
plans, um, do all of the filings
if they really want to develop
their own small business,
understand how to access um more
customers and so this market in
particular, was a great example
because it was both boosting the
community and a community
community gathering space, but
also um the economic development
opportunities for those
individual artists. So basically
this grant in this example, um,
was able to be used to for
physical infrastructure for that
market. So canopies, tables,
chairs, just creating more of
the physical space, um, for
something that I think had been
happening kind of more
informally, um, and they also,
uh, got an altering stage and
audience seating so that.
that can be used, um,
Magdalena.
I'll just give one more example,
uh, Art Magdalena NM was created
as a grant to the village of
Magdalena, and that was an
online platform. So instead of
the physical space, they created
this online website which has
70+ artists and local art
events, um, they launched for
community art events, and so,
um, what Magdalena reports is
they saw increased tourism, um,
00 more than 900 attendees, uh,
attended these events. So, that
also had the added effect of all
the hospitality, the
restaurants, the et. uh visited
while they were going to these
events. So, um, and also local
employment, so they had
musicians, web designer,
curators, exhibition installers,
photographers and event
coordinators all involved in
these events that were then
promoted on this website. So,
those are a few examples.
Madam Chair, um
A representative, uh, no, thank
you for that. Um, I know even
myself, I sometimes tend to
think of economic development
only as like tech innovation,
you know, future things, but
there are also very much um
these areas for diversification
in our smaller communities that
just, you know, truly lend
itself to the communities that
they're in. So thank you for
that, Linda.
Representative Gonzalez, um, uh,
Representative leader. I had a
couple of questions briefly for
you as well.
Oh, sorry, Representative
Collin, no, no, no, no, by all
means represent Cullen, sorry.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So
there was, um, so I did look
over this and I see it's a lot
of workshop.
Um
And of course I always look at,
look at taxpayers' funds.
Taxpayers benefited their
people. So when I look at this
and the fiscal impact report.
Shows that his non-recurring in
the comment section is that it
will most likely be recurring.
So the appropriation of 4
million containing would um
It made you go back uh at the
end of fiscal fund. So because
this is all.
Madam.
uh, Representative Cullen,
excellent question. You know, we
did the first round of grants.
They were heavily evaluated. You
have the results of the report
there, uh, and in addition,
there's a lot of evaluation in
the study, so I think this next
round of grants will also need
to be evaluated. Um, part of
what we looked at when we
brought the original statute
forward was Colorado was
spending, uh, they had invested
one time about 110 million.
into this sector, and they have
a recurring appropriation of
more than 30 million for these
kinds of programs, um, and so,
you know, as the neighbors to
the south, we were looking at
that and saying, OK, what's the
right size for New Mexico. We
want to be careful and cautious
and prudent with these dollars
and so we are starting small and
doing a lot of evaluation and
study to make sure that every
dollar is spent wisely, so I,
um, to answer your question,
Madam Chair, and
Representative, I don't, I, I
don't have a specific plan as to
exactly what comes next. I think
we'll have to work with the
division to see how these grants
go, what the needs are. We have
a road map in this study that we
need to continue to sort of
follow. Um, they have built out
this whole strategy on how we
can really make this a more
robust sector, um, and keeping
in mind, Madam Chair
Representative, that 1 in 9 New
Mexicans is employed in this,
uh, in the creative.
So, can you tell me in
A lot of reading, but um could
you tell me what all industrial.
I, Madam Chair, um, you know
what I would have and, and
representative, I would have to
find that exact page which um I
know is in this, this was
actually a subject of a lot of
study, um, and discussion
because we wanted it to, um,
tied to the ways that economic
development organizations,
nationally and globally evaluate
the impact of creative
industries, so we didn't want a
sort of special New Mexico
definition. Um, the one thing
that is specifically carved out
as film. Um, so film is not part
of this because we already have
the film program, um, and
Madam Chair, Representative, I
may have to get back. This is
such a big report and I don't
have that definition.
Tabbed in here, but it is, um,
everything from, um,
Uh, sort of fine arts that you
would think of like paintings,
ceramics, etc. all the way to um
creative installations like
electric playhouse, meow, wolf,
some of the larger companies,
um, there's an, there's, for
example, a large uh uh tile
factory in Silver City called
Sizyi Tile that actually ships
beautiful tile all over the
globe and and so that's an
example. So it's kind of uh
everything from individual
artists to large.
scale production and
manufacturing.
And Madam Chair Representative,
so you know, they have the turn
on and what um what we're
spending for communities.
So I, because I see a lot, Madam
Chair shops. What is the
projection of what they're going
to be doing, uh.
The visiting. So that's one
example is how much
More rate of return that we're
going to be looking into, not.
Hm
Yes, Madam Chair, uh,
representative, so the research
is that every $1 you invest in
arts and culture generates $7 in
economic activity, so that's
through direct spending, jobs,
wages, and indirect benefits
like tourism, retail and
hospitality. Um, currently, the
creative industries divi um uh
creative industries
establishments are responsible
for about 6% of our GRT, um,
generating over
$6 billion annually for the
state, um, and, you know, the
wages are around the, the
typical wages currently in the
creative industries division are
comparable to the state's mining
industry. So that gives you a
sort of benchmark there. Um, so
that is
Uh, over 9000 jobs, 363 million
in personal income, um, and over
100 million in tax revenue. So
based on the
Several economic studies on your
question of ROI, um, these, this
study projects a 12% annual
growth in total taxable gross
receipts. So this is a growing
industry, um, you know, around
the globe, it's one of the
fastest growing industries, um,
because it also includes things
like uh we have a video game,
um, developer, designer here in
New Mexico as well. Um, these
are
sort of on the frontier I think
as we get into multimedia
investments and, you know,
augmented reality and those
kinds of things, um, there's
only sort of up from here.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative. So my question
is since it generally about the
income that they meet. Then why
are they? I'm a business owner.
I don't get grants. So why would
we in in this I'm trying to be
as gentle and nice about this,
but I'm just wondering why I
would.
If they're jittering that kind
of thank you, madam chair. Madam
Chair and Representative, um,
that, that goes to kind of one
of the central purposes of this,
which is um number one, none of
the grants are going to
individual businesses. The
grants are going to local
governments or um native
nations, tribes, or pueblos, so
they can develop community
assets. And I think the moral
market is a great example of
that, which is a uh shared
community asset. It is a market.
space that now has had a stage
and audience seating added to
that. So in that sense, it's
showcasing the arts, it's
creating that venue so that, you
know, local musicians can play,
etc. but also allowing for the
economic development that occurs
when you have that kind of um
small scale venue.
One of the reasons why this
legislation was brought forward
is because a lot of times when
we talk about economic
development, we are talking
about incentives specifically
for large companies. We are
talking about LIDA funds. We're
talking about IRBs. We're
talking about, you know,
investments that, um, are at the
scale of millions of dollars for
one company, for example. Um,
However, not everyone is gonna
be able to get a job and work in
bioscience or aerospace or or a
high tech industry.
What they might be able to do is
take something that has been a
family tradition for hundreds of
years and turn that into
something that is more of a
solid living. Um, so when you
have people that have
traditional whether they be
Northern New Mexico, southern
New Mexico, all of our native
cultural traditions. How do we
work with those folks that to
where they can not have to have
that second job to put food on
the table for their kids, but
actually
be able to make this, the, the
beautiful and unique things that
they create and turn that into
something that is actually a
meaningful, um, living for their
families, so that has been the
vision because the arts and
culture are in every little town
in New Mexico, you know, not
every little town is gonna be
right for a new manufacturing
facility or for a new big
economic development
opportunity, but we have arts
and culture and we have artists.
everywhere, no matter what size,
um, and so this is a way to
think about, you know, what if
that artist and house in New
Mexico can market to a national
or global audience. What does
that mean for that person's
living and what are all the
needs, um, to make that happen.
And Madam Chair, the
representative, thank you so
much for explaining that. So and
I do, um, so I just want to
clarify that. So then with that,
why are instead of the state.
Well, interestingly enough, some
counties do have local uh arts
councils.
And they are, they do have small
bits of funding available. I
know, um, for example, in Santa
Fe County, there are very small
grants available, you know, less
than $10,000 to do a specific
project that is um either a
public art or a public good or
something that is for the
community. Um, so those are very
small scale, and they're
typically individual projects,
um, one of the beauties of this
is it sort of ties together and
creates a statewide cohesive.
amongst all those local arts
councils so that they can really
innovate and think about if we
can bring in the state funding
to do this, and then we have our
little pot of funds that we can
use to work with some of these
individual artists. I'll work on
these little community projects
that really synergize,
synergizes this. So this is not
exclusive. There are, um,
various counties that have small
pots of funds for creative
industries as well, or arts and
culture broadly in their
called local arts councils.
Madam Chair Representative,
thank you. Yes, it's in Rio
Rancho we have our and um
the arts, so that's where I
always kind of just to let you
know I.
Thank you so much.
Thank you, Representative, uh,
Representative Garcia.
Uh, thank you very much, chair.
Uh, my question is in regards to
uh when these grants go out, uh,
it's not gonna go to individual
individual artists gets together
and form a group.
they will qualify.
Madam Chair and Representative,
it depends on um how they are
affiliated with the local
government. So if they are
operating, for example, um, uh,
I know there are arts programs
that are operating within city
or county buildings, for
example. So the usual
Um, anti-donation clause and
procurement code all apply to
these grants as well. Um,
there's so there's a, there's
nothing unusual or special about
the way these grants are
awarded, um, and so they don't
necessarily have to form a
group, but what we're trying to
do is fund local services or
local infrastructure for
artists, um, to use.
In, in my area, we're in a very
rural situation and uh McKinley
County, especially the western
portion of
The County, uh, we just don't
have.
Um
County buildings are.
Or even a government in, in
those areas, they're all.
Unincorporated areas and but
then we also have.
They
tribes star de Zuni pueblo was
pretty much set, uh.
And be eligible to use this type
of grant.
Uh, but from the Navajo Nation
is huge and it covers a vast
area, so sometimes those are
small.
I guess we can call them
forgotten. So, um, if they were
to develop a
I guess a group, and I don't
know who it would be recognized
by, but it's really needed to do
an economic base, uh.
Within the community where I
come from, there is a group
called Asian.
And uh they go out and market
their.
Their uh product um at fairs and
markets and and they're very
widely known, but it's very hard
for sell uh on a daily basis.
So they wouldn't need an outlet.
And recently, uh.
Uh, the community bought a, uh,
trading post that was had been
vacant for over 40 years or so.
And uh that's one area that
they're looking at to see if
they can reopen that like uh
there's one in historic trading
posts.
That set up like it was back in
the day. So that's what they're
looking at, so that the artist
from the area, local area, and
both uh non-native and native
communities to showcase and do
their uh selling, so if
If that happens, then uh I guess
we have to find a local
government to I, I think that's
what we're talking about on the
basin.
really needed, uh, and not only
the areas of the state. Thank
you.
Thank you it was a Garcia.
Representative call, I will have
one. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
representative. So when we were
talking about not giving to
individuals. So under the city
of Albuquerque Department of
Arts and Culture on this thing.
It talks about the UE.
UT at Bresiliency residency
program that funded 14 selected
artists out of 34.
For the poet.
program and then it says that
the Brazil residency offers 5000
grants to artists of discipline.
Um, at least 7 of those
participants across programs
contracted additional creatives
to support their projects. So I
just wanted, Madam Chair to
represent, just to clarify. So,
The way I'm reading it, so I
want to make sure that I,
whether I'm reading it correctly
or not. So then we give them a
grant and then they gave grants
to these artists. Would that be
correct?
Madam Chair and Representative,
the way that those residency
programs work is that they are
required to provide services to
um whether it be a school, say
you have an artist in residence
at a school and they're doing
teaching of poetry or, you know,
art or whatever, um, could be at
a university, could be to a
community. So, um, the
anti-donation clause and the
procurement code apply whether
the government it's a state
government or a local
government, which means
means that um if uh
Uh
Any business that receives quote
unquote assistance, whether that
be a workshop or a grant, there
is something that they are
providing in return for that. So
it is part of a contract that
they have to do. And that's how
all of those grants work.
Thank you, manager.
I as much about some quick brief
questions for you as well. Um,
I'm curious, this seems to be
modeled as a pilot overall this
often times in tax when we do a
tax credit, especially we make
them as pilots. So we see how
they far after a couple of
years, then we decide how much
we want to invest. Is that how
you anticipate this working as
well, Madam Chair, uh, Madam
Chair, yes. Great. And, and
along those lines, I am curious,
do you also offer through this
technical support to the uh
artists that may be deciding if
they want to form their own, um,
you know.
organization as well?
Yes, madam chair, that's been a
big part of the, there was a
creative industries week
celebration that occurred uh
late last summer, um, and that
was a big focus. It was all, it
was, they were both in person
and virtual. They had thousands
of people actually attend, um,
the totality of those events and
many of them were like, so you
want to build a website, here's
how you do it. So you want to
register your business. Here's
how you do it. You want, you
need, you need help paying your
taxes. Here's some help. Um,
And then, but now we need to
follow that up with more
continuing assistance, um,
rather than sort of like one
time.
Um, and that's certainly for the
individual artist portion of
this, that's a huge need because
they're artists, they're
creatives, they don't
necessarily focus on sort of the
the business aspects of what
they're producing. I, I
appreciate that, especially, you
know, you, you had mentioned
earlier that, of course, there's
a lot of folks that are going to
go into, um, our strategic and
uh industries, right? We, we
thought about quantum right now
and, you know, we have wonderful
labs with a ton of, ton of
things like that. We don't want
to lose a lot of the essential
pieces that are New Mexican. Um,
you know, there's
So many places like San
Francisco used to be a hub of
creativity, and now I'd argue
it's been sucked dry, but sorry,
San Francisco, uh, but I
wouldn't want to see something
like that, and it is so easy for
large companies that invest
billions to kind of take over
that culture. So these efforts
to ensure that we're protecting
that culture, um, and what makes
New Mexico, uniquely New Mexico,
are, are worthwhile investments,
I would argue, um, and into our
economic development as well. I,
and I, I think of that in terms
of the enchanted circles, you
know, uh, you know, again, those
teen tiny towns have really.
created an identity around the
arts and the communities there.
Um, one thing you mentioned when
you came previously and I
thought it'd be good also is
that I thought found it
interesting how you all were
doing outreach to make sure
you're reaching. Can you, can
you, uh, chat us through that
briefly.
Yes, Madam Chair, um, outreach
is really the, the building, the
foundation of this whole
project. So we have had
partnerships, um, it just even
in the passage of the creative
industries division, there were,
um, first of all, there are
these arts councils that we've
been talking about that are all
over the state that have been
basically sort of operating on
their own. There's a large, uh,
organization called Creative New
Mexico that includes those arts
council members, but also lots
of just individual artists. And
then there are
so many different associations.
There's actually like a high
school music association.
There's a, you know, fine arts
association, there's a a
literary association, um,
they've all been part of the
outreach as well, and economic
development department has been
great in setting up a website,
um, putting all the materials
online, having an email list so
that everyone is getting that
email outreach and that's really
why, and they've got social
media as well, which is part of
why there were thousands of
people that participated in
that.
very first creative industries
week, which kind of blew me away
to get on a Zoom and see
hundreds of people, um, ready to
hear about what's next for
creative industries, so the
outreach has been super robust,
um, because people, I think have
really been hungry for something
like this that really sees them
as artists and business people
and the economic aspect of arts
as opposed to just the
creativity aspect of it.
Thank you for that. And I know
that you got, I believe you got
to all the members, the, the
creative industries, uh, I would
appreciate if you also got to to
our newest members as well, that
would be helpful. Thank you. Uh,
and I think, uh, with that I'll
entertain emotion.
Che move Dupas.
Second, I have a do pass motion
on House Bill 265 by Vice Chair
Sanchez, seconded by
Representative Gonzalez. Can we
do a roll call vote?
Representative Cullen? No.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Gonzalez.
Yes.
Representative Lord
Representative Mason.
Oh
By Sanchez.
Madam Char Serato? Yes, you have
a due pass on House Bill 265.
Thank you, members and Madam
Chair.
Next up, we have uh HB 219 Slot
Canyon Riverland State Park. I
believe Senator Steinborn is
going to be presenting this
morning.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
committee. Good to be back with
you again and Representative
Garcia, welcome to the New
Mexico Legislature.
As one of the uh original
sponsors of this last bill.
I think the creative industries
will be an awesome opportunity
for what you were talking about
in your community.
And you should follow up on.
Venom chair, um, committee, this
is a bill to create New Mexico's
36 state park called Slot Canyon
Riverland State Park. It's a
magical place. It's about 1000
acres along the Rio Grande. It's
actually, uh, both on the Rio
Grande but also adjacent to.
This very popular destination
called Slot Canyon that's
actually in the Oregon Mountain
desert Peaks National Park, a
national monument, but there's
no access to that.
And this would provide through
the state park access to this
amazing slot canyon. This park,
uh, would also the, the model
that we're wanting to create
would create camping.
Hiking trails, um, and actually
probably rival the national
monument itself or visitation
because it's already getting
incredible, just continuous
visitation, but people literally
have to park on the side of the
road, hop a fence, head to the
slot canyon, and with this,
we'll actually have this amazing
destination that will bring in,
I think, frankly grow the
regional outdoor economy and
just be another, you know,
feather in the hat of New Mexico
and get them to the state.
So I will just add this is uh a
bill, the chairman Small is the
main sponsor of this bill, the
funding is already uh in the
budget, um, state parks did a
feasibility per law when you
create a new state park, we
actually have to do a
feasibility study.
I've been through this process
twice and one time they didn't
recommend a park. In this case,
they, they thought it would be
higher visitation than the other
parks in Donana County. So, um,
with amazing biodiversity,
recreation opportunities,
including river recreation, so
it's just that we couldn't be
more excited about it and uh as
our the regional businesses and
the tourism folks, everyone
else. So with that, Madam Chair,
uh happy to stand for any
questions, and I know.
Toby Velasquez, director of
state parks, is here as well.
Thank you. Uh, so last time we
took comments on this bill. I, I
believe it's the same, so we're
gonna go ahead and move forward
with the committee discussion,
uh, Representative Cullen.
You, Madam chair.
So the, the last time um you had
come to present, we asked why
you went to and you said that
you wanted the Cadillac version.
Um, since the recommended
version was option 2.
and then, uh, so it ended up
being a tie, uh representative
small came to how to be able to
move this forward, Adam Chair
and and um we told them option 2
would move it forward with us.
On our side, um, and then we did
see an amendment. It was
removed, the city.
Madam Chair, candidly, you know,
our desire is to do option 3,
and that's what was funded and
And so we opted to go that
direction.
So, and, and rather than go
through the exercise of doing an
amendment and then changing it,
I think the better faith way is
to say, you know, we'd really
prefer to go this other way, and
I think that's the more direct,
honest.
Where, where to go rather than
do it and then change it later,
which certainly or try to change
it later, which certainly could
have happened. And in this case,
we really, you know, I use the
word Cadillac, but the truth is
what what we're talking about is
camping. That's one thing that
makes it more expensive. And
camping is what brings in and
keeps those tourists there. So
from an economic perspective,
we're going to get that return
back for the state. We're gonna
get that back to the community.
It's in all of our interests and
certainly our community to do it
right and now that we have this
opportunity with funding, it's
about.
Growing our economy just like
the last bill, it's about. And
that's what this is just, that's
what we want for our community.
I assume you'd probably want
that.
Thank you. Um, yeah, cause most
of New Mexicans and Cadillac is
more of the luxury brand. Um, so
when I, um, I did go through and
read the wholefeasibility study
last night, so, so
as I was going through this
feasibility study and I looked
at all the the people that had.
You know,
Went through it, um, was part of
the team analyzing it, so.
I did look at the option 2
pricing.
That we looked, it's about half
the price which you're looking
at for option 3, and that's it,
and then as well as considerably
less.
Um
So
My concern, I'll just kind of go
through it, so.
So alternative to came out about
3.
447562 million um considerably
less was the parking and
roadways improvements and then
it did go over renovating the
existing house or demolish the
existing to make a visitor
center. What was your plan?
Um, Madam Chair, representative,
I think it's to turn it into a
visitor center, and I don't have
the feasibility study in front
of me, but there is a historic
Ranch house there that's um
You know, can be used and
refurbished, and I think that's
the plan with that.
On the Riverland parcel.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Senator,
and then it does, so this one
was a recommended price about 3
million a little over 3 million,
3.5.
It depends on what you do with
that property on there. Um, and
then, so the cost of alternative
3 was um.
6.7 and then it went with the
options of renovating or
demolishing that property, so
the high cost is about, well,
the low cost would be 8.1, uh,
the high cost about 9.2 and um
Madam Chair, Senator, it shows
that you guys are looking at
just a straight 9 for this.
OK, um,
Madam Chair, Senator, then the
alternative to day use park or
recreation area for staffing
shows the staff salaries to be
at a 107,510. And then
alternative 3, the full state
park staffing would be 338,452
per year.
And that just depends on you.
Different scenarios that I read
in here, um, Madam Chair, uh,
Senator, I looked at the fiscal
impact report, and one of it
notated is that a lot of state
parks, um, are not fully staffed
because of lack of staff,
um, would that be a concern if
you went into alternative 3 of
being able to.
Well, Madam Chair, sometimes,
you know, we fund positions that
don't get filled. We had a park
in Las Cruces for a long time
that had a, a vacancy that
really wasn't filled and it was
Kind of intentional, I think, by
the state parks under the
previous administration. Um, in
this particular case, though,
that's really important. This is
another important part that goes
along with 3, you're gonna have
a heavily, heavily visited park,
probably the camping will
probably be booked much of the
time. You want full-time staff.
That's the difference between
option 2 and option 3 when it
comes to the staffing piece of
it. Option two said we're going
to use the staff from a nearby
state park to help run this.
You don't want that with a busy
full-time state park with
You know, in intensive natural
resources and
Um
Assets to manage and visitation
and
So, that's, that's the need for
that. And I, and I hope that,
um, you know, it is fully
staffed because I think we're
gonna need it. Having said that
for year one, we're gonna be
developing this park because it
doesn't exist. So, so they
probably only need a staff
person now to help shepherd.
The construction and
Planning process which will go
on for a year or two, frankly.
Madam,
so, um, so I, I did look because
it did talk about being able to
use the Leesburg, um, dam is a
campsite because it's only 7
miles away, which is also a
state park, is that correct?
is a state park. So, um, madam
chair, Senator, so within 7
miles, then you're looking at
also creating the campsite with
alternative 3 on um for the Slot
canyon.
And Madam Chair, Senator, when I
looked at the figures, um, so
the rate of return that they
like is 70.
For operating costs and
everything to be covered by
about 75%, um, enterprise agency
goals uh to cover the cost, and
Madam Chair, uh, senator, it's
not even close when they madam
chair, um, it doesn't seem if
you developed uh alternative 3
with that campsite that be
accurate.
I don't, Madam Chair, I don't
know that it will be accurate,
but having said that, uh, just
cause we went through this also
in the previous administration.
Most state parks, believe it or
not, don't generate enough money
to pay for the operations. It's
just the reality of the matter.
A few do, like elephant Butte,
and there's a few parks that do.
So I think you can't look at
this asset just purely in
isolation of does it pay for
itself in terms of park fees.
You look at it in terms of what
you're doing for the day, what
this amenity. I mean, we got
1000 acres of incredible
biodiverse riverland resource
that isn't available to the
public now, it's going to be
available and I would add
through the amazing new rule
passed by the state parks, it's
gonna be free now for New
Mexicans much of the year. So
now kids are gonna have this
major river learning center, um,
Camping, you know, it's just the
value of the community alone
will pay for the park and what
we're investing in it, but I
think in terms of the park
resources coming in.
You know, I think it's gonna be
incredibly popular and time will
tell if, if it actually, where
the economics of just that land.
Madam Chair and senator, I, I'll
just say I, I'm very supportive
of the state parks. It does uh
it's great asset for
communities, however, um,
because of the feasibility
study, and after reviewing that
and after our discussion with
representative Small and um, you
know, when I evaluate the cost,
and yes, you're not always going
to capture it, that is not
necessarily Madam Chair, Senator
that.
You can't always capture, but
Um, the recommended was option
2, the discussion was to change
it to on, um, so,
That was between Mason and I and
Representative Small and by what
I have seen here, my, my vote
will be a no. I'm gonna
interrupt questions real fast
because I'm proud to say, we
have Pun from a panaria in just
outside my district. It's really
good stuff. And I went nuts
buying it. So please have some
sweet bread, uh, it's really
yummy. So, sorry, uh, we, we can
go back to discussion. Yeah,
there was not a comment on the
debate. I thought they were
wonderful questions. Uh, well,
let's go to Representative
Mason.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator.
Uh
Basically, my
Most of my comments will mirror.
Uh
Representative Collins, uh,
You know, going representative,
uh, I mean, senator, Madam
Chair.
We talked about cost.
In the in
The feasibility study.
The state parks
Goal was 75%.
Is what they they don't they
know they're not gonna.
OK.
Provide 100% of the cost.
Of of
Upkeep, not, I mean.
Represent uh Senator
Madam Chair, uh
The cost of the park itself is
not
Really part of the conversation
on this, uh.
Senator, Madam Chair.
The uh the study.
For alternative 3.
That's the cost revenue.
Somewhere between 12 and 19.
That's, that's a long ways from
75.
Granted
Alternative to.
It's 10 to 15%.
So neither neither plan.
Make
Yeah
Financially, according to their
75% goal.
Is that correct, Senator? I
mean, Madam Chair,
Representative, that's what the
feasibility study says, I won't,
you know, I'm not gonna dispute
what they wrote down there, I
think the time will tell.
How, how much you know uh.
Madam Chair Representative from
I mean Senator, I'm, I'm sorry
about that. That's OK. I was
but uh you know, and I'm sure
Madam Chair represented that it
will be a
Uh, an asset to the community
of, of.
Or the county of Los uh
Donnaana.
But
Madam Chair Representative.
The state of New Mexico.
Every resident in the state of
Mexico will pay for the part,
not the community, is that true?
Absolutely, madam Chair
Representative, and, uh, you
know, from where I
I come in these conversations
is.
I have to go home.
Madam Chair and senator and
my constituents how I spent
their money.
And uh
With the
Going with
Uh, Madam Chair and represented
going with the.
The higher price and not the
recommended by the study.
Uh
I will have a hard time
Get selling that program.
In Eddy County, granted.
Uh, Madam Chair, senator, if
this was going in Eddy County, I
would have no problem.
Exactly,
but hang on the facts of the
matter are it is not in Eddy
County or Bern Leo County or.
It's not in 32 other counties in
the state of New Mexico. It is
in one county.
And uh Madam Chair.
Uh, senator
For the reasons
Well spoke by
Uh
Representative Cullen, I too
cannot support it as, as is, but
thank you for your presentation.
Thank you, Representative, uh,
Representative Gonzalez.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
thank you, Senator. Um,
Again, just talking, talking
through some of these options,
the option 2 versus option 3, a
day park versus an overnight
park. Um, do you have any data
or any information to share on
the economic impacts to the
community, the outside
community.
On a day park versus an
overnight park. I know the
feasibility, it's obviously more
expensive for an overnight park.
And maybe what are those
economic benefits of an
overnight park versus a day
park.
I would just say, Madam Chair,
and I don't know if Toby wants
to add anything to it. Thank you
for the question,
Representative. You know,
anecdotally, I don't have any
data, but I have seen parts that
have camping. We'll use
Rockhound State Park and Deming,
for example, a really cool,
unique place, booked 100% of the
time. Then we've got some other
days parks in Donana County,
admittedly that don't have, you
know, they're beautiful, they're
beautiful, but they're, they're
just they use, they don't have
camping and when you don't have
that amenity to keep people
there.
It just changes completely the
equation of who comes, how much
do they stay, how much they
invest. And so just looking at
those two parks, for example,
one is booked all the time, and
one is a lot more modern and
amazing, but it's just a day use
and it has a fraction of the
visitation.
So, I think we see that when you
have that amenity, that's where
that option 3 becomes so
important is to really capture
that visitation and keep them
there. And I would say, I think
this is important, as I've
talked to Toby about this option
two was kind of a pragmatic
financial kind of pragmatic
thing to do. It wasn't that they
were against option 3.
It's everything's resources here
and, and obviously option 3 was
a step up commitment, but um
they're completely enthusiastic
equally enthusiastic with that
with option 2, and you could ask
him that yourself, but.
Anyway, thank you for the
question.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator. Um, along
with that as a follow-up
question. Um, I know the
feasibility study gets directly
into direct.
Direct cost, direct management
of a park, but now to expand a
little bit on a fringe benefit
of a park when you're talking
about fringe benefits. I know
you talked about it very
generally.
Can you expand a little bit, um,
and maybe even the community and
the state, the fringe benefits
for tourism for um environment
for education, um, that will
extend not only to Dona Anna
County, but also to the state.
So you asked that question,
ma'am, uh, representative, thank
you for asking that question.
Um, we are of course building
our brand as an outdoor
destination state. And so this
park and specifically the name
that we chose, Slot Canyon. If
you, you Google that Slot canyon
and you look at how popular it
is.
I mean, it is just taken off
since it's become known. And so
this is an asset to the whole
state. This is like white sands.
This is like one of those
feather in our caps, very unique
destinations. There are not a
lot of slot cans and it's
definitely the only state park
called Slot Canyon, um, with
this beautiful riverlands parcel
that has, you know, beaver dams
and cool stuff going on. So it
is a real asset to the state
within our regional economy,
there is a, there's a community
nearby that I represent called
Radium Springs, New Mexico, if
you've ever driven by it.
Now this is a very sleepy
colonial, OK?
Poor, um, it's colonia.
There is a bar there that
occasionally does really, really
well. It's called the Blue Moon
Bar. It's a grill now too, and a
new, new ownership, the owner is
incredibly enthusiastic about
this because he says he sees
visitors every day who come in
from El Paso to hop that fence
to go to that slot canyon. He's
like, wow, imagine if we make
this a state park.
So, so this is going to really
revitalize, you know, invigorate
the region, um, but also the
whole city of Las Cruces, Donana
County, I would even say
southern New Mexico because most
Visitation, tourism actually
comes to northern New Mexico,
just in terms of the data. So
it's an asset for everybody,
and, um, and I would also add
Just to kind of nerd out a
little more. There's, there's a
new kind of opportunity called
hip camp. It's about a 15 year
old company where people who own
land can actually rent out their
land for campers.
And it's a really unique
opportunity, like if you're
bringing a lot of people in in
your campsites are booked where
someone can actually turn their
land into an asso.
And so there's a woman nearby
that actually uses her property
for hip camp. I think this is
actually just, just a whole new
outdoor industry opportunity
that will be generated from this
park alone.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator, thank
you so much anecdotally, um,
coming from Northern New Mexico,
we have a lot of state parks
within that I frequent very,
very often, um, some overnight,
um, summer day with overnight
restrictions, you know, just
giving some example, um, we have
Murphy Lake, which it is harder
to camp BRV you can tent camp,
um, a lot of locals visited due
to, due to camping, you don't
see as much fringe, but then you
look at Story leak, um, Story
Lake, which brings in um people
to the, the community, they
stay, they
stay all week, they stay the
weekend, um, you have Ian Weber
State Park, very close. They
come in, um, it feeds our local
farmers' market, um, they visit
the, the local businesses, um,
that reach extends all the way
out to Santa Fe and Albuquerque,
and I will say there are people
that come in specifically for
our state parks and they make
the circuit, um, and they make
the circle and, um, now that
we've opened this park up to
veterans.
Hopefully some of these these
bills that have been through our
committee passed, um, we've
opened this part, these parks up
to different opportunities for
our visitors. Um, I think this
is one area that New Mexico can
truly excel and can truly
showcase all the beauty that we
have for our state and bring
economic viability to our
region, so, um, thank you so
much. um I will be supporting
this bill. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Representative. Um, I
had a couple of questions if
there's none of the committee,
uh, so you, I see here the
feasibility study was carried
out from Sen Memorial 38. So
when was the feasibility study
completed?
Oh gosh, I'm just guessing.
Forgive, I'm gonna phone a
friend on this one.
You are phoning a friend, uh.
June 2024.
It looks like July 2024, my
colleague just handed it to me
as well. Thank you. Thank you.
Um, so that was a while ago, uh,
and since that feasibility, some
of the concerns that that arose
for me is that we have seen a
significant decrease in
investment in US parks and
national monuments. Um, I looked
it up briefly. It was something
like 3000 layoffs from the
United States Forest Service and
national parks, and that's just
this year, before that, I hadn't
known that since 2010, um, they
decreased staff by.
20% uh overall and then
increase, there's an increase of
visitation by 16%. So we're
seeing on the national level in
general, um, there is a
significant decrease to that
staffing and that, that, that
funding as well. Um, it seems
that this may be able to cover
some of the interests that we
know exists within the state for
uh national parks and having
services like that. Is that what
you would anticipate as well?
Madam Cherry, yes, I mean,
people, there is actually an
increase in visitation over
parks, notwithstanding federal
funding.
issues. There's a trend line of
increased visitation to our
parks. So to absorb some of that
demand, incredible. The state of
New Mexico right now,
incredible. We see our outdoor
economy being one of the fastest
growing sectors in our economy
in New Mexico. We of course have
an incredible outdoor division.
So this just dovetails right in
that and who knows, maybe um
this will even provide some new
staffing opportunities for Toby
back there to recruit some good
people who may be looking for
work. I, I anticipated that as
well. I've been getting all
these advertisements from the
gov's office saying that.
Where she's ready to hire
uh, so that's that, that's what
I was anticipating too. Do you
have concerns about the
additional, um, honestly, the,
the, the, the trash and what
will happen, having overnight
versus a day pass. Um, ma'am
chair, you know, that, that is
the flip side of the coin with
outdoor tourism, to be sure, is
litter and that, you know, I
absolutely
Um, ethically share that concern
and, and have been championing
for many years the state
stepping up its game on litter
control and have been advocating
and had a bill, in fact, several
years ago, the state had to
adapt to statewide literary
education campaign with the,
with the national organizations
like Leave No Trace Keep
American people safe, education
is the number one most important
thing we can do. So when COVID
happened, we saw a proliferation
of people going outdoors, we saw
an increase of trash also. So it
it's something that goes
Hand in hand with outdoor
visitation. If we're going to
market getting outdoors, we need
to have an equal matched
commitment to education and
anti-litter and
Um, campaigns and so yeah, it is
an issue how you manage the
resource, how you manage
visitation, especially on a
sensitive ecological resource so
that you're protecting it, but
you're also not.
Loving it to death is the
expression they use sometimes in
the outdoor world where you're
bringing in so many people,
you're trampling a resource. So
all these things are
Definitely considerations, but
on the same time,
You know, it's, it's such an
incredible visitation asset that
we're proud of. We want to show
it off. We want to grow tourism
and so, and also, you, you grow
more respect for River ecology.
In this case, particularly the
southern Rio Grande and using
this as a science opportunity
actually build more support,
having it accessible for
conservation and restoration.
It seems to me that, um,
Senator, that uh having
full-time staff support of a
facil uh parcel, um, would
support that educational
outreach aspect more. Is that
what you'd anticipate as well?
Absolutely, ma'am. Yeah, those
are my, my questions. I'll take
a, a motion from the committee.
There's one.
I make a motion to do pass.
Is there a second?
Uh, I have a motion from
Representative uh Gonzalez for a
due pass on House Bill 219,
seconded by Representative
Garcia. Can we take a roll count
or a roll vote, we'll call vote.
Representative Cullen.
No, with explanation.
Representative Garcia.
Yes
Represented Gonzalez.
Yes.
Representativelod.
Representative Mason?
Vi Sanchez.
Madam Cerrado, yes, we have 4 to
2, 42, we have an explanation
for Representative Cullen. Thank
you, Chair.
Um
Does it for me, um, I just want
to say that if you went with
option 2 and then allowed it to
grow.
That's how I always say you
start small and see what kind of
visitors in another campsite
within 6.8 miles, and then, then
you could look at expanding, but
that's my explanation. Thank
you.
Thank you. Uh, you have a due
pass on House Bill 419.
Thank you. Again, we have, I did
not start small when I bought
it. I bought a lot. So please
take some to your office with
that, we are adjourned.
Now
