members of the committee.
All right, I'm here to present
uh Senate Bill 21, which takes
some important steps to give uh
our state control of our own
water resources. First,
It creates a new law to lay the
groundwork for the Environment
Department to implement the
Federal Clean Water Act in New
Mexico.
Secondly, uh, the bill amends
the state's Equality Act to
protect New Mexico's waters that
are no longer protected by the
Federal Clean Water Act, um, or
the Superfund law.
Uh, and, and thirdly, we hold
Plus accountable, and they clean
up our neglected and
contaminated sites. I'm going to
talk in detail about all these
things throughout the world, but
I want to take a second to talk
about the, the process of how
the bill came, um, came here,
um.
Over the last 3 years of this
legislature has supported the
New Mexico Environment
Department to, to stand up the
state surface water permitting
program we have given, um.
Several million dollars in
appropriations over the last 3
years. Um, we've been um putting
our, our state on the path to
developing its own program. Um,
last year, the environment
department held a number of
meetings with stakeholders
representing a variety of
industries, um, and
That is um how this bill that
you see before you, which has
had some changes that I will
talk about, uh, right after I
finish, um, but that's, that's
how we got to where we are
today.
I'm going to go into uh the
details of the bill. First I'll,
I'll talk about the um standing
of the states uh uh surface
water permitting program, uh 47
states already have a surface
water perming program that they
manage and regulate at their own
state where one of 3.
He gets made.
New Hampshire, Massachusetts,
and New Mexico are the only
states that know that do not
have um their own surface water
probiting program, um, we
I refer all those permits to the
EPA.
So, the way that works is the,
the Federal Clean Water Act
protects surface waters.
by requiring a permit for
discharges of pollution into
what is known as the waters of
the United States. The EPA
establishes and enforces these
standards uh through the
national pollution Discharge
elimination system, or we'll
call it a colloquially call it
nifties.
Um, the EPA.
is the lead agency, and we are,
we
Or hoping to apply to the EPA.
Through this bill for our own
ability to um to regulate your
own program, um.
This is the, this is what we
call primacy.
will be applying for um for, so
we've already done this through
it through um
through the legislative sessions
through the uh the the money
that we've appropriated to the
department to start to stand up
this program.
Um
Then
The next thing that this bill
does is that it protects our
state's waters that are no
longer protected in 2023, uh,
the Sacket decision left 95% of
our waters unprotected in our
state. Um, these are, you know,
surface waters that are
ephemeral streams, uh, some
arroyos, uh, they basically
interpreted that the um that
only continuously flowing with.
5% of our waters in New Mexico
are continuously flowing.
So that that decision
deregulated 95% of our waters.
So, to fill that gap is still
amends the Water Quality Act to
require a permits for surface
water discharges that are no
longer covered by the federal
law, and this aligns with
decades of practice under the
Clean Water Act, over the last
50 years, we've protected these
waters. We want to continue to
protect these waters, um, the
bill authorizes general permits
to cover a group of a similar
discharges such as stormwater
runoff from industrial, uh, or
oil and gas pesticide
applications, fish hatcheries,
wildlife recovery.
Those kinds of things. These
general permits offer advantages
compared to individual permits,
like
location,
application
processing times, consistency
with similar facilities, lower
fees, um.
The third part of this bill is a
groundwater protection. The bill
provides authority to hold
polluters responsible for
pollution that threatens
groundwater, uh, that does not
rise to the level where federal
law can support cleanup of the
bill does this by establishing
rulemaking authority and
clarifying the.
Financial liability for
environmental contamination on
our New Mexico law with the.
Federal Super Funds.
There are 10 and contaminated
sites in New Mexico, um, so this
bill, uh, sets up a program to
deal with those sites. There is
money in the budget for um for
managing the neglected and
contaminated sites, 50 million,
um.
And
we do in this bill is set up a
fund at the Environment
department to to clean that up.
So to, to wrap it all up, um,
the fiscal establishes a
statewide water permitting
program.
We will continue to protect the
waterways that have been, um,
that have been deregulated and
that we have.
Protected for 50 years, uh, we
will hold the nurse responsible
for degrading our groundwater
resources and clean up decades
of neglect I have two experts uh
with us uh today. I'd like to
introduce them. Jonas Armstrong,
Shelley Lemon, both from EnemyD
and of course later worth from
the Senate side.
And I'd like to invite Senator
Wirth to.
To speak about the bill.
Uh, thank you, Chair Ortiz, and
also uh thanks to Senator Bobby
Gonzalez, who's the other Senate
sponsor on this bill. I just
want to add a little bit more
about the process, uh, that
brings us here today both a
little more detail about the
working group that met during
the fall and then walk you
through the journey this bill's
been on in the Senate, and the
number of changes that have been
made and how it gets to us
today. So, first of all, uh, as
Ortez mentioned the surface
water advisory panel.
Uh, met 6 times over the fall to
work on this bill, uh, there
were somewhere in the range,
4950 participants from a diverse
group, uh, with interests that
are impacted by the bill,
industry, oil and gas, mining,
construction, agriculture, a
conservation districts,
environmental groups, tribal
governments, local governments,
uh, water delivery control,
irrigation districts, uh, state
and federal agencies, federal
facilities.
Los Alamos, Sandia watershed and
wetlands restoration
professionals by the diversity
of all the folks that we're
meeting, you can see the impact
of this bill and it is a
significant impact. I, I will
say right up front that with
respect to the surface water
portions of this bill. I've
really presented it as a status
quo bill.
I mean, we are asserting primacy
over the remaining uh free
flowing waters in New Mexico.
It's about 5 to 10%, but after
the Sackett decision, about 90
to 95% of our water, uh, which
are ephemeral streams, those not
connected basically we were
deregulated. This bill fills in
that gap, uh, with respect to
the process in the Senate. It's
interesting, uh, I, I make the
referrals on bills.
And I made the decision to send
this bill to 3 committees in the
Senate, uh, because it needed to
go to 3 committees.
It really did. It needed to be
heard by the conservation
committee by the judiciary
Committee and by the Finance
Committee, and we had extensive
hearings in all three and I'll
just describe a little bit of
the issues that came up and how
we addressed them.
Uh, in the Senate Conservation
Committee, there was a 3 hour
hearing on this bill. The big
concerns that were raised were
the existence in the original
bill of a private right of
action, um, there were some
issues with the farm and ranch
exemption and the language that
we had in the original bill, and
then a big issue uh was that the
bill as originally drafted at
the cost of this program being
paid exclusively by fees issued
by the Environment Department.
Uh, so in the judiciary
committee, we
addressed all three of those
issues. Uh, we removed the
private right of action.
Uh, we put language in section 4
subsection C, that deals with
the the fees to give us the
flexibility, uh, to establish
how this program will be funded,
uh, whether by fees, general
funds, a combination of both,
all general funds, states have
done it differently.
And as the chair Ortiz
mentioned, there is $7 million
in the budget of this program
won't kick in for a couple of
years. So during the interim, I
think it's going to be critical
that we have that discussion,
uh, to determine what the fees
are going to look like or
whether we fund this all through
general fund or some
combination thereof with respect
to the farm and ranch exemption.
What we did is take this back to
the exact language used in the
federal law.
One of the things that's,
there's some interesting
language and we spent quite a
bit of time in the judiciary
Committee going through the
language, uh, that's that tracks
the federal government, but I
think there was a comfort level.
Everyone has worked with a
language that's been in
existence since 1972, uh, when
the Federal Clean Water Act was
passed, and so what we've done
is defaulted to that language,
even though some of the wording
is
created some interesting
challenges and judiciary things
we typically wouldn't do, but I
think it was more important for
all the advocates again, when
you're saying this is status
quo, you don't want to try and
rewrite 50 years of
interpretation and statutory
language at the federal, at the
federal level.
Uh, then in the finance
committee, uh, we did discuss in
depth the fee issue and the need
to come back and deal with that.
Uh, also it was requested and we
did this on a floor amendments
that we changed the bill, the
penalties that are in the bill
initially went into one of the
funds versus going back to the
general fund and the chair of
Senator Munoz and other members
wanted those penalties to go
into the general funds, so there
was no incentive to have
penalties be issued to fund.
the agency and then used by the
fund. So we made that as a floor
amendment, uh, and then between
the time it went through the,
the Senate Finance Committee and
the floor, uh, at my direction,
um, the environment department
sat down with the New Mexico
Mining Association.
And worked on a number of
Changes to definitions, things
that
They were agreeable that
department was agreeable to
doing that the mining
association requested and so in
addition to the floor amendment
that I put on dealing with the
penalties going to the general
fund, uh, Senator Scherer uh
ended up putting on 3 friendly
amendments that we had worked on
together.
Um, and basically those change
some definitions and, and dealt
with dredge and fill and some
things that were of concern to
the mining association. And so
that's how this bill gets here
today. So it's been on a journey
and, and it's a journey that
needed to happen.
Uh, this is a pretty
significant, well, I shouldn't
say pretty, this is a very
significant piece of legislation
and their policy choices in
here.
But again, I think what we've
tried to do is listen and
certainly not, not everybody is
on board, uh, because anytime
you're reimplementing a new
program, and here there's a
couple of new programs, uh, that
causes
Concern, how are we going to do
it? We're putting the state in
control, how we're going to fund
it? We can talk about those
things today. So I just thought
it'd be helpful to give you a
sense of
Kind of what we've done to get
it to this point and we're
certainly happy to answer any
questions.
We'll go ahead and stand for
questions, Madam Chair.
Thank you very much. Is there
anyone in the audience who
supports the spill if you would
raise, OK, we're gonna do one
minute each if you would stand
up, so they would know so
they're gonna hold a mic one
minute each.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name is JD
Bullington, and I'm the
registered lobbyist for the
Pueblo of Laguna.
Long before our indigenous
people ever encountered anyone
from Europe in this country.
People of Laguna were dependent
on the water sources of the Rio
Machino, Rio Poatete, and the
Rio San Jose, and they still are
today.
There have been federal
protections in place for the
last 50 years, and now we know
those protections are gone, and
new protections need to be in
place.
What this bill does, it is
insures that anyone who applies
for a permit.
Uh, to conduct any type of
activity.
That might adversely affect
these waters, they're going to
have to insure and guarantee
that their activity is not going
to adversely affect these waters
that the people of Laguna are
still dependent on. This is the
number one priority piece of
legislation this year for the
Pueblo of Laguna, and they urge
you to support the bill.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Vidal
Gonzalez and I work for the New
Mexico C Association as the
director of policy and planning.
I'm a registered lobbyist and
I'm here to speak in support of
Senate Bill 21. This bill has
broad support among
organizations representing a
broad cross section of New
Mexicans working together to
protect our waters. Senate Bill
21 is critical for protecting
New Mexico's waters, eass,
farms, traditions, and our
culture. We wish to highlight
that this legislation is needed
to have a New Mexico-based
process for protecting.
Clean water in both rivers and
asseass while upholding the
needs of agriculture so that it
can continue to prosper into the
future. We need to pass
legislation that will protect
our waters, traditions, and
customs into the future, which
is what makes New Mexico so
unique in the line of
enchantment.
I also wanted to thank NMED and
the sponsor of the bill. Thank
you for your time, Madam Chair
and members of the committee.
Good morning, Madam Vice Chair,
committee members for the
record, Dan Roper with Trout
Unlimited. I'd like to make a
few very quick points. The first
is simply to say that clean
water is critical to the things
our members care about, native
trout, healthy rivers, great
fishing. We don't have those
things without clean water and
we don't have clean water in the
state without the kind of common
sense protections that are at
the heart of this bill. Uh, it's
been stated before, but I'd like
to state it again and you'll
probably hear more about this,
but, uh, agricultural exemptions
that are in the Clean Water Act
carry forward.
directly into this bill. That's
important to us because it's
important to our partners in
rural New Mexico. Finally, I'll
just add, you'll hear a lot
about um point source discharges
into our rivers and streams,
equally important to us is the
health of our wetlands and our
headwater streams higher in the
system. All of those things are
important to the health of our
watersheds and the health of our
watersheds are incredibly
important to the places where we
live and work. Thank you.
Thank you. Good morning, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Gillian
Joyce, and I'm representing
Rocky Mountain Farmers Union and
our members across New Mexico.
It is critical that New Mexico
set up step up to protect our
waters while ensuring
agricultural activities can
continue. That's why we
appreciate the sponsors working
closely with us and others in
the agricultural community to
craft language that achieves
both goals. The exemptions for
agriculture in this bill do
indeed mirror, uh, what we've
historically had at the
better level and protects normal
farming and ranching activities.
These provide certainty to our
members while allowing New
Mexico to protect its waters.
RMFU believes Senate Bill 21
strikes the right balance
between protecting New Mexico's
water for future generations,
while preserving the
agricultural practices that have
sustained our communities for
centuries. Thank you so much. I
urge you to support this bill.
Uh, good morning, Madam Chair
and committee members. My name
is Anna Hansen. I am the
registered lobby for the Pueblo
Auake.
I am honored to represent them.
They consider this bill extreme
high importance, uh, the EPA
currently requires that upstream
permits meet, walking, tribal
water quality standards, SB 21
ensures that we don't lose this
provision when the state takes
over the program.
I am also the chair of the
coalition of
Communities of New Mexico,
sustainable communities of New
Mexico, which represents close
to 48.
percent of the population, it is
made up of elected and former
elected officials. I am a Santa
Fe, former Santa Fe County
commissioner, and I serve as the
chair of that board. We fully
support this bill also. It is
really, it is the most important
bill in my
Thank you.
Madamie, good morning, Madam
Chair, committee members, my
name is Pam Roy. I'm here
representing the New Mexico Food
and Agriculture Policy Council
and Farm to table and we are
really grateful for the sponsors
of this bill bringing it forward
and taking into consideration
the many needs um that our
communities are requesting of
this, how it will take care of
waters that protect agriculture,
our streams and um really want
to thank the sponsors and again
hope for your support for
that will be long, long term for
our values in water and taking
care of our state. Thank you.
Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Zoe Barker. I am the
conservation director with
Conservation Voters New Mexico.
Senate Bill 21 is a crucial
piece of legislation to help
protect the waters in New Mexico
after the federal decision to
update the Clean Water Act. It
left 95% of our rivers and
streams unprotected and 88% of
our wetlands unprotected. We
urge the committee to support SB
21 today to ensure continued
protection of New Mexico waters.
Thank you so much.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Victoria Laconia,
advocacy fellow with the Samiga
Project, I stand before you and
Today in full support of Senate
Bill 21. 1st, I want to extend
my gratitude to the sponsors of
this bill and to the New Mexico
Environment Department for their
leadership and vision in
protecting New Mexico's wetlands
and streams. Clean water
sustains our drinking water,
assea agriculture, outdoor
recreation, and cultural
ceremonies that are deeply
rooted in our communities,
changes to federal clean water
protections have left many of
New Mexico's water wass
vulnerable to pollution. This
bill allows New Mexico to take
control of its own surface
water.
permitting program, ensuring
that permits are issued by
regulators who know our
communities, our ecosystems, and
our needs. I urge you to pass
Senate Bill 21 to protect our
waters for all New Mexicans now
and for generations to come.
Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
committee members. My name is
Emily Wolf, and I'm the Rio
Grande coordinator with American
Rivers. I live about 350 ft from
the Santa Fe River, which is
ephemeral throughout its urban
reach and would lose all
protection under the recent
recent second Supreme Court
decision. The river is a hugely
important center of our
community, accessed by an
important to community members,
including myself and youth,
wildlife, native plants and
trees year round during times
when it flows and during times
when the flow lessens. This
legislation is
critical for protecting our
waterways like this river and
communities and putting the
protection of our water resource
into our own hands here in New
Mexico. Given all the layoffs at
the federal level, there's much
uncertainty about how the EPA
will operate and whether they'll
have the capacity to issue
permits in a timely manner. We
need state authority over
surface water permitting to
create regulatory certainty for
both industry, communities, and
ecosystems, and I urge you to
support this bill. Thank you.
Good morning. My name is Rachel
Khan. I'm the deputy director
and registered lobbyist for
Amigos Bravos. Due to the loss
of federal protections, there
are discharges in New Mexico
that are no longer regulated,
including discharges from
several wastewater treatment
plants and communities across
New Mexico, such as Silver City,
Rama, and Cloudcroft, and this
is only the beginning of the
loss of permits for discharges
in New Mexico.
Federal permits are issued on a
five-year terms, and we get, and
as we get further out from 2023,
which was the year of the 2
Supreme Court decision, we will
see more and more permits not
renewed when they come to the
end of their permit term.
Because New Mexico can no longer
rely on federal protections and
permits to protect our state
waters. It's time to enact a New
Mexico solution and develop our
own surface water permitting
program.
Please vote yes on S. Good
morning, Madam Chair, committee
members. My name is Bruce
Thompson. I'm a semi-retired
professor of engineering at UNM.
I'm chair of the Water Quality
Control Commission and I'm a
member of the board of directors
of met Albuquerque Metropolitan
Arroyal flood Control Authority,
AAFCA, but I'm speaking on my
own, uh, here I not, don't
represent any of these people or
those organizations. I, I'd like
to address a little bit
different perspective than has
been mentioned before.
And that is that our permits are
issued by EPA Dallas and the
folks in Dallas do not
understand the nuances and
complexities that exist in New
Mexico, and there are
increasingly less responsive to
the challenges that we face and
by example, let me tell you that
a maca is operating under a
discharge permit that expired 5
years ago.
Thank you very much.
Good morning, Chair, members of
the committee. My name is Tricia
Snyder, and the rivers and
Waters program director for New
Mexico Wild, and a registered
lobbyist. I want to thank the
Environment Department and all
the sponsors for bringing this
important bill forward and the
significant work that has been
done to incorporate input from a
wide variety of stakeholders.
This includes, as mentioned by
leader Worth, the Environment
Department, running a surface
water advisory panel, which, uh,
I was honored to participate in
with representatives from
industry, local governments, the
NGO community, uh, Pueblo and
others over the fall.
EED provided significant
opportunity to discuss intent
and provide feedback during this
process. This bill provides a
mechanism to get New Mexico back
to the level of protection we
have enjoyed for decades and
ensure that permits will be
issued here in the state by the
people who know these waters
best. For these reasons and all
the others already mentioned, we
stand in strong support of
Senate Bill 21. Thank you.
You
My name is Bobby Bisold. I am
with an organization called
Rivers Run Through Us. Um, we
are advocates for the, the
rivers, the intimate streams,
and all the waters of New
Mexico, um, and as you know, the
Supreme Court made a ruling that
uh basically dismantled all the
protections of our waters
because most of our rivers are
intermittent, uh, or many of our
rivers are and they don't
qualify for protection, um, now.
under the Supreme Court ruling.
Um, this incredible bill that we
have the advantage to bring to
the people of New Mexico would
bring us protections, and I want
to read you one little short
thing from it is the Hopi
Declaration of Water. This was
issued in 2003 from the 2nd Mesa
in Arizona. I'm gonna read a
little part of it for you.
All living beings come from
water.
All is sustained by water.
All will return to water to
begin life anew.
We are of water and the water is
of us when water is threatened,
all living beings are
threatened. What we do to water,
we do to ourselves.
Can we
Are we done with? We're done
with the pilot. So now we'll go
to Zoom and look for, please
raise your hand if you are
supporting this bill.
Man chair. We currently have 14,
uh.
Participants who are raising
their hand in support on the
Zoom 15, uh, if you would like
to make public comment, please
keep your hand raised, raised
and uh make sure you introduce
yourself, uh, when you're
unmuted and your time will begin
uh once you
Are needed. We had 18, uh, show
of hands, but I believe that
less are going to make. Uh,
first off, we have Sophia.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Sophia Jenkins Nieto,
and I'm here on behalf of youth
United for Climate Crisis Action
or Yucca, um, we stand in strong
support of SQ 21, because our
state's waters must be protected
from pollution, and our
communities deserve stronger
safeguards against toxic
discharges. New Mexico is
already one of the driest states
in the country, and we cannot
afford to let our limited water
resources be contaminated.
Too often, industries have been
able to discharge pollutants
into our rivers and groundwater
with little oversight, leaving
communities, especially rural
and indigenous communities
facing the consequences of
unsafe drinking water and
environmental degradation. Our
water is sacred. It sustains
life, supports ecosystems, and
is deeply tied to our cultures
and traditions. We must ensure
that every drop is protected
from harmful contamination.
It is past time for New Mexico
to strengthen its ability to
hold polluters accountable and
prevent further harm to our land
and people.
We urge you to pass SB 21 and
take decisive action to
safeguard New Mexico's water for
future generations. Thank you.
Except we have Emily.
Hi, my name is Emily Tucker with
Food and Water Watch New Mexico.
I live in Albuquerque, uh, Food
and Water Watch stands in
support of SB 21, which will
ensure our waters are protected
for generations to come and
joining 47 other states in
administering a surface water
permitting program.
As we see the worsening effects
of the climate crisis, we need a
robust permitting process to
protect our water resources.
Currently, EPA issues these
permits, and New Mexicans have
to rely on staff located in
Dallas for any needs and
questions that arise about the
process, allowing enemyD to
handle the process at their 20
field offices across the state
will better serve the unique
needs of New Mexicans locally
and enable communities to have
better access to regulators.
That is why, uh, Food and Water
Watch urges you to vote yes on
SB 21. Thank you.
Thank you. Next up we have
Francisco.
My name is Francisco Guevara. I
am president of Los Rios River
Runners, New Mexico's oldest,
most experienced rafting
company.
The economic backbone of New
Mexico is tied directly to our
water.
Outdoor recreation businesses
like my river guiding Company,
agriculture, and our drinking
water supply all rely on
healthy, clean waterways.
Our natural resources are vital
economic assets, but they are
also fragile, with no state
permitting program, our rivers
and streams, are open to
pollution from industrial
runoff, sewage, and chemicals,
endangering everything from
local businesses to our homes.
Senate Bill 21 will establish a
permitting program for the many
waterways that are no longer
federally protected. Please pass
this important piece of
legislation to protect
businesses and
families like mine.
Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
committee members. I'm Barbara
Cali, registered lobbyist for
the League of Women Voters of
New Mexico.
The league supports stringent
regulations to protect ground
and surface water quality from
pollution that can impact human
health as well as the natural
flora and fauna. We believe that
such regulations must be
strictly enforced. The league
also believes the government
should monitor and measure all
water resources and uses and
publish this information.
Minimize water contamination in
order to promote the health and
safety of all life and preserve
and restore rivers and
watersheds.
Please vote to pass Senate Bill
21. Thank you.
Except we have Adrian.
Uh, buenossilla, uh, good
morning, chair and members of
the committee. Uh thank you to
the sponsors for bringing this
critical piece of water
legislation forward. Uh, my name
is Adrian Angulo from Nosa
Tierra Conservation Project. Um,
I live in the South Valley here
in Albuquerque. I'm an irrigator
like many of my neighbors, um,
with rising food costs, more New
Mexicans are gonna be turning to
farm share programs, climate
smart, community agriculture
that not only helps places like
the South Valley and
Albuquerque, but
rural communities and economies.
All over New Mexico that rely on
clean water from ouras and
rivers to grow food and feed.
Over 90% of our state's waters
are at risk after rollbacks to
the Clean Water Act. Now,
currently, uh, EPA issues
permits that New Mexicans have
to rely on EPA staff located in
Dallas to protect our waters and
answer permitting questions as a
proud New Mexican. There's a
special type of heartburn that
comes with relying on Texans.
For anything.
Uh
Yeah, I do apologize as we had
gone over time. Next up we have
somebody who does not have their
name listed. We will move on to
the.
Ex-com. I'm sorry.
This is Leila McFerrin. I'm the
vice president of the Upper
Pecos Watershed Association. On
behalf of the board of directors
of APA. I'm speaking in support
of the passage of Senate Bill
21. Upless efforts to protect
river habitats and water quality
are funded by Federal Clean
Water Act grants or the New
Mexico River stewardship
Program.
Due to uncertain federal
funding, we depend on the state
program to safeguard our public
lands and waters.
We have 3 ongoing projects
totaling $1.2 million at this
time.
The legislature is considering a
$10 million appropriation to the
River stewardship program and
setting rules for pollutant
discharge into rivers. We
support these efforts to protect
the Pecos Valley watershed and
New Mexico's environment and
want to thank the sponsors for
bringing this bill. Thank you
very much.
Thank you. OK, next up we have
Carlos. Thank you, Madam Chair,
committee members. My name is
Carlos Matutes. I am the New
Mexico community advocate for
green Latinos. We are an
environmental justice
organization focused on uh
Latina communities and other
communities of color. We
strongly support Senate Bill 21.
We understand that clean.
Pure water is absolutely
essential to the life and
well-being of our communities.
I'd like to especially thank the
sponsors and Senator Wirth for
the wisdom to bring 3 referrals.
I think that a lot of us thought
that that was perhaps a little
excessive, but we trust the
process and we trust that this
is important enough legislation.
These are common sense
regulations that we need for New
Mexico, and we really like to
think, uh, the wisdom of Senator
Wirth for bringing all three.
Referrals there. So please, we
do encourage you to do pass on
Senate Bill 21.
Thank you. Good morning, uh,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you for
bringing this uh to your
committee and thanks to the
sponsors for bringing this
forward and to all the
legislators and NGOs and
community members and
departments that have come
together to work as a gente, um,
as neighbors as a state to
accomplish this very important
uh piece of legislation. Clean
water is important for all life.
We depend on all life as all
life depends on us as humans.
So without clean water, we can't
have that life, um, and we'll
leave our future generations in
a wreck if we don't take action
as we are now, so I applaud you
all for bringing this forward.
Um, we've had past contamination
in Pecos, um, I grew up on the
Pecos as former chairman of the
SECA commission, a small farmer
in Pecos, and then Water
ambassador, and many other roles
I play in helping keep our
traditional communities intact
with clean water, um, along with
our cultural traditions, um,
my asset you please support this
uh important piece of
legislation. Thank you.
Thank you. Next up we have
Catherine.
Hi, my name is Katherine Harris
Thurina.
And I'm a constituent, and a
Madame Chair and members of the
committee. I appreciate your
support on this. I strongly
support SB.
21 and uh whether we're
Living on a farm or having a
business are just being at home.
We all need clean water.
Thank you for your support.
Thank you very much. That
concludes all the support from
Zoom. Now I would like to have a
show of hands of opposition to
this bill.
And if you'd like to speak and
stand up, you'll have one minute
each.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Howard Hutchinson
with the San Francisco soil and
water conservation District.
I served for 20 plus years on
the water quality control
commission and worked with
Shelly and a lot of people in
the environment department on
protection of the waters of New
Mexico.
However
In looking at the changes that
are proposed.
It looks like we are going to
swamp.
The department and the water
quality control commission with
rule hearings.
And also hearings on
Uh
Challenges to department
actions.
The other part that I'm
concerned about is in the
liability section that is being
added.
We took the private right of
action out of the bill, and I
commend the sponsors for for
doing that.
But the liability section seems
to put it right back in there.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Lin
Summers. Uh, I was a certified
wastewater operator for about 25
years. I've been fighting the
water fight here in New Mexico
since Bruce King was governor,
uh, there are 3 things with this
bill, of course, we're at war
with federal government over
water and their refusal to deal
with it, and I think we're on
our own and I, I absolutely
salute.
Thus sponsored the bill for
doing this. Two things I brought
a lawsuit against 6 Curry, who
was Secretary of the Environment
Summers versus Curry involving
section 0 of this bill, which
deals with gray water, gray
water deals, uh, it deals in
this section. It deals with uh
flows of 250 gallons of water a
day or less, and that's not the
water quality control Commission
Act, which is 5000 gallons or
more per day. Second of all, you
don't address nonpoint sources.
of pollution, their 300,000
septic tanks in the state of New
Mexico.
And that needs to be addressed,
uh, and there's one other thing
but I'll save it for the next.
Thank you.
Thank you Madam chair members of
the committee, Kelly Fajardo, on
behalf of the New Mexico Farm
Bureau, New Mexico's farmers and
ranchers share the goal of
protecting our water quality,
but we have serious concerns
about the rulemaking authority
granted under SB 21. The bill
gives broad regulatory power to
the water control commission and
the New Mexico Environ
department. If there is no clear
guarantee that farmers or
ranchers, those directly
impacted by these regulations,
we'll have a seat at the table.
We've heard assurances in past
legislation that stakeholders
would be included in the
rulemaking process, only to be
left out.
when critical decisions were
made. We can't afford that to
happen again. Farming and
ranching already operate under
tight margins, and every new
regulation adds financial
strain. If these rules are
developed without input from
those who who know the land the
best, they risk being
impractical, costly, and
damaging the agricultural
livelihoods. We cannot support
this bill unless it includes a
firm commitment that
agricultural stakeholders have a
seat at the table. Thank you.
Good morning, chair of members.
My, my name's Matt Thompson with
the New Mexico Mining
Association. First off, I'd like
to agree with Leader Worth. This
is a critical bill for the state
to get right. Um, maybe not a
more important bill the entire
session because it affects all
of industry, everybody here you
can see.
Um
First off, I'd say we've seen a
much needed evolution in this
bill. We participated in the
swap process and the draft bill
that came out from that, um, was
workable and then the bill,
unfortunately got worse,
however, with some serious
collaboration and input from
industries and advocates and the
uh the department itself, the
bill has come around and um we
are very appreciative of the
collaborative effort that uh
that leaderorth and the
department allowed. The bill
still has some technical.
provisions that we would like to
see clarified in order to truly
replicate the federal rules.
Therefore, uh, to keep the
status quo, as was mentioned,
that's what we're, that's what
we're shooting for. Therefore,
we stand today in respectful
opposition.
Good morning. I'm Terry Coleres
CEO for the Greater Albuquerque
Chamber of Commerce, uh, with
all due respect to the sponsor
with whom we work on many bills.
We do stand in opposition today
to the bill. You know, let me
say that we are appreciative of
the amendments, and we are
appreciative of the
collaboration, but we still have
concerns about the bill. We're
concerned about the workforce
piece trying to find the 50
employees that are going to be
needed that uh are at a very
high level of expertise, so
we're concerned that it's um
gonna be pretty difficult to
find them, and they will be
critical in the process. We, we
would recommend instead that the
bill be put in the interim
committee and let's work through
this, slow it down just a bit,
and um uh we would appreciate
your um listening to our
comments. Thank you so much.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
Ashley Wagner, the vice
president of government affairs
for the New Mexico Oil and Gas
Association. We represent over
200 member companies. I'm also
speaking on behalf of the
Independent Petroleum
Association of New Mexico.
We thank the sponsors for the
amendments that were made in the
Senate, and we look forward to
the work continuing in the
house. One of our concerns that
remains is that the surface
water advisory panel raised
serious concerns about NMED's
ability to have sustainable
funding for the program in this
bill. It is unclear how much
NMED estimates it will cost and
how much of the funding will
come from permit fees only.
Facing a department budget off
fees means an unstable market
for FTEs and necessary
personnel.
The New Mexico Environment
Department just shut down the uh
permitting for air quality
permits because of lack of
funds. This stops businesses
from locating here or expanding
their operations. If enemyD
takes over the NPDES program, we
are concerned that the same
thing could happen. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Jason Espinoza
speaking on behalf of the San
Juan Water Commission and the
Associated General Contractors
in New Mexico. Uh, we do
appreciate the evolution of the
bill and the amendments
specifically made on the floor
and Senate Judiciary. However,
we still do have concerns about
the definition of the waters of
the states, uh, and then
specifically on the construction
side, the legislature,
especially this interim, has had
a lot of conversation about cost
escalation on construction
projects as well as delays. We
do think that the legislation
will
exacerbate that issue and we'll
continue to see increased cost
escalation and delays on public
projects as well, so we're
concerned about that. Thank you.
Good morning chair members of
the committee, Mike Miller,
Permian Basin Petroleum
Association, um, we too
appreciate the evolution and but
we still have some problems.
Senate Bill 21 expands permit
denial criteria and imposes
vague and subjective standards
could be weaponized to block
critical industry operations
proposed framework creates
uncertainty for operators,
discourages investment, and
threaten jobs in one of New
Mexico's most vital economic
sectors. The bill's excessive
permitting and enforcement
provisions failed to balance
environmental.
protection with industry
viability instead creating
regulatory roadblocks that will
increase operational costs and
limit energy production.
Additionally, the legislation's
provision on produced water
handling imposes redundant
regulatory layers that conflict
with existing state and federal
oversight potentially stalling
advancement in water recycling
and beneficial uses, practices
that enhance sustainability in
oil and gas operations. Thank
you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
Beverly Itzinga, executive
Director of Dairy Producers of
New Mexico, as everybody else
mentioned, we do appreciate the
sponsors and the evolution of
the bill. However, again, we
also have some concerns, mostly
being we already have the most
stringent groundwater
regulations than any other dairy
state in the nation, and so I
believe this will result in
duplicative permitting as well
as having, um, stringent
groundwater or surface water um
regulations as well and so just
the
regulations would be harmful to
our producers. Thank you.
And a chair members of the
committee, good morning. My name
is Kent Cravens. I'm a
registered lobbyist with Mexico
Association of Realtors and uh I
won't, I won't uh elaborate on
any of the details because
you've already heard most of it,
uh, but I will say that we are
concerned about further um
encouraging development of, of
real property in many ways, um,
that's our thing, and we, we
like to, to see if we could
preserve uh those elements of,
of, of what we're doing with
water as important as it is.
to our state and to our culture
and to our way of life. Um,
it's, uh, it's very important
that we pay attention to.
Uh, the, the real estate
development aspect of it, so,
uh.
And that includes workforce and
and so forth. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
I thank you. Now we'll go to
Zoom for opposition, please
raise your hand on Zoom.
Um, for opposition for the
spill.
in opposition.
Um, if you would like to make
public comment, I will unmute
you and.
Uh, your time and you need it.
We have two.
Oh, please say your name
You
You may need to unmute yourself.
Kent, could you unmute yourself
and then uh introduce yourself
before you begin. OK, we are
going on to Yes, good morning,
chair members of the committee.
My name is Alison Riley, public
policy director with New Mexico
Chamber of Commerce. Um, first,
I want to start by saying we
understand how serious this
issue is for our state, and we
truly appreciate the hard work
and numerous amendments.
However, while great progress
has been made, there are
significant areas that remain
unaddressed. One key example I'd
like to talk about is the need
exemptions for firefighting
activities in our state,
firefighting is a matter of
public safety and an economic
imperative, considering that
during wildfires, such as the
fire of 2022, rapid response is
essential.
Firefighters used bulldozers and
other equipment to establish
fire lines. Sometimes crossing
dry washes and streams, which
under the current bill language
could inadvertently trigger
permanent requirements. These
delays could hinder efforts to
suppress fires, resulting in far
greater economic losses in
communities already vulnerable
to disruptions.
Additionally, quick flood and
fire restoration work is
critical. The timely removal of
debris and restoration of stream
channels prevents further.
Thank you. I, I didn't go over
the time, uh, Madam Chair,
there.
Thank you very much so, uh,
Chete or leader worth, is there
any final comments you'd like to
make? Uh yeah, I'd like to
address some of the comments
that we heard, um, I want to be
clear that this bill doesn't
change any of the exemptions
that agriculture and ranching
has have enjoyed uh for.
The last several decades, those
exemptions are taken from the,
from the CFR from the Federal
Register are here in this bill,
um.
The there'll be subject to the
same requirements, uh, and
permits that they have for, for
years, and then we also have a
provision in this bill that
prevents, uh, the double
permitting, I think folks are
concerned about. Um I also like
to address the workforce, um,
you know, we've given funding to
support the standing of this
program. I don't think we'll
have an issue at all finding the
people who can, can enforce
this, this new permitting
program.
Um
And lastly, uh, the Mexico
Environment Department has a lot
of research on how much this
program is going to cost, they
estimate that it'll be about 8
million, and I'm sure we're
gonna dive into uh the, the how
we pay for that, whether it's
fees or um.
You know, or a legislative
appropriation, but I wanted to,
to really allay some of those
fears that we don't know how
much it's going to cost. I think
we have a pretty good sense, and
they have for a while.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Your words, do you have a
comment?
To the committee, we, we have,
uh, first up is Representative
Matthew. Thank you. Thank you.
I'm not sure if I can, there's
new.
So
OK.
You're not supposed to
Um,
madam chair, thank you
presenters. Thank you very much.
Obviously I'm looking at and I'm
assume that you didn't get that
out in a week or two, probably
took a lot of time, um, in
incredible amount of work and on
such an important topic, um.
And I also appreciate all the
people who came and shared their
thoughts with us today.
Um
My first question.
I
Kind of, I'm interested in what
the permitting situation is. The
testimony, um,
That
there were hundreds of
neglected, uh, contaminated
sites in New Mexico when the
feds were still in charge.
And
I'm sorry, um.
And my question is,
In determining how to deal with
the existing permits.
What are are any or uh any
substantial number being just
continued at this point, uh,
are, are, is there an entire new
permitting process.
Um, and under the federal system
was the problem with the
permitting system.
Um, that it was a bad system or
it wasn't enforced and what are
we doing to try to have a better
permitting permitting process, a
lot of questions. Goodbye to my
if you like.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
Representative. Um, my name is
Shelly Lemon. I am the surface
water quality bureau chief for
the New Mexico Environment
Department and there were a lot
of questions wrapped up in, in
your response. So first off,
this bill is creating um several
different things. Um, one is
taking over the federal program.
For point source discharges.
Those are discharges from
discrete conveyances like a pipe
or a factory discharging to a
surface water and currently that
program is run by EPA Region 6
in Dallas, Texas, um,
The, the other thing that this
bill is trying to do is develop
a state permitting program for
point source discharges that are
no longer protected. Um, that
the waters are no longer
protected under the Federal
Clean Water Act because of the
um scaling back of the
definition.
And we also have a program for
neglected and contaminated
sites, which are the groundwater
protection piece. So those
neglected and contaminated sites
are part of our groundwater
quality program, um, to clean up
contaminated groundwater that
historically dumping
contaminants and contaminating
background.
Ma chair representatives um.
And presenter um.
What's the time period?
Well, I guess my
Is the EPA going to continue its
role EPA in Dallas and continue
its role in permitting and what
is the time period.
To
Complete the
and my complete, I realized that
new permit applications may be
filed at any time, but to
Get us to a point of uh the
workload has been caught up.
So, Madam Chair and
Representative, this is the
first step in taking primacy
from EPA, um, once we
Approve this legislation, um,
then there's a process we have
to go through rulemaking, we
have to develop, um, our funding
component, then we apply to EPA
to take over the program, um, so
we're looking probably 2 years
out to apply to EPA, maybe a
year and a half if things go
smoothly, um.
And then when we enter into an
agreement with EPA, we will
phase the program in, so we
won't.
take over the program all at
once on day one. we will phase
it in probably over a 5-year
period and take over the permits
that are expiring or
administratively continued from
EPA as we take over the program.
So that's uh details that will
be in our um agreement with EPA
on how we're going to run the
program and how we're going to
phase in the program.
Currently there are about a
little over 100 individual
permits and up to 4000 general
per, um, man, that's a long
task, um.
Have you established priorities
for the in terms of the
permitting, in terms of what
should come.
Uh, what's the most important
permitting versus what can.
Be put off, um, and if so, what,
what's your sort of criteria for
doing the permitting.
Madam Chair and Representative,
currently, again, EPA will
continue to be take over, um,
the permitting process. So,
right now we haven't um fully
detailed the way we're going to
phase in the program, but
looking at other states,
typically they take on the
municipal wastewater treatment
plants first, because they're
relatively simple discharges,
um, and then you take over more
complicated permits, um.
And as you move along and you
get more um used to the system,
working out the kinks and things
like that.
Uh, Madam Chair, uh,
Presenters, um.
Is there
Is there any risk to the public.
Uh, as we engage in this process
which is going to take several
years.
Um, and is there?
Any way to mitigate.
The risk if there is risk to the
health or safety of the of the
public.
Madam Chair and Representative,
I believe the risk would be if
EPA decides that the permit is
no longer required under the
Federal Clean Water Act before
we have a program.
Um, in that case, we still have
water quality standards for
surface waters that are in our
administrative code and that we
can enforce upon if they are
violated. So we, we currently do
that as a program if there are
violations of our water quality
standards, we go after the
violators, but with this
permitting program if a permit
is to be rescinded from EPA and
the discharge continues. We
would likely go after.
that discharge, um.
Let me go.
I'm curious, uh, Madam Chair.
Uh, what is the
In terms of
and and requirements, uh,
workforce that is going to need.
To
Madam Chair and representative,
uh, were estimating that it
would cost $8 million at full
implementation per year.
So that's taking over all of
EPA's permits and also
implementing our state
permitting program for those
waters that are no longer
protected, um.
That currently we have, we spend
about 900,000 assisting EPA and
the Army Corps of Engineers with
their permitting programs. So
it's an additional 7.1 million
per year, um, and then we're
estimating 60 full-time
employees. We have 10 existing
staff that are working on this
permitting program, um, and so
we would need 50 additional
staff that includes permit
right.
writers, compliance and
enforcement staff, data stewards
and database managers, staff
managers, attorneys, as well as
administrative, um, financial
and human resources support.
I share uh presenter big
project, um.
Just a couple more questions,
um,
in the, in the presentations,
there was some.
Some discussion about the number
of stream and so forth.
How
What is our plan?
Or process to make our
Operation better than EPA and
the Fed the feds.
Madam Chair Representative
Matthews, the, the bill is
really our plan, you know,
standing up the service water
permitting and then protecting
the waters that have been
deregulated, um, that, that
would also require permits to
discharge into those waters as
As they have been.
As has been in existence for
over 50 years.
Thank you.
Um
In Albuquerque, it now happens
at the Rio Grande periodically
goes dry. You can actually walk
across it without getting your
feet wet.
And I'm wondering what, if any,
impact.
This bill will have.
On the Rio Grande.
In, in, in the part that's going
dry.
Madam Chair and Representative,
this protects water quality, so
as our water is maintained so
that we can use it as we need to
use it. So, um,
With, with the drying of the Rio
Grande, um, there's nothing new
that's coming out of this. We
have, like I said, water quality
standards to protect uses in the
Rio Grande where it goes dry. We
have water quality standards to
protect ephemeral streams
because they function and serve
um ecosystem services to the
larger watershed. So we do have
things in place right now that
define those goals for the water
body, and that's what this
permitting
program would help with is
making sure that anybody who's
discharging pollutants through a
point source or through dudgeon
cell activities is meeting those
standards and making sure that
it is not degrading the water
quality Madam Chair, uh,
presenter.
Mm
There isn't a plan to be sure
that this doesn't happen
anymore, but I, I guess that
would be expecting us to control
the rain and all the other kinds
of things, OK, but I have to
tell you, it's pretty shocking
to watch the river.
In the middle of the city, go
dry, um, and it's and it's
obviously a concern to those of
us who live the last question
is.
What happens if we don't pass
this bill.
Uh ma'am.
Representative Matthews.
Number one, we'll continue to
default to Dallas.
Have the Texas EPA administer
Federal Clean Water Act that
survived. Number 2, will
continue to have where there is
no regulation, and I think a
really key point was made.
Currently, there's permits that
have been in place for those it
is critical that we fill in the
gap.
And basically continue.
With the same level of oversight
run the federal government,
which did that until.
Um, so that's the second piece
of it. And then the groundwater
piece is something that all of
us have seen.
Here in Santa Fe, our district
court.
went through a heck of a delay
because of dry cleaning fluids
underneath a building there.
This is the type of fund that
will be available when the
federal super and I'm really
encouraged that there's 50
million
Senator and
Yeah, I really appreciate your
work on this and what I'm
hearing is we're going to do it
better.
And uh then the federal
government has done it.
And um
We hope to hear back from you
periodically about how we're
doing it better. So thank you so
much for your work on this.
Thank you, Representative
Pereira.
this forward, I'd like to hear
more remediating these.
Thank you, um
I'm sure uh Representative
Ferrera, Jonas Armstrong,
division director of the Water
Protection division at NMED.
People contamination is
obviously an issue in your
community in other communities
around the state.
With our efforts against certain
responsible parties, this bill
would sure up our ability to
hold them accountable for that
contamination, uh, and when
there is not a responsible party
anymore if there is that
situation provides a fund and
with the appropriation House
Bill 2 as it currently sits.
would provide funding for the
state to go ahead and clean. Um,
POS would definitely fall into
that list. So with uranium
sites, so would, uh, petroleum
contamination, so would dry
cleaner sites like we just
talked about.
There are a range of
contaminants in P.
Madam Chair and Representative,
um.
We have
Uh, several of our colleagues at
EPA have chosen to retire.
Um
Others are staying and doing the
work, um, so the EPA is
definitely, um,
Under a watchful eye right now
and
Going into a period of change, I
believe so, um, right now we're
just waiting to see it's pretty
early, um.
Because of this change, all of
the changes have not been
implemented yet, but, um, there
was a reporting that um the
federal government is going to
try to cut 65% of EPA's budget.
Um, so 65%.
Which
My program for surface water
quality currently is about 70%
federally funded. So, um, it's,
this is important to protect
surface waters in our state is
to ensure that our state
continues to do that work.
To protect water quality for all
New Mexicans.
Well, madam, what's happening at
the federal level and
I'm very worried about the EPA.
Thank you, ranking members
Zamora.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee and presenters
for bringing this bill forward.
So I think we've, we've heard
quite a bit already.
And, and the concerns of the
people are.
There's legislation here in
front of.
We've stacked 2 bills, and yet,
All the rulemaking is still to
be had, so.
I've heard the concerns, uh.
In the halls in my office and on
the phone, how do you feel,
Madam Chair, and
And Representative, how do you
feel?
That
This, these concerns can be
taken care of.
Oh, and I know not everybody's
gonna like it because we're
talking.
We're talking taking EPA rules.
Through through the waters of
the US.
And, and bringing them to the
state.
And then tightening them up some
more like Representative Herrera
said.
And or or making more policy.
So we know there's going to be
more rules.
More policy
And it's, it's, it's gonna be
Maybe not worse, but it's, it's
gonna be harder on, on
businesses.
And, and
And this is gonna affect
everybody in the states. So it's
gonna be
Ei policy on everybody, overall.
So, so how are we gonna go
through the rulemaking.
And make that all fit.
It
Are we still gonna bring people
to the table or is there gonna
be a certain committee that's
gonna make the, do the
rulemaking, Madam.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative Zamora. Um,
I think really important
questions that that you're
asking, um.
Rulemaking is uh is a
stakeholder process, you know,
and I have.
Confidence that NMED will get
their notices for online, I
think we all, it's incumbent
upon us as legislators as well
to inform our own communities
that rulemaking is happening and
that we need a wide variety of
voices um in the process, you
know, I, I feel really good,
Madam Chair, Representative
Zamora, about the exemptions
that exist for uh for ag and
ranching, I think that is
important to you, it's
definitely really important to
me and everybody on this
committee because we focus on
those.
issues every day, those
exemptions, um, are in the Clean
Water Act at the federal level.
And they're in, and they're in
this bill, um, so there won't be
really many changes with regard
to those communities, um, we
ensuring that there is that.
That the waters that they use
for their operations are
continue to be, you know, as
clean as possible as free from
pollution as possible, and
that's why it's so important to
set up um this program. I, I
hear you on the rulemaking and I
think we, um we just we need to
continue to ensure that
stakeholders are, are part of
that process, but we, you know,
we have some guardrails in here
for that rulemaking, including,
you know, the exemptions that
exist for for farm and agate for
the others.
industries as well. Um, Jonas,
would you like to add something
to this? Absolutely. Um.
Representative Zamora, I, I
would just
Say that you know one totally
hear you on the details that are
going to need to go into the
rulemaking. You're right about
that. These are complicated
issues and not everything can be
spelled out in the legislation.
One thing I would want to point
out though is there's existing
statute and it's on page 21 of
the amendments in context bill.
Where we are.
Changing significantly some
existing language because that
existing language is incredibly
broad in terms of what it could
allow a rulemaking to look like.
I'll read it for you now. It
says that the water quality
Control Commission may adopt
regulations.
To be administered by the
Department of Environment or
surface water discharges.
Period.
That's it.
So we're coming to you with a
bill that has explicit language
in it like the chair just
pointed out regarding exemptions
that would need to be in any
such surface water discharge
permanent program, uh, regarding
general permits that have to now
be required, which are
As Ms. Lehman described earlier,
the vast majority of what we do
under uh under this type of
regulation.
And so I would just say to your
concern about the breadth of
what an agency can do in a
rulemaking process. This bill
really.
One additional thing I want to
add.
more amendments put on by
Senator Scherer.
Or specifically when you go
through those definitions, when
you go through that tightening
up, what it's doing is narrowing
the scope of the rulemaking.
Putting in statute.
That I think addressed the
concerns that you're bringing.
Doesn't solve it, but I think
the reason you saw and heard a
lot of the testimony was, hey,
we're better.
After the floor amendment, and I
think that that was the purpose
of doing the amount of statutory
language in here that's going to
narrow the rulemaking that needs
to happen.
And Madam Chair and presenters,
so.
That just leaves so many doors
open.
And, and we know how
Or some businesses can struggle
at different times, whether it
be farming or mining or
For a small cleaners in, in, in
this, in, in your city.
What
There there was a comment made.
Munoz.
Didn't like
Or, or, or didn't accept.
The fact that these monies would
go back to to NMED.
And, and those money should go
back to the general fund.
enemy or or the monies that they
that they
A cruel, I guess would be the
right word to say is.
Come back to their funds at at
EPA.
So then
Was it statutory that, that
The argument was made about or,
or is it just somebody's
Liking or or what, why did, why
did that play out that way? Why
didn't these money?
In the original statutes, the
money went, the penalty money,
and I want to be really clear.
That's different than the
funding money.
penalty money went to the
general fund.
The initial bill proposed to
change that and move it into one
of the new funds that's being
created.
And Senator Muno fund, we agreed
to do that with respect to the
penalties, you don't
Penalties they're charging.
And Madam Chair and senator.
I don't mind the penalties going
into the fund that enemy D. I
just don't want the fund to be
paying the wages and, and, and,
and maybe that's what he was
concerned about.
But I think we could have
narrowed that down and still let
these monies go back to NMED.
And
I guess there's two sides to
that coin whether
Were there many enemyD still
needs money from the general
fund or not. So, we'll, we
won't, we won't just sit, sit on
that, uh.
But I was wondering why, why
that took place like that.
Uh
Getting, getting Madam Chair,
getting more directly onto the
bill.
And
Look
And then we could, we could take
all day going through a 75 page
bill, right? But
Why, why was, was
Department of Environment
deleted.
And then put right back in in
the land and I'm on page 5. So
then, so then we strike out.
And I don't have the lines
because this is the my bill with
the, with the amendments on it.
But
We, we strike out.
The Department of Envi when we
start strike out of environment,
but then we go through the bill
and it gets put right back in.
Can you kind of explain to me
why, why that happened.
Madam Chair represents, I, I'll
start. There were 4 lower
amendments on the Senate side,
um, and so what you see here is,
you know, the amendments in
context of the Senate Judiciary
Committee so and uh I think
things were just renumbered and
realigned um when we added um
all these various definitions,
but I will let.
Leader Worth described in more
detail.
Uh, so ma'am you're on page 7
numbers here. Senate floor
amendment on page 7 of the
amends and it redefines
department, means the Department
of the Environment.
This is the definition, in other
words, now the reference of
going back to the site you
cited.
It now says the department,
well, that's now a defined term.
So the definite of environment.
So again, I can't tell you
exactly why that was so
important, but that was one of
the things that it just
And just
Madam Chair represents. It's on
page 7 about halfway down.
And this bill, even though
My, my first impression, it's
all, it's all gonna be surface
water.
But then there's also produced
water in here and, and
irrigation.
I believe pump
Is this, is this Bill?
Or surface water or for all
waters?
Madam Chair
Madam Chair, Representative,
this is the Water Quality Act
covers all waters and that, um,
speaks to what that means, which
in groundwater. So the Water
Quality Act, um, which is the
first part of this bill.
relates to both surface water
and groundwater. The second part
of the bill is that national
pollutant District that is for
surface water, and that begins
on.
56, so.
You know, from 56 to 75.
Is the um new mega stomach
that's taking over the federal
and and I was, I was hitting it
on page 14 on section D where it
says shall adopt water quality
standards for surface and
groundwaters of the state based
on credible science data and
other evidence.
that's existing law.
Yes
So
When it, when it comes, Madam
Chair, when, when it comes to
exemptions.
When we're talking exemptions.
For, for
All the different people that
are exempted all the way from
MAG to some.
Although, and I believe there's
some exemptions for for oil and
And all that. So, when it comes
to exemptions.
Those, those exemptions will be.
Decided what they are in the
rulemaking process.
represents Zamora. They they
exist in this statue.
That we're bringing forth.
So they're, they're part of the
statute.
OK, and I, I guess I didn't
totally understand that.
Uh, on one of the
And, and I don't have
On on page 20.
We talk about gray water.
Is not, is not sprayed.
And, and it
And I was wondering,
This is saying that Greywater,
Madam chair, can't be sprayed,
right?
Madam Chair Representative
Amana, that is an existing law,
um, the exemptions that um are
part of this bill that are taken
from the Clean Water Act at the
federal level. Start on page 39.
So what you're looking at, Madam
Chair Representative Zamora, is
existing law. So so.
Even though we have existing law
and a rule.
Or in in statute when, when
we're redrafting these bills, we
can strike that existing law,
right?
Madam Chair Representatives one
could, but I don't, but, but
we're not doing that with this
law. OK, and, and, and I get
that, but the reason, Madam
Chair, the reason I'm asking my
question is, it's an existing
law.
And you didn't strike it, and I,
and I want you to, to
understand.
that
In, in the egg community, we're
taking.
Surface water from our ponds,
from dairies and stuff, and
maybe tell water pits or
whatever we used to have back in
the day, and we're actually
running it through sprinklers.
So, if, if we're going to
rewrite
And add to the to the to the
existing law.
I would think that a person
might be looking at that maybe
striking it.
And not, not letting it
remained, remain in law.
Because
Because nowadays
We actually spray that water, or
I believe it would be.
Under the definition of spray.
Uh
Madam Chair, if, if we can, I'll
go ahead and let somebody else.
Ask questions if there's other
people on the list.
And then I'll go over my notes
some more, maybe come back to a
second.
Ask if
If there's somebody that
somebody else doesn't cover.
So I just
I just hate to keep holding
everybody up, me reading my
notes here and trying to. Thank
you very much, uh,
Representatives Moore. I will
say that we are 5 minutes from
being called to the floor. I'll,
I'll send a message and ask for
an excuse. Um, I arized is the.
Spring of the sprinklers that
ranking members from, is that
not Madam Chair Representative
Zamora, that would be under our
groundwater discharge permit
regulations of Thank you very
much. I would like, uh, we have
2 more committee members that
have questions, um, ranking in
some more or do you still would
like to yield the floor.
OK. Thanksentativesabel Moya.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
thank you so much. Um, I'm
Um, learning about water, um,
uh, especially 75 pages of it.
I was like, yikes. So, um, so I,
I just want to kind of get a
feel of, um, I understand that
this was, uh, 2 bills at one
point in time. Can you kind of
walk me through like what did
those two bills do and why?
So Madam Chair and
representative, uh, happy to do
that. So initially, Senate Bill
21 was going to deal with the
primacy piece. So that's where
we say,
We no longer want EPA and 22
initially was the sacket fix and
the groundwater piece.
The reality though as we got
into this.
There was a realization, these
all tied together.
And so the decision was made in
Senate Judiciary after the first
day of hearing, hearing both
bills.
took a pause, came back at the
request of the chair with a sub
that put them together. Uh, and
again, I think you can see why
there's lots of different things
that overlap. And yes, it's,
it's 704 pages, uh, but having
two separate bills and then
reopening the same sections. I
just think from a compilation.
Standpoint it made sense to have
them together and since we've
done that, I think it's worked
pretty well in terms of how the
bill has gone. Um, thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you, Senator.
Um, I'm, um, I too kind of share
a little bit of um of uh
representative Zamora's
concerned about we'll make with
an education, so I don't trust
that process.
Um, so, um, so if you like, so
in within and I know it's
different in, in, in, in every
entity within enemy D.
Who is the ones that actually
like is there, is there a
commission, uh, you'll have to
educate me on this, like, who
actually and and who are they
like, how is that commission
made up of? Like who appoints
those people, who makes those
rules?
Madam Chair and representatives,
so we, um,
Proposed rules to the Water
Quality Control Commission,
which is made up of a variety of
different members, which are
defined in the water quality Act
who, um, the, the water quality
control commission is created
and who was on that commission
is all existing legis um statute
under the Water Quality Act. Um,
when we do our rulemaking, I
will say for the surface water
Quality Bureau under the Clean
Water Act were required to. It's
called
the triannual review. It
doesn't, it, it takes longer
than every 3 years, um, to
actually get him approved, but
we're required, so it's, it's a
regular occurrence for my bureau
is what I'm trying to get at.
Um, when we go back to the
commission to evaluate our
rules, um, adjust them, um,
reissue them, you know, revise
them with existing current um
updated science, so it's
something that we do relative
relatively frequently compared
to other departments and other
um programs. And it's also a
public process, um, under our
Uh, rules, any person can
request, so we also have third
party rulemakings, we call them
third parties, which is not the
department, um, or the
commission who is proposing the
rules, but a third party, um,
when we develop our rules, we go
through that public process and
stakeholder process, um,
typically in our triannual
reviews, we have anywhere from
13 to 18, uh,
Participants, people and
organizations that are
participating actively in the
rulemaking and proposing
alternatives to our rules. So,
um, it's, it's a pretty robust
rulemaking process that we go
through.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair,
thank you, um, so is it
Is, is the ones that are doing
it, my, my concern is, um,
In it, like, like in education,
we had the people um making
rules that were um appointed by
the executive.
And there was no accountability
to the public, even though the
public.
Had hours of testimony that
hated it, and they still went
ahead and did what they wanted.
That's what I'm afraid is gonna
it it is, that's why I don't
trust that process, to be honest
with you. Um, so if it's a bunch
of people that are, that
whatever executive, I don't,
yeah, but my mine is
accountability pieces. What is
your accountability, like me,
if, if I make bad votes, um, I
may get, uh, you know, voted out
type of thing. There's
accountability with, with
certain things that I do, um,
but, uh, when in that rulemaking
process, um, no matter the
public testimony or the or the
stakeholder.
process, um.
That there is no accountability
pieces there, especially when
it's people that are appointed
by the executive. Um, how is
that?
Is that any different in this
process?
Madam Chair and Representative,
um,
I, I understand your concern,
but we also see if there are
issues with the rules that are
adopted, they get challenged,
right? And then they go to
through the courts, through the
appeal process, through our
permitting process, like they
will get appealed at some point
if um
If it doesn't make sense, um, if
it's not based on scientific or
um existing information if it's
just at the whim of somebody,
typically that does not happen,
um, with the water quality
control commission. They are
appointed, but we also have
representatives at large that,
um, I believe there are 4 out of
the um maybe more, uh, but the
other, the
ones that are appointed deal
with water. They, um, it's
Department of Health,
Environment Department, game and
fish, um, state engineer, so
they're, they're in the water
world to begin with, um, and so
that's also helpful. They have
kind of the background on and um
framing of what we're. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you so
much, um, my, my next question
is, um,
I
Kind of with NMED you said um
that you are going to probably
need about 50 more FTEs, um,
right now is NMED fully.
Madam Chair Representative, I
enemy's vacants funded vacancy
rate at the end of 2024 was down
to 5%, which is pretty uh
impressive for a small agency
just a couple of years ago, that
number was at about 20%.
Last legislative session, uh,
you all appropriated $6.2
million in general fund and we
used uh a few more million in
our fee funds to support what we
call the appropriate placement
to pay people in accordance with
their education and experience
pursuant to state personnel
office rule. Uh, what we've seen
since then is that dramatic
reduction in our funded vacancy
rate, which has been, uh, yeah,
just really beneficial for the
agency. So thank you.
And then, um, thank you, Madam
Chair. So, um,
And I know you said cause you
walked us through that this like
the rulemaking process is gonna
take like 2 years and then, and
then you're going to phase in
the program. And so you
technically like when um
In that rulemaking process,
you're probably not gonna need
the 50 right away, or will you,
uh, you know, like, is it gonna
be increments that you're gonna
need to fill these or do you
like that?
I'm Madam Chair Representative,
um.
Yes, it will be phased in over
time. It, we're looking at
adding probably 5 years, maybe a
little bit more over fewer years
depending on the progress that
we're making and um when we
start issuing permits, I will
mention that, you know, it's
gonna take longer time to apply
federal program. However, on the
state side, we could start
sooner because we don't have to
go through that EPA approval
process. So that'll be on a
different timeline, a shorter
timeline, so we will be
developing the state permitting
program at the same time, but we
will, before we actually get the
federal program.
Um, and thank you, Madam Chair,
and, um, presenters so.
Um, let's shift gears a little
bit. So I understand that the
EPA.
Permits don't man chair
representative, that's correct.
And then, um, Madam Chair, and,
um, with the, so the fees that
the state will be putting, I
mean, the, the permits that the
state will be issuing will have
a fee, correct?
Madam Chair Representative Mira
Moya, um.
Possibly, we don't know yet.
That's, that's part of the
rulemaking process. It could be
that we stand up this program
with general funds, no fees, um,
but, um, the, the way the states
do it that have this permitting
program already in their states,
they, you know, they have a
range of, you know, 3030 to 70%
fees to general fund
appropriation to stand up the
program.
Go ahead and later
representative.
This is going to be a decision
we need to make.
And I will tell you
I have really been pushing back
against
Funding agencies through fees
across the board. I've been
voting against all kinds of
bills, including a $25 increase
for the clerks on marriage
licenses. Just we've got the
resources here in our state.
What we're doing here is asking,
You know, all that impacted
Folks to make a big change in
status quo right now is no fee.
I think, and I'm certainly going
to argue we should do this with
general fund. We've got the
resources to do this. Look, we
just, you heard from Mr.
Armstrong, we just spent $6
million to finally get this
agency caught up in terms of
their pay. I think that's a
decision that
We'll work through our interim
process with the legislative
finance committee, and what we
did is made initially, this
started as a bill that was going
to be funded with fees. We
changed the language to make it
flexible. I personally think we
should do this with the general
funds. Some other states do it
that way. Some have a hybrid,
some do it with fees. That'll be
something we need to decide.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you, Senator, because my,
my biggest concern is now
establishing fees, I mean, and
because that because how many
permits are out there? Like
we're.
I think you mentioned it, but I.
Madam Chair Representative,
there's about a little over 100
individual permits and uh about
4000 general permits, which
cover categories of discharges
like storm water industry and
stormwater running off of
industrial sites, so things like
that, um, and 21 concentrated
animal feeding operations, which
are under a general permit.
And um, Madam Chair, so do
municipalities have to get these
er, Madam Chair, Representative,
yes.
The municipal wastewater
treatment plants are under this
program.
And, and, and Madam Chair,
that's, that's like, that's my
concern with the fees where
there's no, there wasn't fees,
because you're impacting
municipalities across the state.
So I hope that we, um, again, I
don't trust rulemaking, but
yeah, um, but, but hopefully
within this process, there isn't
because that is a concern, um,
because some of these, some of
these municipalities that that
affects their, their, their
bottom line and some of them are
barely making it.
So, um, so we definitely need to
Thank you.
Um, uh, uh, we have one more uh.
Did you want to go back to
Madam Chair, to continue to be a
motion from, but before we move
forward, let's go back to
ranking members and more.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I'll
be short. So.
I think you're selling your bill
a little bit, uh, Madam Chair
and Senator, by saying that
All this work's being done in
Dallas.
Because, because
Is the truth of the matter that
There are boots on the ground in
the state of New Mexico through
NMED.
And then what is it that we keep
saying about Dallas, that some
of the the the paperwork that
goes to
The EPA goes to Dallas, and
that's where they.
They decipher.
So Mancho, let me give you
representative.
Exactly what's happening in my
district here in Santa Fe.
Bishop's lodge.
Very high-end Albert's resort.
was trying to deal with its
sewage discharge treated?
And they were proposing to put
it into the Tasuki Creek.
Which is a free-flowing river.
And basically,
The entity that was involved as
the lead on that was not New
Mexico, it was EPA.
And so what Bishop's Lodge
didn't do was notify the Tasuki
Pueblo downstream that also had
exerted primacy.
And so that ended up not
happening.
And that really brought to light
to me.
The need to have the state of
New Mexico making this decision.
Again, we're all the other
Western states do this. Texas,
it's New Mexico, New Hampshire,
and Massachusetts.
So the primacy part of the bill
and the EPA and, and yeah, you
know, you can sell that. We
don't want Texans doing.
But I also think that it's
important to have our technical
expertise implementing the
Federal Clean Water Act. What's
left of it?
And then the other piece, the
EPA is not doing after the SAA
decision because it's no longer
regular. The state's gonna do
that.
Madam Chair and do you agree
with all that or, or
Or would just
Would you lean back more towards
the, the
NMED is doing the work.
And turning in paperwork into
Into the Dallas office.
Madam Chair, Representative, so
currently the EPA administers
responsible for issuing the
permits. They're responsible for
enforcing the permits.
What New Mexico does, what?
The environment does is assist
EPA. So if we get a complaint,
um, we can go validate the
complaint, verify that
refer it to EPA. EPA does
chooses whether they're going to
enforce or not, whether they're
going to issue a penalty or not.
We do not have a say in that,
except to say, here's what's
happening. We visited the site,
um, with the permitting, they
draft the permit.
They review our standards, they
do all of that administrative
work for issuing the permit.
We review it.
And certify it to make sure that
it is meeting our state water
quality standards. Um, it's
called a 401 certification
because it's under Clean Water
Act Section 401. So, um, we do
have a, a hand in that permit,
but we're not the ones who are
drafting the permit, issuing the
permit, enforcing the permit.
Thank you. I just want to make
sure that our answers are
succinct. All right, go ahead.
I, I, is that your one? Do you
need,
madam, and, and
Taking a little further. So does
EPA have
boots on the ground in the state
of New Mexico.
Madam Chair Representative, they
have 2 people.
OK.
OK, so, so Madam Chair and
And uh
Expert witness. So those two
people, they stay in the office
in Albuquerque.
Madam Chair and Representative,
um, no, they do inspections as
well.
We have 3 inspection staff. They
have to, so there's 5
inspectors. And
I just, I just think that every,
every time
That I've dealt with any kind of
Surface water issues and, and
permits. I worked at Rey and
Dairy for 22.5 years.
I never saw somebody.
Other than enemy looking at
That stuff and inspecting it.
Am I correct in saying that,
Madam Chair?
Madam Chair Representative, that
would be our groundwater bureau
folks, uh, dealing with dairy
issues.
Uh, so you would have seen them,
yes.
But that would not
OK.
And, and Madam Chair, and
presenters, thank you.
Uh
This is, this is a complicated
bill. It's, it's very long. It's
It has the public has a lot of
concerns with it, the
And
Although we see what's going on
at the national level and, and
what's going on.
With the change of
administration.
It's, it's hard.
It's hard to
Uh, Madam Chair and presenters,
thank you for your.
Thank you. We have a motion on
the table.
Senate Judiciary Committee sub
for Senate bills.
It wasn't
representative Ferreira.
Representative Laura Kadena.
Yes, to explain my vote, please.
Representative Moya.
As
Represent
Um
ranking members and more.
No.
Madam Vice Chair Keats.
Yes
I,
I apologize. Representative
Matthews.
Yes. Thank you. OK, Madam
Cheritas.
Do you pass
Back to
Moya. OK.
I apologize. Um, Representative
Moya.
No
Thank you, Representative.
Thank you, Representative, you
have a due pass, um, for a
community substitute Senate bill
21.
Uh, a
A 5 to 2. Thank
you.
Representative Laura Kadena.
and explain your book.
making sure that we're filling a
tangible follow up with this
offline, um.
process needs to be, but they're
