This.
Wonderful so it looks like we do
have a quorum and as other folks
come in I'll keep an eye on the
attendance side by the end of
our our friends join but I
believe we can go ahead and get
started with our first bill that
SB two seventy three.
With.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino I believe
I see him on the other sign
excuse me it's it's
Representative Bobby Gonzalez
okay yeah we can absolutely I
see and I'm sorry we're I'm
sorry Senator Gonzales it's fine
don't worry.
I still use here we miss you.
Okay my apologies are senator I
I'm sorry I was looking at the
wrong side of this test.
Senator Gonzales with is there
anyone you'd like us to bring
over that will be your expert
witness today well Madam chair
of I believe that we probably
will help will secretary of Mike
Santa from the department of
transportation and we might have
other staff members.
Wonderful can we bring American
we go ahead and bring secretary
sent all over he just even the
attendee side.
Great thank you.
Wonderful I now ask Senator
consoles I I'll leave it to you
to present your thank you very
well will good morning again
madam chair members so.
With those Senate bill twenty
well this changes the
distribution of the eighteen
point seven five percent of the
motor vehicle excise tax revenue
collected by local government
road fund to the transportation
project fund well that that the
bill does not make any other
changes to the amount of the
distribution of the motor
vehicle excise tax well madam
chair members so hello this is
being brought to you know this
year by the department of
transportation and the one of
the parts that they have
experiences that on by Floyd by
having this legislation it would
improve the efficiency you know
and the distribution that much
more expired way to the minister
ality said the to the counties
so
you know this was so we had
discussions on this and that's
what the department calls at all
this is so much better approach
to go into this so alright and
with the so madam chair members
so we do have secretary Mike
said the wall in the in the yes
to this by adding additional
comments.
Thank you senator secretary
please feel free to a new and
address the the committee.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee Mike
Santa secretary for the
department of transportation
thank you to Senator Gonzales
for Kerry this bill and also to
Representative Castellano who is
carried in the exact same bill
on the house side so we have
both Sanchez and this committee
so that's good to see just real
quickly madam chair like sooner
Gonzales said he really is a
pretty straightforward bill in
the sense of there's some new
money going into a local Fund it
will probably be right around
forty million dollars and if we
do nothing that money will go
into the current local
government road fund and if this
bill passes it would instead go
into the transportation project
fund so the big difference
between the two funds is the
local government road fund is a
seventy five twenty five match a
lot of localities especially
smaller have a hard time meeting
that twenty five percent match
it is more restrictive than what
you could use the funding for so
you can use it for studies are
designed for those types of
things to get projects ready
whereas the new transportation
project fund that was passed in
twenty nineteen is a ninety five
five match you could use it for
a lot of different items related
transportation including studies
and design so that the our local
entities can get projects ready
shovel ready as well as
construction so that's the main
difference all this bill does is
you wanted in the old funder in
the new fund we think it's
easier to spend in the new fund
are counties the cities and
tribal partners think the new
fund is much easier more
flexible and so we're trying to
help them by getting this money
going into the fund so that's
what this bill does madam chair
members of the committee so
thank you.
My apologies and the city and
meeting I thank you Secretary
Senator there any other comments
are are you to move forward to
the COVID.
Madam chair on we're ready I
don't know if you have any
public input it we're stand for
questions.
Thank you senator and so now
we'll move on a public comment
as you can see what's gonna post
up there is a is a survey that
merry will post asking if you
are in support of this bill so
where you can go ahead and
impose that this is only
available for the attendees
take a peek at their and and
I'll ask you if you are in
support or opposed to this bill.
Wonderful so I if you are
support or in opposition to SB
twenty high transportation
projects funds also please
either click support or oppose
we'll keep this up for twenty
seconds we have another ten
seconds to go.
In.
The wonderful so I'm gonna go to
close the pull I just for
context we have thirteen people
in attendance we've had for vote
three and support one opposed
seventy five percent to twenty
five percent off so now I'm
gonna go ahead and start with
those are in opposition to this
bill if you are in opposition to
this bill would like to speak on
it please go to click the right
hand button at the bottom of
your screen we'll get folks
about a minute to go ahead and.
Thank you.
Not seeing anyone raise their
hands all you'll know that
changes if you are in support
and would like to speak on this
bill please could impress the
raise the band raise your hand
button at the bottom of your
screen okay folks a minute to go
ahead and do that.
And so ours are secretary is
that is is going to be posting
on they're going to have eight
two minutes is that right merry.
Madam.
Yes it's two minutes wonderful
so we'll have everyone will have
two minutes to comment we have
well folks I would like to
comment on this I'm very will be
posting Act timer you probably
have seen this in some of our
other committees as well so
we're gonna go to get started we
can we can move Jim Garcia over
and you'll be the first to speak
and the next we Matt Thompson.
Would you like me to move him
over merry I can do that if that
helps.
You can mute yourself now.
Thank you madam chair John
Garcia and I'm the executive
director of associated
contractors of the New Mexico
with the heavy highway utility
division we are the group that
is actually building the
highways I will need my two
minutes that we are in support
of this bill we think the
administrative functions that
secretary Santa and administers
is is a outstanding and we think
this is a great tool for him to
utilize is resources so with
that madam chair members of the
committee we thank you.
Thank you so much Mr Garcia and
now we'll have Mr Matt Thompson
speak Matt you can find
yourself.
Morning madam chair members my
name is Matt Thompson I'm a
registered lobbyist for Apache
corporation
as thank you Roadrunner is also
a member of an outfit based in
the Permian called Permian
strategic partnership.
And as such it's it's seventeen
oil and gas producers are banded
together to work for quality of
life enhancements across the
basin
we support Senate bill twenty
and the agree with secretary
Santa Senator Gonzales that the
bill will expedite and
streamline the process which
will allow improvement in road
conditions increase road safety
and enhance the quality of life
for one year all New Mexicans so
appreciate time and again we
support Senate bill twenty thank
you.
Thank you Mr Thompson and so
that looks like that is all of
our public comments today thank
you everyone and I'd like to
turn it to our committee members
if you have any questions up
he's going to raise your hands I
see that we have Representative
Lujan.
Morning thank you madam chair
and thank you the sponsor for
bringing this forward at we saw
the syntax and Revenue yesterday
with them more of your bill from
Representative
and so I think that this is just
really good legislation I I'm
glad you're doing it and.
this is this is part of the
session we start seeing this
happen so I guess whoever gets
it through
each side of.
First I guess Senator.
You want to listen on that
process maybe a little bit if
you like I don't know but I just
think it's good legislation I
appreciate it both of you
carrying this thank you so much
thank you Representative and may
we don't have to have the time
or for the committee we can turn
that off for this.
Thank you.
I.
Thank.
Did you wanna response to us
Senator acutely very well all
madam chair members so this is a
practice that has been done for
many years.
The what it is the so.
There's good to it because it
gives an opportunity in on both
sides you know to have the
legislation and normally
something like this it just
flows through then what happens
is so if it makes it to the
governor's desk on both sides
you know the legislation that
comes in second is the one issue
sign.
But there's no competition
there's just the process of just
working with legislation or if
for some reason that there was
trouble in one committee you
know either in the center of the
house you know it still has that
opportunity up another bill
moving forward.
Thank you senator on and now we
have Representative.
Thank you madam chair Senator
Gonzales I'm honored to carry
the same bill on the house side
as you on the Senate side one
DOT came.
And ask me to carry this bill.
And I knowing that you're
carrying the one just as I I
said sure I was very honored
you've had a lot of experience
in the legislature and I know
you carry something that means
something for the people of the
state of New Mexico and I I what
I like about this bill is that
it gives the matching funds are
lower but also secretary a
Sentinel can attest to this if
you can match that fund like
small communities when this
abilities you know villages to
still get the same kind of.
I guess.
Okay state can compete with the
urban and bigger community
service felonies to get real
funds to our projects done to
this fund because they they I
think what we can
State they waive the matching
funds if I'm correct and all
that
secretary Seneal speak on that
but I'm very proud that we can
get this legislation passed
through because I think it is
going to help our rural and
urban communities and our
villages thank you madam chair
thank you Senator Gonzales for
bringing this bill forward.
Thank you.
Senator do you want to offer
clarification I know
Representative stand up kind of
ask for little to clarification
on how those funded move
where were you okay
Representative.
Madam chair yes if a eight as
senator or
six a central can just explain
that because I think it's it's
important that we understand
what this fund does in that
major.
Madam chair all of all yield to
one secretary Mike Santa.
Thank you thank you madam chair
I think what Representative cuts
on it was referring to is there
is a ninety five five match
which really helps our smaller
communities are really having
problems coming up with the old
from the seventy five twenty
five.
but if you can't even meet that
five percent match there is a
hardship waiver that you can
file with us you can get the
project a hundred percent funded
and so you know when we look at
some of the smaller areas they
had a million dollar project
they needed to get funded but
they would have to come up with
two hundred fifty thousand
that's a lot for some of the
small cities and villages so
million dollar project we would
fund nine hundred fifty thousand
the committee would have to come
up with fifty thousand even if
that fifty thousand was just too
much and they could show us that
we could just fund the entire
million for them for that
particular project as just an
example so there's a lot of
opportunities the point is to
get this money out into our
local communities get the
project done every single
committee have needs across the
state big and small I want to
make sure that we're trying to
meet those needs both rural and
urban so that's a great point
that Senator from the.
Thank you now we have
Representative one plant.
Representative.
My mute button yes good morning
madam chair and Representative
Castellano and senator Gonzalez
I don't have too much to say
echo the comments of the
previous representatives but I I
do want to say how exciting it
is to see you both working
together on such a critical
issue.
As we look at the needs of rural
citizens in rural towns and
villages our roadways are
absolutely essential.
The social determinants of
health.
Our intersectional we connected
and I see this as a really
positive step in ensuring that
the roadways and the
infrastructure that we know we
must improve continually will be
served by this great piece of
legislation in closing I look
forward to casting my vote yield
back madam chair and
representatives.
Thank you Representative Montoya
and now we have Representative
last.
Madam chair and like to move to
pass when you're ready.
Thank you are you are the last
commenter they see on our board
and so we do have a motion for I
do passes their second.
I believe I heard it from
Representative Montoya.
And so thank you so are we made
it we have a motion
Representative lacks a motion to
pass that on SB twenty merry
making we have a roll call vote.
Representative black.
Yes.
Representative Castellano.
It's been nearly yes.
Representative Cook.
Representative Fajardo.
Representative Fajardo.
Here yes yes okay sorry
Representative Lujan yes.
Representative Montoya.
Yes.
Vice chair Representative
Serrato yes.
Thank you so by a vote of eight
six in favor and none of the
opposition hi SB twenty
unanimously seen as you passes
through this committee thank you
senator bring it forward.
Thank you thank you madam chair
and I might say that I'm very
impressed all your the
percentage of the loading of the
being able to read on the bottom
that's very nice really
everything that merry that's the
only way we still together I'll
be honest.
A little more out.
Thank you thank you Sir thank
you thank you Secretary now we
have Senator Ortiz Y. Pino with
SB seventy three definition of
rural library Marian believe.
If we can go ahead and bring him
over the great.
It over.
Yes.
Senator you are one of our
panelists Center TCP and you
have to
if you like us also to bring
over yes ma'am chairman shell
line mark leaves on I was gonna
be on issue with the imperial
valley library yes he and and he
here's shell shell landmark.
it's it's imperial valley
library believe in the the.
Attendees.
Thank you Senator please go
ahead and bring forward your
bill.
Thank you very much madam
chairman and members of the
committee the stranger to see
all of you.
Senate bill two seventy three is
separated the clearing of the
general problem that develops
Act recast the
rural library endowment fund
this this went through two years
ago and it slowly is growing and
so three million dollars now we
we keep trying to add money to
each year and really this is an
opportunity to return it's like
if you need to have the
opportunity this year in the
future of adding money to the
rural library endowment fund I
think it's a target we're hoping
for is fifty million dollars.
At that level the fifty plus
libraries that qualify would be
able to receive the annually we
think something in the
neighborhood for thirty five to
forty thousand dollars each M.
and then large enough to help
them actually survive their
their struggles financially vary
from community to community but
in every instance all of the
small rural libraries.
Well so and so we services and
and fund initiatives in
operation now but we need to
find quite a small rural library
is figure three thousand early
arbitrate three years one that
did that allowed fifty
Mr line marking gives you actual
numbers of these close noted
fifty libraries qualified in the
state that is state they're not
these are libraries that are not
in communities large enough for
a municipal governments and in
finance and they survived by a
donations by some small amount
of help from the state and now
this rural library endowment
fund.
What we did was we we use the
definition of three thousand and
we didn't qualify it so that if
if the library for example in in
one of the Pueblo.
Served by this and there are a
couple years listed listed in.
Twenty eight hundred people when
we will and we created this fund
one seed grow at all percent
communities rose at all.
The over the three thousand
three year and then becoming
eligible to participate so this
is an effort just it's very
simple you just verify said they
were three thousand or less
population that is community
service I am the are.
We're we're we're creating and
enjoying the sun hello Mr line
marking explained the specifics
of the bill that is very simple.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Senator T. Pino
Mister I back if you would like
to comment.
Thank you very much madam chair
members of the committee hi
there are actually one libraries
that are eligible under this
definition the fund also will
help library help communities
that don't have libraries in all
towns established libraries
So the idea of the fund
originally was that that these
libraries could have a permanent
reliable source of income many
of these libraries.
Don't know what their budgets
are gonna be from your tears
help okay if if they grow over
three thousand we hope that hi
this they will still be able to
pick depend on this money
to sustain these libraries these
libraries are so crucial to
their communities right now
especially so many people don't
have internet during the
pandemic and and pretty much
everyone of these libraries is
providing free internet
sometimes inside sometimes
outside the library to local
citizens where they can invite
Seto standing by cedar for
example I students are go to the
library every day just to go to
school this library is existing
on and under eight thousand
dollars a year in right balance
here so so a fund like this if
it grows to fifty million which
is our our goal will really
they'll be able to hire a light
gray and and really sustains a
libraries in towns like that all
over the state.
Thank you Mr mark on Senator
Ortiz Y. Pino do have additional
comments or would you like to
move forward with the COVID no
no madam chairman I think we
would like to listen to the
committee's questions and and
concerns.
Thank you senator Ortiz Pino I
now will go to open for public
comment again merry will be
posting up whole to ask if
you're in in favor or in
opposition to SB two seventy
three definition of role library
for the our attendees that we
have I just you'll know we have
for attendees at this time.
very I'll give you a moment to
go ahead of the poll.
Give me a moment I'm trying to
find it is sorry no worries.
You know we we have a just a
handful of folks of the folks
that are in the of our of our
public commenters please raise
your hand if you are in
opposition to this bill does use
your right hand but out there
never mind I apologize thank you
merry forget that up so quick so
again are you a supporter
opposition MSPs to seventy three
definition of a rural library
please click US support or
oppose I'll get folks in under
ten seconds to comment.
Okay thank you we did not have
any of folks vote in the poll
still we'll go to public comment
if you are opposed to this poll
are opposed to SB at two seventy
three please raise your hand if
you're an attendee it's a little
hand market the bottom of your
screen.
Seeing none if you were in
support of this bill would like
to speak please press that raise
hand but at the bottom of your
screen if you'd like to speak in
support.
There was no public comment on
this I will go ahead and move
forward to the committee I see
Representative Montoya is hand
is raised Representative
Montoya.
Madam chair and senator Ortiz C.
penal so good to see you I
admire your work this bill in
this process I followed
intimately last year and as a
member of the northern New
Mexico Society systems think
previous to being elected I was
very much an advocate and the
rural libraries are a life link
and the struggle I I applaud the
work because it really knits
together and focuses on the
potentiality of the rural
libraries not only for the
traditional use but as a place
to gather as a place to access
internet as a place to sort of
congregate in the best of ways
I'm really heartened to see that
although it was such a good move
last year to bring that funding
to the fifty one now libraries
that benefit.
to see that you're coming back
to refine it you know it's.
It's diligence and it's well
needed my question is of the
fifty one libraries are there
tribal libraries included in can
you expound on that.
Madam chairman and and the
Representative Montoya yes there
are tribal libraries and and I'm
gonna turn to my experts witness
to give you the specific numbers
she is a an encyclopedia of
knowledge of on New Mexico's
rural libraries he's actually
traveled the state and the and
as with most of these librarians
so show where you like to
respond to Representative
Montoya is question about tribal
libraries Madam chair
representative Montoya thank you
for your question there are ten
tribal let their nineteen tribal
libraries in the state ten of
them are eligible for this fund.
In the end it.
You
madam chair and shell name mark
I have watched your advocacy and
you are true champions to take
the time and diligence to devote
to the wellness and that the
full potential of rural
libraries to is just an
extraordinary thing to to
witness I thank you for that
answer.
I yield back thank you
Representative Montoya and
Representative actually
may recognize the chair for a
moment we'll go back chairman or
CEO good to see you give comment
on this bill.
Yes I do madam chair but that
rents and I was on before me
thank you Representative
Fajardo.
Thank you I'm the switch my
screen real quick second see
everybody sorry about that guys.
Thank you thank you.
That chairman thank you senator
for bringing this for I just
have a really quick question and
hello and I know like in my area
the light at the library's
pretty much been shut down due
to the pandemic to to the
pandemic is that going on around
the state are we seeing all the
library shut down if so what do
you have any idea when they're
going to be open back up.
Madam chairman and and
representatives are those again
ability to search my experts at
the one that I see regularly is
in little valley library index
and.
That one.
is open on a on a very.
Which restricted basis you have
to be massed it's only open for
a certain number of hours you
have to use the hand sanitizers
when you go in but it is still
operating and people are still
availing themselves of the
computer laboratory this there
and I think eight eight
computers and Community makes
full use of but it is no more
restriction basically not as
many people at one time rollout
in I'm not sure what's going on
in the others but I will defer
to show on that one.
Madam chair representative I had
to thank you for your question
it varies throughout the state a
lot of the smaller libraries
have library boards in they are
making their decisions whether
to be open according to how they
interpret the governor's
recommendations here in Rio
Arriba county are.
I'd say about half of them are
are open like the in little
valley library is open to I
think for for patrons at a time
I met most of the libraries
aren't open are taking
appointments so people can come
in by appointment and get their
unemployment or or whatever it
is they need to do on the
computer and they're also taking
doing a lot of books but
curbside delivery of books and
things like that so there are
some services available to
people who need a military
services copying services and
stuff like that by appointment
so it's it's really a makes I'd
say probably about half of them
are open right now.
Thank you thank you for that
Senator message and I chairwoman
yeah the only thing I will I
will say and this is my personal
two cents billion thing I don't
like about your build Senator
and I wish we have language in
their requiring that that these
libraries be essential.
Everything that we have been
through
you know you guys have seen the
photos as students out in front
of Walmart sitting on concrete
trying to get web access and I
know in my district we've had
problems with
libraries being shut down and
things like that and you know
it's just it's been a into this
the only thing I wish we could
do is make these libraries
essential so that if something
ever happens again not only are
we done their vote but where put
putting additional money cares
Act money and everything else
that we can because we've all
seen what these kids have gone
through I'm especially in these
rural districts a Representative
role district like you know a
lot of my colleagues on on this
on this thing and we've had
children
you know I have metal lake in my
district there's no internet
access and so we have kids who
are here behind in education so
the only complaint I have
Senator.
but thank you so much for
bringing this forward.
Thank you Representative I think
that's actually a good idea that
we're you know at the time we
were drafting this bill we had
and we hadn't thought of that.
Representative on now we have
chairman the gal Garcia.
You madam chair thank you
senator up for bringing this
legislation forward
that is a very
Captive.
Concept that Representative
Fajardo just mentioned I totally
agree with their creating the
essential public institution.
and and that goes to the topic
before us so
as the mouse and allowed
you know madam chair and senator
our land grants of some very
unique libraries.
Which is kind of a cornerstone a
lot of those communities and one
in particular as
mention to but madam chair one
in particular is the I. P. Q.
I'm very
there in the plaza just right
across the street from the
church and
it's it's such a beautiful
setting they're not be Q..
About this library is kind of a
cornerstone of on going
community activity.
Basically they have a own place
there for the inductions they
have food distributions there
they have all sorts of
activities and during their
fiesta
that I'm very is used as a
dressing room or some of these
traditional OB dancers because
we know that barbecue was
established by
you Senator be.
Indians.
Consider a renegade by the
colony so they moved them all
the way from hoping that.
The Q..
To kind of get get get him out
of trouble in terms of of the of
the riff with that with this
this the Spanish militia but
You know and it's it's it's and
a lot of times a madam chair and
senator a some of these
libraries I cut you.
Are always struggling for
resources and operating bunnies
and the and the like and
and the other one of which you
probably know at
madam chair and estimates analog
is a is the library on the some
of the of the about land grant
there in the NL a.
You know I think you were part
of our Land Grant Committee when
we tour that library if I'm not
mistaken yes.
And and you know that was kind
of a unique library created
during the governor David cargo
era where he went throughout
northern New Mexico I don't know
if you did the the same in the
southern part but he kind of a
help create these these rural
community libraries and the and
Iowa on the summing up the
bottom grant is a good example
of that and
you know I don't know if you if
you kept up with the and I'm
sure what with the development
of and I'm very you could you
saw when we went there that they
were need of shopping and and
most of all kind of operating
expenses so that they could
house a big because it was
because they they they were
doing it all on a long term
basis so.
So I applied this this
initiative and and and and
senator if you have any comments
on the and I would like very you
know we'd we'd be open to to
hear those madam chair thank
you.
She shell wants to say something
about the V. and will agree
madam chairman so I'll let him
speak on this.
Madam chair representative
Representative thank you for the
question I am in touch very much
with both the at the queue and
the and we have a library the in
a way the library really needs
help badly they do have a leaky
roof their heating system is
that they're the only free
internet for seventy five miles
so people really depend on that
library.
so it's it's crucial that they
get funded the advocate library
struggles all the time how to
pay for how to pay their
employees actually their annual
budget is somewhere about fifty
thousand dollars a year their
facilities utilise gorgeous as
you know but it's also
inadequate so they could use
some help with their facility so
both of those libraries are are
really amazing and and really
struggling.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator.
Thank you chairman and now we'll
go to Representative black.
Thank you madam chair Senator.
Yes my question would be how
does chaparral is currently
trying to become incorporated
and so I guess my question would
be do you now if they would
qualify they would qualify for
this up until they become
incorporated.
For the for the library that is
I believe it's currently being
built.
Madam chairman and and
Representative black I believe
that they would not because
chaparral it has a population.
Larger than most of our our good
size towns I think I think that
I haven't pursued Medicine
seeing the latest census figures
but it seems to me that it was
getting close to eight or ten
thousand people in several.
So our our tree thousand limited
would exclude them unfortunately
Thank you for all right of
course and through their ability
to to.
Retain the property the gross
receipts tax and also property
tax they they might be able to
sustain that library and and
other civic services with.
With the their their their tax
possibility right now is the
county of million of it it gets
the gross receipts tax ownership
at all and and so it does it
does create an indeterminate
inequity there that I show in my
correction tape probably
wouldn't qualify just because of
the size limit that we've
installed.
Well I'm actually if they are
not incorporated into the
library incorporates just a five
oh one see three they will
qualify and I've heard some talk
about chaparral library we may
be able to have a few funds from
the endowment if they apply for
them to help them establish a
library.
The sites the three thousand
population limit All I Want C.
three libraries in
unincorporated areas are
eligible there's two right now
you see yes in Eldorado which
have.
Students but because they're and
incorporated they're eligible
for the fund okay good and and.
Yeah.
Thank you we are.
Representative like I do the
other thing is that isn't the
state library and.
uses some of the money from the
endowment fund to help
communities get their libraries
off the ground and and and that
is one of the purposes built
into the into the legislation
that created the fund so.
Yes.
For them is the settlement money
coming into the Andaman and
right now is is is one they
would probably be able to get a
state incorporate a lot of
issues and and and Corporation
is not is not the the solution
for the community.
Thank you for that center okay
so let me make sure I have this
right I believe you said if
they.
A library when they when they
start out is below the three
thousand threshold that would
qualify.
And then it what would happen if
they if they're population grows
over that.
Madam chairman and and
Representative shell reminded me
to it that we have in there
the specific exemption for I
know and see three libraries you
it's it's not a public library
in the sense of government only
supported.
Even if the community is service
is over three thousand it would
be able to to qualify for these
funds the and the two examples
he gave were plus seek us where
there is a librarian is an
unincorporated community and is
run by a sizeable and State
Street and Eldorado which is.
You know.
Near Santa Fe made in that part
is not itself incorporated and
to the library there is also a
five oh one see three.
Nonprofit so they are also
eligible for this fund.
Thank you for that Senator so is
there a cap on on population I
mean is there a stopping point
were were these libraries may.
Grow out of this system.
Madam chairman and
Representative black I I'm gonna
just thirty shell because I
think it is three thousand if
you're not serving an
unincorporated area and you are
in to a five oh one see three
the Ellen show respond to and to
give you the specific.
Representative black madam
chairman thank you for the
question the
So part of the bill assess it if
it community grows over three
thousand people
then they still remain eligible
for the funding.
Frankly I don't really know what
would happen if an
unincorporated community became
incorporated and then the
library
The library becomes part of the
municipal system at I'm not
exactly sure what would happen
in that.
Okay thank you for answer my
question Senator.
Thank you Representative.
Thank you we do have one more
had Representative Sam.
Thank you madam chair of.
Senator T. Pino receipt shall
Mike my question is I know that
last night we we did pass on the
floor
unanimously the corporation
chaparral and and my concern
would be that if this library at
from Representative black is
being built at this moment.
That they would get penalized
for not do you know if they're
over the three thousand
threshold and that's my concern
so I guess.
Shell the question can be
answered so maybe there's still
hope that shop around could
still have the library under
this bill if they are over three
thousand.
On the last question there is
black yes you yes.
Madam chairman and and and
Representative Castellano I
think I think you see Community
incorporates Michelle please
correct me if I'm if I'm the
stages.
For example shaqo incorporates.
In.
Then.
At the library is not part of
this this program yet I don't
believe because it doesn't
actually exist yet.
But if things work right and
becomes a community library they
have other means of.
Dissipating in financing and.
Thank the amount of money they
we get some more rural endowment
fund even if we reach the fifty
million two year.
Would be far less than then they
would be able to generate within
their community and state retain
their gross receipts tax their
property tax and so on like
other small towns
There are still other state
programs and provide money to
all the live results what is it
over a hundred libraries in the
state.
And and and those programs would
be available to the shops at a
library so I I I just hesitate
to say that losing this small
amount of money would be in any
way
An argument in his their
integration because a we gain so
much more in terms of the
library but as you know there
are lots and lots of issues
involved in corporations that in
relation yes bill off the floor
last night on that.
The staging show or would that
be an accurate statement.
thank you senator Ortiz Pino yes
I believe that's accurate right
now each library is going to
probably get under a thousand
dollars the first year of
disbursement in the amount of
money available to help other
library Smith started small
towns is also going to be about
the same amount maybe nine
hundred dollars so it's at this
point is not significant at all
unfortunately ansys chaparral
does not have a library and I
think if the if the town of the
city incorporates they'll be
able to put resources into a
library and and they will be
eligible because of their
population that.
Thank you thank you of Senator
shall my other question is is
generalizing my area who runs
the library on gonna have I you
know I knew there was a library
but I I've never been there will
is it at the old schoolhouse
words it tells that or.
You guys can tell me yeah.
Representative Castellano
members of the committee the fan
we have elaborate.
Is in the old community center
there the the library director
is named have a
yeah I'm I'm black in the right
now thank god yes.
Right here in your and that so
with the I believe the land
grant again the libraries and
community centers yes my
understanding of it and that.
Because there I when C. three
Verde able to get capital
funding to repair the library
but they can get it through the
lead a process so they're
tempting to get they were the
legislature gave them twenty
five thousand dollars to lead
and they're tempting to to get
that money to fix up their
library but it's not sufficient
in that amount it needs so much
work
but yet so it's so wonderful
lepers.
Thank you guys and thank you for
the information thank you madam
chair Mr chair I yield.
Thank you in seeing no more
comments what is the wish of the
committee.
In the past.
We have a Representative Lujan
has been a motion to pass as
their second ticket.
Representative Montoya again
wonderful so Representative
Montoya seconded are we have a
motion of a two passed in SB two
seventy three definition of role
library and merry can you look
for the roll call of.
Representative black.
Yes.
Representative Castellano yes.
Representative Cook.
Representative Fajardo yes.
Representative Lujan yes.
Representative Montoya.
Yes.
Representative Serrato yes.
Mr Chairman.
Yes.
Thank you very are you with two
four six seven on in the
affirmative none in the up in
the opposition on the negative
are you have you just pass on us
B. two seventy three thank you
so much Senator thank you very
much committee members and and
madam chairman and Mr chairman
that a great discussion and I'm
and thank you for your support.
Thank you and I'll hand it back
to you at your fingers you Madam
I think Representative a month
ago I had a question so hang on
Jerry.
Madam chair and Representative
is and gas I am so moved by this
work moving forward you know the
the amount of money is so little
there must be the next step and
now that I am in this
position to support I am at your
service and perhaps in the
coming year we can develop some
legislation that I can actually
help to carry as well.
Really appreciate that and will
we'll spend some time talking
because we have some ideas thank
you.
Thank you thank you
Representative thank you senator
congratulations
We have some legislation that
has been referred to a committee
so we might be needing more than
likely we we will be meeting on
Saturday it's just that I have
to coordinate a time where it
doesn't really conflict with
other a committee hearing so all
and the state to into that and
and thank you our illustrious
sat October sitting in I was
putting on a bill run the Senate
with with great success.
It's.
So members that pretty much does
afford today I I hope you guys
treated are former state
representative George Dodge with
the with kid gloves you know
he's a good guy.
Thank you members and
We'll see you guys on Saturday
and I'll get that information
out that to you as soon as I'm
able to coordinate with merry.
Based on this finding.
Thank you Representative.
You have a good day.
