Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Madam chair to get all.
I am here in Estes.
I here so we have a quorum six
of
Six of us are here and we're
gonna go ahead and start with
Representative merits Dixon I
believe house bill two hundred
sixty seven welcome
Representative Dixon.
Thank you.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'm
here this morning to present
House Bill two sixty seven.
First I'd like to acknowledge my
co sponsors for this bill
Representative Candie Sweetser
you Mr chairman Senators Bobby
can solace and hope are.
House Bill to sixty seven
economic recovery and job
creation.
Our hospitality and leisure
industry has been hard hit as a
result of the pandemic but the
economy will soon reopen and
this bill insurance that New
Mexico is ready to capitalize on
the expected boom in travel when
restrictions are lifted.
House Bill to sixty seven over
two years we'll find seven
million dollars to support
business improvement districts
retention and expansion of
tourism businesses.
Eight million dollars to fund
tourism invent revitalization
program to support and expand
existing events while attracting
out of state traffic to New
Mexico's diverse events.
In thirty million dollars to
develop a tourism industry
career advancement pilot
program.
And marketability following
significant sorry it will
interest increased leisure and
hospitality workforce skill and
marketability following
significant losses in employment
and at this point I'd like to
turn it to secretary Schreier
because she'll be able to go
into detail about why this is
necessary thank you very much
welcome madam secretary.
And we can see your screen.
Excellent good afternoon Mr
chair members of the committee
thank you Representative Dixon
for the opportunity to testify
as an expert for H. B. two sixty
seven which is part of the
tourism recovery package as we
consider what are tourism
recovery looks like post
pandemic there are two main
factors demand generation which
brings business visitors to our
communities and customers to our
local businesses and to assets
stabilization which means
supporting our communities our
businesses and protecting our
visitor experiences we need to
make sure that the treasures
that make New Mexico true
survivor.
Quickly I'm we have very broad
support for this tourism
recovery package and it's
mounting pre pandemic the
tourism industry employed over a
hundred thousand New Mexicans
tourism recoveries about
employing our people preserving
our culture and diversifying our
economy this list will continue
to grow.
This bill funds three programs
that I will review in further
detail as Representative Dixon
mentioned tourism focused
economic development districts
events revitalization program
and the tourism industry career
advancement pilot program each
tackles different challenges
that are either new to the
industry due to the pandemic or
have been amplified by the
pandemic.
The program proposed in each
beat two sixty seven work in
tandem with the tourism
department executive budget
request including a twenty five
million dollars special
appropriation for destination
marketing each B. two sixty
seven is designed to support
asset stabilization without this
investment economic recovery
within the industry may not be
successful.
Both local governments and
private sector facing a
financial crisis well relief
efforts are critical we must
also look at how to bring back
demand and stabilize our assets.
Each September the city of
Farmington hosts the four
corners four by four week in
multi date city wide festival
for all things off roading at
the center of the infants is the
rocket grand nationals which is
a national championship series
for extreme rock crawling
vehicles to the COVID nineteen
pandemic the organizer's moved
it to Utah.
Event organizers estimate about
six thousand people come to
Farmington for the infants
New Mexico deserves to get this
of it back New Mexico deserves
to preserve our local produced
events and we deserve to compete
with Utah Colorado and Arizona.
Our tourism events are at risk
of not returning.
And the social and economic
benefits events are multi
faceted there is the economic
benefit of bringing outside
money into our community many of
which are small rural
communities that rely on events
from for much of their tourism.
There is the rich cultural
benefit of sharing celebrating
in training cultural values and
traditions and there is the
overall overall tourism
conversion benefit events give
visitors particularly the drive
market visitors a reason to come
now.
Our tourism events provide
proven economic return and
cultural impact and they are in
danger of disappearing.
Revitalisation programme focuses
on technical assistance
marketing support national
sponsorship business development
and sponsoring up to four
hundred events over two years
providing investment for
stabilization purposes the
tourism department has an
unfunded legacy event
sponsorship program that will be
bringing back in FY twenty two
with this funding.
The tourism department developed
an event economic impact
calculator and will be requiring
reporting for all of its
sponsorship program participants
the importance of understanding
the economic impact of events to
local communities cannot be
overstated and also helps us
understand how this in fact in
this investment helps grow
economies.
A friend of mine ager Montoya
began his career as a hotel
Bellman.
He was mentored and accepting
new rules throughout a hotel
operation front desk thank Madam
housekeeping manager sales
manager and eventually general
manager.
His claim to fame is that he was
the youngest hotel general
manager in Albuquerque's history
he climbed the hospitality
career ladder because people
invested in him and then toward
him.
New Mexico's tourism workforce
is a little different that are
surrounding states we don't have
a a fancy Helton program or a
Disney training program.
And for decades we mentor each
other building talent from
within.
Seven years ago I had the
privilege of being mentor by at
Pulsipher sales manager of the
fund a hotel and I'm beyond
grateful to the time he invested
in me.
Our workforce trouble now during
this unprecedented time the
tourism industry seeing
disproportionate injury during
the COVID nineteen pandemic even
compared to the overall negative
impacts on small business
throughout the state.
In December approximately thirty
thousand leisure and hospitality
workers were without a job a
significant reduction from
nearly eight hundred thousand
who were employed in this
industry this time last year.
From the beginning of the
pandemic through the end of
January over sixty three
thousand leisure and hospitality
workers have filed for
unemployment New Mexico which
translates to seven hundred and
thirty five million dollars in
unemployment claims these are
our neighbors and our
constituents and they deserve a
strategic path forward.
The proposed tourism industry
career advancement program has
four components a talent
retention for high education
felt a higher education
fellowship.
Professional certificates on the
job training which is modeled
after economic development
departments need to program.
And of course
program administration costs.
There are several methods of
measuring impact.
The tourism department proposes
that the thirty million dollars
will provide on the job training
and educational opportunities
for approximately five thousand
five hundred out of work leisure
and hospitality workers getting
our folks back to work.
Collaborate across private and
public sectors to create a sense
of place and drive commerce this
is what special districts are
about special districts provide
an opportunity to solve unique
local challenges capitalize on
opportunity to drive economic
growth and they are fantastic
tourism economic recovery
platforms.
Because of the shift of consumer
behavior in online shopping
local governments realize a
significant decrease in local G.
R. T. leisure and hospitality G.
R. T. has seen similar
downturns.
Because tourism was down for
most of twenty twenty local
governments realize a
significant decrease in local
lodges taxes well with many
recognizing less than half of
what they collected in FY twenty
this means that local
communities do not have enough
funding to properly promote
themselves like they did in
years past.
Some destinations are more
focused on tourism economies
than others in fusing
investments in in these local
special districts now act as a
catalytic platform for the
entire destination it also
supports building business
retention and expansion
opportunities these local
options allow private sector and
public sector to collectively
drive tourism for marketing and
tourism development.
Special districts focus on the
tourism economy is a national
best practice.
Here are two examples and spare
the time I'm not gonna go into
detail but no these initiatives
are measurable and our proven
economic development strategies.
Historically in New Mexico
tourism economic strategies have
been primarily a marketing
investment for the state.
The pandemic has made the need
much greater.
As a cautionary tale this
morning there was an article
published in Roswell daily
record about the city of Roswell
temporarily closing its
convention center this is
devastating that is the economic
driver bringing conventions and
meetings to the city putting
people in our hotels in our
restaurants in our museums.
This just shows every single day
matters and we need to take bold
aggressive measures to prevent
this from snowballing.
Recovery will be difficult but
the investment outlined in H. B.
two sixty seven is the path
forward and I respectfully ask
for your support today thank you
Representative Dixon do you have
for the comment if not we can
stand for questions.
Thank you I have no additional
comments western states.
Thank you very much madam
secretary and did you want to
introduce you other experts here
with us Representative Dixon.
I believe secretary my counties
with us and then a gentle lady.
US secretary mccamley with
workforce solutions as well as
secretary Garcia agree it goes
with department of cultural
affairs secretary mccamley.
Thank you Mr members of the
committee I'll keep this short
as I know you're on a time frame
here we just want to be here in
support of this bill It jobs
really really well with the
stuff that we're looking at
doing it workforce solutions as
secretary stronger point out.
The majority well I would say
the majority but the biggest
group of people that we've got
unemployment or from the tourism
and hospitality sector in the
sooner we get those folks back
to work the sooner we can get
the unemployment rolls down and
we are engaging very closely
with secretary Trier on the
sector strategy approach that
will allow us to utilize our
services in terms of workforce
development to really get folks
the training they need to get
these tourism jobs in a twenty
first century economy I think
that's really important in
addition there's a lot of work
going on the outdoor rec
industry it and economic
development which weaves its way
really far into this when you
look at things like mountain
biking secretary in Gallup the
outdoor recreation stuff into
your see all the stuff in
northern New Mexico I just want
to let everybody know that we're
all rowing in the same direction
on this one in we all plan on
using this money very very well
in a targeted fashion to get
folks back to work that'll be
here to answer questions about
the bill Mr chair thanks for
your time.
Thank you very much Mr secretary
will also want to welcome this
Pretoria Greg she's the.
Charter research at the tourism
department here what this in the
virtual committee will now will
go before we go to the committee
members will go to the audience
if that we have a thirty four
attendees with us.
in the audience zoom rooms so
what and raise your your virtual
hand and will take public
comment at this time.
Will up will lead to a you into
the.
Into the room and then on mute
yourself when I call your name
introduce yourself as well even
though I call your name Mr out
bill Bentsen welcome.
No actually I have a excuse me
I'm I'm here for a later hearing
I've I apologize for universally
raising my hand thank you Sir
let's go with that Deborah good
angles.
Thank you this is secretary
associated with the New Mexico
department of cultural affairs
the department stands in support
of this bill which provides
marketing support and technical
assistance for special districts
many of which are arts and
cultural based it also provides
technical assistance for legacy
events many of which are also
arts and culture based and it
provides career advancement
support for creative workers who
have been affected tremendously
by the pandemic arts and culture
and tourism or sister industry
in New Mexico each is necessary
for the success of the other
each is an essential economic
driver for the state HB two
sixty seven recognizes this
relationship and provides
targeted support to encourage
the merch will re emergence of
both sectors statewide thank you
for your time.
Thank you madam secretary please
stay with us if you can in the
in the committee room I will
never miss Allison Smith.
give us a second to of.
Allow you to address the
committee and then on mute
yourself.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
members of the committee my name
is Allison Smith I'm the
registered lobbyist for The New
Mexico restaurant association
The New Mexico restaurant
association stands in support of
house bill two sixty seven and
wished to thank Representative
Dixon for bringing this forward
we also want to thank secretary
Schreier for hard work promoting
tourism in New Mexico as a
secretary testified the pandemic
this had a devastating effect on
tourism many of our independent
restaurants rely on the tourism
economy for their success our
local flavor makes New Mexico a
treasure destination for
tourists and we ask you to
please support this very
important investment in our
tourism future thank you for
your time.
Thank you now we'll go to Mr
Russell why Rick followed by JD
Bullington.
Thank you chairman my name is
Russell Wyrick I'm the executive
state director for the New
Mexico small business
development center network I
cannot speak in favor or against
the bill in either way I just
want to provide you with
information I could tell you as
a program we have the nineteen
centers across the state from
Oct for March ninth through
October thirty first almost
twenty percent of all of our
counseling hours across the
state went to tourism related
businesses so it is definitely
factual that the tourism related
industries has been.
I hate to use that word but
devastated through this pandemic
and I can attest that from the
time that we had invested the
resources in regard to the
program number of jobs saved
across all industries in the
state we saved almost five
thousand jobs of from March
ninth through October thirty
first and about six hundred
eighteen of those were tourism
related jobs when you look at
the percentages of time
investment the jobs saved even
within that perspective the the
seven jobs within that industry
is incredibly difficult also
within the loans and capital
infusion we help we help the
businesses with almost a hundred
and for well over a hundred and
five million dollars of loans
and only twenty five of twenty
five million of that went went
to tourism related businesses
almost a quarter of all the
loans people at that we help
people take or tourism related
businesses that are borrowing
money to stay in business so
wanted to share that information
with you and hopefully it's
helpful to the committee thank
you.
Thank you Mr JD Bullington
followed by minimum mechanical
thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee this is JD
Bullington with the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
I think we all know the hardest
hit sector of our economy during
this pandemic is the tourism
leisure hospitality and
recreation secretary these
business sectors an
extraordinary help right now on
this legislation combined with
other pandemic relief efforts
provide substantial targeted
relief funds the statewide small
business segments of our economy
depend upon the movie
congregation of people unlike
any other in our state so the
additional funding to boost out
of state visitation statewide
events will be especially
critical as restrictions
received nation wide and
vaccination spread people will
want to travel once again Mr
chairman members of the
committee we need them to do so
Mexico over other destinations
so the chamber strongly supports
this bill and urges the
committee to pass house bill two
sixty seven thank you.
Thank you servicemen of a goggle
followed by Ashley Wagner.
Good morning I'm gonna go I am
the registered lobbyist for
Economic Forum and we applaud
this proposal by the tourism
department and are very glad to
see that there are coordinated
interest in efforts with other
departments we think this will
make a huge difference we agree
that this is truly a strategic
plan forward it exemplifies what
needs to happen in terms of
getting people to New Mexico in
terms of creating more jobs and
having an Avenue for
sustainability that will
encourage more people to come
see us meet us and come part of
our community we're just very
pleased and strongly strongly
hope that this moves forward
because we know the return on
investment is going to be worth
it thank you thank you Mr Ashley
Wagner followed by Justin
Hoffman.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I am
Ashley Wagner director of public
policy for the New Mexico
chamber of commerce and I
represent businesses and every
type of industry across the
state we stand in strong support
of this bill because it will
create job placement and
upskilling opportunities for our
leisure and hospitality
workforce who have especially
been negatively impacted during
the pandemic this bill will help
our economy further recovered
because it will help bring
tourism back into the state
thank you so much.
Thank you Justin Hoffman
followed by Jason Espinoza thank
you Mr chairman my name is
Justin up then and I am not the
one of the co owners of old
barrel tea company along with my
family members which is based
out of Albuquerque New Mexico
are manufacturing facilities
located we have four locations
across the state and we have
additional locations in Colorado
Arizona
I'm speaking directly in support
of this bill we've utilized a
tip funding from the
manufacturing standpoint and
with our business will grow to
company along with noisy water
winery have directly benefited
from that funding one of the
things that we like to stay in
our families that funding has
allowed us to bring people in
and grow our business and it
allows us to work on our
business not in our so we're
able to bring in people that we
can help fill the rules so we
can grow our business and and I
fully see this driving economic
recovery and support and and the
tourism economy which has been
able to take an educated funding
so I in my day job I'm also the
director tourism The Village
Rideau so and we see so many of
these businesses hoteliers the
convention centers that are
directly impacted by comment and
it would really really benefit
from the support of this bill so
from the readers of tourism
department as well as my
family's personal businesses we
want to provide full support for
this bill and hope that you as
well thank you for your time.
Thank you Mr Jason Espinoza
followed by do setor.
Welcome.
Distressed you know so.
We'll go back well he's we'll go
back out do center what you put
in a.
Address the committee.
Thank you Mr chairman my name is
Terry said of the registered
lobbyists for the Indian public
culture center in the public
market thanks owned by the
nineteen published from New
Mexico we strongly support the
legislation as a the the economy
is severely in need in addition
to the tourism industry and we
hope to see this bill advance
through the process thank you.
Thank you Mr Espinoza.
Chairman can you hear me now you
sure can okay hi chairman Jason
Espinoza registered lobbyists
with heritage hotels and resorts
which is the largest independent
hotel brand in the state
hospitality industry is the
state's second largest employer
and we stand in strong support
of the legislation with oil and
gas revenues likely to continue
to decline in the future it's
time to make a financial
commitment to the hospitality
industry there has been a strong
revenue source for over a
hundred years we need to act
fast as a destination to rebuild
our tourism industry the
programs that this legislation
intends to create are important
especially as we start to see
light at the end of the COVID
nineteen total funding these
innovative programs will give
New Mexico a head start and
competitive advantage and
rebuilding and revitalizing the
tourism industry additionally
chairman also the registered
lobbyists with New Mexico eight
PM which is the statewide
association of economic
development organizations which
stands in strong support of the
legislation many of our
communities that we represent.
Tourism really plays a key come
is a key component of their
local economies and many
communities we've spoken with
have identified tourism as a key
growth opportunity movie we as
we look towards economic
recovery just adding in to Mr
Hoffman's comment relates to the
need to need to plays a
significant role in supporting
economic expansion for economic
based businesses and we see the
need the parallel programs at
this legislation creates will
play a significant role in
rebooting the hospitality
industry part both by reskilling
employees and providing
financial assistance to
employers possible funder
heritage hotels and resorts New
Mexico ideas standing strong
support thank you.
Thank you Christopher goblet
followed by Thomas Sharmell.
Good morning members of the
committee chairman thank you for
the opportunity my name is
Christopher go Blay I'm the
executive director of New Mexico
wine and grape growers
association we're here today to
speak on behalf of the element
of the bill focused on the
events and while we support the
entire bill just speak quickly
to the impact these events have
on our tourism economy B. and on
the industry we host four of the
largest annual events every
memorial and Labor Day New
Mexico wine festival in
Albuquerque and Los crucis to
give a sense of the tourism
impact in Los crucis over
seventy percent of our twelve to
fifteen thousand attendees will
come from el Paso or from Mexico
and each one of these four
events will have a five hundred
thousand dollar economic impact
collectively that's two million
dollars of economic impact
that's for not only the
association and the members who
are the wine growers and
producers but it's also over
three hundred annual arts and
crafts vendors who rely on these
festivals to support them so
we've in the last four years
expanded our events into smaller
rural communities including
Rideau so Silver City point how
this
and so I'm very very grateful
for a cabinet secretary Schreier
and for the the bill sponsor
that there is an advanced
component I think they will
events Dr a lot of activity in
our industry and in the
community and we stand support
and ask for your support of this
bill thank you very much.
Miss play thanks for being with
us Thomas Shaw will follow by
Jason Weaks.
Good and start over.
Can you answer me look at
previous thank you okay good
morning chairman and members of
the committee my name is Thomas
on a policy analyst with the New
Mexico higher education
department.
Acting secretary Rodriguez asked
that I represent current
apartment today and she had to
attend to another committee
meeting the higher education
department strongly supports
house bill two sixty seven
portions of this bill aimed at
retaining the students in person
who have chosen a career in the
industry.
When they have just established
a long career a brand new ticket
and brand new to the industry
the programs and strategies in
this bill not only add to the
value of the industry as a whole
but to the values of the workers
themselves again the department
strongly supports house bill two
sixty seven thank you thank you
and Center best to the secretary
was over in appropriations Jason
Weaks well by Jose Garcia.
Mr chair representative any
thank you for Linux test Friday
Jason Weaks on behalf of the
hospitality association the the
brewers and distillers skills as
well as the Albuquerque Hispanic
chamber of commerce on tourism
has been a cornerstone of the
New Mexico economy for a very
long time we haven't had a lot
of attention to it because it's
just sort of machine that that
just keeps going and generating
revenue for the state creating
jobs for the state well this
pandemic has brought the
industry to its knees quite
frankly the industry is
struggling hospitality
association is the statewide
trade association for both
watching result ancillary
revenue in business generated by
the the tourism department are
tourism industry significant it
generates hundreds of millions
of dollars proceeds tax revenue
for the state and quite frankly
employs a huge number of
individuals their quality jobs
in quite frankly these jobs will
go away unless we invest in the
industry now we have a great
opportunity ahead of us we have
an opportunity to invest in an
industry that we can grow we can
we can close the gap between a
competitive markets in Arizona
and Colorado in Texas we can we
can come out of the back end of
this pandemic in better shape
than we entered it but we is a
state have to be forward
thinking we have to invest the
money in the right way really
appreciate Representative Dixon
secretary Sharon the rest of the
administration bringing this
forward this is the exact type
of investment that we need we
need every single one of these
dollars infused into this
industry quite frankly without
that infusion industry might not
make it quick in in if we do
that investment in the industry
gonna come out flourishing quite
frankly we're going to see
something on the back and it's
going to be amazing we talk
about diversification of our
economy all the time this is how
you diversify the economy set up
to succeed the set up to six I
think building on.
Have their assets are tourism
industry amazing for those
reasons on all entities that I
just named in that I represent
standard significantly stronger
support this legislation thank
you.
Thank you Segar see up all by
Representative Randy Randall.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Jose
Garcia I Representative AS in
global in some global is an
international facility
management company we are proud
to manage the Albuquerque
convention center the
Albuquerque civic plaza the
Albuquerque regional sports
complex and the Los crucis
convention center I'd like to
say that at this point in time
where tourism and obviously my
focus is meetings and
conventions this is this house
bill two sixty seven is going to
be integral in our recovery so I
stand one hundred and ten
percent behind it as does my
company and my corporate offices
thank you for this time and
let's move on House Bill to
sixty seven forward thank you
very much.
Appreciated a Randy Randall
welcome.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'm
Randy Randall tourism director
for the city of Santa Fe I
applaud Representative Dixon in
the administration's efforts
represented by this bill is it
will help to prop up and restart
our all important events they're
gonna year with little to no
income and are facing many added
cost if and when they are able
to be presented again we have
over a hundred events that are
very important to the City of
Santa Fe.
We will also provide critical
training and cost related to
retiring as our hotels and
restaurants are able to ramp up
operations finally will help our
communities as they attempt to
rebuild their tourism economy
through support of the many
small businesses that have all
been all but.
Iterative and they need to pivot
their operations to restore
their financial base this bill
will help in all areas of the
tourism economy I strongly
support it and urge you to
support House Bill to sixty
seven as well thank you very
much Mr chairman thank you and
welcome anyone else which from
the audience Representative
thirty six attendees with us now
anyone else wish to address the
committee.
Anyone with any concerns or in
opposition.
Or any latecomers in favor.
Thank you attendees for joining
us and folks watching on the
webcast will go to the committee
Representative guy goes.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative
and secretaries for being here I
just can't tell you how much I
appreciate this bill and I
appreciate that it's a three
pronged approach to address a
recovery of tourism jobs I know
especially down and in my area
Los crucis you know I know I've
talked to
representatives from the
heritage hotel many times and
have heard the plight and so
this is definitely something
that that could be a boost for
for the whole state
One of the questions that I I've
got is
is there going to be a component
that helps the small a rural
events because so many times
they're run through grant effort
grassroots efforts and may not
have the infrastructure to
understand how to qualify to get
that get access to those dollars
Representative.
It's thank you Mr chairman and
Representative Gaydos if I may
defer to secretary Schreier.
Mr chair members of the
committee representative thank
you for that very important
question because our rural
events are critical to their
economic developments and so we
will be doing significant
outreach throughout the state to
ensure that our local event
planners and our communities
know that this resource is
available and to provide
technical assistance and the
grant application process we've
been successful with several of
our cooperative marketing
programs and grant programs to
collaborate both in urban and
rural settings to make sure that
we have equity across the state
and geographic diversity and the
different types of funding that
we find in in the forms of
grants throughout the state and
so we will be working directly
with those communities and event
planners.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Secretary for that answer I
think that's just so important
as somebody who writes requests
knowing how to get to that
process can be difficult and
specially with it within those
rural areas I and we're I think
that in fusion is so desperately
needed so I appreciate that
also wanted to ask once again
what is the appropriation that
is being asked for for this
project.
Thank you it's Mr chair and
committee members Representative
Gaydos secretary it is a total
of Mr chair members of the
committee Representative thank
you for that question it is a
total of forty five million
dollars eight million will be
for the event revitalization
program seven million will be
set for special districts and
then thirty million will be
utilized for the career
advancement and training for the
industry similar to need to.
And thank you Mr chairman thank
you secretary
you know I think I've heard of
and I don't remember if it was
you were secretary mccamley
mentioned that Mr mccamley the
there were seven hundred and
thirty five million of
unemployment claims within this
industry and so I I just think
that the masses that the The
appropriation of forty five
million which I know is a pre
appropriation but it really it
makes sense to do that
investment and so I'm very
supportive of this legislation
so thank you for bring it forth
thank you.
Thank you representative
Representative Dow.
Mr chair and thank you
Representative is for all of you
signed on to sponsor this bill I
think it is vitally important
I'm looking for developing yes
I also want to thank the
secretary for her for this and
recognizing the need I think I'm
at secretary from tourism as
well as workforce development
have really demonstrated their
desire to help with economic
recovery this one of my favorite
things icing Department
tourism's impacts because they
certified and I just want to
thank you for your work on that
and what percentage of folks are
participating in that today or
in our.
Help save jobs as well.
Mr chair members of the
committee Representative thank
you so much for acknowledging
that program New Mexico state
certified was developed in
response to the COVID nineteen
pandemic we wanted to make sure
that our businesses had the
tools and resources to educate
their managers within their
organization to operationalize
the public health order COVID
safe practices to both protect
employees and to protect
customers we launch that back in
may as a pilot program with
tourism and then we expanded it
for several other industry
sectors and we've had over eight
thousand organizations go
through the program we've had
over twenty thousand people get
trained specifically in those
COVID safe practices and
absolutely I feel like this
helps ensure consumer confidence
but when.
People are very nervous about
going into businesses and and
trying to live within the
pandemic of a COVID positive
world and so we're very proud of
that work and we're very
grateful for the partnerships
we've had to execute it thank
you.
Thank you for that.
I.
my district I was trying to get
on in support of the public.
It's that.
The founder.
Our hours to make sure that you
happen and so you know we have
to cancel all of our agents know
sponsorships or marketing this
is an international rates people
come from all over the world and
so I'm looking at destination
marketing sort of along the same
lines of what Representative
gave us was that how do you
envision destination marketing
we reach programs through the
here it's like to the US oversee
and
they also receive technical
assistance application.
Mr chair members of the
committee representative thank
you yes tour the let the he let
is a treasure for southern New
Mexico and they've done a
phenomenal job of growing that
event year over year and yes our
events revitalization program is
designed specifically for those
types of events that are
struggling because we know that
while there has been historic
local business sponsorships for
these events and communities
sponsorships we know that both
local communities and businesses
are not going to have the same
type of cash available to
sponsor events and so we want to
make sure that this is a
resource so we don't lose those
traditions within our community
and then also part of the
program is having a national
business a national sponsor
vision business development
technical assistance we're we're
bringing Sanchez from outside of
the state and bringing wealth
into our state so that's why
there's a multi pronged approach
to the event revitalisation
because we want to make sure
that it's not just a relief
effort but it's sustainable and
over the course of several years
and of course we will always
provide technical assistance for
people to apply for the
sponsorship program.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you Secretary for that
he'd Act I the tourism industry
in career programs so J. two
currently does cost years
unemployment are do you intend
to do the same with these
dollars as well.
Mr chair members of the
committee yes we are modeling it
after G. tip it's a fantastic
proven model that has worked for
manufacturing food processing
and other eligible industry
unfortunately tourism
hospitality is not one of those
eligible industries and
typically we don't need it
however the pandemic has made it
just critical that we have an
and a program at a structure
that's not only great for
training but also provides
assistance to businesses and
that reimbursable reimbursed
salaries because this minimizes
risk for business as we re open
the economy there's a lot of
question marks and a lot of
businesses aren't quite sure how
to move forward but this will be
a program that we can launch as
we open up our economy to
minimize that risk to provide to
up skill our employees and
and get re opened.
Thank thank you Mr chairman
thank you Secretary for that
when I saw that it's one of our
favorite restaurants in support.
Eight thousand dollars into
their their their produce to
open only to go back to
Representative.
That is a complete they have to
perishables so they're closed
again and so if you're helping
supplement wages that's awesome
and I think you are not with us
secretary programs with
workforce investment act is
costing jobs here that they do
you.
You've got to do everything we
can for this industry state
dollars federal dollars COVID
dollars I'm very concerned.
I do appreciate your leadership
on that what do you see the role
of state parks in.
Our state.
Members Mr chair members of the
committee Representative thank
you are we are state parks are
treasures their great
experiences for visitors and
there are wonderful
opportunities to increase
tourism when it's safe and so
we've had our state parks
primarily just for in state
purposes during the pandemic
because we've been trying to
slow down tourism because we are
trying to mitigate the spread of
COVID nineteen however as we
move forward and as the rollout
of the vaccine continues and we
start seeing more states go from
red to green we're going to
fully reopen our economy and our
state parks are great tourism
assets so we want to make sure
that we continue to support them
as well.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative for bringing the
bill and thank you Secretary for
your comments you know just in
closing I would just note you
know this is the commerce
committee we want to help you
guys in any way that we can for
the first time in twenty three
years there is a vacancy the
state park director and you know
what to say director to wait for
her leadership in state parks I
think it is a revolutionary time
for us to consider state parks
projects for us to look at the
capital needs the infrastructure
needs whether that's an.
Act.
This Walgreens stations whether
it
EPA approved fishing cleaning
stations are parts the detention
and hopefully you guys will take
this opportunity with the state
can see to look at someone who
not only has part experience but
house resort experience
hospitality leisure leisure
tourism experience this type of
opportunity doesn't come along
very often and I hope that
there's intentional
conversations importation
between the outdoor recreation
department your department
economic development we really
treat our state parks as the
enterprise at the should be that
they will finally get the
attention that they deserve
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Representative set up
of.
You Mr chairman thank you to the
sponsor of this bill Sanchez of
this bill I wanted to check and
so I know that from what I
understood when I was in the
bill that this will primarily be
focused on twenty twenty two and
twenty twenty three are there
elements of this bill that you
see as supporting industry
tourism as we return you know in
twenty twenty one I don't know
that in some how you feel that
in the long run that would help
that as well.
Mr chair members of the
committee representative thank
you for that question during you
know twenty twenty one is going
to be tough this calendar year
as we're not quite open yet
we're not it's not quite safe to
be completely open yet but there
are strategies that will
continue to be developed within
the tourism department now
whether that's for meetings and
conventions or with more the
business
business travel and how we're
going to roll out for leisure so
we're it we're not sitting on
our hands during this crisis we
have developed probably around
twenty new programs in the
course of ten months and that's
because we're being responsive
to this industry we haven't you
heard earlier from Russell from
STTC we have a partnership with
them making sure that we're
providing resources and access
to those relief funds and to
technical assistance and
coaching we have task forces
that are working right now with
industry we're developing COVID
safe practices for events we're
looking at what can we do now to
prepare for recovery we have a
full digital preparedness
recovery program what we're
working with forty seven
partners across the state to
really ramp up their own
marketing platforms that
includes their websites or
social media cut calendars like
we're developing like this whole
program so we can just hit the
back then but and and just go
once it's safe to do so and I'm
really proud of the work that
we've done with both private
sector and with public sector
it's been a tough year but I
look back and I'm just really
grateful for the collaboration
and partnership in just really
the innovation that's coming
from government it's it's really
special thank you Secretary
might add to that yes please
thank you Mr chair
representative the Secretary hit
the nail on the head but even
more so one of the things we can
start doing right now is looking
at training.
Programs.
As you look to see things open
up you know in twenty twenty two
this is an opportunity for us to
really start saying okay what
are those jobs going to be what
skills the people have the need
to have to get those jobs and
how do we get people in there
and we're rapidly reaching the
point where we're gonna start
asking people who are currently
looking for work right now Hey
look you know if you can't find
a job right now if things are
still a little unsafe now is the
perfect time to go back to
school or join a print training
program to get yourself those
skills that you're gonna need
moving for we've already started
thinking about how we want to do
that that is very vital part of
this bill as we think about
moving for next couple years so
those are things we're going to
start looking at here fairly
soon.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you for the response it's it's
wonderful to hear I really like
the forward looking aspect you
will have to this I am also
curious and I am sure that I
know this is in the intent of
the bill but I see it as being
parallel important as well the
skill sets in the training that
we're looking at are those
translatable into other fields
as well.
Mr chair members of the
committee representative thank
you for asking that question one
of the things I love about this
industry is that you learn of
those transferable skills I know
someone that was recruited as a
butcher by Jose Garcia who we
heard from earlier today with a
and G. global he recruited them
to be part of the Albuquerque
convention centers operational
staff he then went and became
the director of sales of a
prominent hotel in Albuquerque
and now he's actually doing
coding and working in a
marketing firm so you can see
that the career paths might not
be clear cut like a nurse or a
doctor about this industry
trains people with great
experience great soft skills and
those are all transferable
skills into several different
sectors.
Great thank you so much Mr
chairman thank you to the
witness that the sponsor the
bill I I really appreciate
hearing that I I believe it's
very forward thinking because
the economy that our graduates
are graduating into right now is
not linear you know Sheryl
Sandberg talks about that you
know it's not I do latter that
you're on or on a jungle gym and
you just kind of piece together
what that looks like you know
I'm part of the generation that
graduated with the two thousand
eight recession and there's no
new generations graduating and
it's a new recession and my
concern is that when you read
any reports on the long term
economic impact of those
graduates and earning potential
is significantly decreased
because when we are graduate so
I look forward to supporting
this bill especially for those
graduates who are graduates
uncertain times I really
appreciate this effort and thank
you so much for being poor
looking all your responses thank
you Mr chairman.
Thank you Representative
Baldonado.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative Dixon for
your bill
I think everybody likes it
It's a it's a tough time for
that industry right now and I
just might take a couple seconds
to to make a few comments but
specifically Representative Dow
hit heavy on state parks and in
access to those and you know if
anybody's listening out there
would love to see that that
state parks you know begin to me
they should of I'm in my opinion
I've been much more open
throughout this pandemic for
people to get out recreation and
can be allowed to while to get
out and social distance without
being you know piled up on top
of each other but that you did
and set of Representative in and
Mr chairman and I'm this is
comments of for the secretary
shore
you mentioned the the Farmington
rock crawl and I missed whether
or not that that event has has
kept going on and where was it
impeded by by comment
restrictions and things of that
nature Mr chairman and and
Representative Dixon.
Mr chair members of the
committee representative thank
you for that question
unfortunately that particular
event moved to Utah and part of
the reason why we have this bill
in front of this committee today
is because we deserve to bring
that event back and that's it's
not alone we have a lot of
business that have has left and
that we have an opportunity to
bring it back but we also have
our local events that are
produced locally that we also
want to make sure come back and
we're at risk of losing these
infants and they can't go two
years so we're working
diligently with the governor's
office and with the Economic
RecoveryCouncil to develop a
path forward of what that might
look like including COVID safe
practices for those events so
Mister chairman and and
Representative and secretary
that event left the state
because of the Covid
restrictions Representative.
Mr chair members of the
committee that event chose to go
to Utah because of the virus and
they there were some
opportunities that they were
able to do in in Utah.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Secretary for that for that at
the end that answer a few years
ago we lost the the Arabian
horse show that used to that
used to come to the New Mexico
state fair obviously that wasn't
due to comment that was due to a
of a nicer better bigger
facility in Oklahoma and and I
know that was a big
disappointment Mr chairman for
for the Albuquerque metro area
when that it came in I think it
was a week long and for the to
show up for that thing it Mr
chairman and and Representative
Secretary I did want to mention
I haven't had the opportunity to
to be in front of you very much
but I'm I'm an advocate for the
sportsman's community and for
the opportunities that it that
it presents in in the world of
of of of tourism I know that the
previous cabin secretary did
engage quite often with the the
hunters and outfitters and
guides associations and and
things of that nature to
encourage and bolster that Mr
chairman and and Representative
just you know I always say this
for the record a lot of those
folks that come out New Mexico
from out of state will spend ten
fifteen twenty thousand on each
trip and so there it's a it's a
big a big dollar kind of deal on
some of that parlays into what
game and fish in there some
bills that would would change
some of that structures to what
type of licenses are available
so I just hope that we as a
legislature continue move
forward to see our state
Have the funding for a quick
recovery in of the bill like
this is I'm not always an
advocate for for you know huge
appropriations like that but I
do believe that this one is
definitely probably headed the
right the right direction so
thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Dixon and I'm
done.
Thank you Representative.
Any other comments by the
committee.
What's the pleasure the
committee Representative
Baldonado this was chairman of
the to pass.
Thank you.
We have a motion for a do pass
by Representative Baldonado
second by Representative okay
goes.
Please up.
Normally would do any opposition
and gavel it down but we're on
zoom so we'll do a roll roll
call is a call rural.
Thank you chairman.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Dow.
Yes.
Representative lost thank you.
Representative will.
Yes.
Representative will yes I'm
sorry Representative yes thank
you.
Representative Johnson.
Yes.
Representative
yes thank you Representative.
Bill.
Yes yes sorry thank you.
Chair of the era.
Yes ma'am thank you and chairman
my Estes.
And I both yes so Representative
Dixon congratulations you have a
do pass on House Bill to sixty
seven thank you secretaries for
visiting with us this morning
and all the secretaries of just
been working.
Twenty four seven this past year
but but the three of you in
particular just doing up one
heck of a job of keeping us
afloat keeping workers.
ready to go back to work in
building our economy so thanks a
million.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee.
Thank you we will now go to
Representative Chandler for
house bill two hundred forty
eight so are you with us
Representative I am Mr chair
thank you for recognizing me I
will need superintendent Russell
told included into this
discussion.
He's been provided to panelists
Representative Chandler great
thank you very much may I
proceed Mr chair.
You have the floor thank you.
The New Mexico legislature has
also authorize the office of
superintendent of insurance to
collect fees from certain
insurers producers and other
persons or entities transacting
insurance or insurance related
business in the state.
These fees cover such functions
as application processing
examination license
continuations reinstatement
appointments statutory form
filings right regular patient
compact complete resolution
comment in assistance and others
in twenty twenty all state
agencies were asked to identify
enhanced revenue opportunities
by both DFA and the LESC.
The only revenue generator for
OS I is license and application
fees well within schedule
receive some minor adjustments
in previous years the last major
adjustment in fees occurred six
years ago and twenty fourteen in
the summer and fall of twenty
twenty OSI review the fees
charged for similar actions in
the surrounding states of Texas
Arizona Colorado and Utah.
Each state the schedule very
somewhat the increases that OSI
proposes are intended to achieve
some similarity between New
Mexico and the fees charged in
surrounding states into to more
accurately reflect OSI's costs
performing its statutory
responsibilities.
If a current New Mexico feet is
similar to a featured for the
same action and surrounding
states OSI has not proposed the
fee increase none of the
additional fee income would
remain with OSI money would be
transferred to the general fund
the fire fund and the Carrie
Tingley Fund.
I'm supporting this lesson
legislation because I think it
is important
but modest effort to generate
monies for the general fund
without creating distrust
disruption in the industry and
it is keeping us in line with
other state other surrounding
states and Mr chair committee
super the superintendent of
insurance Russell told here is
is available to provide further
detail thank you welcome Mr
superintendent.
Mr chairman it's good to see you
again.
I appreciate the Representative
Chandler's sponsorship of this
bill this is I know everybody
says about this really is a very
straightforward simple bill we
we are creating no benefit from
it.
as you know Mr chair of maybe
the rest of the committee
members as well we get no
general funds for our operation.
All of our operations are funded
through free and licensing and
that sort of thing and I'm
pleased to tell you that we've
been able to.
Expand our capability and do
more with less in our budget for
fiscal year twenty to is there
is it's actually the same as the
current year so these really are
monies that we do not need but
the general fund us and so we
met with both the legislative
finance committee.
And the DFA through the summer
into the fall to look at
The opportunities to raise some
additional moneys for the
general fund I do want to
emphasize something to
Representative Chandler.
said and that is we are very
careful in these recommendations
to make sure we are not out of
line with any of the surrounding
states.
in fact we.
Going out of our way to make
sure we stay competitive if not
below the fees that are charged
by by other states we're not
made a major adjustment in the
fees since twenty fourteen then
I would not constitute this
constitute this is a major
increase either most of these as
you see in the bill are very
incremental amounts.
there are across the board we've
deliberately held the fees for
individual producers and brokers
and such at a very low level.
I'll be happy to answer any
questions that you Mr chairman
or the committee members may
have.
Thank you Sir Representative
Chandler.
Thank you Mr chair with that are
presentations completed.
Arliss we have thirteen folks in
attendance
When we go ahead and let and
Representative Chatfield but any
any folks in the audience was to
address the committee in favor.
Of this bill going to raise your
hand anyone in opposition to go
out and raise your hand.
What you let in a secretary
Trujillo as well.
Mr JD Bullington welcomes will
we'll get you a.
We'll get you squared away here
in a sec.
Welcome Mr Billington's thank
you Mr chairman members of the
committee this is JD Bullington
speaking you today on behalf of
the independent insurance agents
of New Mexico we believe that
the speed increases while
appearing to be low in the
aggregate are too high and
should at least be reduced to
half of what is proposed
insurance producers and agents
are pointed to sell for multiple
carriers this is what makes them
independent competitive
invaluable for consumers who are
looking for the best insurance
rates the additional fees on
licensing renewals and
appointments collectively add up
for a producer who is appointed
with with many carriers.
This increase in the cost of
doing business applies not only
to the agent producers but also
to the insurance carriers who
often pay these fees themselves
so our organization is concerned
that insurance carriers may
start on appointing independent
agencies to help defray their
operating costs and that would
not only hurt the producers that
are pointed to market their
products but the consumers as
well therefore Mr chairman
members of the committee we just
ask that you please consider
reducing the size of these
proposing is fees thank you.
Thank you Sir Mr bill Benson
welcome.
I'm sorry I your hand was up a
moment ago.
Good in on mute yourself if you
wish to address the committee Mr
Bentsen.
So you're in the you're in the
committee room essentially got
an up on mute yourself.
Welcome.
Thank you very much.
We can hear you.
Okay.
I'm.
Is secretary put trim Lopez at
least in the meeting room.
No Sir but what a good address
the committee regarding house
bill two forty five excuse me I
think I I.
You're on a different bill.
No no no I'm not I was in the I
was in the queue for two fifty
six four hundred Representative
Chatfield yes anyone else was to
address the the committee and
two forty eight.
Welcome secretary Trujillo the
We just hang out with us behind
the virtual Dyess there's no on
other hands in the attendee list
there's for the record there's
twelve attendees.
Of members of the committee.
A couple questions up
Representative Jenner a
superintendent so the
Refresh your memory we the I I'm
hoping this committee does get
more insurance legislation and
that we learn the up the
economics of insurance so to
tell me if I'm if I have this
correct so we don't taxed state
in Mexico isn't tax insurance
companies like G. R. T. in terms
of revenue because the revenue
and that the the input and
output just to kind of be on the
margin so that the company keeps
coming along and and and and and
ballot claims get paid out how
up how are insurance companies
essentially.
Tax so to speak could you
explain that to us Mr
superintendent.
Money from insurance that is.
Thank you Mr chairman in every
state in the nation insurance
companies have paid fees that
are tied to.
Where individual filings their
rates their forms and we are.
Right in line with everybody
else in fact the number of the
individual fees that J. D. was
talking about.
They're paid every other year
not on an annual basis.
the premium taxes that apply to
health insurance I think you Mr
chairman are familiar with but
that's pretty much it in terms
of taxes.
The brokers and agents are not
taxed on their commissions.
So it really is through these
filings.
The the companies pay into the
states.
And as I said earlier.
we have done nothing here to put
us.
Aligned with the other states.
Thank you Representative
gendered superintendent so the
premium tax.
you know I love it the way state
government calls different taxes
by different means but so the
premium taxes essentially
attacked unique to your industry
in lieu of gross receipts or
whatnot and how much is the
premium tax how how's it
assessed on on particular
transactions Representative Mr
chairman Representative Chandler
members of the committee it
won't surprise you to learn
there's no simple answer on that
there's there is a based
The man Tax there's a surcharge
that's paid by health insurers.
some companies are subject to
the normal taxes of any business
in the state.
we don't tax the.
Actual business of writing
insurance.
I see I see well we'll talk more
offline superintendent
Representative Chandler in the
interim in terms of if somebody.
Okay by the hundred other policy
K. twelve dollars a year that
twelve hundred dollars you know
where does it go in terms of
payouts company profits and and
tax revenues but we got to get
it right you know we gotta get
it right so that we don't lose
insurance companies.
That that are out and consumers
get.
In a solid deal just like other
folks in bigger states so thank
you for that Representative
Baldonado.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative for your bill
today some real quick is
probably questions more for the
superintendent that anybody Mr
chairman
the that is this board show me
where this fever doesn't get
charged as a charge to the
insurance companies are charged
to the consumer and how does it
look kind of walk you through Mr
Chairman Representative
balled out is no charge to the
consumer now the space these
fees are paid one one of two
things happens.
An adjuster
The producer of any kind wants
to have a license to do business
in New Mexico they pay a license
fee.
If a company wants to do
business in New Mexico they have
to have what's called a
certificate of authority.
Again this is done in every
state so they pay to our office
FE for that certificate
authority and that's certificate
authorize them to do business
across the state for their
particular lines of business as
you might well imagine of the
larger companies have multiple
lines of business so they're
they're paying those fees every
time they decide to enter in a
new line of business but again
the thing is that we have
proposed
we sent them to all the
respective associations before
bill was put together and we
said if you see something here
that's out of line is going to
be problematic for you.
Please let us know we did make
some changes but I think the
version you have in front of you
is the one that the industry
expected to see in supports.
So Mr chairman and
Representative Chandler and Mr
superintendent.
What what does this money go
we're gonna do with this money
do you need it to run your
office is that this is it.
These these additional fees
would go to the general fund
we're not proposing to retain so
so we've Mr chairman and
Representative Chandler and the
superintendent we are we just
raising fees because Arizona
doesn't or some other state
doesn't want to be more money in
which is going to that I mean
this is a tax Mr Chairman ours
is a fee.
Mr chairman if I may these are
fees these are not taxes
and we prepared this proposal in
direct response to legislative
finance committee appropriation
and the department of finance
administration to try to
identify
ways to put some balanced
diverse the general fund and to
put some additional money in
that fund.
Mr Chairman representative
superintendent what is the
actual fee that that those folks
pay for now I guess he said it
was the the adjusters and
license folks yes today it's Mr
Chairman it's actually in the
bill.
we also have a chart I mean it's
a lengthy list of all the
different fees that are paid it
depends on what kind of business
you're doing or what kind of
business you want to do Mr
Chairman I'll stop you there
because maybe it sounds like
there's a lot of different these
is this a is this the the what
you're raising the fees at the
same like ten Bucks whatever it
is on every fee that you have or
have the no Sir.
No Sir
like on the the fees for.
brokerages you're the increases
from twenty dollars thirty
dollars.
for advisory organizations it's
a significant job but it's still
below what Texas and in other
states charge that Mr chairman
and and Representative
superintendent
So so basically this fees going
to harm the practitioner the
person is trying to do business
in the state of New Mexico this
is going to be more money out of
pocket every year when they
renew their licenses that
percent.
Is this true of all fees but you
know that small incremental
amount we're talking about is
not going to make much of a dent
in somebody's expenses or in
their income on the flip side.
These these are cost of doing
business every insurance company
in the.
In the country
roll Senator their premiums this
is the.
So Mr Chairman is done Mr
Chairman representative and and
superintendent you just said
they roll that into their
premiums is the premium not paid
by the consumer Mr Chairman.
It is but you know that.
It's not a one for one
relationship Mr chairman and
Representative as you know the
fact that they pay ten dollars
for additional for some license
the doesn't mean that there's a
ten dollar add on to every
premium the premium is I mean
that cost the spread against all
their shareholders so you're
talking pennies on the dollar if
that.
Mr Chairman representative and
Mr superintendent I'm a licensed
real estate broker and so my my
license comes under the purview
of the regulation regulation and
licensing division right that's
not the case with the insurance
is that correct you guys are
your own entity and license no
separately.
Yes Mr chairman and
Representative Baldonado there
was a constitutional amendment.
As some years ago setting this
up as a separate office and
there's two we are to generate
enough money in fees to cover
all of our expenses and that's
part of the reason that we.
Have no General funds
appropriated to us.
So Mr chairman and
Representative superintendent
you have no general fund
appropriation you so you've you
operate your entire operation of
these fees is that correct that
is correct Mr chairman and
Representative all the.
Mr Chairman representative and
and Mr superintendent how many
how many folks do insurance work
in the state of New Mexico
Missouri kind of a general
number of how many people are
licensed to do that work.
Mr Chairman Representative
Baldonado I don't have the exact
number but it's a very large
number is it ten thousand I
don't know much much more more
than that okay in the real
estate world is about ten
thousand some like that and so
it's it's much larger than that
by a factor of five six seven.
And and Mr chairman we also
license
You know people want to do
business in New Mexico but they
don't live here course so they
have an out of state license fee
that they have to pay.
Mr Chairman representative and
and Mr superintendent the.
The FIR says it this would
generate about three point eight
million dollars is that what you
understand Mr chairman or is
that just for that Fund and then
three points about seven point
nine million in total.
Mr Chairman representative and
Mr superintendents are looking
at three point eight for the
insurance operations funds that
stays with you is that correct
Mr chairman.
Mr Chairman representative
Baldonado it does not it that is
amount in excess of that which
we are appropriated by the
legislature that money will go
to the general fund.
So Mr chairman and
Representative superintendent
what what is the insurance
operations fund what is that can
you explain what that is to me
well we deposit all our fave not
all our fees most of our fees
into that fund.
And the General Assembly of the
Legislature other Mr Chairman
authorizes us to spend a certain
amount of money that number this
year and next year is about
forty seven million dollars.
Anything that comes in above
that rolls over to the general
fund.
So Mr chairman Representative
superintendent this this
increase or talk about
sentencing and go directly to
the general fund it's just
starting to be more in your
account that rolls over to the
general fund is that correct.
Mr chairman and Representative
Baldonado yes we're not
authorized to spend that money.
So.
Mr Chairman representative in
and superintendent I see there's
two other beneficiaries of fire
protection fund in the law
enforcement fund
If I'm not mistaken Mr chairman
and Representative
superintendent yours past recent
past we've swept those funds a
lot of times for properties we
we when our budgets week or or
coming in low
so so basically I guess I'm
trying to understand this fee
that you're where did this come
from Mr Chairman support and
Representative superintendent
whose ideas this to to just
raise fees is just a simple grab
more tax dollars for the general
fund.
They're not Mr Chairman
Representative Baldonado it's
these are not tax funds these
are adjusting fees that haven't
for all practical purposes been
adjusted for.
Six years going on seven years
and these monies were as I said
we'll go into the Legislature
all state agencies were asked to
identify ways that either.
They could generate additional
revenue and that's what you're
seeing in front.
Okay so Mr chairman and and
Representative superintendent to
make it sound like there's
Senator is built impact I think
the varmint Department reach out
to me to to do a fee increase
and I and that and take them up
on that offer.
Is it sounds like to me that
we're just part bunch across the
the the the board here just
trying to drum up more money and
we're doing it not like this
really going to the people
saying they were going to tax
you more we're gonna pass these
these fees that we adamantly
want to describe not as taxes
with their taxes in my book it's
it's it's something that you get
this if you if you pay for
something you get a service so
Nick million I pay that the
garbage that the the village
listens to pick up my trash
eight pay them a monthly fee to
pick up my trash I get a fee I
get something for it in this
case.
We don't know what we're getting
for this this doesn't this isn't
a fee that that the feeling in
need you know I know the the the
the game and fish they're going
to come to the table I don't
know if it's in the the session
or soon but they want to raise
fees for licensing will that's
cyclical for them but but they
provide that service you get to
what time you get to go and fish
you to do what they've given and
I just simply don't see through
any of the testimony today the
reason for this other than it
just raises more money and to me
that's a tax and so I it just
I'm trying to understand where
it is this is coming from maybe
I do now maybe based on your
comments superintendent and I
just I just wish we weren't
doing things like this Mr
chairman and and Representative
Chandler and superintendent
that's that's all the questions
I have thank you.
Thank you Representative
Powdrell Culbert.
Thank you
Mr Chairman representative.
I'm still not.
Real clear as.
What the fees as well.
And
Something you said earlier.
That.
An agent or company.
Has to pay a fee based on.
The product.
They set out for example I'm
receiving that is being.
I'm going from selling life
insurance.
I am selling life insurance and
now I want to add.
Health insurance so my question
is.
Is there different thing for
each one of those.
And what is the difference
between the fees.
Mr Chairman representative no if
you're licensed to sell
insurance in the state with some
very limited its options.
you can sell whatever shirts
you're like now it is true that
here like every other state.
You have to take continuing
education.
Course in your area of specialty
once you pass that there is no
additional license fee.
Okay so my life insurance.
Health insurance.
Property can.
Insurance all that I can sell
under once I complete that
course.
Yes ma'am okay I I the other
question that I have Mr chairman
and and Representative.
Is I briefly got a run through
the
These and revenue generation
and.
I was looking at nonprofit
health care plans.
And.
It looks like their fee is going
to go from a hundred dollars to
a thousand dollars am I
misreading that.
This is following applications
for preliminary permits in
issuance right now it's the card
please a hundred dollars your
proposed increases a thousand
dollars.
Yes ma'am.
What's the purpose was such a
big increase that's I think
that's a pretty hefty increase
that one is a very have to being
crease Mr chairman I wouldn't
deny that
The Texas charges twice as much
as two thousand dollars in the
state of Texas we have very few
nonprofit
help health care plans we have
lots of non profits but very few
who actually gets licensed is a
nonprofit health care plan when
they do such a filing with us it
is a very intensive review on
our part we have to assess their
financial solvency we have to
look at the training their
marketing materials their forms
their proposed rates.
It's very labor intensive
hundred dollars does not come
close to.
Covering our cost on.
What does that.
Almost a hundred percent
increase.
That merit that big of an
increase.
Mr Chairman Representative if
you're asking me
does our work ever jobs justify
that answer is yes
unequivocally.
Okay well Mr chairman and and
Representative
How often.
Does a nonprofit come for for
that I mean how many nonprofits
are we talking about because I
think that is a very large
increase.
right now we have a grand total
of one.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Representative.
Thank you up.
Couple of.
That's a thing on my questions
are answered before.
And representative of Figueroa
was trying to get back in
any other up.
The the questions Representative
of will go back to committee
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
I'm good thank you okay.
Mr Chairman referred to pass
for.
All righty so the committee has
a motion for a do pass by
Representative Gallegos motion
okay I'll second the motion for
a do pass there's this there's
a.
For the motion.
Mr
chairman from of the tables was
motion to be tabled tabling
motion to express and there's no
further
Just you further hands up what
not so good in a call the roll
on the tabling motion.
Mr Chairman.
The two table.
Yes to table.
Representative Dow to table.
Representative to table yes to
table.
Representative was to table
noted table.
Representative Johnson to table.
Representative Powdrell Culbert
to table yes to table.
Representative the table due to
table.
If you get over to table.
No table.
I just additional table.
No.
Chairman I'm back.
Representative Dow to table yes
to table so that thank you
don't.
What is the county.
I'm chairman masters I have.
What
to table down to table
Representative Fajardo to table
Representative well to table I
have Representative could you
guys know to table
Representative Johnson no to
table Representative set up to
table Representative figure on
the table and Representative
Maestas no to table so I have
two three four five not to table
one two three.
I'm.
Thank you for that I should've
kept track of a pencil handy the
motion to table
We'll go back to the original
motion a do pass motion by
Representative Gallegos second
of.
By myself I believe is that
correct yes right call the role
in the depressed motion thank
you chairman I'm two passed the
act Representative Baldonado.
No.
Chair thank you Representative
at
all no.
Hello no.
Representative enables yes.
Representative Johnson.
Yes.
Representative Culbert low.
Representative SAINATO yes.
Representative.
Vice chair Figueroa.
Yes.
And chairman by Estes.
Yes and so Representative.
Hello you have a to pass on
house bill two forty eight.
Was to Judiciary next so thank
you for being with us this
morning thank you chairman thank
you committee for superintendent
will now go to.
I had a moment ago
Representative Chatfield welcome
house bill two hundred fifty six
who do you need in the room with
you.
Representative Chatfield thank
you Mr chairman.
Mr Chairman could you please let
in my co sponsor representative
Lente.
Secretary secretary Catrina
hunter Lopez.
Right just to make it easier for
us to give me
of forgive me Representative L.
of miss Lopez of we got our
thank
my good friend and neighbor
Rebecca Baca.
Welcome welcome and
Do you do you have some other
expert witnesses to come for us
today.
Misbach anyone else we should
let in the and into the virtual
committee room.
Yes Mister chairman our bill
Bentsen.
Bill Clinton if you could raise
your hand so we provide your
name quicker.
For some reason I'm unable to
promote Mr Bentsen two panelist.
Okay.
We'll get him in here in a
second welcome Mr Bentsen.
so all righty we have a then a
whole team of panelists.
Thank you Representative great
to see you this morning and I'll
turn it over to you
Representative Chatfield.
Thank you Mr chairman I'm glad
to bring before you today house
bill two fifty six and I do have
a committee so.
Mr Chairman admitted.
Thank you Representative if you
could read the the the number on
the bottom of the left hand
corner of the document so we're
all clear on what we're looking
at thank you Mr chairman it is
two one nine.
Eight five six.
Point one.
Thank you two one nine eight
five six point one and I'm gonna
take a quick glance at my shared
file and.
And see if I can grab it.
And.
Let's see is everybody else
everybody else built a minute
to.
To grab it as well.
And this is two fifty six as
stated.
C..
Wonderful we have a committee
substitute.
And.
Bam it's here eight fifty six
point one so it's a nine pager
I'd like to make reference to
the committee substitute during
the presentation
members of the committee.
Thank I move.
To move consideration of the
committee substitute for that
two fifty six I'm sorry I forgot
the number thank you
representative about all second
that so
so we have a motion to move the
committee substitute for
discussion purposes so what are
you up explain the bill tell us.
How the substitute is different
and then you can kind of cherry
on meeting with regard to your
experts Representative Chatfield
thank you Mr chairman of the
bill directs the.
Agency on aging and long term
services to can be in a task
force to determine the
feasibility of launching elder
workforce development
opportunities and select rural
and tribal communities Mr
Chairman we have a problem out
in our really remote rural areas
and and that's a common to the
area where I live in in the
north eastern New Mexico and to
many tribal lands of the the
older folks there are do not
have access to medical services
in home services like they do in
a more populated area my I just
about a year ago lost my father
in law he lived there on the
ranch in the you know.
remote from us a different home
we took care of me and but we
were totally unable to access
many of the services that are
that are common in more
populated areas and for for that
reason we need to somehow help
these there are we're not the
only one there's lots of lots of
people that just cannot access
those services medically trained
people that know what to know
how to help some of these older
folks often times they just are
forced to move to Albuquerque
our larger metropolitan area and
they've lived their entire life
out in the the in the far
French Joe wilderness and and it
can be just a death sentence to
a to an older person they they
don't want to go there and do
that then and so what this would
do the research and then the
possibility that maybe some of
the younger folks that live
there and need a job could be
trained how to take care of the
elder folks in the community in
a medically our knowledgeable
way I mean we we certainly take
care of our own but sometime we
just don't have the medical
training to do that and some
folks just don't have family
nearby so with that I would like
to.
Ask a representative mentioned
my co sponsor VS substantive say
about the bill and then turn it
over to our expert witnesses.
Welcome Representative let this
Mr Chairman good morning
committee members good morning
thank you Representative
Chatfield for allowing me to
speak this morning you know
Representative Chatfield here on
on the health aspect of of why
this is so important but
undeniably our population in New
Mexico is getting older that's
just a fact of the matter
especially those as you
mentioned in rural New Mexico
and then those within native
American New Mexico as well and
so the history of the lack of
education of the lack of
training within those two
different demographics have not
proven that we now have an issue
with people not only just in
terms of health disparities but
then those that are now looking
as an elder to go back into the
workforce become gainfully
employed to enter the workforce
now as an elder and so what that
means is that you know some may
wish to want to continue to
remain mobile so they want to
get a job or they want to
continue to have their money can
do to work so they want to get a
job or what's happening now
especially in the state of
America New Mexico is that many
of our elders our grandparents
that are taking care of great
grandparents they're taking care
of now of their grandchildren or
great grandchildren so that
forces them back into the work
force to try to gate again find
some kind of a gated some type
of gainful employment for their
for for their own well being and
their own support for the
household and so what this
provides then is that it would
task the
Authorize the department of
aging a long term or services
that they provide a an analysis
if you will to look at it again
the health an independent aspect
of what Representative Chatfield
talked about regarding the
termination for the need of
services that support elderly
independence by providing
opportunities for healthy and
independent living within those
rural and tribal areas of our
state as well as workforce
opportunities to conduct conduct
an asset and mapping gap
analysis to determine
availability of and access to
elder workforce opportunities
and so while this initially had
appropriations to a hundred
thousand I think we will show
now in the committee substitute
and I'm glad the secretary
should also attest to this is
that they have gracefully and
thankfully they have opted to
absorb that cost for the hundred
thousand dollars which I think
at this point now relieves us of
having this to be an
appropriations bill so now they
will take the charge in
providing this hundred thousand
dollar study for these purposes
that Representative Chatfield
and I mentioned previously so
that Mr Chairman thank you for
the opportunity to opportunity
to appear in front of your
committee absolutely
representative welcome great to
see this morning when you go to
share this portion of the
meeting research abilities your
panel of experts and I hope they
wish to address completely we
have some members that I have to
go to Education Committee so we
definitely want to take action
on this before they leave thank
you Mr chairman I would love for
this market is weak if she had
something to say followed by the
secretary.
Good morning chairman my Estes
and members of the committee
thank you for the opportunity to
be here we have secretary Cochin
Lopez and our what are other
expertise bill Bentsen
associated with
this provision of expert
testimony on this bill I am the
current director of the office
of Indian elder affairs at age
in a long term services and I'm
deeply honored to speak with you
on behalf of our rural and
tribal elders in New Mexico.
And I'm especially honored to
work in support of those who are
dedicated to serving our elders
in New Mexico in my work I've
had the opportunity to view
first hand what tribal
communities are challenged with
when they grapple with a lack of
training education and economic
basis and opportunities on a
daily what on a daily basis I
witnessed the efforts of those
who serve our elders through
sheer correct and determination
and I witnessed the efforts of
those who give their best to
those they serve without
adequate training and without
sufficient educational support
but I would like to ask you to
imagine what the service
providers can do with relevant
educational support on the job
training through apprenticeship
programs certification and
degree programs and other
educational opportunities.
New Mexico is a predominately
rural and frontier state and
many of our tribal and rural
communities are located in these
areas service providers who
remain in these areas lack
opportunity to access
educational opportunities
without having to drive for
hours to get there.
The need for enhanced economic
opportunities in rural and
tribal communities as well
documented as unemployment rates
in many of these communities are
consistently higher than the
national average.
Tribal in rural communities who
lack the infrastructure
necessary to offer comprehensive
pathways into wealth for
workforce are limited due
district limited strategic
planning current unemployment
employment opportunities in
silos funding.
Limited training education and
economic opportunity
significantly affects their
ability to provide the comp
right service that is needed.
New Mexico is current is
projected to be the third
highest percentage to have the
heart third highest percentage
of the nation's population age
sixty and over.
This is going to lead to the
increased demand for elder care
and of more robust elder care
work force.
This thanking demographic offers
many opportunities.
In presenting house bill two
fifty six we've had the honor of
working with true visionaries
who knows the challenges in our
rural and tribal communities
true visionaries who see the
potential of our service
providers and those who advocate
for ways to empower those that
can serve our elders we
recognize and honor the
government to government
relationship with our twenty
three sovereign nations and we
want to assist them to address
the unique challenges that they
face while trying to address the
needs of their growing
populations.
We know that there's an existing
disparity between rural and
tribal areas and urban areas of
the state.
House bill two fifty six will
help identify the existing
assets or the lack of in the
gaps in services in these
communities in addition to the
preliminary and final reports
that are required by house bill
two fifty six.
those reports will advise and
direct options for how we can
address to existing disparities
in a culturally appropriate
manner that honors the needs of
our vulnerable elders and tribal
communities the resulting
analysis will inform the
creation of rural and tribal
tribal elder workforce
development pilot programs in
those communities and further
it's our vision that these
piloted communities will have
the capacity for replication in
other rural and tribal
communities throughout the
state.
Once again Mr chairman and
members of the committee we we
ask and respectfully ask that
you envision what are tribal and
rural communities could do if
they had relevant opportunities
for educational support on the
job learning through
apprenticeship programs and
certification and degree
programs that increase their
capacity and knowledge we
respectfully request your
support of house bill two fifty
six to develop an elder care
workforce development task
workforce to advise and direct
our much needed work to empower
our tribal in rural communities
as they seek to support and
assist elders to age with
dignity and respect in their own
communities thank you for the
opportunity to address you I
will pass this on to our
secretary hope from Lopez and
ultimately to bill Benson who is
our expert out of Washington DC
and I will stand for questions
when appropriate thank you.
Madam secretary welcomes hi
thank you Mr chair members of
the committee so I am going to
keep this brief cause I know
that other people have to go to
different different meetings but
quickly this bill is really
important to us you know we we
hear about COVID impacting so
many things and certainly COVID
has impacted the work force in
and long term care.
Prior to comment we've had a at
at the national shortage of
caregivers specially with elders
and in our nursing facilities
alone you have over three
hundred percent turnover rate we
really have no mechanism right
now especially in these rural
communities to develop career
paths that would allow care
giving to happen and people to
remain with dignity and respect
in their homes Representative
Chatfield last year approached
us wanting to have more services
in these outlying and rural
communities and as we started
developing those concepts were
how we implement those things
the work force wasn't there to
really develop the economic
sustainability in those
communities this will allow us
to start to do that one of the
reasons and the major reason why
we took out the the
appropriation in this bill is
because we believe that this
falls right under the key piece
of bait responded that this body
help passed last year and so we
do have a little bit of seed
money and we need to understand
and we need to develop a
workforce and get people
interested in this in this line
of work so that we can also
apply for different types of
requests and develop
sustainability within the state
so thank you Mr chairman this
body for letting me present
today and I'll pass this on to
bill and I know that we have to
be pre so thank you thank you
welcome Mister Benson thank you
very much Mr chairman and madam
chair woman as well as other
members of the committee I will
be very brief I think that
Representative Chatfield and
Lente as well as
miss Baca and that secretary
hope from Lopez of really
covered all the key points I
might just add a couple of
things that might be helpful
Senator I Senator have referred
to the fact that New Mexico has
a and increasingly older
population one of the most
significant in the country at
present twenty six percent of
the.
Rural population of New Mexico
is age sixty five and older by
comparison just sixteen point
one percent New Mexico's
population is over the age of
sixty five by further comparison
across the country it's fifteen
point eight percent so you're
already a much older state
generally and definitely in your
rural communities as well as
your tribal communities I'm
getting down to the northeast
New Mexico in quay county twenty
five point two percent of the
population is over the age of
sixty five and Harding County is
thirty four point one percent of
the population those are
significant those are
significant numbers and they
will only grow and so in order
for those folks to remain
independent safe have decent
quality of life there's a need
for a better service network and
infrastructure for them and this
asset mapping a gap analysis
will hopefully identified both
the gaps that are there the
strengths that are there today
and what might then be done to
improve that
the jobs are critical the
ability to have a workforce
that's prepared to meet the
service needs of that growing
older adult population is one
that is is everywhere across
this country and certainly it's
true especially in rural and
tribal communities the New
Mexico department of health
twenty eighteen health indicator
report that notes that without
increases to the health long
term care and support services
for older adult populations in
New Mexico this aging
demographic shift may endanger
the health of the state's older
adults and especially those
living in rural communities on
the department of workforce
solutions projections for the
twenty twenty eight industry
share of employment projects
that the health care and social
assistance industry will grow by
seventeen point one percent in
the coming years the economic
research and analysis bureau has
identified home health and
personal care jobs as the top
occupation in the state home
health of personally jobs are
projected to grow by thirty five
point eight per.
And during this time in New
Mexico so what this bill does
just to reiterate is to provide
a snapshot based on the selected
rural and tribal communities as
to what is assets currently
exist what are the gaps in the
services and one of the
employment needs that are going
to be essential to meeting his
needs of the older adult
population and not only the
employment needs but the
education and training
opportunities prepare this
workforce I'm I just might as an
aside before I close I was
recently out in Oberlin Ohio a
rural rural community in Ohio of
college town and did focus
groups with a group of young
people and it turns out that
according to them the most
coveted job in that rural
community is working in the
senior care facility because
it's a reliable job people get
work in the dining facility they
get training in culinary arts he
creates an opportunity for them
to move on to better jobs
elsewhere the traffic job
opportunity high school kids
according to high school kids in
our focus groups and that rural
community just one example and
I'll quit their I appreciate the
opportunity to join you today
thank you so much.
Thank you very much appreciate
you.
Coming out in the middle of your
afternoon real of our morning
welcome and that Representative
Chatfield thank you Mr chairman
I stand for questions all right
fantastic we'll go briefly to
the audience there seven
attendees in the audience.
It.
Oh man I gave us.
Thank you to the audience we
have seven attendees please
raise your hand to address the
committee secretary through
he'll.
We'll go ahead and up let you in
and then on mute yourself.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Lynn Trujillo and I and the
secretary of the Indian Affairs
Department thank you
Representative Chatfield Lente
for bringing this legislation
the Indian Affairs Department
stands in full support of house
bill two fifty six this bill
will help us to understand the
existing services and identify
the gaps and Services to our
elders which in turn will help
us better understand how to
further develop support systems
to care for elders warn powering
our community members the
passage of this bill one
handsome quality of life for
tribal and rural elders and
Justice our elders have cared
for us we must care for them I
urge this committee to support
this bill thank you so much
chairman and members of the
committee for your time thank
you and resolve it as if you can
keep the secretary in here with
us in the in the committee room
welcome madam secretary I
realize it was you I miss Ellen.
Hi the southern pines welcomes
thank you Mr chairman implies
registered lobbyists for the New
Mexico caregivers coalition and
we want to express our support
of Representative Chatfield
Representative Lente spill which
recognizes an extremely
important issue and I'd like to
note that in addition to seniors
this also applies to people with
disabilities of all ages who
need services in the home in
order to maintain as independent
a life in their own home and
community as possible so we urge
your support of this bill and we
would also request that perhaps
a representative from the care
giving community be included in
the group as well I'm not seeing
that the proposed substitute but
in the original bill there was
no such representation and we
think that that the care givers
coalition could bring an
important perspective to the
group thank you Mr chair.
Thank you very much and we're
not prepared to make that motion
at this time but I'm sure the
Representative will consider
that in the subsequent
committees anyone else wish to
address the committee.
Rep I attendees that most folks
are here in the room with us so
welcome everyone I will go to a
members of the committee
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Thank you Mr chairman high
representative Lente how are you
doing.
I just like to say that I I I
think this is a great piece of
legislation and and quickly I
lost my dad in July and he had
lived in a nursing facility for
seventeen and a half years and I
think part of the the
Thanks for lack of a better word
they kept going so many years.
They asked me what is that he
likes to do.
And he was a gardener the staff
is thank you in the garden if it
was grant you wanted it was
grant you we see.
And
I think he's a gardener.
And for twelve of those
seventeen years.
He.
That was the most beautiful
roses.
In the area in fact people would
talk about it so folks would go
and visit the elderly just to
see the variety of roses that he
was able to grow and so I you
know I think sometimes we we
under estimate what our elders
have to contribute to our to
live in general I know that
we're right now everybody's into
the health care but I just like
to say that the
there's much more it brings
quite great quality to the
community and to the life of
that individual other than
I'll just the health care
industry you know they had older
folks there that was teaching
each other.
On how to knit and and paintings
and pottery they had a full
program so I think this is
This is a great idea
Representative Chatfield and I
moved to do pass and I can do
that what.
We'll keep that in mind
Representative
that out though.
Thank you Mr chairman I I'm
sorry I missed it and I don't
understand but I just a question
not really understanding what
the the substitute doesn't step
in the bill I was taking a peek
at it and they missed it.
Mr Chairman.
The substitute drops the funding
from roughly appropriation and
it adds a couple of names on to
the task force.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
to the sponsor the bill my
apologies for being so dense the
moment one other thing I to
question about was that to
representative let this point
about a number of our seniors
you do our primary or secondary
caretakers of I are minors image
that our state and I didn't see
in the bill worry I know you're
doing a lot of research into the
different pieces of of you know
elder care engaging elders in
the work force is there an
element in there that will also
take a look at the additional
needs or or the or those those
particulars for seniors are
primary secondary caretakers.
Mr chairman I would like to
defer that to my expert witness.
Yeah.
please Misbach yes I Mr chairman
Members of the committee yes we
we do have and and
Representative just about that
we do have intent to look into
those because we certainly have
a sizeable number of our elders
that are caring for their
grandchildren and we recognize
that there is that many gaps
often times associated with that
in in our programs we actually
really have a focus related to
supporting elders that are
raising grandchildren and we
offer support services and that
so it's absolutely necessary we
agreed that that population be
significantly our address for
the true the true cultural
issues that they're dealing with
in the inter generational types
of programs that that they're
facing intergenerational
programs truly make a difference
when the entire community at any
age is involved in the process
and that really strictly very
important to rural and tribal
communities.
Thank you Mr chairman the
responsibility for that I
appreciate that and I'm very I'm
excited to see you know what you
come back with I know you guys
are doing a lot of wonderful
leadership and that and in all
these rounds but really I'm just
really curious that that the new
generation of kids out there are
facing a smattering of things
that are new to all of us and
and so I I think will be very
interesting to see
recommendations thank you so
much for that.
Thank you representative of
federal.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
representatives and thank you
expert witnesses.
Comments probably apply most to
the work force professionals in
the reserves are going to be
doing and I was really a
gratified to hear Mr Bentsen
speaker about that are high
school age population and.
I'd like you to speak a little
bit about the task force looking
at dual credit opportunities and
certification opportunities that
high school students can pursue
those connections with their
community colleges
and then are going to be looking
at in general licensure and
certification procedures on that
section of statute and coming
back with recommendations of
things we might need to address
as a legislature so couple
questions there thank you Mr
chair.
Mr chairman I'd like for my
expert witness to once again.
Thank you I'm I'm I'm I'm gonna
pass of course question of the
soft you Mr Bentsen but I
believe that you are asking very
important in relative questions
Representative thank you for the
question
yes absolutely dual credit
programs are significantly
important but there's also a
segment of the population that
stays within their tribal for
rural communities they never
really go off and leave the
community and may or may not
have access to educational
opportunities so not only do we
want to support dual credit
programs for high school
students but we also want to
support anyone at any age that
chooses to to go down the road
to support elders and community
and provide opera educational
opportunities to them as well so
we don't want to restrict it to
any one segment of the
population but we want to ensure
that accessibility is is
relative to all and and able to
all and I'd like to turn this to
our bill Benson to follow up on
the quote on the answer to the
question thank you thank you
Rebecca and thank you Mr chair
and a madam chair woman yes
there's very specific language
in the detail of the bill itself
that speaks to the areas of
study under the elder care
workforce portion of it one of
them for example relates
specifically to the availability
of and need for educational
training or certificates to
equip current and future
employees with the skills
necessary to enter or remain in
the workforce and and I'd also
mention that the community
college system is absolutely
indispensable to the work that
we envision doing here the task
force itself will include
representation from the
community college community
across the state of New Mexico
envisioning that they will play
a vital role in preparing young
people and particularly
including high school age
students and beyond for the
various workforce opportunities
with the elder care and that can
be.
Eddie so I think there's there's
actually very specific language
out to the point that you've
raised Madam chairwoman.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
both miss Clark and Mr Bentsen
yeah page seven has some really
great language on investigating
that educational need and
particularly Misbach I
appreciate the fact that you're
looking at all ages because
anyone can go into this field at
any point in their lives.
And that the task force is is
asked to identify barriers to
establishing those opportunities
I think it's going to be really
helpful across the state Mr
chair my last question would be
about how you envision
leveraging what the task force
finds out in the specific
communities.
To be used more widely across
the state.
Mr Chairman once again my ex for
with so so Mr Chairman
Representative Figueroa I think
that
that's that's the plan is to to
start applying this across the
state we have the opportunity to
do it in rural communities which
we think is tougher and so
laying down that that that that
are blazing that trail is going
to help us to implement that and
then on rural areas and I think
develop some career paths I
think it's really important for
us to know and to understand
that we've got to bring value
back to care taking expressly
with our elder population and
looking at certifications and
looking at ways to incentivize
or create career paths expressly
in these rural areas is so
important for us to develop a
continuum of care both in and
out of institutional settings
for our elders and our adults
with disabilities and so
bringing that to the forefront
creating opportunities and
creating a career
I think it's really important
for us to establish how
important it is to care for the
elders you know took care of us
first personal one.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
representative I think that's
the exact reason why I am so
delighted that this bill came
before commerce and economic
development because.
Course this is about caretaking
our elders and our folks with
disabilities.
But it has such a tremendous
economic impact as we build
these pathways to this kind of
career in this kind of work so I
so appreciate the bill and I am
excited to support it and
when I talk about replicating it
around the state I am
particularly talking about the
rural communities because I
agree with you the need there is
so tremendous so thank you very
much Mr chair and thank you
representatives for bringing the
bill.
Thank you representative
Johnson.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
sponsors of this bill I just
want to say that I hope that the
elder care I want to do this
task force in this work ties in
with what our elders led to do
and that's farming in their
culture and their language and
being bought ness and their
ceremonies and tying it in with
the artists and industry and
tourism arm of this because that
is what they love to do and they
just don't want to be home being
taken care of they want to
continue to make contributions
and they want to stay strong
they have animals farms and
things of that nature so thank
you so much for bringing this
bill forward thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you to Representative
Powdrell Culbert.
Thank you Mr chairman of the as
I was listening to what everyone
else saying you know we keep
talking about our community
colleges you know playing a role
but but also Representative
inject you might look at it when
you all all
Jump through whatever hoops you
have to jump through at the end
of the day consider.
The ship programs.
Because you know there's so much
not everybody wants to go to a
college campus.
You know and and apprenticeship
programs can be very easily
taught in a short amount of
time.
And so you know we had a long
discussion on the floor
yesterday about our relationship
and I think they're very very
valuable short term.
Skill developing certification.
Programs that can improve and
help with
some of what I'm thinking will
come out of this this surveys
and everything once they're done
so thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you your.
Yes Representative please thank
you Mr chairman thank you
representative you are are I
appreciate that suggestion so
much you know the the problems
easy to see even the cowboy let
me see the problem there but I
appreciate these folks
dedicating their expertise in
their resources to consider
things like apprenticeships and
and community colleges and
training programs and and how
are we going to fix that problem
so that's what this bill is
about.
Thank you Sir Representative
Johnson as at thank you Mr chair
I move it to pass.
All righty so we have a motion
for a do not pass on house bill
two hundred fifty six but I do
pass.
And commerce and economic
development substitute for house
bill two fifty six more seconds
a second by Representative
Powdrell Culbert before we call
the role as I think you have
such a field thank all the
honored expert to join us here
this Saturday morning on a
critically welcome secretary
hotel Lopez for your tremendous
work in in various various
fields in helping so many people
statewide thank you for doing
what you do quick mention I
noticed that the committee
substitute took away the
appropriations paragraph this is
just a per diem so I see no need
for this to go to appropriations
I mention it to the.
Appropriations chairman the
speaker but does anyone have any
objections if I up push to
remove the appropriations.
The committee assignment from
this piece of legislation all
righty wonderful we we have a
motion and a second for the
committee substitute generally
call the roll.
Chairman Representative
Baldonado yes.
Representative Dow.
You may have gone to education.
Well.
Same Representative.
Yes.
Representative Johnson.
Yes.
Representative.
Alright yes.
Representative bill yes.
Madam chair if you get on.
Yes.
And chairman my Estes yes you
have a due process motion
Representative Chatfield I I
what persuaded me was when you
said remote rural.
Because this entire state is
rural the whole state is rural
but there are some remote rules
I mean when you're going into
town and the town is eight
thousand people that's a that's
a rural stuff with that that's
the beauty of New Mexico so
thank you Representative we'll
see you on the house floor soon.
Thank you all up expert
witnesses we will bring this up
Mr Chris Erickson if you could
bring in Mr Chris Erickson up.
A professor of a economic from
the New Mexico State University
and I'll turn it over to by your
Figueroa to conduct the rest of
the meeting.
Thank you Mr chair let's give
everybody a minute to pull their
documents up.
Would you like to take us
through.
Well as all.
Thank you madam chair honorable
members this is a house joint
memorial two.
And it's regarding the work that
I believe must be done in the
interim.
as you recall some of the some
of the you'll timers back into
two thousand thirteen the Madam
speaker of the house can
Martinez.
In the depths of the you know
the abyss of the Great Recession
created the jobs council and
when statewide and we had this
great economic conversations
but it didn't really turn into a
a gave us a much greater
understanding of New Mexicos
economy the need to diversify or
has I say build our economy
and but it didn't pan out in
terms of policy or programs or a
to gentry that I think we need
to take we we need to take
takes serious leaps into the
future of with regards to
economic policy and it's hard
it's hard citizen legislate tors
you know the AGS so many
responsibilities the governor
when the governor takes power
every eight years or four years
they have tremendous.
Responsibility is just dealing
with the you know the the day
today of state government that I
think we need a economic policy
council and so this proposes to
create a fifteen member economic
policy counsel with with mostly
non legislative members and so
the membership of would be
let's see I'm.
One representative from this
committee one representative
from the Senate tax business and
transportation committee
I members of economic
development organizations for
members of the public of that
you know the entrepreneurs or
business leaders but more
importantly for public members
with the economic academic
research backgrounds of end up.
Building relations with the U.
N. M. Economic department Mexico
state Economic department that
only two universities that have
like.
Academic economic departments
eastern eastern western
highlands have a business
departments that deal with some
of these things but but I think
the the the the the to see two
three to think like an economist
to to have that academic
background is key in unraveling
some of our old statutes and
dealing with modernization of.
Are you know whether is be
broadband or or developing you
know
But the call when you are
economic development from
agricultural products are are
New Hampshire Destry maybe into
cannabis industry I think the
most telling aspect was dealing
with our liquor statutes of the
day it's just so archaic and
it's just the the the last of
its kind in its in its current
form and this hinders economic
development across the board so
anyway with that I'll turn over
to economics professor Ericsson
we thank you Sir for joining us
this morning.
from the great the the great
that the bay area of Las Cruces
New Mexico.
Yes.
Thank you thank you madam chair
and thank you Representative bye
asus I've come to speak in favor
extension of the the economic
policy commission New Mexico
faces a great many challenges
coming out of the pandemic as we
know the employment rate is very
high right now there's going to
be structural changes the
economy we also have to face the
fact that regulation on the on
on oil and gas leasing is
changing like the change
dramatically going forward we're
all aware of section to await of
the president's recent
executive action which holds a
new leases on federal land that
potentially could affect the
something like fifty percent of
the oil and gas production in
the state and finding an
alternative to oil and gas
disbursed not not to replace all
of gas but to diversify the
economy and reduce the Penn
state legislature on our sorry
the government on the on the oil
and gas revenues I think is one
this very important issue that
is very difficult to tackle and
having a commission that is
looking at it at a from a
bipartisan no on a technical
point of view I think would be
very helpful for the legislature
I know the very health the
legislature there are other
issues I as you come out of the
pandemic is going to be most
most people think they're going
to be a dramatic changes in the
retail sector the move towards
online how should New Mexico
well legislation Mexico need to
deal with that with those issues
there are a you know health care
is changing because the pandemic
I'd so personally done tell tale
of doctoring at that calling in
for a doctor's appointment for
the first time hi and this is
also directed change health care
going forward.
We can think of a number of
other areas where there is a
need for modernization response
both to to the pandemic and also
just generally we need a
response to make New Mexico more
competitive
and so that's why I am in favor
of establishing a Commission and
I hope that the legislature of
and this committee will look
favorably upon thank you very
much for have the chance to make
some comments.
Thank you professor and
president you and your your
commitment to participate in
this council you know maybe this
initiative happened so we're
really appreciative of your
leadership they are the con
Department study international
economics national economics but
they're very familiar with state
economics and to build the
relationship between this
committee in particular and and
the econ departments of state
and UNM is is a this is gonna be
a great great building project
what I meant to say madam chair
was value added agriculture
Representative Dow is a leader
in that with her
With their of meat processing
bill and another aspect so
grateful to her thank you madam
chair with that will stand for
questions.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Mr accent for your comments
we're gonna go to public comment
we have a couple people in the
attendees section if you are
here to speak in support.
Please raise your hand and we
will move you in as a panelist
you are here to speak in
support.
All right if you're here to
speak in opposition.
Mr as the now so we will move
in.
And madam chair I was late on
clicking I'm actually in support
of the legislation well that
makes more sense I was a little
bit surprised I have to say
Jason all right let's say we
speak and support thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative my **** this
Jason Espinoza registered
lobbyists with New Mexico idea.
A wide association economic
development organizations and we
think the sponsor for bringing
this forward are you know really
looking and and create a path to
to look at economic development
is important in bringing the
council together so we do stand
instructs support and we're
happy to as this bill moves
forward to work with the
sponsored identifying
organizations and stakeholders
that can participate in the
council as well thank you.
Great thank you Mr Espinoza will
now go to the committee.
Representative colder.
thank you madam chair number
would do pass.
In.
Very efficient we'll move right
do passed from Representative
Powdrell Culbert and a second to
from Representative Dow.
And then we'll Hans for
Committee I'm just going to say
I think it's time that this
topic guided to tension during
interim and is going to be
especially crucial in the next
couple of years so this is an
exciting endeavor madam
secretary would you call the
roll.
Yes madam chair.
Representative Dow.
To say yes.
I need direction will.
We'll go back to her just just
keep going we'll give another
drop okay.
I'm Representative will.
Yes.
Representative Johnson.
Yes.
Representative Colbert yes.
Representative SAINATO yes.
Representative though.
Yes.
Representative Dow.
Yes please thank you.
Hello.
Absolutely yes.
Estes.
The number yes and and forgiving
did was Representative Powdrell
Culbert name called.
Yes thank you I'm just.
I have one two three four five
six seven eight yeses and two
excuses chairman.
Thank you madam secretary Mr
chair you have to pass.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr Harris and for
being here Mr chair the
announcements that's our last
item yes thank you madam chair
thank you Dinaric sent the so.
I don't I I think we're going on
the floor on Tuesday we we make
on the floor next Friday health
we'll find out in the next forty
