Members of the House roll call
is open.
Spurs I speaker.
Testing.
Crab apples.
At.
Can hear just fine
Representative.
Members will call is closed we
have a quorum.
Please rise for today's vacation
offered to us by the gentleman
from Chavis city into terror
leader Townsend.
If you would balance me.
I do have my father we thank you
for this day.
I ask blessings on all of those
in attendance and whether
they're here in person or
virtually from them and their
families.
I just lord that you protect our
service people.
Abroad.
In on station within our
boundaries.
I asked the lord to choose.
Just us with the ability to.
Comprehend.
Listen.
To react.
In a civil manner always.
With the decorum of the house
that money.
Because.
All of those rules lord.
They allow us to act in a way
that.
Needs.
Middle ground.
And we're our constituents are
all blessed.
The proper ways board I just
asked you.
Watch over us and keep us let's
in Christ's name I pray amen.
The gentleman Representative
Crowder would you please leave
this in the pledge of
allegiance.
And then we just able to would
you please it is in saluting New
Mexico's flag.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Miss.
Mr speaker members of the house
good afternoon.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
Interjections ordered his
request for folks through their
jackets that's perfectly fine.
Members are there any instance.
I do think that us on the floor
has their laptop turned into the
zoom.
I was that I had centers of the
in we're getting a little.
Reserve lane is on it.
Is it is Representative
Strickler is set up.
Thanks John.
Are there any nonsense.
We we brought in some lunch for
the staff today.
I think that they have all had a
chance to eat in there maybe a
few.
May be a few.
Extra green Chile cheeseburgers
from the Sheik foundation in the
house sergeant at arms office as
members want to grab one but we
want to make sure that the staff
the first.
There are six left.
So we'll see who is the most
fleet footed and green Chile
cheeseburger motivated member of
the house of representatives six
left that I thought was
important to have the folks that
support our work get a chance
the first so there was the
leftovers that if there's no
further notices will go to third
reading.
Do we not hear a
These are to play ball because
there aren't enough that members
of the Florida important even
one team.
We can we can do to get came at
that just see Mr speaker.
The gentle lady from.
Catches the core influencia
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you Mr speaker just so you
know on my end of the assume I
did not hear either one of the
pledges and so I'm not sure if
it's because someone didn't what
didn't have a headset or
whatever but I'm not hearing
well just FYI thank you Mr
speaker thank you generally we
did to them we had to pledge
allegiance Representative
Crowder and we had the salute
from Representative Stapleton
I'm not sure what happened that
less please look into that and
thank you for letting us know.
We will go to the third reading
gentlelady from Bernalillo Mr
speaker I move that we go to the
next order of business third
reading of legislation.
You're no objections were.
Get your yes.
We're gonna start with item
fifteen gentlelady from Valencia
Representative Fajardo are you
ready on that I don't.
Yes can you get me to that
point.
Is is Ivey Soto actually with
you or is that like a is that
this computer affect.
Some of those okay it is in
background.
Research internet to a cat.
Thank you Mr speaker I can
barely figure this part out.
It's not laughing funny okay let
the record reflect all action
necessary for placing House Bill
one to nine as amended on final
passage has been taken the
gentle lady to explain the bill.
Thank you Mr speaker this is
house bill one twenty nine and
that basically it's once and
make it my nose I apologize this
isn't this bill to resolve some
language in a resolution by the
nationals that copies the state
legislators our own Ivy Soto who
is the president as a member as
well as well this bill for the
body does three things.
Fires pharmacy benefit managers
to report how much they receive
advocate requires percent of
rebates to be passed through to
patients to help them at the
pharmacy counter and ensure that
any payment payments a patient
makes or that is made on their
behalf by an employer
Okay.
Where payments as a foundation
and manufacture co pay counts
for their out of pocket maximum
and Mr speaker in the body I do
have ace and amendments to this
this legislation it's very minor
just some of language fix fixes
and Mr speaker let me know if
you want to take care of that
amendment now or later you're
ready to please tell us the two
oh two number for the amendment
thank you Mr speaker two two
zero one three eight point two.
Thank you John we haven't hasn't
passed out it is on the website
gentlelady has moved the
amendment and other gentle lady
and you suffer any further
explanation if necessary thank
you Mr speaker like I said this
is just some cleanup language we
found some of the medical errors
in the original bill and so it
doesn't change the bill at all
just just makes it clear and.
Okay Is there debate on the
amendment.
Is there objection to it.
Gently you representative Cadena
have you raise your hand to
debate the matter.
No Mr speaker I'm on the bill.
Okay hearing objections the
Amendment house floor amendment
number one to house bill one
twenty nine as amended has
adopted gentle lady from
Valencia you still have the
floor thank you Mr speaker we
stand for questions.
Hey there is debate the gentle
lady from you a representative
Cadena Mr speaker thank you with
the gentle lady from Bernalillo
yields.
I need.
Can.
County and her friend from
Bernalillo you you'll gentle
lady.
I yield.
Thank you and good morning I
have Mister speaker been in
conversations with both of these
legislators over the morning and
last few days I do have a
concern about passing this bill
through the house floor in part
because I agree with the merit
and purpose of of most of this
but there's a piece here related
to transparency in which for not
calling all the players to the
playing field there's so much
work systemic work to do on a
national level that relates to
drug pricing this bill certainly
help some patients in New Mexico
figure out their budgets and
hopefully afford the medicines
they need but it's not
addressing the underlying
foundations of why we have
exorbitant prices that that
families can't afford wealth
well some corporations are
profiting billions off of life
saving medicines so I certainly
spoken with both the Sanchez
body and look forward to some
continued conversations on the
Senate to make sure that all the
folks involved well that all
including the pharmaceutical
manufactures the PBMs Adams the
carriers and plans are involved
in our requirements to provide
information so that we can
better understand how health
care pricing is happening and
how drug pricing is happening so
in the long run we can make
better policy decisions so I've
spoken with both the Sanchez but
just wanted to express my
reservations that right now
we're only asking the PBMs and
the plans to be transparent and
we're not asking big pharma to
do the same but I think all the
folks need to be considered in
this moving forward thank you Mr
speaker and Sanchez.
Thank you generally there's
further debate the gentle lady
from Bernalillo Representative
Armstrong thank you Mr speaker
will the gentle lady from
Valencia yield.
Yes I have a yield to the time
lady from Bernalillo thank you
kind lady and Mr speaker I don't
disagree with the previous
comments this is just a piece of
the pie and that we need to look
comprehensively at the entire
continue on to really get it
pricing for pharmaceuticals.
However Mr speaker and gentle
lady I I take a slightly
different tack to if you will
from the previous gentle lady
and that is anything that that
pushes us to bring everyone to
the table I'm so I'm I'm going
to support the bill because I
think it it it is pushed towards
to we have to bring everyone to
the table I don't think anyone
in that continue on and
particularly the PBMs will let
this stand and not addressing
the whole continuum and we've
been talking about it for years
and it's always start to put
some teas and and some mechanism
in place to start getting it
some of it I I.
We are just spinning our wheels
so well I think it does need Mr
speaker and gentle lady and
we've talked about this a
comprehensive look at the entire
continuum of prescription drug
pricing and I had made a
commitment and committee that we
would look at this and the
interim whether this came
whether this bill went through
or not but I do think we need to
put pressure on all components
of the system to to come to the
table and and figure out
transparency and rationality and
not pricing of pharmaceuticals
so thank you Mr speaker and
thank you gentle lady.
Si no further debate gentle lady
to close.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
the house bill one twenty nine
as amended do now pass.
I joined for good on house House
that can filter for Senator any
sort of working.
Mr speaker I'm going to have to
work on that but I will get that
what in the up in the Senate
please stop using we're on final
passage of house bill one twenty
nine as amended the vote is now
open.
One minute to close.
The clerk to call those without
a recorded vote.
Representative Cook.
Representative Eli.
Representative Ely is a yes.
Representative Rod Montoya.
Those are close by the end of
sixty six in the formative to
the negative house bill one
twenty nine as amended has duly
passed the house.
Next we'll move on to item
number one gentlelady from going
into Representative Cadena are
you ready on that item.
Yes Mr speaker please get me to
that point the record reflect on
action necessary for placing
House Judiciary Committee says
to rest one fourteen on final
passage has been taken the
gentle lady to explain the bill.
Mr speaker thank you I'm here
today with the house Judiciary
Committee substitute for house
bill one fourteen Mr speaker I'm
proud today to be presenting
this bill in collaboration with
the law office of the public
defenders in the New Mexico
criminal defense lawyers at so
ciation for me Mr speaker this
bill is about improving public
safety certainly of importance
across our New Mexico
communities what this bill does
is address our long standing
have visual offender
enhancements that have been
built within a mandatory
sentencing scheme and moves New
Mexico towards individualized
sentencing which is been shown
and demonstrated across the
country to actually improve
public safety making sure that
our judiciary has the discretion
on imposing the appropriate
sentences as needed and setting
the appropriate offenders to
incarceration as needed Mr
speaker with that I'll stand for
questions.
Thank you join either is the the
gentleman from San Juan
Representative lane.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
from Dona Ana kindly you'll.
Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman from someone.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
generally.
so the way I understand
currently are syncing scheme
prior to this bill.
Is when we talk about Vigil
fenders what we're talking about
is is persons who have
previously been convicted of a
felony offense and now they are
being sentenced for a second or
possibly third or fourth felony
conviction is that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman yeah.
Mr speaker so in other words
we're not talking about first
time sounds correct.
Mr speaker gentle.
And Mr speaker gentlelady from
dawn on you the way I understand
section one of of this bill.
In subparagraph a what it does.
Is if you have a person that
additional offender that that
only has one prior felony
conviction and now that person
is is being sent for a second
felony conviction.
what this subparagraph a does
that changes of the mandatory
sentencing happen of one year
and gives the judge discretion
to cents for one years that
correct.
Mr speaker gentlemen not thank
you.
The.
What happens if the judges have
two options in the judges
currently in the way that they
have Vigil offender have
enhancements work required to
ask years to each felony in a
single case some timing
sometimes adding up to decades
of action.
And the keep park here
for this enhancement requires
that the judge actually send
that person to prison so what
what section one subsection
eighty is doing is eliminating
the habitual offender
enhancement for those that have
a simple possession felony as
we've defined in this section so
basically this is not folks that
are trafficking this is not
folks that are distributing
these are people that possess
the essences we're saying in
that section eight specifically
there on if you're looking at
the HHC sub page one lines
twenty three through twenty five
that simple possession is no
longer included in the habitual
offender enhancement sentences
sentencing scheme.
and this certainly is about
improving public safety but it's
also understanding trauma and
substance use disorders in New
Mexico as a public health issue
not a crime there continues to
be demonstrated evidence of that
we use when we send people to
prison for mandatory and unitive
sentences we certainly have not
address their underlying
addictions or substance use
disorders and there likely
coming back to our communities
and neighborhoods without having
access imported programming in
treatment actually have a shot
at something kind of different
in their life just as we would
treat a disease like diabetes or
something else Mr speaker
gentleman.
Mr speaker one hundred
I I read the text will
differently so let me ask a
couple of questions to make sure
that maybe my understanding just
isn't correct.
Mr speaker gentle lady I I do
see the references in lines
twenty three through twenty
five.
the simple possession if you
received a felony conviction for
that.
I think what that does is it
says you can even be considered
a habitual offender and so you
can office seeks the Senate
finance committee that correct.
Mr speaker I didn't quite
understand that question would
you please repeat it one more
time.
Mr speaker gentle lady so
essentially what we're doing is
we're saying
if you have been convicted of
simple possession that rises to
a level of felony.
Your not gonna receive a
sentencing enhancement
underneath this subparagraph
Hey.
That is our intention yes Mr
speaker and gentleman.
Mr speaker gentle lady to that
so I interpret this program
because well and and sixty eight
sixty six yes we just want to
that's actually reference to the
D. W. I. statute is that
correct.
Let me confirm that Mr speaker
gentleman.
Yes it is Mr speaker and
gentleman the state the statute
currently applies to all
felonies acceptability DWI.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle
thank you Mr.
Thank you Mr speaker dealing
from down in and I think those
inclusions in this bill that
does make sense to me
I think when we think of
sentencing happens at least for
me as a as a citizen coming to
the legislature I tend to think
of those things more like
violent crimes and things like
that so to exclude of possession
and E. W. Y. I think that makes
sense when you understand what
the purpose of a thing to happen
is.
but the the thing they were
wearing didn't understand.
It does have its own stair step
in that does not mean it's about
enhancements there just.
Thank you Mr.
Mr speaker gentle lady from Dona
Ana.
But what subparagraph a does it
will definitely is.
What it says is the judge may
add a similar thing happened.
Two felony offenses other than
D. W. I. or simple possession
and that something hasn't maybe
up to one year is that correct.
I'm not sure if I understand the
question but currently the head
coach of the fender enhancements
COVID one four and eight years
yes.
Additionally maybe I should just
ask question is what what is
subparagraph a change in the
existing law thank you I
appreciate that
subparagraph a first of all on
this first page here means that
we are stripping simple
possession from the habitual
offender enhancements completely
it will no longer be in place it
will no longer will no longer
have offenders that are sentence
or sent to prison.
Group sentencing speaking when
we turn to page two we then get
to see what some of those
definitions are.
But.
When we see we just read it one
more time so to make sure I'm
giving you accurate information.
Only other piece we're changing.
On page two as we're making it
gender gender neutral here we
had it name is his before so
we're changing the his to the
habitual offender.
And we are then giving
discretion on the other felonies
so instead of us shall we change
the shall to may and that we are
adding that it could go up to
one year instead of the
mandatory one year.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
donors so I think that confirms
what I was saying which is.
If if this bill didn't exist for
example.
What would happen is if a
virtual offender is now standing
for sentencing on a second
felony.
Current law obligates the
district judge to add an
additional year as an
enhancement on top of whatever
since it would receive for the
underlying second conviction is
not correct yes.
So Mister speaker gentle lady.
What this does is it allows the
judge to review the
circumstances of the second
felony to determine whether or
not an additional one year
should be enhanced upon the
sentences are correct.
My talking points Mr speaker
gentleman that's correct.
Thank you Jim thank you Mr
joiner for doing and just wanna
make sure I have my arms are for
on this as we proceed and then
within the same section one
paragraph be on page two
starting line fourteen.
It's a it's a similar concept
but now we're no longer talking
about one prior felony
conviction we're talking about
two prior felony convictions
that correct Mr speaker going
from down under.
Yes we are Mr speaker and gentle
lady and that's when the
sentencing changes from a one
year minimum to a four year
minimum.
And Mr speaker generating.
Current law obligates the
district judge to ask for years.
To what is essentially the third
felony conviction whereas this
bill would give the sentencing
judge discretion of up to four
years on the third felony
conviction is that correct.
That is correct Mr speaker and
gentleman.
And then finally the one I think
this bill does if you look in
subparagraph the still on page
two one twenty three if not
interested a situation where you
have Mitchell offender who has
three or more prior felonies.
And now they're during sentenced
on.
For for subsequent county so
maybe this is the fourth or
fifth or six power any.
And what current law says is
that if you are one of those
Vigil fenders the judges are
obligated to increase your
sentence up to excuse me is
obligated increase your sense by
eight years is that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman that is
correct within the last few days
I had the incredible opportunity
to speak to some women that are
in programming at the civilians
of post incarceration and
substance use treatment program
that I believed contracts at the
New Mexico corrections
department but also other
agencies House women frankly
that have been in and out of our
criminal justice system and
struggling with substance use
disorders and Mr speaker
gentlemen as I spoke to one of
these New Mexicans within the
last few days she told me her
story about coming from real New
Mexico imagining a full life
ahead of her actually studying
for an associate's degree in
criminal justice when she fell
into math for the first time Mr
speaker and gentleman she talked
to me about her license that and
and all the mistake she's made
and all the decisions that she
wished she could take back but
she also talked to me about
never being in a place to
address and treat and health and
begin the work on her disease Mr
speaker gentlemen as I was in
this conversation with her she
goes back to a courtroom in
April with possession charges
and yes just as you explained in
section C. we're addressing
folks that potentially are on
their fourth or fifth felony
this woman in particular is in
that situation and so the based
on the charges which we are not
addressing will still be one and
a half years at the judges
discretion but this particular
woman who's finally in
programming in in her sobriety
on a path to her recovery is
facing a year and a half.
On those possession charges
because again she she had she
had drugs again she had messed
with her but she's actually
looking at a prison sentence of
twenty four years on those
possession charges because of
that three eight year a Vigil
stacked and so far she's not
been offered a plea and she's
trying to figure out to find her
face and her focus to somehow
stay in this program knowing
that her life could include
twenty four years in front of
her when she's finally getting
treatment for substance use
disorder so Mister speaker
gentlemen I appreciate your
thoughtful read and
understanding of what we're
doing here in H. B. one fourteen
and just want to offer that
again with our purpose here in
eliminating simple possession
from the habitual offender
sentencing
enhancements is really about
this understanding that
substance use disorder in New
Mexico is a health care issue
and that we as a state have not
gotten anything out of having
these mandatories of these
mandatory incontinence on the
books.
Speaker gentleman.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
don't actually really appreciate
bring that simple I think it's
open for discussion and and
actually I I agree with with the
premise that if we're just
talking about possession
offenses that happened right to
level family that that's a
different kind of family and
friends and and I do
I do understand that we're
dealing with an addiction right
so that's a different arena so I
appreciate you point that out.
but I I'm just looking at even
we want to ask the question
we're in subparagraphs C. on
page two.
Starting line twenty three if
such a person convicted of a non
capital filling in the state
whether within the kernel court
or the controlled substances
act.
So.
Does this bill change the
setting that you just described.
Mr speaker we slow down and tell
me one more time.
Well yes.
Mr speaker gentle it is probably
because I form the question
poorly
let me look at the tax.
At the same place that you are.
So Mister speaker gentle lady.
Let me ask the question this
way.
Subparagraph C. on page two it
does make references to the
controlled substances act.
And so I assume that that is
what the the lady is being
Prosecuted under.
And so I'm just wondering does
this bill help.
Her because there's no reference
in subparagraph C. like the
risen subparagraph anti.
To accepting of simple
possession charges from the
enhancement of these Mr speaker
and gentleman I'm certainly take
a back and forth with my
experts.
And it's in the references we
thought we are attempting to
accomplish this but I appreciate
your clarity and I'm looking to
agree that potentially we need
that same language to follow in
the fall in the subsections.
I dress what are impact was we
would be happy to fix Mr speaker
and gentleman.
Mr speaker gentle lady from don
and I think it's a simple of the
fixes you have the new text
added and so program any that
specifically meant simple
possession.
and I think just to make it
clear you could add that into
subparagraph B. in subparagraph
C. and and and probably care
that the fact.
Mr speaker and gentleman I'm
following.
Okay.
Mr speaker.
It seems like a may not have
that language in my email as we
depreciated here catcher.
Thank you Mr generated from Dona
Ana.
The other thing that I I think I
maybe have some concerns with
his right you know I think it's
important.
from the sentencing scheme
standpoint that we make sure
that we have uniformity of
justice that certain senses are
being handed down to certain
individuals based upon state
there so socioeconomic status or
or or honestly the quality of
the lawyer that they may or may
not have.
And so I have some concerns
about the changes this bill
makes no I think when you're
dealing with someone like under
subparagraph a that they only
have one prior felony.
And now they're being sent on a
second billion and maybe that
one prior felony was you know
ten fifteen years ago.
and they simply made another bad
decision we're not really
talking about of what I would
consider my money anyways
officials vendor.
This is only the second time
that offend I think in that
sense Mr speaker gentle lady
from Dona Ana it makes sense to
have discretion at the District
Court level to be able to
determine.
The facts and the circumstances
and and see whether a sentencing
enhancement of up to one year
makes sense whether it be
beneficial or whether it be
detrimental.
My concerns though is is when we
get into subsection B. and
subsection C..
What subparagraph B. no we're
not talking about someone who's
being sentenced on a third
felony.
And subparagraph the we're
talking about a person is
convicted of a fourth fifth
sixth felony.
And so I think in most people's
minds those those are those are
the person we think of when we
talk about the visual offenders.
And I worry for those people.
That they if we remove the
mandatory sentencing scheme that
we're gonna have disbursement
treatment among defendants.
Depending upon again so soon at
economic status and the quality
of lawyer that that person can
or cannot afford.
And so you know I don't do
criminal defense work I've done
some prosecutorial work my
observation of the system is is
a lot of these cases don't go to
trial autumn receive plea
agreements.
And during that plea agreement
discussion there is this
discussion about possible
sentencing and whether the state
will agree to a certain sentence
or at least not opposed.
A certain sentence.
And so what I hear that this
bill made do is.
Monica let's say I'm a I'm a
habitual offender who's being
what state prosecutor for four.
Twenty five point inspection
the.
What I fear is is the amount of
the enhanced since that I may
receive from the district judge
will be dependent upon my
lawyer's ability to marshal of
good plea agreement and I just
have real concerns about whether
work is currently treating
people based upon how well they
can afford legal counsel.
and so what I have.
Mr speaker I I appreciate those
comments first.
Mr generated so with with that
I actually have
house floor amendment number one
to house Judiciary Committee
substitute for house bill one
fourteen.
And I would move that Mr speaker
and when you're ready for me to
read the to to number and
explain them and I'm happy to do
so.
The gentleman that would you
please tell us a to a two
number.
Revenue figure it's point two
two zero one one two point one.
Okay John with the family of the
two two number hasn't passed out
of this on the website gentleman
to explain the amendment.
Thank you Mr speaker.
And so I personally draw our
attention back up to
subparagraph a.
On page.
One and two and what this
amendment does it keep the
discretion and.
Question in place yeah so we're
in a
second one instance the Jewish
department discretion it's not
obligatory.
the only real substantive change
of listening listening is.
On page two line I.
If the prior offense is a.
A sex offense then we're going
to keep the mandatory sentencing
enhancement of one year.
But it still keeps in place the
discretionary piece for any
other felony conviction.
And then the rule changes that
makes Beyonce of her.
Hey would be in subparagraph
BNC.
And it removes the discretion
and keeps the current statute in
place.
In the sense that the visual
offender would receive of the
mandatory sentences and again.
The rationale behind the
amendment is to ensure that
there's uniformity and Justice
and that we don't have a
situation where the same
defendants.
Are being sent for the same
crimes.
And one seven one the defendant
receives a certain sense and the
other defendants receive a
longer sentence.
Just because of their
socioeconomic status or the
quality or lack there of of
their turning so with that Mr
speaker stand for questions.
The gentle lady from the
Indiana.
Representative Cadena is this a
friendly amendment.
Mr speaker and gentleman I was
trying to say that I just need a
minute to pull of the amendment
before the gentleman explained
at us so I'm trying to catch up
now that I have it but Mr
speaker gentleman at this point
it is not a friendly amendment.
Generation identity was to
debate amendment before we go to
others thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman I so much appreciate
the consideration around what
justice really means in the
system that is designed to
uphold it and I certainly Mr
speaker and gentlemen really do
appreciate the ways that you've
articulated and names that often
an outcome as someone moves
through our system may depend on
access you have to capital and
resources and connections to
potentially navigate your way
out of a harsher sentence Mr
speaker gentleman as this
question was raised in committee
it was really important for me
to name if we were doing the
opposite with the sentencing
scheme and talking about
additional discretion for
harsher penalties I certainly
would appreciate the intention
of this amendment and might even
consider it friendly but what
we're actually doing here Mr
speaker gentleman is making sure
that we eliminate the simple
possession enhancement across
the board and then make sure
that the judiciary has the
discretion to decide if and when
and how to impose these
additional prison time sentences
for New Mexicans moving through
these cycles it's really
important to share Mr speaker
and gentleman that for the
people who are running through
this pattern they're
overwhelmingly
Representative by the public
defenders and often stuck in
cycles of poverty substance use
disorders and other social
issues so while we might
consider that a justice system
justice system should
in its foundations have.
A path of equal treatment we
already know and evidence
demonstrates that such things
are not true and what this
legislation does is give people
room to move from what's
mandatory now to potentially
having a chance at expressing
different circumstances and
potentially not having a
mandatory prison sentence out
leveled upon.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman just for this of this
amendment does not remove the
substance
use the the
Position of exceptions as we
discussed earlier I think that
makes sense to me
and I hope that this this bill
moves along with generally will.
add the language to some
programs can see that's one of
the the court.
You Mr speaker temperament.
Is it on the amendment chairman
San Juan Representative Montoya.
Thank you Mr speaker is a
gentleman from San Juan County
you.
Mr speaker I gladly yield to the
gentleman from San Juan County.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman
just recreate there has been
some discussion
in this session but also just
over the last couple of years
about what is called
Institutional racism
Mr speaker and gentleman
Could if if a.
judge were to
maybe have preferences for
maybe have that.
A history of being harsher with
minorities is it possible that
that person through this
discretion could continue that
pattern Mr speaker and
gentleman.
I think I got you to because we
were having feedback on each
other Mr speaker John from San
Juan.
What this what the underlying
bill does.
that the amendment seeks to
remedy.
Is you could have the same
defendants commit the sentence
you to you get a few different
defendants commit the same act.
And they have different legal
counsel and be from different
socioeconomic backgrounds and
you could have.
Defender a receive a lower sense
and defender the.
Even though the committed the
same offence and so I I do think
discretion makes sense when
you're talking about just a
second felony but we're trying
to third fourth fifth felony we
need to make sure that there's
uniformity justice and that's
what this amendment six you.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman I I think that is
something that that we advocate
for
Is equal treatment under the law
and it appears that if this bill
goes for for it as it is we're
talking about is at the
likelihood of not having equal
treatment under the law and I am
just
surprised me too to have this
discussion on the floor that we.
Would would be advocating for
that.
Treatment Mr speaker and
gentleman just a quick question
because I I don't know this but.
Felony possession what what what
what is the the trigger for the
felony possession.
Mr speaker you want someone.
No expert on this one I recall
from law school it's been.
Fifteen years ago it is I think
it depends on the amount of
possession so certain amount.
Jumps from a misdemeanor to a
felony.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman that's.
I do understand of folks to
struggle with addiction.
And I I do see that as
for the Sanchez trying to get to
Mr speaker and gentleman I I
think when we start talking on
three four or five times Mr
speaker and gentleman.
The the consequence potential
are the people around the person
who's a setting so Mr speaker
and gentleman I I just only.
Basis of trying to make sure
that we have equal protection.
I I do support what you're
trying to do here and I look
forward to supporting your men
thank you Mr speaker.
And Mister speaker John just one
clarification I think you might
also there might be something
about the type of drug as well
could trigger feeling I'm not
sure but I think that's why the
gentle lady from Dona Ana is is
specific about excluding
adjusted session charters so.
Exams are for the debate on the
amendment the gentle lady from
Chavis Representative Ezzell.
Mr chairman thank Mr speaker
thank you very much will the
gentleman from San Juan you.
Mr speaker above the yield to
the gentle lady from Travis.
Mr speaker gentleman from San
Juan.
Can you give me a distinction
about the drugs you were just
and talking about can you give
me any clarification there I
mean this are going to be a
differentiation between
marijuana unless they mess or
coke.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
I I'm I don't know in New Mexico
about what if it's the type the
triggers Bellinger's I just want
I don't want to miss to our
members that it may and so for
what it would be is for example
marijuana may be treated
differently than crack cocaine
but what really that doesn't
matter because what the
underlying bill does and what
this what this amendment seeks
to also do is if you are caught
with possession whether it's
marijuana or crack cocaine or or
methamphetamine any of those it
doesn't matter you're not gonna
receive a sentencing enhancement
so it it does away with any kind
of distinction based on the type
of drug.
When we're talking about
sentencing enhancements.
You Mr speaker gentleman of I I
get what you're trying to do
here in your amendment and I am
in favor of it.
Of.
Because this no
Are we just going to continually
let them out I think that is a.
Taking out the words shall and
replacing them with may.
Is very troublesome to me that
they're going to be a habitual
offender I think the word shell
is a very important word Mr
speaker gentleman would you
agree with my analysis on that
after there especially there's a
second conviction.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Travis to be clear what this
amendment does that if your
standing for a second felony
conviction to be sentenced upon
that it does allow for
discretion at the district judge
level and again I think I think
that makes sense to the point I
don't know that I would I would
be those purses Nestle your
visual offender you could have a
person would say that they were
eighteen and they made a bad
decision committed a felony in
maybe the thirty eight now like
I am and and I make another bad
decision there's twenty years of
time between those two offenses
so I think it makes sense to
give the district judge of some
discretion but when you get to
the point where now I've
committed a third more if
Fellaini I think those persons
truly are habitual offenders and
so then I think the sentencing
scheme makes more sense to have
showers may.
You Mr speaker and gentleman I
think you're exactly right.
These people are needing help
but turning them back out with
the words.
Show stricken it does not get it
the judge because of our crowded
conditions right now I get it
those judges will say okay we
will let you go again and we're
back right back on this sign
will cycle time after time
they're going back to the same
playgrounds to meet up with
their friends if you want to
call on that and getting into
the same amount of trouble so
Mister speaker gentleman are
like your amendment I think that
people need to be very aware
that the strike one okay we're
going to give you a chance
strike to okay of bid be pay
attention but after the third
time I think it's important that
we do make some concessions
there that there is a going to
be a longer term Mr speaker and
gentleman thank you very much.
These are for the debate on the
matter the gentleman from Chavis
and Lincoln representative
Nibert.
Thank you Mr speaker will look
gentleman from San Juan County
general Mr speaker going to
yield to the gentleman from
Chavis and Lincoln.
Mr speaker and gentleman I was
going to ask you a few questions
to the sponsor but it appears
that you're.
Addresses the very concerns I
was born and raised already with
you all the amendment.
I heard you correctly Mr speaker
and gentleman.
Your.
Your thoughts are to.
Mandatory sentences for the
truth a bit full fenders but I
don't discretion for the people
that only have one two maybe
three convictions did I hear
that correctly Mr speaker and
gentleman yes sort of the the
discretion comes in if.
If you have only you're only
being sentenced on your second
family so you have one prior
felony
just a applies and then
subsection get that too I'm now
being finished on the third
failing you know so I think that
is the true potential of talent.
If you offender and and some
programs city we're not talking
about for good.
That's and again I think we all
agree that that the true the
gradual fender
Mr speaker and gentleman that
was my concern because we see on
the paving as recently as two
nights ago.
Shop was
In.
For lack of a better word and
what.
He told reporters he's tired of
being the subject of habitual
offenders people that continue
to engage in that activity
I think we owe it to the
citizens of New Mexico.
We.
Stand up for for victims rights
and what we have the truly bad
actors the people that have
shown themselves incapable of
adhering to the rules of
society.
That we deal with them and we
deal with them evenly across the
board.
It's somewhat harsh.
I think we have to get their
attention and so I appreciate
your bringing.
The some of the four I was going
to make similar statements to
sponsor but I think this is a
better time to do it because
you're a member does exactly
what I think a real concern is
the method is to address.
People.
Continue to disobey the full.
Thank you the slap on the wrist
you put out for a few years and
and gel which offender statute
was to.
Make them think twice about
engaging in that behaviour yeah
and.
Gentlelady from Tony and I can
say it happen work but.
The evidence is we have the same
people committing crimes over
and over and over.
Just part of their.
They are.
We got a deal.
Horsley with those folks for.
You bring this amendment will
certainly supported thank you
Mr.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
San Juan.
This is the general from
Bernalillo Representative read.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from San Juan you.
Mr speaker I gladly yield to the
gentleman from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
San Juan I'm looking at your
amendment and I see two very
important items in there when we
look at number two you're
looking at state statute twenty
nine dash eleven thirty dash
three in these are sex offenses.
And I think it's important what
you're trying to do you're
saying we need to really look at
sexual offenders we know that
they have a high recidivism rate
is so you're saying we ought to
look at them is that what this
is saying that it would you know
just.
Mr speaker gentleman from
Bernalillo so it does what what
it does with regard to a first
Representative one prior
felonies or time but someone had
the second felony convictions
are being sentenced on.
If they're prior felony is a sex
offense so we're talking about
egregious things agriculture
aggravated criminal sexual
penetration for talking about
order sexual contact of a minor
we're talking about grievous
things and so that that is the
underlying rationale for not
excluding sex offenses from the
discretionary peace within
soccer referee.
This
from San Juan thank you for that
answer and when I was working on
it your it's actually an item
three and six use reference New
Mexico state statute is sixty
six dash eight dash one number
two and that's statutes.
Is if we look at chess for our
students to the sticks from
twenty twenty.
We have a hundred ninety.
Catalent transaction listens
well
those thirty so we're all
related.
I think it's important that we
look at addressing or alcohol R.
D. W. aren't right which is in
the top ten on nation and it's
time for us to take this.
Account work on a.
Mr speaker gentle from
Bernalillo I do recognize the
adrenaline talk it is an issue
for our state
this amendment and the
underlying bill do not include
DWI offenses for the setting has
been in the reason why I I as I
understand it if you look at the
DWS doctors themselves other
actually a little bit unusual
one that they actually have
built in sentencing within them
and so the that sentencing
structure varies depending on
whether you're convicted of a
first you WYSIWYG third you'll
react whether those D. W. eyes
are aggravated based on the
alcohol blood content or based
upon because they are to another
individual so I don't know that
there's a need to include them
within the setting has been
trucker because a way those
statutes are written based they
have the in house was built
within.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentleman from San Juan I
support this man.
I could tell you that that
wasn't true I can tell you that
based on my experience and what
I've observed is not all lawyers
are created equal.
And it's a relationship business
like many other businesses and
so what what happens is you may
not be.
Of politically correct to say so
but what I've seen happen is
defendants in up receiving
different plea agreements and
different sentencing.
Since the results based upon the
agreement of their the fact that
that the defense attorney is
able to marshal.
Thank you.
But don't know what I'm hearing
from the gentleman and the
speaker is a.
Choose your interview.
from San Juan McKinley that is
correct as well.
Your roommate was a losses.
You that's funny your job right.
gentleman from Silicon they are
did you I'm sorry did you ask
part do appear in court resolved
in just the speaker yes Mr
speaker thank you yes I do.
Thank you and thank you Mr
speaker and gentleman and do you
feel that may be
the more you charge your client
the better.
deal you're going to get in
front of the judge.
Gentleman from C. one economic
I do not schools and and norm
where where other attorneys to
disclose the fees they may
receive to the to the district
judge.
So so you see.
Is.
the Mr speaker and gentleman
from San Juan to using this
service done to.
And then I learned the speaker
and gentleman.
Representative on.
Matter who you are or what you
did or what crime you committed.
I was predictable.
Okay and I believe in just about
all the judges in the state in
New Mexico very much in here to
the same standards thank you
everybody the same regardless of
how nice is to the attorney for
the state in the past or the
prosecuting attorney just
everybody is treated the same
the firm you hear you say in
this legislature you are making
this short.
If you.
During the he's going to get a
better deal than the one that
doesn't have a good attorney I
think it's unfair to the
judiciary and I think it is
wrong to treat your fellow
duration LA so I really and this
is going to do here that and
with that Mr speaker I I I yield
my time I do not support that
thank you Mr speaker.
Gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative Maestas.
Thank you Mr speaker will
generate on demand from some
long here.
Mr speaker above the objection
from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
general someone just a quick
comment on the amendment I think
it's awful and I think it's a
trying to accomplish what the
bill.
Will accomplish.
it's not the judges.
In order to the dependence on
the to offender act as the
prosecutor the judges just the
impact.
Once you figure John from
someone as you know the judges
just calling balls and strikes
this allows the prosecutor to
till more hard strikes over the
plate so it's the prosecutor
today that has discretion
whether to pursue which will
enhancement whether to use one
two or three depending on how
many convictions are at their
disposal and there's nothing
that I can do about it.
I do I haven't done these
hearings as a defense lawyer but
as a prosecutor there's nothing
the defense.
What you apple support certified
documents you have the
transcript of the plea if
necessary and just talking with
a virtual offender
but what's what's what doesn't
work today is the fact that two
of their statues used as a plea
bargain.
And so so you have all the
ability to hit somebody with a
four year Mitchell enhancement
the state will plead guilty to
the crime and I'll take away the
four years I will hit you with
the enhancement.
And then it kind of puts the the
the victim of the judging a
weird space because like we were
going to send you want since
going to prison or not.
because as you know Mr speaker
John from someone the underlying
crime is is discretionary this.
I think this will set a much
stronger tone individualized you
know the rights of victims and
the and the and the and the
justice and he's to be dished
out twenty particular defendant
and nothing in this bill takes
away the ability to do what your
minister is trying to achieve.
If a prosecutor hit somebody
with a year of which one has
been based on their complete
street they will the judge will
give on that in that eight years
but I think just in terms of
given the prosecutor more tools
in the toolbox and really
modernizing our criminal code
discretion is a must if you want
to craft that that sentence
conducive to what is the just
result of that sentencing you
know being pursued by the
prosecution's are strictly of
cannot support your amendment
but but the engineer moment
frankly is is accomplished by
the intent of of the bill is
currently.
Thank you Mr speaker Jon Bon
Juan.
The hearing no further debate on
the amendment to the gentle lady
from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move to table the
amendment.
Generally these motion is to
table the amendment vote of yes
the amendment will be tabled a
vote of no and will be back on
the date of the amendment.
The vote is now open.
The maintenance issues folks
accessing site so that's fine.
To the chief clerk to call those
without a recorded vote
Representative Anderson.
No.
Representative Anderson votes no
Representative Gail Armstrong
no.
Representative Gail Armstrong
both no Representative
Baldonado.
Well now Representative
Baldonado votes no
Representative Crowder.
Representative Crowder votes no
Representative Ferrary.
Yes Representative Ferrary both
yes Representative at a.
C. H..
Representative Lord.
Able Representative Lord votes
no Representative Lewis.
The comic and right.
Yes Representative Lewis both
yes Representative Maestas.
Thank you Margaret yes
Representative Maestas both yes
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Pettigrew votes
no Representative yes yes.
No.
The votes no Representative
Townsend.
Representative Townsend votes no
yes yeah.
As long for the affirmative.
It is.
Well yeah I talked to yes.
And Christine Trujillo bowed to
table.
Those now really closed with a
vote of forty five the Fuhrman
of twenty five negative the
amendment is tabled John
gentleman from San Juan you have
the four.
Thank you Mr speaker I I
appreciate the dialogue with the
gentle lady sponsor I think it's
been good dialogue I appreciate
a lot of what's being
accomplished with this bill.
I do want to make clear we we
have great judges in the state
of Mexico that we should be
proud of.
And my comments regarding the
uniformity Justice of nothing
actually to do with the
judiciary whatsoever
situation that comes up in every
to see example should some light
on one string was writing about.
uniformly just being on the
quality of lawyer is let's say
that someone is charged with
possession but also they had a
fireman's time and you'll get a
second charge of felon in
possession of a firearm both
felonies.
And so the defense attorney can
work a plea agreement to say
look will plead guilty to a
simple possession charge in
exchange you.
Thank you dismissed the felony
and possession of a firearm.
If that plea agreement is
reached there will be no
enhancements under this bill
because exempting out of drugs.
Session charges.
If your lawyer cannot reach that
deal then you are subject to
impact so that's the disparity
that I'm talking about has
nothing to do with the judges
and has everything to do with an
attorney's ability to get
certain charges dropped through
a plea bargain which happens
every day in our courts in the
state.
and and and honestly and in a
bad way this is the real of
health works and so I do want to
say to the gentle lady
I appreciate the conversation I
really do think if we could just
add a little length to be into
that we talked about to make
sure just certain.
just going about wanted to make
sure that simple possession
isn't included under BMC I think
that would would go a long ways
towards protecting the defendant
that the gentle lady gave an
example of so thank you for the
debate with that I you've got
for Mister speaker.
Further debate the gentleman
from Bernalillo Representative
read.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady yield.
Thank you Mr speaker yes I yield
to the gentleman from Bernalillo
the.
Mr speaker gentle lady from well
Los crucis.
Well I have an amendment and
what I want to address is the
ten years look back.
The ten years in the bill says
that basically if I haven't been
convicted in the last ten years
then all right and this is have
a clean slate gentleman from
Bernalillo Representative REME
are you not able to use your
device.
The debate.
One of the one of the issues is
for reasons as yet unknown.
When members are using their for
Mike's it's very very difficult
for them to be heard on the
webcast
Mr speaker you'd like for me not
to use the like in general we
have with the rules that we've
adopted other than that.
For leisure we're asking folks
to use their to other devices
which is what we've been doing
through the.
The sessions would take a minute
for you to get set up.
Okay thank you Mr speaker I.
I've activated my
Computer.
thank you Mr speaker we'll go
gentle lady from Dona Ana County
you.
Mr speaker yes failed to the
gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you
on the Mr speaker and gentle
lady from Dona ana county and
looking at the bill one of the
things by is that you can't work
at it over here all.
Propylene when we start talking
about what are those convictions
because are are more serious
crimes.
When we look at people who were
Senators for more more.
We start looking at individuals
that are there for armed robbery
kidnapping murder and almost all
of our our search for our.
In particular right yes a sense
over ten years.
What we Fund I have an
amendment.
Mr speaker R. I would now move
amendment number one helps for
the minute number one.
To.
The.
When I can give you the two oh
two number please do.
This.
Two numbers to one nine eight
one three point one.
Okay hasn't passed out is on the
website general please explain
the amendment.
Mr speaker and members of the.
Mr speaker and members of the
house.
This ammendment is to remove the
ten year what.
okay let's let's pause we had we
have to get our tech sorted out
here
So are you using wholesaler you
not using it said I'm just going
to be helpful to you gentleman
from Bernalillo so that you can
be heard you're not coming
through on the zoom at all.
Mr speaker is is better.
It is better in general we also
the clerk's office has has has a
heads up for you if you'd like
to use it that all are by far
the best solution to help me
connect one one I think I've got
one in my backpack thank you
Google plus for second.
Mr speaker is that working.
Okay thank you.
Mr speaker and members of the
house when we work at house bill
one fourteen.
Your many substitute we go to
page three.
Paragraphs we wanted to we see
that there is an exclusion for.
convictions more two years our.
Most of our serious convictions.
Are
For crimes that have counties
stuff in here.
Armed robbery are kidnapping.
Of human trafficking.
Of murder in the first second
degree.
And all of our structure from.
And that's particularly
troubling that an individual who
has been set for first first
second degree felony and just
over ten years in prison.
Walked out and if you will
have a clean slate.
When we look at this law.
And I think it is those
individuals that we need to our
we would have.
That we.
Yes.
Important we.
What are you looking this our
amendment.
Thank you Mr.
Right members I just conferred
with the chairman of the rules
committee we're going to you
know if members I would like for
today if you want to use you for
my we can go and do that.
If we're not if for some reason
it's not coming from the webcast
like to switch back to going to
your your device but no one can
hear you gentleman and
Let's just let's let you switch
to your just for Mike.
Mr speaker I apologize that you
know for the technical
difficulty so Mr speaker members
of the house what I was
explaining on my amendment when
we look at the most serious
crimes for which people are
sentenced there are sentences go
beyond the ten years.
When we look at those crimes
were talking about armed robbery
we're talking about the
kidnapping of trafficking human
trafficking.
Of murder in the first second
degree.
Up the sex crimes almost all the
sex crimes follow up in here
this very serious first and
second degree sex crimes follow
up chair you.
So to be is traveling that we
allow those individuals to come
out of prison and if you will.
Have a clean slate with this
bill.
So they come out we can't look
back to we know that sex
offenders do have a propensity
to go ahead and and reset of
eight.
And did not look back it is an
injustice for our society.
So Mister speaker that is the
purposes man man is.
The judge look at is passed if
he continues to have a criminal
history.
Where let's say he spent twelve
years in jail and he gets out.
And he re of students with the
same type of violations the
court should look at that.
And that is the purpose of this
ammendment thank you Mr speaker.
The gentleman I will go to the.
Generation Dona Ana is this a
friendly amendment Mr speaker
and gentleman no it is not.
He generated your comment on the
amendment before we go to the
debate yes they would Mr speaker
and gentlemen I just want to
make sure the body understands
that this ten years were
referring to on page three of
the house Judiciary Committee
substitute for H. B. one
fourteen is not new language
that I addressing or approaching
for the first time with this
bill this ten year definition of
a prior felony conviction is
current law so while I've I've
heard this Mr speaker gentle
lady in part because the
gentleman brings a bill like
this pretty often and raise the
question Judiciary this ten year
window.
Is not part of what I'm doing
and I also just want to clarify
for the body the tenure clock
again current law doesn't
actually start until the
sentence is completed so that
doesn't mean there's a ten
there's a windows ten years
between crimes but this could
have been a crime committed
twenty seven years ago with a
long prison sentence along
probation parole period that
finally becomes completed
successfully before that ten
year window starts but again
this is not a friendly amendment
it's not something I've worked
to address or change in this law
and certainly not to the
gentleman's point about making
sure judges have room to look
back at some one of the only
convictions that is certainly
within HB fourteen and that the
intention with the judicial
discretion is so that they do
look closely at all applicables
felonies and make sure that the
offender receives the sentence
that's appropriate for their
crime thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Thank you generally is there
debate on the amendment.
Hearing none the gentleman from
Santa once Bernalillo
Representative Eli.
I'm sorry generation million.
Mr speaker I move to table the
amendment.
Generally this motion is to
table the amendment yes we are
tabled the amendment there's no
we will be back on debate of the
amendment the vote is now open.
It's yes.
Yes No lobby during the.
The clerk to call those without
a recorded vote.
Representative Alcon.
Representative Cook.
Representative Dow.
Representative Serrato.
Yes.
Representative Alcon hodi F..
Right those closed by a vote of
forty four in the affirmative
twenty three Indian negative.
The table.
You know if you still have the
four.
Thank you Mr speaker you know
it's troubling that we don't
look at that ten years what we
in essence do is we allow our
most violent people's to what is
termed final out.
Walk out of prison without a
probation or parole.
Of we also have them leave
prison complete their their
sentence.
And it's in their conviction was
over ten years ago.
So.
What we're really doing is
prosecuting the residential
burglars the drug is the and
we're going to exclude drug
possession now.
The people in that area.
Anyway Mr speaker thank you very
much for the time but I can't
support the bill in its current
form.
The gentleman is for the debate
the gentle lady from Chavis
Representative Ezzell.
Mr speaker thank you very much
will the gentle lady from done
in a yield place.
Yes Mr speaker I yield to the
gentle lady from Travis.
Mr speaker thank you very much I
have read your bill
and those disappointed that we
didn't get to make some changes
here that Mr speaker gentle lady
if if I'm reading your bill
right for you.
Our hopefully wanting to do and
I think this is where you're
headed is to make sure instead
of of course iterations that
these people will receive some
more sort of treatment or go
through rehabilitation.
The type thing is that correct
Mr speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker gentle lady they will
certainly you still receive
sentencing on whatever criminal
penalty they were convicted of
but this is removing just for
simple possession the mandatory
habitual offender enhancements
and my hope is yes Mr speaker
gentle lady that we can get more
New Mexicans closer to the
health care they need as they
struggle with substance use
disorders.
Mr speaker gentle lady of.
Especially are drug offenders
There is a need out there for.
Treatment and rehabilitation of
the mode more serious criminals
They definitely need help but
the recidivism rights there are
just staggering Mr speaker
gentle lady whenever we're
talking about the the drug
offenders and I'm not talking
about those that are cooking
methods so let's to sixth
graders and that type of stuff
I'm talking about those that
might have an addiction to
cocaine or might have an
addiction to meth that do need
to get some help there and Mr
speaker gentle lady with the
judges in these cases have the
opportunity to be able to do
that if they if they feel that
is important to.
Mr speaker gentle lady we're
trying to get a step in the
right direction like you've
named simple possession is just
folks that that possess those
drugs we are not eliminating
enhancements for people that are
trafficking or distributing or
like you said could you math and
selling it to sixth graders
certainly
our our intention is to meet
that direction and try to create
room to create a more resources
and more of a public health
approach so that we can actually
reduce recidivism Mr speaker
madam chair I know you and I
have been in some conversations
about this that we want to make
sure New Mexico is a place so
that when families and and folks
that are struggling are ready to
do something different they have
resources to turn to but there's
a lot of data that shows longer
sentences do not increase public
safety in part because they
actually lead to greater
recidivism rates.
Mr speaker gentle lady I do
appreciate that comment right
there and yes there is the need
to try to get treatment for the
certain offenders not.
Of.
That they currently don't have
right now Mr speaker gentle lady
but the key word there you
brought up and their families
these people and their families
Mr speaker gentle lady I do want
to point out that it's not not
up to the families to get the
help that these people need it's
up to that person who is in need
of it to desire to have that
help to have that treatment to
be able to be rehabilitated to
get through the therapy part of
it until that happens it doesn't
matter if they are addicted to
drugs if they are directed to
alcohol until that person makes
up their mind that they do want
to help it's all for not so
Mister speaker gentle lady.
Are there any treatment
facilities in the state of New
Mexico right now that have been
endorsed or authorized or.
Recommended by the.
Rex's department of the state of
New Mexico.
Mr speaker gentle lady I don't
quite have an answer to your
question but I certainly would
want to echo your sentiment that
our state is in desperate need
of additional programming and
facilities in particularly for
women and even more so for
parents I appreciate and agree
with your point when someone is
ready to potentially pursue
programming or recovery that's a
decision only they can make I
brought in families because the
impact of substance use
disorders in our state certainly
is generational and I know as
you do that we need to continue
to provide opportunities to
interrupt the cycles Madam Mr
speaker and gentle lady it's
been my experience and certainly
what drew me to introduce this
bill was thinking of all those
women and moms specifically in
New Mexico that haven't had bed
spaces or places to turn when
when they've made that decision
Mr speaker gentle lady I've in
the work I do gotten so many
calls over the years from mom's
desperate very bad like I'm
ready I swear I'm ready is there
anyone that would do meth detox
or is anyone have a bed space
and sure enough you call some of
the treatment facilities in New
Mexico and they'll say we might
have an opening in three weeks
and Mr speaker gentle lady we
all know that three weeks that
person may not be in the same
place with the same commitment
or safety or stability to have
found programming and I
certainly Mr speaker and gentle
lady would appreciate an
opportunity to work with you and
others to think critically about
how we increase these resources
especially when folks have kids
so that they can find a place
that safe and stable to both
invest in their own healing and
recovery and health and have
somewhere safe to bring their
kids along with them for that
process.
Mr speaker gentle lady I
appreciate that long answer that
you gave on that but you did not
answer my question over are
there any treatment facilities
right now in the state of New
Mexico that are being endorsed
recommended or otherwise
authorized by the department of
corrections and you said at this
time you did not know I will
bring you up to speed Mr speaker
and gentle lady from done in a
the answer is no there's no full
time treatment program for these
people that to desperately need
that help.
If the judge in sentencing.
Let's let's just say let's make
it really see because there's
Alcoholics Anonymous meetings
all over the state in New Mexico
and it is saved so many lives Mr
speaker with the judge would
you.
Of.
Recommend that whenever these
judges are saying okay this is
your first offense I'm gonna let
you out second offense you know
we're going to.
May increase the time that they
incarceration up to four years
would you say that it would be a
good idea for our judges decide
yes we will commute the sentence
but this is going to be what you
have to complete by going to and
in a meeting gourd a a meeting
and you do have to make reports
every week.
Mr speaker gentle lady those
treatment programs are there
that Mr speaker gentle lady.
A lot of these people.
Have gotten so.
Caught up in the drug racket
part of it.
That they do need is to conceive
care twenty four seven and until
they can complete the first part
of it however long it may take.
They don't need to be sidelined.
With this worrying about their
family if they are going to
completely heal Mr speaker.
They have to be focused on
themselves I want their families
to be safe don't get me wrong I
want their families to be safe I
want their families to recognize
the fact that their loved one is
getting the desperate treatment
that they need to make their
family home look here Mr
speaker.
I think it's just
unconscionable.
That for any of these people
that are suffering from any of
these.
Maladies.
Ungodly mind boggling melodies
that they are going through.
That New Mexico does not offer.
The help that these people do
need because once we let him out
and according to your bill Mr
speaker and gentle lady.
Whenever these taken out the
words Sheldon and put in place
in this place may increase it.
Up to one year over maybe
increase it up to four years or
may increase it up to eight
years.
When if we are doing that these
people are getting out.
And there's no treatment Mr
speaker and gentle lady they are
going back to the same
playground to that same group of
people that they went to jail
for.
Mr speaker that's not doing them
any good it's not doing their
family any good and is not doing
those people that live around
them in the in the.
It's not helping them one iota
and is not helping our
communities at all Mr speaker.
Yes.
If these if there was a
facilities in the state of New
Mexico I think it would be more
beneficial to have certain not
all of them but certain people.
The assigned to these facilities
for a long term where they can
get the help they need that will
not go back in.
Commit the same things over and
over and over because we know
what it calls per day to house a
prisoner Mr speaker.
The answer here is the cure to
the problem and I I agree that
this bill does not go.
Far enough in my opinion.
To be able to get the certain
people help Mr speaker I would
like to just the lady if she
agrees with what I'm.
Suggesting here as far as our
correctional department goes.
Mr speaker gentle lady I agree
that we need also the
programming and resources for
folks that are sentenced to a
prison term and for people on
the outside so I do agree that
in our state we have much work
ahead of us to build a
behavioral health system that's
responsive and appropriate for
our communities.
Mr speaker I think it would be a
lot less.
Money that would be very well
spent if we did heads treatment
facilities in the state of New
Mexico where these people could
be helped on a twenty four seven
basis Mr speaker gentle lady D.
I. and understand the intent of
your bills but I don't think
that we and I don't think the
citizens of the state of New
Mexico would be appreciative of
the fact that if they are going
back in there for their.
What would that be.
After their third.
Sell any conviction that they go
that they would be released Mr
speaker with that being said I
cannot support this bill thank
you very much the general is
further debate the gentleman
from the Representative Scott.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Dona Ana yield.
Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman.
Mr speaker gentle lady from the
line you have I'd like to
forward just a bit on the gentle
lady from Travis is one of
questioning your legislation
says position.
Possession of what in particular
place.
Mr speaker and gentleman these
are possession charges so and
make simple terms or layman's
terms like controlled substances
or drugs.
I would like to know earlier it
was names that marijuana was
potentially on this list but
because of recent legislation
passed in other years it's not
in the same felony sentencing
structure as other drugs.
So Mr speaker and gentle lady
this would be possession of
methamphetamine cocaine heroin
Perhaps he called me if it's
not.
What.
Mr speaker gentle man I don't
have a full list in front of me
but what we often refer to
possession is what people have
on them for personal use so this
is not someone with the
distribution or trafficking or
as other speakers have named of
the manufacturing of of
substances in New Mexico it's
what people are are holding on
to for personal use.
Speaker gentle lady but the
strokes that I just mentioned
which or generally speaking very
highly addictive would be.
Included in this legislation is
that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady and.
Or treat.
Valuable.
To a person incarcerated for
possession.
Mr speaker and gentleman it
depends.
Mr speaker gentle lady let me
rephrase the question or
treatment programs to persons
incarcerated in New Mexico or
they made available to those
people incarcerated to try to
rehabilitate them.
For the sentence is completed.
Mr speaker gentle gentlemen it
depends if they're potentially
incarcerated before a felony
conviction they like we don't
have access in most of our
county jails if they are
incarcerated in the New Mexico
corrections department with that
felony conviction it depends if
the program has opening in bed
space it depends what facility
they are housed at it depends
with the wait list look like it
depends if the corrections
department has determined that
building basic literacy is a
priority for that particular
offender in the system and that
should come first so Mr speaker
gentlemen it it really does
depend on where someone is
wanted is incarcerated but their
underlying needs are and what
the availability of potential
and very limited resources might
be within the facility where
they're housed.
Mr speaker and gentle lady it
would be the policy of this
state however that while a
person is incarcerated that
there would be some attempt to
rehabilitate them before they
are released back into society
would be an accurate statement.
Mr speaker gentlemen that was
certainly.
Be accurate if we had a system
that worked as it was designed
to Mr speaker.
Gentlemen.
In my time at the corrections
department in the previous
administration I know that there
was so many hard working
behavioral health specialists
and and CIOS and teams that
really wanted to make sure that
inmates had an opportunity to
access the programming and and
treatment that may be important
in their lives but unfortunately
that's just not how it works the
corrections department doesn't
have a budget that is adequate
enough to do that
the corrections department is
understaffed the corrections
department is under resource
also certainly I know we like to
believe that when someone goes
to prison rehab is the purpose
that unfortunately in most of
the country when someone goes to
prison they're locked up and
stayed learn better how to be a
criminal when they return to our
communities.
It is understood that often
treatment in prison is just less
effective inside than it is on
the outside.
So Mister speaker and gentle
lady okay I'm following up on
the gentle lady from Travis is
line of questioning.
Within the prison system there
is currently a potentially
treatment opportunities
available outside of the prison
system there are no is that
correct Mr speaker gentleman no.
It's not accurate.
Mr speaker and gentle lady could
you explain on Oct.
Mr speaker gentleman
Because we don't have a
behavioral health system in New
Mexico that works I appreciate
the leadership of our
appropriations committee for
being so thoughtful and building
further resources out I
appreciate the leadership of our
health and Human Services
secretary and behavioral health
director for working towards
that Mr speaker and gentleman
the they behavioral health
system we had was somewhat
crumbled over the last decade
and it's going to take a lot of
work of all of us to rebuild
what it looks like so that
people can access treatment and
programming and resources they
need when they need them close
to home and are real and
frontier communities whether
their parents whether their
elders whether they're
struggling with co occurring
disorders and mental illness and
substance use disorders
certainly New Mexico is not in a
place to meet the needs of our
families and I believe it's on
all of us to figure out how we
build a system that's going to
work.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
If I'm not mistaken you just
answered my question yes now let
me move on if you will I see
statistically.
The New Mexico has the highest
property crime rate in the
nation.
And the second highest.
Crime rate in the nation.
And all of my question would be
hello all all from we're.
For example property crime the
associated with the felony crime
of possession would be
frequently or infrequently.
Mr speaker gentlemen I can't
answer that question with
accuracy today.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady all will speculate if you
will.
That is a very high percentage
of these property crimes if you
will or in fact associated with
some form of drug addition.
Drug addiction and your
legislation in the photo plus
felony conviction.
Gives judges the option of
program these folks.
Mr speaker and gentle lady my
question would be at what point.
This do need protection.
From these folks would point.
These repeat offenders need to
be incarcerated.
And it does appear to be.
Rest of the whole spiel.
Mr speaker gentle lady that was
in fact question.
Mr speaker and gentleman
your plea is addressing the
underlying statute we have a
habitual offender enhancement in
place and it was designed
decades ago so that when some
New Mexicans are folks kept
showing up in the criminal
justice system they faced
additional penalty and.
As in time of for those repeat
offenses what this legislation
does is only eliminating those
official offender and hence
mints for people that are
Working with simple possession
again this is possession for
personal use if someone was part
of a property crime that level
to a felony offense the
judiciary would still have
discretion to impose the
habitual offender enhancements
this bill does not change that
so certainly again we are
amending current law and we we
even place that pile of of
discretion for our judges to use
should they decide it's
appropriate to level these one
for eight year prison terms on
top of the sentence for
someone's charge.
Mr speaker and gentleman ladies.
That concludes my questions and
very much appreciate the answers
thank you ma'am.
Through the debate the gentleman
from civil and McKinley
Representative Alcon.
Enough for the gentle lady to
close.
Mister speaker I appreciate the
thoughtful conversation and move
I do pass on the house Judiciary
Committee substitute for H. B.
one fourteen we were on final
passage or passage of House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for house bill one fourteen the
vote is now open.
Thirty seconds to close.
The clerk to call the member
without a recorded vote.
Representative Anderson.
Yes Representative Anderson both
yes.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of forty five in the affirmative
twenty five the negative house
Judiciary Committee substitute
Carrasco one fourteen is duly
passed the house.
Next one item eleven generated
Hialeah.
Are you ready on that item Mr
speaker would you please get me
to that point but the record
reflect all action necessary for
placing House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill twenty seven on final
passage is been taken gentlelady
to explain it all Mr speaker and
members of the house House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill twenty seven.
would help raise the awareness
about the systemic problem of
haze in in the state of New
Mexico Mr speaker.
House Bill House Judiciary
Committee substitute.
Shows that Hayes is an activity
expected of someone joining a
participating in a group that
humiliates degrades abuses all
endangers them regardless of a
person's willingness to
participate Mr speaker and
members of the house fifty five
percent of college students
involved in clubs teams and
organization experience hazy and
there has been for the budget
since two thousand seven
involving Hazen and Mr speaker
and members of the house there
was an incident just last year
in Las Cruces New Mexico at the
New Mexico State University that
involves shooting as an act of
Hazen Mr speaker I would like to
have us here you go to I'd like
to give to my co sponsor the
gentleman from Chavis.
Thank you Mr speaker the
gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln representative Nibert
thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentle lady
this bill has been a long time
coming and it's been my pleasure
to work with you want to I
believe that we do said need to
send a message to our college
students that the
at least get their attention
that this action or these
actions would be prohibited by
law and there's
two things that people need to
be aware of this bill calls for
a petty misdemeanor for the
action of pacing and a
misdemeanor for the action of
aggravated hazing although I
would submit that if an
aggravated hazing occurs there
will be more serious
consequences due to the actual
damage caused to the individual
that that is a victim
I believe that the if this is a
bill that everyone ought to get
behind and hope that the we see
that on the final of thank you
Mr speaker thank you gentle lady
for bringing this.
Thank you John and gentlelady
from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I now stand for
questions there is debate the
gentleman from Bernalillo Santa
Fe Torrance and Valencia
Representative McQueen.
Mr speaker gentle lady doesn't
generally do you Mr speaker I
yield to the gentleman from
Santa Fe.
Mr speaker gentle lady I saw
this bill in yes you to sherry
in fact we thought twice and I
am voted for this bill in the
past for versions of this bill
in the past.
I'm not gonna vote for today
because I.
Come to the conclusion that.
Simply criminalising more
behavior
especially when it's directed at
young people.
Is not the solution.
Mr speaker gentle lady I think
what we need to do is to create
an environment and foster a
culture where using.
Is not acceptable.
And I think that's done through.
Our collagen Mr yours.
teens are coach's your
professors are teachers are
student leaders.
And Mr speaker tell lady
ourselves.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
We had using in this chamber.
Mr speaker gentle lady it's not
using that.
Is likely to result in injury I
understand that.
And you could be pressed Office
just good fun.
We stand that.
Mr speaker gentle lady I think
most hazing incidents.
Most hazing that goes wrong
where someone is harmed.
Start out that way.
And I think that's the problem.
Mr speaker generally I think
he's in is the.
It's sort of the the grown up
version of pulling.
And Mr speaker tally I think
we've done.
Sidey is sort of learn to
address bowling you know I've
been school in a long time my
kids aren't really there yet
they're showing up there right
now so I I don't know how
successful that's been with
using is a continuation of that
mentality.
It troubles me that in our house
in this chamber.
We have a practice.
Making members seen.
On their first bill.
Mr speaker gentle lady I will
call the tradition because to me
it's a tradition is a good.
But we have a practice of doing
that.
Mr speaker generally that's
he's.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
It's disrespectful to our
members.
Is contrary to the decorum of
our house.
And so waste of our precious
time.
So Mister speaker gentle lady I
agree
we need to do something about
these.
And I think the first thing we
should do is and hazing in our
house.
Thank you Mr speaker talent.
Sure maybe John San Juan
Representative Montoya.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
General gentlelady from
Bernalillo yield Mister speaker
I yield to the gentleman from
San Juan.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady always concerns me when I
find myself in agreement with
the chairman of the house
energy.
Mr speaker and gentle lady that
is the first thing that came to
mind is
There is of.
What we might call traditions
initiations and hazing.
And
Mr speaker and gentle lady I'm
I'm trying to find out and as
I've been reading through
I have not seen this bill so I
quickly was reading through it
now and I'm I'm trying to see
what the differences between
hazing and have aggravated
hazing.
so could you please explain to
me the difference when hazing
and aggravated hazing Mr speaker
gentle lady Mr speaker you might
cause co sponsor.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
San Juan aggravated hazing is an
intentionally or recklessly
endangers the physical health
of.
Ridicules or humiliates the
student or prospective student.
The the.
Right part comes in when there's
actual damage to the individual.
Our.
I'm trying to point to you the
specific language.
It's on a page two wines twelve
and following.
We're aggravated hazing is
defined.
So Mr speaker and gentle lady or
gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln
How is it determined.
That is hazing not aggravated
but just hazing.
The the individual is it based
on that whether or not the
individual themselves.
Feels like it was made whatever
the intention was to humiliate
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentleman with.
The act of hazing.
Is going to be seen through the
eyes of a reasonable person.
And that reasonable person is
going to judge the actions as to
whether or not that crosses a
line that does the things that
are set forth in this
legislation.
Trying to humiliate embarrass
of.
It's center.
So Mister speaker and and gentle
lady.
Or gentleman
It appears to me that the person
themselves are the ones who is
going to.
Determine whether or not they
felt it was.
Over the line and then a
complaint would be made.
the problem that I understand
the reasonable person standard.
But the person who.
Feels like they work targeted.
and the speaker and and and and
gentle lady and gentleman.
Not everybody knows every
circumstance of every other
person.
But Mr speaker and and and and
gentle lady
A lot of discussion over a
perceived slight.
generally comes from the person
knows all of their circumstances
but many times Mr speaker and
and and and gentle lady
not every person involved in the
act understands the.
circumstances of that individual
the reason I'm saying this Mr
speaker and gentle lady
There.
Our.
Things that
somebody feels very very
sensitive about.
And they assume everybody is
picking on that because they're
sensitive about it but Mr
speaker and and gentle lady I
don't know that everybody knows
that and quite frankly
especially if there's a group
involved Mr speaker.
And gentlelady its it's maybe
one or two people may know
something about that person but
generally when there's a
incident of hazing it's not one
individual.
Against another individual it's
generally a team or a sorority
or as
As a Representative McQueen
mentioned the the house chamber
it's usually a group of folks
but not everyone knows.
About each individual's personal
circumstances however Mr speaker
and and gentleman.
There could be the instance.
where someone is.
Let's say there were there
haven't decided their sexuality.
And Mr speaker and and gentle
lady.
Everybody that group may not
know that however Mister
speaker.
And
and gentle lady.
Of whatever has been a tradition
of this act of hazing could
potentially have someone be very
very offended by it.
maybe they maybe it's singing a
song and maybe ask him to sing
the wrong song.
The problem Mr speaker gentle
lady is not the purposeful
intent when we know that
somebody purposely did something
but whole group.
May be involved and the reason.
That I'm I'm bringing this up.
Mr speaker and and gentle lady
was several years ago.
When my oldest son was in middle
school.
There are became what was a very
dangerous activity that took
place at school we're
I'm not exactly sure what the
circumstances were rounded but
several kids started with
pencils.
started's stabbing each other at
school.
Now when this was going on Mr
speaker and and and gentle lady
my son was not in school
because
My father in law had passed away
and my cell is very close to his
grandfather.
And Mr speaker and gentle lady.
When that happened my son return
to school the.
Two days later and that was
about the time Mr speaker gentle
lady that the incident had
caused a lot of and
consternation by the parents of
kids who had been stabbed with
pencils
and understandably so.
My son returned to school.
On a on a I believe it was on
Friday and he was suspended with
about seven other kids.
Because he was named.
As one of the kids who was
involved.
And Mr speaker and gentle lady
he was in school I went to the
school administrator and said.
Been away from school you're
very records show that he wasn't
here.
And you're lumping him in with
these other kids well the answer
was well he was named by other
students it was completely
irresponsible on behalf of that
school.
I literally
I vehemently and literally took
almost a week.
To have to have a his permanent
record expunged it was
ridiculous Mr speaker and
gentleman but he was thrown in
with a group of other kids.
Now that was something that
actually took place there was
discipline that was necessary.
The problem I have with.
Anything that has to do with
hazing is you end up taking the
individual out of it.
And so my concern Mr speaker and
gentle lady is.
Avid hazing is one thing.
But to include regular hazing
which most folks believe it to
be.
Harmless an initiation or
something like that obviously
there are varying degrees of
this my concern is.
The consequences that are here.
Are pretty substantial.
we've heard over and over and
over.
About and and and by the way Mr
speaker and and and and gentle
lady I've coached a lot of
sports.
And I have seen varying forms of
this I've always clap down on a
very hard as a coach.
But among the individuals
involved.
Most of them believe it to be
harmless we know it is not
harmless but most of them
believe it to be harmless.
Mr speaker and and and gentle
lady my concern is the
consequences here.
Are pretty harsh.
We just heard.
of Bill.
That we just passed out of this
body.
That.
Points to the fact that.
Young people do dumb things.
And we just passed a bill out
here that.
The the majority of the argument
from the sponsor was that.
They need to be given a chance.
My concern is.
That we're dealing
With these acts.
Average of hazing completely
understandable I were handling
that here.
But regular hazing.
For the majority of people.
Who are part of the group
especially if they went through
it themselves and I think it was
no big deal I was forced to sing
on the house floor I know I have
a terrible voice.
But I had to sing and I knew it
was coming and I was worried
about it from the moment I was
told about this tradition I was
told I have to do that.
And some people though have a
especially I would figure in
this body have a pretty good
sense of self I think you have
to have a fairly big ego to go
in front of people and tell them
that they should vote for you.
So I I think this is a it maybe
it's the wrong group to be
talking about this but in
schools
I'm worried about the others who
gets thrown in because they were
part of the group.
now the individual themselves
they don't understand that their
new.
And they don't as well know
what's necessarily the motives
of the other folks and some of
them think well I have to go
through it's only fair that you
go through this.
So Mister speaker gentle lady.
I don't disagree.
With the underlying reason for.
For the bill that you're
carrying.
I'm just worried that.
Especially we're talking about
college kids where we we have
now made it to where a parent
can claim their child.
On their taxes until they're
twenty six years old.
We we're we're calling them
still adolescents when when they
we were being told that their
brain.
It as an adult avid still hasn't
fully developed we're talking
about these kids in college that
are eighteen nineteen twenty
years old.
so I'm I'm just really concerned
about the severity.
Mr speaker gentle lady I'm not
I'm not looking to undermine
your bill as a matter of fact if
you remember you carry a similar
bill a couple years ago and I
actually sent Representative
Nibert to go there to help you
with that bill so I'm not
looking to undermine your bill
here but what I am saying is I
have some concerns.
Young people the dumb things.
And I'm worried that the
punishment that's contained here
might be that might be a little
too harsh.
Once again I'm not talking
necessarily aggravated hazing
really is almost just a criminal
act but I'm worried that because
there are several folks who part
of the group.
Maybe some of those kids that
are involved are just not strong
enough to tell they may not have
the confidence to tell the other
folks that they're involved
with.
Wait a minute I don't want to
have anything to do with this
because if they do that are they
now going to be subject of
ridicule themselves and maybe
some further acts of aggression
by those who are more the folks
spearheading so so Mister
speaker and gentle lady at the
more this is more of just trying
to have a conversation with you
than anything.
I'm I'm a little uncomfortable.
With some of the harshness here.
Because I I don't believe
everyone.
Who is around and that that
might be the best way to put it.
Around when the hazing takes
place in reality just might not
be have a strong of personality
to stand up to the other folks
that they're part of the group
with.
And and pushing back so I'm not
trying to.
Like I said I'm not trying to be
too harsh on this bill because I
understand the thought behind it
I'm just a little concerned that
that we could be going a little
too far.
with with former dealing with a
group and so with that Mr
speaker and and and generally of
all this the rest of the debate.
The Germans further debate the
gentleman from the
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentle lady yield Mister speaker
I yield to the gentle mentally.
Thank you.
My first question to the bill's
sponsors Mr speaker.
And gentle lady would be.
What is the impact of the petty
misdemeanor and a misdemeanor.
To a person under the age of
eighteen.
And to the person over the age
of eighteen what are the
implications of the petty.
Misdemeanor and a misdemeanor
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
the a misdemeanor could be over
the age of eighteen could be
incarceration up to one year and
a petty misdemeanor would be six
months but it has no mandatory.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady so.
Let's go with the concept of
incarceration for a minute.
is there any other penalties
that are associated with this
potential.
Of at.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
Mr Mr speaker and gentleman from
Lee for either one of those they
can in this bill that could not
also be assessed fines.
Or appropriations.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady is there a limit on
the funds.
Mr speaker gentle lady Mr
speaker and gentleman from Lee
yes.
Okay Mr speaker gentle lady with
what's the maximum final level.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Lee the one with the over
eighteen if you ask about that
would be
one K. which is the agency
misdemeanor and the petty
misdemeanor would be for.
Five hundred.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady.
So if I understand correctly if
you're over eighteen you can you
could potentially spend up to a
year in jail.
The face of the of one thousand
dollars and potentially or
appropriations along with that
Mr speaker kind lady so how long
Mr speaker and gentle lady how
long does the state on a
person's record.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
lead to clarify.
Are you your statements it's
could be one year in jail all
the all the fine but it's not
goals.
I
think one of the probation I
misspoke.
Thank you very much and Spencer
how long does a misdemeanor
state on a person's record Mr
speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker and the gentleman
from Lee based on all of new
expansion expansions law it can
be stay there for you and then
be expunged expunge it.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady so
My next question with respect to
this would be doesn't Mr Maynard
GPU from holding a certain level
of security clearance.
In an employment.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Lee it can it depends on the
employer.
Mr speaker gentle lady I do not
believe that it would affect
your security clearance for a
misdemeanor crime.
Thank you Mr speaker magical
sponsor.
Thank you for that clarification
it just there there.
With the representatives of the
following me the those before me
I I I understand what the intent
here is the I do I do have
concerns was the potential
impact that this could have on
somebody and
That in so many ways could be
innocent bystander and as we've
watched over the last year with
some of the rights of the path
and destruction of properties
In Santa Fe on our square.
The destruction of the monument.
You know we had people with good
intentions showing up being
associated with people that went
there to destroy and and that
concerns me when when you can
have somebody innocent in the
middle of the group and then
could potentially have.
Such an impact.
and so.
Let me Mr speaker kind kind lady
let me continue all of my
questioning.
My first question is is there a
significant problem in New
Mexico.
With respect to hazing what's
the percentage of students in
school at a college in the
number of hazing incidents so we
may have on a twoyear basis.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Lee I am aware of the hazing
situation that took place at a
high school in Las Vegas New
Mexico which was horrible I am
aware of hazing that has taken
place in University of New
Mexico I'm NMAA you'll Mr
speaker I don't have the total
figure to give you on how many
dairies of the State.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady
for our higher education
institutions.
As the ones that we have in the
state of New Mexico.
How many of our student activity
Hamburg's already significantly
address raising thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Lee I don't know of I'm sure
that universities in the a
discussion to me in terms of
carrying this bill did state
that universities do emphasize
Consequence consequences but
just encourage them to stop the
hazing
from NMSU and the University of
New Mexico they did both speak
to me Mr speaker I do not have
that figure in how many have
been in their books.
I will turn it over to Michael
Sanchez.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady
Right now I'm not aware of any
him books that haven't but one
hundred percent of them will
have it if this legislation gets
signed into law.
So Mister speaker and gentle
lady because sponsors
We're we're implementing our
intent is to implement a law
that the colleges in the state
of New Mexico have not depart
determined or deem necessary to
put in their activity books.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Lee yes they have.
They they gave input into this
piece of legislation.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I I
understand that they gave input
with respect to this
legislation.
But.
I guess the point is I'm driving
to is is of our colleges at this
point have not and our board of
of of directors for each college
have not determined this to be a
significant in this issue to be
in their handbooks their student
handbooks.
Would you would you would you Mr
speaker and the gentleman from
the New Mexico is one of six
states that does not have a
specific law prohibiting or
defining Hazen so.
Based on that that they would
put it into the Humboldt as a
law when is that a low in the
state of New Mexico.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
understand that but in our
student handbooks at all the
schools if you check out a piece
of equipment recreational
equipment.
They have the rules with respect
returning now but we don't have
a house bill that addresses
whether or not they should
return that piece of equipment
looked repercussions are.
Let me continue on to point.
We have colleges in the state of
New Mexico that our board of
directors at each college has
not seen this to be a
significant enough issue up to
this point in time to actually
put it in their student handbook
and yet we want to rattle off
work and I'm I'm trying to get
to the bottom of this thank you
Mr speaker thank you gentle
lady.
Next to the general fund going
into grant and Sierra
Representative SS.
Thank you Mr speaker with the
kind lady from Bernalillo please
yield Mister speaker I yield to
the gentleman from.
Grant County.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
gentle lady I I just wanted to
to bring up a point and and I
appreciate the legislation
approved appreciate the
discussion here today it
obviously allows us to see all
the different angles from every
member that that has made a and
brought up their their points I
just had a quick question up you
know
Representative Representative
problem excuse me Mr speaker the
gentleman from Bernalillo Mr
Garcia be good.
I was what I was willing to
participate I guess one of the
sales will be to participate in
in this in in that traditional
singing and so my question is
if I if I participated in that
in the future I don't know if
this is been affected because
this is for higher education but
if I was to we won't Charlie.
Persistent participate what
another member be able to.
do you feel that this would
cause another member could have
another member of follow up a
complete over that that's a
complete.
Gentleman from grant are you
referring to the singing on the
floor is that I'm not a member
right yes ma'am what Mr speaker
and the gentleman from grant.
This bill sets up a structure
that shows whether there was
actual.
There was reckless
Whether it was reckless intent.
Just.
All physical mental injury to a
person on the house of
representatives I don't see
where this bill relates to
somebody B. and
mentally in.
Physically injured.
All there was reckless
intentional harm done to a
person.
You Mr speaker gentle lady I
just wanted to bring that up I I
I do appreciate that discussions
stop I was just you know I I I
I.
I do appreciate every once in a
while we have to leading up to
the conversational bit and
hopefully make I put a little
smile on everyone's face I was
hoping that I would on.
I would I guess so participate
in giving Mr the gentleman from
Bernalillo a song in Spanish so
I'll end with that thank you
much I yield.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman from grand.
Grant good because.
Was it will still here SO Mr
speaker gentle in.
Okay seeing are for the debate
gentle lady to close.
Mr speaker first like to thank
my co sponsor reserves are
generally the gentle lady from
Sandoval Representative Powdrell
Culbert.
Thank you Mr speaker Mr speaker
and gentle lady from Bernalillo
will yield Mister speaker I
yield to the gentle lady from
Santa Mr speaker gentle lady can
you tell us how long you've been
working to get this piece of
legislation passed.
Mr speaker and the gentle lady I
think it's either three or four
years.
Five years five years and Mr
speaker and gentle lady can you
please explain to the body.
Your persistence for getting
this piece of legislation on
both.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
this would serve as a deterrent
to the act of hazing.
R. Mr speaker gentle lady I am a
member of a sorority and this is
in the state of New Mexico and
many of all colleges and there
are fraternal fraternities and
clubs and organizations and Mr
speaker gentle lady there
certain things that goes on in
it within that the group I mean
the culture of these
organization that perhaps they
determine well they did not
realize that it is an act of
hazing one because we doesn't
have anything in New Mexico that
said Hayes in our substantial
risk of physical or mental
injury can be considered AZ and
Mr speaker and gentle lady from
Santa I'm looking forward to the
fact that.
Young people in colleges would
be aware have knowledge that
hazy in to the point of
committing physical harm is
wrong to the body of any student
and so Mr speaker and gentle
lady from Santa Fe to have a
young man in college I do have a
young man that was meant to in
high school to be part of a
fraternity.
I hope that as a mother that
some day if he decides to
participate in a fraternity that
he would not be hazing to the
point of that and so many
parents across the state will
know that their children perhaps
paticipate in clubs and
organizations would not be given
an opportunity to be recklessly
harm all.
Be physically all mental injury
to them Mr speaker I need to
clarify with you the gentle lady
from Santa that
Hey is it does not include
coaching training condition and
physical education customary
Medicaid budget and school
sanctioned events I just want
our young people to be aware
that they can not and they
should not participate in hazing
to the point of that.
A gun and somebody is shooting
them to show that there are
Station part of the book club
should.
Many times these young people
may not know that.
It is listed and it is and the
law is in New Mexico realize
that when you shoot somebody yes
currently yes Mr speaker this
all.
This is that.
Many of these young women and
men may not be aware that the
consequences to Hazen and that
is my goal Mr speaker and the
gentle lady from Santa Mr
speaker and gentle lady did you
any discussion with any of the
powers to be at our
universities.
In regards to that if you were
able to get this through this
house of representatives in the
benches to the governor's desk
that they would.
And student handbooks so that.
Young people who are going into
college would know that this is
now against the law Mr speaker
and gentle lady from Santa yes I
did from the university of New
Mexico and and I miss you.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
us in support of this cause
having worked today PED I worked
the streets in the work street
gangs with the
with the police officers and
there's a big difference.
And we play.
And gang activity.
And having been a student who
was very involved in way too
much staff at the university of
New Mexico.
You know there were times that
you wondered about the safety of
individuals at that particular
time.
Who were in the fraternities so
I think you're New Mexico that
we need to start.
Somewhere of letting our kids
know that this act these types
of activities.
Are not sanction.
I served on the state's parole
board for seven.
Seven years and it's interesting
how if you have that opportunity
to look at an individual's
record and see where he or she
is specially if there adult.
You know for that kind of went
off the tracks and when you look
at some of what goes on on the
campuses and some of what goes
on in the streets that's not a
big difference what we have laws
on the streets.
For young people in gang
activity but yet we do not have
the laws on the campus so Mister
speaker gentle lady I stand in
support of this piece of
legislation thank you.
Seeing no further debate the
gentle lady to close Mr speaker
I started out saying that house
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill twenty seven
would help raise awareness about
the systemic problem of haze in.
Across this country it is that
it's it's there but forty four
states have passed laws
that.
Hazing laws Mr speaker I hope
New Mexico would be one of those
states added on to it and Mister
speaker I would like to say Mr
speaker in the house of
representatives in the state of
New Mexico I strongly believe
that saying in because I sing on
the floor a lot all the time
it's not considered hazing and
and us just saying is not
considered hazing I would hate
to see that somebody bring a law
that says you can't sing on the
house floor so Mister speaker I
know that house Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill twenty seven do now pass.
We are on final passage of House
Judiciary Committee sensitive or
House Bills one G. seven.
The vote is now open and.
To the your legislator not a
singer.
Thirty seconds to close.
The clerk to call the member
without a recorded vote.
Representative Lord.
You.
Representative Lord both yes.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of sixty in the affirmative line
in the negative house Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill twenty seven has duly
passed the house.
Gentlelady from the song was Rio
Arriba Sandoval and Santa Fe are
you ready on item eighteen.
Let the record reflect election
necessary for placing House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House leader veterans
military affairs committee
substitute for House Bill twenty
with an emergency clause on
final passage has been taken
gentlelady to explain it all.
The gentle lady I just didn't.
Thank you thank you very much Mr
speaker
it's a pleasure to be here with
you Mr speaker and the other
members of the body this is a is
a bill that is a long time
coming and a long time over to
and it's an honor to be
presenting it to you Mr speaker.
Along with my co sponsors
Representative Rubio Roybal
Caballero and Representative
Daymon Ely.
I'd like to begin The
presentation Mister speaker by
simply reviewing what the bill
provides.
The bill provides that all
employees all private employers
in the state so.
Offer okay paid sick leave.
Up to sixty four hours a year.
Accrued.
At in the following way one hour
for every thirty hours worked
that's in section four of the
bill Mr speaker.
In section five of the bill
there is a provision that allows
for.
Supplemental lease in times of
of public health emergency.
And that provision allows an
additional eighty hours to be
offered in an area where there
is a public health emergency
declared.
Section six.
Recognizes that some employers
may offer more generous sick
leave policies and in those
circumstances Mr speaker this
bill is not intended to disrupt
those policies.
Section eight Mr speaker
imposes notice requirements on
employers.
And
requires a notice to employees
as well as posting requirements.
The bill also Mr speaker
includes anti retaliation
provisions that protect
employees who may complain about
their employer not following the
act.
Section eleven provides in
forced missed by the enforcement
mechanisms Mr speaker.
Section twelve.
allows for civil actions to be
brought and defines a burden of
proof as well as certain time
limitations Mr speaker.
And lastly well perhaps not
lastly but section thirteen.
Provides certain penalties that
may be imposed seven employer be
found to have not complied with
the statutory provisions of the
act.
And lastly there's a there are
some just technical classes at
the end of the bill Mr speaker I
would point out Mister speaker I
do have an amendment to the bill
and I ask for guidance as how
you'd like to handle that and
I'm quite certain I co sponsors
will would like to address
generally when we have comments
from your co sponsors and then
we'll take up consideration of
the budget very well Mr speaker
with that I would like to yield
the floor to my co sponsor from
going on a County Representative
Rubio.
The general any other
Representative Rubio.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you Representative of the gentle
lady from Los Alamos well you
yield.
I will gladly yield to the
gentle lady from going on.
Thank you of the gentlelady from
Los Alamos
it is absolutely a great honor
to be able to bring this
legislation for to you all this
late afternoon early evening
I am
Overblown a little bit by just
the the the amount of work that
has gone into this effort for
folks who don't know I house
bill twenty also had a companion
bill early on in the session
which was house bill thirty
seven and it was sponsored by
myself and a few others and over
the course of this legislative
session we have combined house
bill twenty in house bill thirty
seven
to what you read today and it
has been a great evolution and
and certainly the foundation in
which I feel is a step forward
to addressing not only what the
lady from from the gentlelady
from Los Alamos has mentioned
that it of it's a moment in
which we needed to address a
long time ago
But it's it's all we're also
doing it in a moment when so
many inequities have been
unveiled to us over the course
of the last year many inequities
that many of us actually knew
existed
but I think through this global
pandemic have to spend that much
more in the fight and so house
bill twenty really works to
build a foundation on how we
move forward
not only to address what I still
believe is is an emergency to
try to adhere to our communities
here in New Mexico but also to
really paint to really build a
path forward for for many of our
our communities all around the
state.
You know half of New Mexicos
workers have indoor the comment
pandemic.
Feeding our state caring for
children without access to
earned sick time.
They have gotten sick at work
they have done their family's
sake much of which could have
been avoided.
If they had earned sick time.
In the meantime we are giving
small businesses almost one
billion dollars in relief.
And so for me and this
legislation the least we can do
an exchange is to provide the
same protections to workers that
places like Colorado which did
so last year in the middle of
the pandemic and Arizona which
passed one several years back.
I want to just see really really
quickly
That.
No matter where this bill sets
the cap on hours of earned sick
time.
The burning time is still very
slow.
That's to say someone working
full time we'll have to work six
weeks six weeks to earn one day
off.
No one will ever be able to earn
the full eight days off unless
they work close to two thousand
hours in a year.
Studies have already shown that
the federal paid sick days
provided under the cares Act
limited COVID transmission.
And a wealth of other studies
show how this is good for
business because it increases
productivity and reduces
absenteeism.
And preventing workplace
violence by providing time off
for survivors of domestic
violence and stalking.
Until we pass this bill.
Workers in New Mexico will
continue to work sec.
Are we really okay with that in
this state and in this age.
Are we really okay with workers
taking unpaid time off when they
are already earning poverty
wages.
Are we okay with the fact that
impacted workers are more likely
to be workers of color.
No of course not and that's why
we must pass this now.
A lot of the the effort that has
come forward with house bill
twenty is from of thousands of
workers who have come forward
and I think most of you have all
experienced it in the last few
weeks as this legislative body
has gone virtual during the
session is the hundreds of
people who have come forward to
not only share public comment
the really share their stories
and I had.
Many many people reach out to
me.
Sending me stories about how
paid sick leave and paid sick
time.
Could potentially transform
their lives for the better.
We have people like that SO that
us who
lives in Santa Fe with her
sixteen year old daughter.
The school.
Her entire family tested
positive for COVID nineteen.
Neither she nor her husband had
paid sick leave.
Her husband was hospitalized for
two months before he passed away
and during that time he was
never paid and time with her
debts have grown.
The seven but address.
You also.
For thirteen years and
representative.
Someone from the restaurant
industry.
She's never had the benefit of
paid sick time.
When she and her husband tested
positive for COVID nineteen they
were fired by their employer and
not paid for the time that they
were in quarantine.
Yes ma'am.
She and her husband have a nine
month old baby.
And her baby became seriously
ill of COVID nineteen.
Her husband had to miss work to
take care of them and during the
two weeks that he took care of
them they did not pay him
because he did not have the
benefit of paid sick time.
Gobble.
He was born and raised in
Farmington.
He works as a server in a local
restaurant in as a gymnastics
coach in in a local gym.
He lost his job at the
restaurant where he works and
how to quarantine for thirty
days without pay after his co
workers
after some of his coworkers
tested positive.
He's taking out loans and
borrowed money from family
members after using up to
savings just to survive.
Some believe us.
She's living Gallup for twenty
one years with her husband and
her two children and five
grandchildren.
She works in a small business
with four other workers.
And you to the pandemic their
hours have been substantially
reduced.
But because he's part of a high
risk group she does not have to
pay it she that risk of COVID
nineteen and yet she still
doesn't have paid sick days.
Okay got it okay.
Resides costs.
She works in a company caring
for the sick at home.
And therefore she is in direct
contact with vulnerable people
every single day.
She has to be in perfect health
to take care for patients.
If she gets sick her income will
be reduced and she doesn't have
paid sick days.
Choosing between not earning her
salary or going to work.
Clients at risk.
Just that.
Is another individual.
And her story begins with her
daughter attending school and
her so and and her and her
school suddenly contacting her
to let her know that someone in
her classroom was was tested
positive for COVID nineteen and
that the classroom had been
exposed.
And they were expected to
quarantine.
She is a mother.
And the only care taker for
child I'm also works at a
childcare center.
And.
Decided to forego going to work
so she because she had to stay
home and take care of her
daughter.
And also because she just didn't
want to expose anyone in the
child care center.
She quarantine with her
daughter.
But unfortunately because she
depends on the state paycheck to
survive.
It was just she she lost out on
she lost out on.
We'll see you will.
Is the early childhood childhood
educator.
At a at a local children's
academy in Albuquerque.
And every day she says she's
exposed to diseases and she runs
the risk of making her family
members sick.
As a mother two children she
needs these paid sick days to be
able to financially support
herself and her family during
these difficult times.
Policia who works at a grocery
store.
Is scared every day to go to
work and to be exposed.
Her dad was her landlord also
also suffers from multiple
sclerosis and she worries that
she's she's she would get him
sick.
She needs better pay she needs
paid sick leave and she needs
better safety precautions.
Alyssa was a child care
provider.
Says that they were supposed to
be open to the they were
supposed to be open and
essential workers just doesn't
understand why we have to be
open to the public knowing that.
We're expected to minimize
contact with everyone that we
have that we're in contact with
even though we're not given
protective gear offered hazard
pay.
She would like to have measures
to ensure her safety she still
doesn't want to feel like she's
working just to get sick.
Okay it is in the delivery
service.
He's tired he's scared.
He needs a break.
It provides for two little boys
and some days you just can't get
out of bed.
He works in delivery and the
workload is just becoming too
much.
And he is also in the deliveries
in the delivery industry.
And she is struggling as well.
Crystal.
Also in the food industry.
Session doesn't know too much
but there have been positive
cases within the last week and
she's scared to go back to work.
Because she's afraid to bring it
back to her kids and her
husband.
And not really sure what to do
she needs support.
But it's unclear what a future.
What our future lies.
Emily is a health care worker.
She said she still sees people
going to work with symptoms or
with positive results.
People are scared to go to work
in fear of losing their jobs and
not being able to support their
families.
She says we all deserve
protected here hazard pay paid
sick time.
Jake works in automotive.
He works for car dealership and
is afraid out work because he
doesn't have hazard pay or paid
sick time or enough protective
measures.
If you have to choose between
his biggest fear would go with
if you had to choose his biggest
fears that he would get sick and
you wouldn't be able to pay
rent.
He said that they haven't been
provided with enough safety
equipment nor is there any
concern from management besides
making money he wants some hope.
Your words in the food service
industry.
He has not had any income for
the last three weeks.
It was a delivery driver for
Papa John's and spun
fortunately.
Had pneumonia so he hasn't been
able to work he has no income
and it's not safe for him to be
at work with a viral infection
going around so he hasn't he
hasn't gone.
Julie is from Carlsbad.
Because it's considered an
independent contractor.
He's also a senior citizen and
she had to move around a lot
over the course of the last year
in order to provide better
employment and better access to
Of places so that she can come
you because her car keeps
breaking down.
And it's expensive for her to be
able to get it fixed.
Audrey is a health care provider
in Farmington.
She says we have to go out into
public for clat clients anytime
they need something I need the
security of knowing will not
fall behind financially if I get
sick.
We.
From Aztec also works in
healthcare.
So we don't get paid sick we
don't get paid sick leave
employed we don't get paid sick
leave.
At the same time we're not
staying home when we're sick.
Many are bringing the virus into
our facility.
We need paid sick leave so
people can stay home and take
care of themselves and protect
our patients and our community.
Marian from Las Vegas says that
she has to leave her kids alone
at home.
If I take if I get sick taking
care of them and there's what
happens to me in mine.
I don't have paid sick time.
Rhonda who works in delivery.
So we're supposed to get PPE
kits of gloves masks and
sanitizers but we're still
waiting for it.
As a delivery driver I am
eligible for PTO or hazard pay.
We are as a result we get no
benefits we work our goal
without.
She says she's tired.
She was a grocery worker.
Has no paid sick leave.
Mary from Aztec.
Also works in the healthcare
field.
She says we said of COVID
patients out of the hospital and
nursing homes and exposing
ourselves numerous times in a
day.
Still we go home wondering at
that one time is the time or PPE
doesn't work enough and we bring
it home to our families.
We don't have paid sick leave
our families don't have paid
sick leave.
I want to prepare a conversation
some kind of relief.
J. from
our employers are making record
profits and only giving us the
scraps that will continue to do
so unless we make them give us a
better deal.
I want paid sick time.
Stephanie in Alamogordo.
My bosses are actively telling
me not to enforce the mask or
limited capacity requirements.
I want businesses that will
support our workers.
As a part timer I have no sick
leave.
If one of my customers gets me
sick I have no recourse and my
company is not helping me to
prevent that.
Just the bar Dr Jessie Barnes.
He's worked at a primary care
clinic in the south valley for
the last eleven years.
He's also the father of two
school age children he doesn't
know how we would have made it
through this past year without
the paid sick leave in this
clinic.
Unfortunately he says he sees on
a daily basis the impact that
the lack of paid sick leave has
on our community members.
He's reminded of the patient you
help cultural Sarah in her
sixties was work six days a
week.
In office buildings for over
twenty years by the time she
came to get her breast mass
evaluated she already had
advanced cancer.
She tearfully told him how she
put off visits and screening
tests like mammograms for year
after year after watching co
workers lose needed pay or even
their jobs for taking time off.
We know that this pandemic has
highlighted and has exasperated
existing inequity in our
society.
We should make paid sick leave
mandatory.
Aaron hands bro is the mother is
a single mother of two.
And for most of her life she's
working either service industry
or contract positions.
In both of these types of jobs
days you don't work or days that
you don't get paid.
Because she does not have any
paid maternity leave she had to
go back to work within weeks of
both of her kids being born.
With no real recovery time after
her birth after the birds she
got sick easily when she
returned to work.
We know paid sick leave and she
often had to go to work when was
she was sick and this just
became a vicious cycle.
She would get sick been able to
rest and recover somehow push
through and then get sick again
within a few weeks.
It took many years for her mean
system to get back to full
strength.
She would never want to see
another new parent go through
this.
Sam is another individual.
She's an immigrant.
She's a single mother a domestic
worker caring for disabled
people in their homes.
She's proud of what he's
contributed to our state.
She believes she's the
cornerstone of our economy and
she believes that she is the
reason that she makes it flow.
During the pandemic her
financial situation was so
impacted her hours have
drastically decreased and like
thousands did not qualify for
any kind of relief and safety
net programs to sustain herself.
She tested positive for COVID
nineteen for risk for risking
going out to work to put food on
the table.
And what she feared most was
that as a single mother she was
infecting her nine year old son.
You're not.
Is another individual.
She's also an immigrant mother
of three daughters.
To the domestic worker you have
no access to paid sick time.
Last year her entire family
tested positive for COVID
nineteen.
And it also started because of
the work environment that she
was in and the employers lack of
action in preventing spread in
providing the paid sick leave
that was available last year in
across the country.
When her husband started showing
symptoms of COVID nineteen he
immediately told the employer
however he was questioned about
it.
Whether or not he was really
sick in Helsinki truly was.
Insinuating he had to go back to
work.
Right after their daughter's.
And her started showing symptoms
they also wanting to stop the
spread.
However her husband's employer
did not given access to paid
sick time.
And for reasons of delegate help
her husband the breadwinner.
It took a great toll on their
ability to survive financially
all resulting in impacting their
mental health since they have
three daughters and bills to
pay.
This
is another individual.
Who have been impacted very much
by.
COVID nineteen and not having
access to paid sick time.
She too was an essential
domestic worker taking care of
children.
An immigrant mother of three
children M. and and also
struggling the pandemic has
impacted many low income working
families like her especially in
matters of health and financial
stability.
Last year there was an outbreak
of COVID at her work and her
employer's response was not
adequate which led to more
positive cases.
During this time lawyer never
provided federal paid sick days
making decisions about her
health and being unable to feed
her family was even more
difficult.
She finally decided not to go
back to work due to the multiple
positive cases and also because
her doctor needed her to undergo
surgery to prioritize for health
since you've been fighting
cancer.
It is an essential domestic
worker.
An immigrant mother.
She's been living in Albuquerque
for seven years and has never
had access to paid sick time.
In November she tested positive
for COVID nineteen was laid off
by her employer without sick pay
and was denied access to federal
paid sick time.
Blanka.
Is another individual.
He is she lives in buffalo New
Mexico and is the wife and
mother of two boys.
She's a seasonal worker she
works initiate Act and in the in
the book.
She thought that not having
rights was only for farm workers
but she's learned that there are
many like her and many feel that
they do have every right to
budget.
She suffers from asthma.
Thank you to this pandemic per
family.
And her decided that she would
not work because they knew that
if she got sick she would not
have rights.
Because of this decision they
have suffered financially.
Her eldest son decided to start
working in a restaurant realize
that this company is only taking
young people in order to not.
find them a lot of the different
right under under our laws and
as a mother her concern is great
for him and her family.
Her husband is also important
worker and essential worker who
has not stopped working since
the pandemic began.
This is why she's fighting for
paid paid paid sick time.
Chris Owen is from southern New
Mexico.
Thank you for representing a
coalition of workers.
She's been in the service
industry for over seventeen
years and has mostly worked in
front of house rules copy Breese
bartender maitre D. lounge
Management.
In the restaurant industry she
says we often have to choose to
work over getting health care.
For example in December of
twenty nineteen she watched
viral from Kyle from Kyle
infection spread among servers
you can not miss work or pay for
care as it passed among our
entire staff over two weeks she
said they all became she also
became infected.
It culminated into one hundred
two degree fever and she could
hardly move.
She said this would have
happened if employees had sick
time to get well and not affect
others.
The general atmosphere within a
restaurant is that you work
through illness to see how you
feel once you're here.
You most often you're you're
must you must often attempt to
work or get the ship covered
before taking a sick day.
Kitchen staff for hourly workers
often work paycheck to paycheck
missing one shift can make it
hard to cover living expenses.
Catherine.
Is also from southern New Mexico
and she's been working in the
restaurant industry for sixteen
years since she was sixteen
years old.
She's been a hostess and server.
In addition to many other roles
in restaurants.
And her experience many times
to work with state co workers
because they were unable or
unwilling to go home and during
these times the rest of the
staff had to duck and Dodge sick
co workers and avoid getting
themselves thank.
I've also seen bosses refused to
believe their employees are
actually sick.
In fact one time I called in
sick with ping guy that I caught
from my daughter I was actually
made to drive to work to prove
that I really had pink guy.
This is not only unsanitary and
unsafe but it was also demeaning
to not be believed or trusted.
I don't see any.
Is also from southern New Mexico
thank you representative
Absolutely of health care in
this process.
She's an immigrant a domestic
worker and she's the mother of
two daughters and her husband is
a mechanic.
She also represents families in
her community that would greatly
benefit from hospital twenty.
For her it's important because
for many years she was injured
which left her with no mobility
and relaxed and the only way for
her to move was to direct
yourself around.
She was unable to work which
left her without a job and could
no longer take our daughters to
school and they fell behind on
their expenses.
Is another individual.
She comes from a low income hard
working family which has been
forced to work through illness
to make ends meet.
She's worked in the hospital and
hospitality industry for almost
four years.
Where she worked while she was
sick it was normal for co
workers to come in sick even
when handling food.
Her mother sixty two years old
and still working she cannot
afford to miss a state that they
have a work.
She's had many jobs in different
industries and it's very common
for workers to come in sick.
To work at a small local
restaurant review self workers
season cough in your food.
She remembers co workers coming
in second having to leave before
their shift ended because they
could not do it any longer.
Maybe and I'm.
She is from southern New Mexico
has worked in the restaurant
industry for five years.
She was asked to she she's asked
for only a week off for her
health care because she had the
flu and almost she had the flu
and almost for five years.
She got the flu from a colleague
at work who even though she knew
she was sick couldn't stop
working.
She went to the doctor because
she was ill but it did not
improve after three days she's
going.
Representative Rubio gentlelady
just a moment of the gentleman
from Chavis Eddy and Otero.
Thank you Mr speaker I.
Representative point of order I
believe.
that the three hour time limit.
Under the rule is says.
debate for well it's under
consideration.
Of the last.
Twenty minutes.
Has very little to do with the
bill it's all part of the
introduction in the time should
stop start when the lady
finishes her introduction.
Gentleman what I'd like to do is
this is I I disagree with you
the three hour starts when the
bill was introduced because then
it's under consideration
however.
There has to be time for
thoughtful debate and so I'm
gonna ask the gentle lady from
Los Alamos Rio Arriba and
Sandoval County to see if we
could wrap this up and get to
debate but gentle lady are
Representative Rubio you still
of the four but I'm gonna ask if
you would mind the previous
manager mark so you got to
debate thank you.
Thank you Mr speaker and.
About to finish so thank you
I think it was just important
for folks to hear
the.
This isn't even.
I mean this is just a very small
number of people who are
directly impacted by how house
bill twenty affects the state of
New Mexico and those of us
moving forward.
and so with that I will I will
yield back to the representative
to the gentle lady from Los
Alamos
and and move forward.
Mr speaker would it be
acceptable if we allowed five
minutes to our other co sponsor
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Gentlelady ER but I I would like
to limit the gentle lady from
Bernalillo to five minutes
because I do want to get to
debate the rules to provide that
there should be thoughtful
debate and I want to spend all
the time on introduction
legislation.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
I'd like to yield the floor to
the gentle lady from Bernalillo
for for brief introduction of
the bill thank you.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady please feel.
Yes gentlelady from Bernalillo
I'd happily yield to you.
Thank you very much and I'm
gonna begin my comments very
briefly on explaining to those
that are listening in Spanish
because we had countless
Testimony in committee from
Spanish speaking women have
interpreter so I'd like for them
to understand quickly what we're
introducing and why we're
introducing it very quickly but
unless you spend a school jungle
you know the C. let's guest
house present dental lately he's
last Yang table stand is the
interim.
Testimonial.
You know speedy I don't care
we are almost a stellar he's
let's see on.
This I think.
Was this must be the NM care
representative that almost last
four cease humanness.
When does the story just okay
it's been.
He was present that Amanda Soto
simple May Day but I get to be
anonymous the bill money almost
although in went them fully in
less throughout the school so
you very much this so right I
don't know but it's not a felon
he's less you on let's get on
with that yes Representative
Bandel locations there is no
city Adam Hernandez thank god on
and suspense the monuments the
school meet this.
Thank you Mr speaker I just and
and gentle lady I wanted the
person said again brave
testimony to enter stem that we
were all that we took their
testimony during committee and
are presenting it with our a
presentation of this legislation
today and I just want to quickly
point on several things and
thank Representative
go sponsor Rubio for mentioning
and talking about the many many
stories because.
Mr speaker and gentle lady the
reason I one of the reasons for
high I supported this
legislation and actually have
worked my entire life I've come
full circle in working my entire
life for this legislation as
many of you know I'm a labor and
community organizer and part of
the work that I have done has
been to ensure that we have
living wages and that employees
workforce across the board at
all levels receive benefits
better.
Without without saying them
their rights benefits and living
wages are rights of every
employee I worked in this field
for the UFW organizer I worked
as a file organizer many of you
know about the fund us straight
of women that were with the
plant of over four thousand
women that were required to work
long hours not take bathroom
breaks unless it was time they
were limited to very
short lunch breaks they weren't
given any breaks.
And they work tirelessly on the
line to make
So on the line and many of them
were subjected to extreme
physical hardship and there was
never even an idea of the
thought of having paid sick
leave and we went in to organize
and help those women petition so
that they could be afford it on
what they believe to be very
basic rights of their position
as hard working women.
I worked as a blue collar would
be nicer in a white collar
organizer so also when apps me
also is the United steel workers
right now is as a member of the
of the teachers unions.
My work.
Was.
Listening and working alongside
fellow.
Women mostly women workers I was
also a single mother working in
a steel plant in a chemical
plant is a steel worker as an
organizer when I became ill.
And I realized that even though
I was working hard and become a
single mom on expectedly.
The very rights that I was
fighting for embarking for were
not afforded to me I was told
there was some
had a debilitating onslaught of
a of an illness that required
was life threatening and
required immediate emergency
care I was given a choice.
Well you have insurance go ahead
and have your surgery
but you're not going to be
secure and ensure the job to
come back to mind you I had a
three year old single mom
certainly I was diagnosed with
suddenly a with the sudden
onslaught of life threatening
disease.
And.
Forced to make a decision.
Whether I would take care of my
my a life threatening illness
whether I didn't have childcare
I had a lot of decisions to have
to make as a single mother.
I heard during the pandemic Mr
speaker and gentle lady and
members of the House countless
stories I started calling around
in the district that I represent
and I heard from single mothers
crying and crying and crying
working.
Two jobs as McDonald's workers
as janitors and second job and
not having enough money even in
those two jobs Mr speaker to be
able to pay for the essentials
and now faced with the pandemic
being told that they had to not
work and not in being faced with
the prospect of not having a job
to come back to come out with
stories I'm.
I I'll honest five minutes and
we're well past that I didn't I
didn't realize I have my timer
on and I have my timer on I had
exactly sixty I'm sorry fifty
six seconds left on.
Yes my.
Okay I'll all right Mr speaker
I'm sorry I went by my timer I
didn't realize that we had
another timer so
I stand in complete support of
this piece of legislation and
encourage all of the members of
the house to borrow to pay close
attention to the testimony that
we will help clarify as we go
along and I welcome the debate
and I thank you for your
consideration all those what is
the it's good to the consultants
or eight yes federal scandal
good animals but I will say this
good LCS.
Mr speaker I believe the
previous speaker just that are
and now introduced by proposed
amendments.
In terms of order of Business Mr
speaker gentle lady we will go
to the amendment before we do
I've been asked to remind the
members please do not read
whether you've done that are not
please do not do that it does
follow the house rules are the
gentle lady do you have the
amendment number the two or two
number I I do Mr speaker the two
oh two number is two two zero
two nine one point two.
Hang on just a minute gentlelady
we're getting on the web it has
been passed out.
Gentlelady while that's
happening wanted to go ahead and
explain the amendment.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
I'm happy to the amendment does
a number of things Mr speaker we
are removing the emergency
clause at the end of the bill
and therefore we're also
removing reference to it in the
title.
On page three Mr speaker we are
just clarifying that and we're
adding
The term lament regeneration
asked the word employer online
nineteen.
And we are removing from on page
three online twenty the phrase
or an individual performing
domestic service in a private
home for remuneration.
On page six Mr speaker.
Line twelve.
the intent of this
Amendment is to clarify that
sick leave does not accrue until
the leader of the effective date
of the act or employment.
The public doesn't losing my
place Mr speaker
Number six.
Is related to that one as well.
Number seven Mr speaker.
is similarly related if it is
intended to clarify that.
Are requires that sick leave not
accrue until the sixtieth day
after initial employment.
We change Mr speaker on page
nine the term line line the term
good say simply place it with
reasonable that came up Mr
speaker and house Judiciary.
On page ten Mr speaker we
clarified in this is it this is
a helpful recommendation from
house judiciary Mr speaker that
in terms of the public L. health
order if it is a public health
order that is defined by
geographic area that of these
provisions only apply to that
Geographic Area.
let's see on page thirteen Mr
speaker.
We at just also for additional
clarification on line twenty two
pursuant to a collective
bargaining agreement.
So this clarified this clarifies
that there's no stacking unless
the Lee that is provided is
pursuant to a collective
bargaining agreement.
And let me see Mr speaker and
we're getting close to the New
Mexico on page fourteen this
provision has
relates to when an employer may
ask for written verification
of that there was good cause for
the sick leave and that we had
originally said that could not
of for
for three day three consecutive
days and now it's two
consecutive days.
And lastly
On page twenty three Mr speaker
as I said we're removing the
emergency clause so the usual
rules will apply in terms of
effective date Mr speaker.
And I believe that covers the
amendment there is debate on the
amendment gentleman from Chavis
and Lincoln representative
Nibert thank you Mr speaker will
the gentle lady from Los Alamos
County you'll.
Yes Mr speaker John and
hopefully you'll to.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady of thank you for for making
some clarifying
amendments here but I do have a
couple questions regarding
I believe it's.
Number three and number four and
now I'm.
I see you're taking out the
language regarding domestic
Let me read the bill
Domestic service.
And I think that may have been a
result of some discussions we
had a committee but
Would you agree with me that
even taking that line now that
the bill as Representative then
as employee is still the fine
that of the mastic of certain
domestic service being performed
in your home by someone would be
deemed an employee whether that
language is there or not would
you agree with me.
Mr speaker and gentleman up that
depends.
I think it would depend Mr
speaker on the arrangement that
the particular homeowner has
with the individual so for
example Mr speaker there are
home service businesses like
many maids our.
I don't know I clean my own
house Mr speaker in kind
gentleman so I don't know all
the all the ins and out of US
keeping services but it would
depend on on the nature of the
relationship.
Mr speaker gentle lady I would
agree with you if you hire a
business that then sends people
to your home to perform the work
I would agree that that's not an
employee you're hiring a
business to perform a service
you don't care who shows up just
somebody shows up and takes care
of but when you contract with an
individual to perform that work
would you agree that that person
is now your employee and would
fall under the provisions of
this act.
Mr speaker actually kind
gentleman I would not many
individuals Mr speaker have
multiple phones that they claim
when I did have a housekeeper
that was the arrangement so I
would contend Mr speaker that in
general most of those
arrangements if there along the
lines that I just described
would be the individual could be
viewed as would be viewed as an
independent contractor.
And Mr speaker gentle lady up.
That that leads me to some
questions regarding the
definition of employee.
Because it says in your bill's
employee means an individual
employed by an employer
including.
Eric goes on part time seasonal
or temporary and so you have
someone come into your homes.
Once a week or every other week.
The mother grant to help you
clean the house to
cut down a tree to to do
whatever in I think the idea
that this person is
automatically an independent
contractor you is is probably
not an accurate statement of the
law and.
If we have employee to provide
life is to provide.
I believe the that we are going
to.
Create a law that places.
The employer.
Under some obligations under
this bill that they're not
anticipating and.
Well I appreciate you know
you're addressing an issue I
raised regarding domestic
service.
I find taking out that language
may maybe because
some people not to know where
they're at on that and and so to
me we're still capturing those
folks and and if you're
employing someone on a part time
seasonal or temporary basis they
could be deemed unemployed and
could be
You are the employer and you are
subject to the very things that
you're trying to get to in this
in this bill and so I appreciate
many of the things you did in
your amendment but I still think
that that's one issue that is
still going to be a problem for
employers of people who come
into their homes on a.
Part time seasonal or temporary
basis Mr speaker and gentle lady
that's that's just.
The one concern us all with your
with your amendment
but I appreciate you addressing
the others thank you ma'am Mr
speaker thank you John use our
for the debate on the amendment.
The gentle lady from grant and
Dogo and Sierra Representative
Dow thank you thank you Mr
speaker and thank you gentle
lady
during your committee hearings
where there're domestic workers
who testified that they were in
need of this release.
I happily yield to gentle lady
from you Mr speaker I think
you're from Sierra a grant to
logo in Sierra thank you Mr
speaker thank you representative
from all those counties will you
yield
I certainly will gentlelady.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady from all those
counties if I recall the parts
of the testimony that I heard
there were many of migrant
workers domestic workers who
shared stories of caring for
folks who were positive who they
clean their homes update they
were doing work in their homes
Mr speaker gentle lady from all
those counties is that correct.
Of Mr speaker gentle lady there
were it was testimony at various
times from domestic you know
cleaning folks and and child
care folks in like a gentle lady
and Mr speaker thank you Mr
speaker and thank you gentlelady
from all those counties and yet
their testimony did not result
in them being included in
covered in this bill could you
explain why Mr speaker gentle
lady Mr speaker internally.
I don't think that's a fair
characterization of what I said
Mr speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentle lady are
people providing domestic
services in the home covered
under this bill.
Mr speaker gentle lady what I
said is it depends on the
relationship Mr speaker gentle
lady and and how how that is set
up Mr speaker gentle lady.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle
lady.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Is there for the debate on the
amendment.
Surjection to the settlement.
Representative Scott gentleman
from Lee did you wish to speak
or you're just showing you have
an objection.
We will go to a roll call vote
then.
This is on the adoption of the
amendment presented by the
gentle lady from Santa and Los
Alamos and Santa Fe
Representative Chandler voted
yes and the member will be
adopted in a vote of no the vote
and the amendment will be
rejected roll call is now open.
Thirty seconds.
Electronic questions close the
clerk to call the remaining
members.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Chasey votes yes
Representative Chasey votes yes
Representative Crowder.
Representative Crowder votes no.
Representative Harry Garcia.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Often the hell that's yes
Representative Hochman Vigil
votes yes.
Vote is now closed by a vote of
forty six in the affirmative
twenty two in the negative on
the house bill twenty is adopted
the gentle lady from Los Alamos
Rio Arriba Sandoval and Santa Fe
still as the for Representative
Chandler.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Gentlelady we're back on the
building will.
Mr speaker I understand that I
am stand for questions.
There is debate gentleman from
lady Representative staff.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Los Alamos on.
Several more County issue.
Mr speaker and gentleman from we
I will yield.
Speaker gentle lady let me start
by saying that I do with.
A significant amount of
skepticism.
Was true and so itself.
Any more than it is in the
employer employee relationship.
Well let me start with our group
several questions and the first
one would be.
What these rules apply only to
private employers and not.
State.
Police.
Mr speaker and gentleman it's
because we made the assessment
that virtually all of those
entities provide similar or very
generous benefits packages and
that this legislation was not
necessary for them Mr speaker
and gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
you'll have to speak up just a
bit you are not not easy to
understand for all the side of
the there I'm very sorry I will
try to speak if Mr speaker I'll
repeat that answer Mr speaker
and gentleman the answer is that
we made an assessment that
public employers such as cities
counties and state generally
offer very generous
compensation and lease packages
and that this bill was not
necessary for that reason.
And yes Mr speaker and gentle
lady.
According this person off the
street definition of family
member.
Is much broader in this bill.
And it is.
From.
State.
Employment.
Can you explain why that would
be.
Mr speaker up kind gentleman I
cannot explain why that would
be.
So.
The lady.
Might be appropriate then to
include.
State employees.
In the scope of this bill.
Mr speaker kind gentleman we
have already made a
determination that they will not
be included within the scope of
this bill.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
In the course of the
conversations would.
Making of state.
Local employees subject to this
have had an impact.
Only have elected.
Mr speaker and gentleman I do
not know.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
Would it be safe to assume.
The.
This legislation will increase
the costs to businesses in the
state particularly hard hit will
be those small businesses.
We had a and
Essentially a week and a half of
employment to future employee
with potentially little benefit.
Of Mr speaker and gentleman from
Lee I do not
Really understand your mask so
perhaps you could help me
understand that question better
Mr speaker gentleman.
Speaker gentle lady forty hours
a week.
The total.
The total time that can be
included in future sixty four
hours.
So for a forty hour work week to
looking at approximately.
One of the weeks of labor would.
It represents one and a half
weeks.
Of time.
I'm not sure Mr speaker German
how one would be laboring when
they're out sick.
Mr speaker and gentle lady the
provisions for billion answer
or relatively general sort of
the.
Those are called.
There isn't much of a
requirement for the verification
of illness with the correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman up that
question has a lot of value
judgments invented in the bill
provides that an employer may
ask for verification Mr speaker
after two consecutive days of
absence.
Mr speaker and gentle lady and
would be very reasonable to
assume.
One day absences would.
Not necessarily require.
The employee or as defined in
here the employees family the
deal is that would be reasonable
assumption.
Mr speaker and gentleman the
bill describes the conditions
under which an employee may use
there earned sickly order I'm
not sure I understand your
question Mr speaker gentleman
from only.
Gentlelady on Merrill street in
that.
What.
The end result of this will be
employees taking advantage of
the sick leave provisions in
this legislation to perhaps give
a day off here or there when
they need.
Driver's license would not be
reasonable assumption.
Mr speaker gentleman I think
that
Do you is a very cynical Mr
speaker and gentleman and I for
one believe that the large
majority of employees will use a
sickly for the purpose for which
it is
defined within this law.
Mr speaker gentle lady monarch
passed.
Have you ever been responsible
for making a payroll.
Mr speaker and gentleman of.
If you're asking whether I
supervised employees I can
assure you I have.
Mr speaker gentle lady
that is definitely different.
Right now his paychecks out of
your check.
And I will tell you that
whatever cynicism
the exhibit and is well
justified if you want to in
later Mr speaker let me move on.
Yeah contractors for example.
They do Senator although I don't
use a babysitter anymore what
what what the baby server be
considered an independent
contractor.
Again Mr speaker and gentleman
it would depend on the
circumstances but I would think
I would suspect in most cases
the babysitter would be an
independent contractor.
Would you describe for me.
The clear standards for the
determination of whether an
employee is an employee or an
independent contractor could you
read.
Provision in the bill.
Mr speaker of a gentleman from
Lee there is no point such
provision in the bill.
So Mister speaker gentle lady
that and do do it to do with
the.
Subject to interpretation.
And certainly could be.
source of conflict is that.
This would be your assessment.
Mr speaker talent would you
repeat that question.
In the determination of whether
a person.
Is an employee.
Or.
Track.
If this legislation passes.
Result in.
Conflicts of that definition
because of the ambiguity.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
the way I don't believe it is
and they give us.
Mr speaker and gentle lady there
is no standard for making that
determination.
I believe that's what I heard
you say.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
believe what I said was there is
not a definition of independent
contractor in the bill.
Mr speaker gentle lady and
therefore no standards for
making that determination is
not.
Mr speaker and gentleman I do
not agree with that conclusion
there is a standard in common
law Mr speaker and kind
gentleman.
Mr speaker.
Gentlelady.
A lot of folks working for
different organizations
All of these new economy
businesses would certainly.
Disagree with you.
What has occurred Mr speaker
gentle lady.
There is no message to help them
implore your determined.
What is your issue is the core
of what.
Of a family relationship.
How would an employer challenge.
Climb of relationship.
In that circumstance.
Mr speaker General and firmly.
The employer would talk to the
employee the and have a
conversation about the nature of
the relationship.
Mr speaker and gentle lady there
would be no audit process
available then.
No standard if you will agree
on.
Just to.
The employee's claim.
Of sprite Sir Tom all of.
As a consequence of a
relationship there would there
really isn't any way to audit
that claim is the.
Mr speaker I don't I'm not
familiar with the term audit in
this context Mr speaker gentle
lady let me let me rephrase.
And use the term verify instead
of cold.
Mr speaker gentleman from lady
the way of an employer to verify
again is through a conversation
with his or her employee.
Rectus Mr speaker I would
encourage to ensure there's open
communication between
supervisors and employee
employees I have found in my
experience as a manager and
supervisor that is the best way
to know what is going on with
your employees I actually
speaking with them.
Gentlelady I'll move on once
again.
Hello member for more shrimp.
Government employees are from
Venus if you will.
What discussed for just a minute
what the consequences would be.
For government ordered shut
down.
On a business.
Mr speaker talent if you could
offer me some specificity as I
have no idea what you're asking
me.
Mr speaker gentle lady I believe
there are consequences in this
bill for a government ordered
shut down of the business which
would result and paycheck
protection in the event of that
shut down could you describe
with some specificity how that
would work.
Mr speaker gentleman are you
referring to the provisions that
relate to land and urgency order
is put in place I don't remember
any phraseology in light bill
that refers to quote government
shutdowns.
Mr speaker gentle lady I believe
that emergency order would be
from the government would not.
Mr speaker gentleman if the
question is do governments do
urgency orders issued from the
government the answer to that
question is yes.
The consequences Mr speaker and
gentle lady of the emergency
order would be.
Mr speaker Sir question
gentleman from only.
Yes that is a question what
would be the consequences of an
emergency order on business with
respect to the publication to
continue to pay their employees.
Mr speaker and gentleman if an
emergency order were in place
that caused employees to
Not be able to to go into work
they of those employees would
get an additional eighty hours
of earned sick leave.
Per week.
Having difficulty hearing your
answers could you repeat that
please with a little more in
Texas.
Mr speaker and gentleman from we
the the employee would be
eligible for an additional forty
hours of sick leave.
Mr speaker Sir.
Mr speaker to element I
apologize I aired eighty hours
of sickly.
So.
That's true for weeks.
Full.
This.
If if an emergency order was
issued by the state government.
One would not be used to state
government's responsibility.
To make employees whole run then
you pull your.
May.
Mr speaker gentleman I believe
it is fair I think there is a
relationship Mr speaker between
the employer and employee
loyalty and there is
Us sharing of obligations and
hardships and in this case I
think it is reasonable for the
employer to offer sick leave to
those employees who are unable
to work.
And would be without income.
Mr speaker and gentle lady once
again we come to the difference
between a small business owner
and and folks that.
Operate in the realm of large
business or government
employment.
The service is that the employer
and that's circumstances also.
Without any resident.
So.
Another two weeks of pay in that
circumstance one million for
proposal.
Business owners completely
blameless.
His business is closed.
And is required employed weeks
two more weeks of revenues is
called.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
Pollution madam chair.
This bill.
Is reflective.
Business.
The payroll practices were
margins or sufficient to cover
these kind of contingencies and
I believe that this legislation
passes small businesses will
suffer thank you Mr speaker and
gentle lady for your answers
there is further debate the
gentleman from Travis Etienne on
Turkey Representative Townsend.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Of will the gentlelady yields.
Mr speaker gentleman from Travis
county and hopefully you'll to
you thank you ma'am
I'm gonna make this short and
sweet.
I have a four man.
That I want to introduce.
and.
I believe this has been passed
out and is on.
Would you is that correct Mr
speaker yes Representative
gentleman from Chavis said he
and chairman has been passed out
German to read into it to
number.
Yes yes two two number is
pointing to two of two one two
point two.
A gentleman what I want to go
ahead and explain the amendment.
Thank you Mr speaker this
amendment is is of.
Very simple.
It includes state and county
employees into this process.
Mr speaker I think that it is
You know I.
I have what's the process with
state employees.
For a number of years.
And I know at one time our state
employees.
When it in years.
Ten years without a pay roll.
Classification adjustment.
And.
It.
Bothers me
considerable.
That we would propose something
from this house.
That we say yes to the great
benefit of all employees out
there but we exclude our own.
I know
Mr speaker and gentle lady you
have a provision in there eight
four exemption.
but I don't believe that's
adequate so Mr speaker and
gentle lady that is my proposal
that we include state and county
employees under the process.
Gentleman let's see this is a
friendly amendment gentlelady
from Los Alamos Rio the Santa in
Santa Fe this is a friendly
amendment Mr speaker it is not a
friendly amendment.
A gentlelady would you like to
explain why this is not a
friendly amendment.
Because as I said we've already
made the determination that
state and the local employees
have adequate weight means to
achieve the goals of this bill
we believe that they receive
very generous benefit packages
and for that reason
I do not agree to this
ammendment thanks gentle lady a
survey on the amendment of the
gentleman from San Juan
Representative Eli.
Thank you Mr speaker is a
gentleman from Travis Etienne
Otero yield be happy to yield.
Mr speaker gentleman my
understanding of why public
employees are not included is
that their to have generous such
sick leave packages is there any
harm if that's true is there any
farming including a in this
bill.
Not one yes all we would do by
including the S. this body
voting for this would include
that not only today but the days
in the future.
Our employees would be covered.
Mr speaker and gentleman our
teachers currently covered under
the original bill.
I don't believe they are.
Mr speaker and gentleman of.
The other difference I think
that matters is how we define a
family member.
So for example a meet the local
municipality will adopt a
handbook that handbook full
defined who's entitled to sick
leave and what persons you're
allowed to care for
Mr speaker and gentleman in your
opinion does this underlying
bill more broadly defined who a
family member is.
Such that public employees would
be able to better care for their
loved ones.
in the event that they were
included in that they would.
Mr speaker gentleman I I think
that's the rules sorted driving
issue for me as to why if if
we're gonna pass this kind of
legislation.
Why we should include public
employees it's not that they
don't already have sick leave of
course they do.
But this ammendment wanted
insurers is that we we we treat
public and private employees the
same and it affords more
protection for public employees
than what most handbooks are
gonna find and that protection
is in the form of how we define
a family member that you're
allowed to use sick leave in
order to care for and for that
difference which I think is a
substantive difference I support
your equipment thank you.
Thank you Sir.
There is further debate on the
amendment the gentle lady from
granite Dogo insurer
Representative Dow.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you what with the gentleman from
from the Eddy and Otero you'll
be happy to.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you kind gentleman I too would
like to support this bill Mr
speaker and gentleman if there
are you included and the funding
is already available Mr speaker
and gentleman it only makes
sense that they would have an
equitable way to apply the
benefits to their family and the
broad definition of family
wouldn't you agree Mr speaker
gentle and.
Yes Mr speaker and gentle lady
of that's the whole purpose of
this amendment is to bring our
state employees.
To a level of equity.
And the quality.
Of treatment we talk about this
all the time but then the first
thing we do is excluded from the
bill and I think we have made of
a huge mistake and it's in the
just serviced our own employees.
Mr speaker and gentleman I think
it's really interesting that the
title of this bill it references
all employees of New Mexico and
as these amendments have come we
keep reducing the number of New
Mexicans who are actually
eligible and even some of those
people who are being included
excluded part of the twenty
minute description we have of
why this bill is necessary Mr
speaker and gentleman I'm not
even sure that the title is even
accurate to the constant ability
more because one almost one
fourth of our employees are
government employees and they're
not secluded from this bill so
the title should be changed to
say almost three fourths of New
Mexicans with the exceptions of
domestic workers thank you Mr
speaker.
There's further debate the
gentleman from San Juan
Representative Montoya.
Yes thank you Mr speaker is John
from Travis Etienne Otero kids.
We have to deal.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman so Mr speaker and
gentleman B. sides.
What was described as our state
and county
Workers already having good
benefits due to those benefits
allow for someone who may be
stocked or has someone a
following them and they're
afraid to go to work and they
could use their sickly for that
does it is that something that
is in the the state hamburger in
county handbooks that is a
benefit that they have.
Well I would hope there would be
some provision for that but I
doubt very seriously that it's
in their hands.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman because that was a
very substantial portion of a
very long introduction
at the beginning of this and how
we have to do this because of
from the standpoint of the of
the Pete the.
The safety of of employees I
don't believe that is a way Mr
speaker and and gentleman that
state employees can use that Mr
speaker and gentleman as far as
the the actual benefits and that
are afforded to state and county
employees
does that do those benefits of
sick leave go all the way down
to someone who is seasonal or
part time because the speaker
John either way I'm
understanding this legislation
to read.
those
that that anybody who has a
single employee.
And that that they can accrue at
the at the rate of six weeks at
a time.
One day of sick leave I believe
that is what I have understood
at the beginning of this is that
the way you understand this
legislation to be written.
Well Mr speaker and gentleman
this.
And your question now main the
policies with them.
our state hand but did not
address the.
But on top of that.
I think this is a perfect
example if it's good for the
goose is good for the Gander.
And if we're gonna sit here as a
body and mandate.
A policy to every employer that
pays taxes to provide this
building and everything that
goes with that but we exempt
ourselves.
I just I would classify as being
disingenuous in the process of
administrative administrating
public policy.
So thanks for that Mr speaker
and gentleman
I've even today I heard a
message of preacher was giving
and talked about how.
The one thing that really upsets
folks is when legislators do
something and apply it to
everyone else.
And make sure that it doesn't
apply to us.
And Mr speaker and and
gentleman.
The way this is written we know
this is going to be a
substantial cost to the average
New Mexican who employees even a
single person.
But miss and gentleman the the
idea that we would do that to
them.
And we wouldn't do it to
ourselves because it's going to
be a substantial increase to the
cost of running the state.
Of that doesn't make sense to
me.
Mr speaker and gentleman it also
in the statement that
that state employees
and and county employees already
receive very very good benefits
Mr speaker and gentleman I I
believe that depends on the job
I mean there are a lot of very
of low
wage jobs that are in state
government as a matter of fact
Mr speaker gentle might my son.
Of graduated from New Mexico
state with a civil engineering
degree and the the one of the
reasons the benefits are
somewhat better than water in
the in the private sector is
because.
Of.
They say that well you can look
you can look at the average wage
it is almost twenty percent less
if not more that if you're in
the public sector if you're in
the budget if you're in the.
Private sector than if you're in
the public sector so Mister
speaker and gentleman I I'm not
sure.
That some of the folks who are
not receiving
just as good okay just maybe
somebody doing the same job in
the private sector sees this as.
Well but as was stated they
already get good benefits I'm I
just I'm having a hard time
seeing that because we know that
we have a hard time recruiting
for the state jobs and we hear
over and over and over committee
after committee when you have a
department head come in and tell
us well.
We can't fill those positions
because we're not competitive
with pay.
So we then turn around and say
and not only that we're going to
pass a law.
That makes the.
Makes the sick leave benefit
better than you have we're gonna
force that to happen we have
total control over what we do is
state and county employees but
we're not going to offer that
benefit to you we're gonna
mandate though that the private
sector do it for their employees
and the speaker and gentleman I
see that you're that this seems
to be the total reason for your
amendment is that correct Mr
speaker yes Sir Mr speaker and
gentleman.
The total refund for this
amendment is to provide the
policies that we're
at our requiring.
Every employer in New Mexico to
provide we are provided on our
to ourselves I mean it's it's.
Then it only seems
I think someone that does.
In my opinion.
It would be hard not to support
this amendment and support state
employees I just think you have
to tell him that we believe and
we value them the same way we
value.
that private employer is what I
was where I was coming from.
Thanks for that the speaker and
gentleman I I I do believe those
in particular those low wage
state employees would appreciate
having the same benefit if we're
if we can believe that an
employer or someone who employs
a single employee can afford to
do this sure the state
government can afford to do that
if if if not I don't know why we
would then mandated on a
somebody was hired a single
employee so I I I look forward
to supporting your amendment
thank you Mr speaker there's
further debate on the amendment
gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative Martinez.
Thank you Mr speaker the
general.
I do have the.
Thank you Mr and and gentleman I
I appreciate the the amendment
I'm I'm trying to understand
though and and pardon me if I
may Mr the initial position of
the amendment but.
Don't state and local government
employees already receive a
benefits package that includes
are these types of benefits.
Mr speaker and gentleman there
are many many employers across
New Mexico that.
That provide these benefits can
you explain to me why we should
exclude state employees.
Mr speaker and gentleman
the I don't think that's the
question I have a question for
you just don't state and local
government employees already
receive it's kind of budget and
my answer to you us there are
many employers across New Mexico
that provides yes that we are
our mandating further coverage
would you please answer me and
tell me why we should exclude
state employees.
Well Mister speaker John with
all due respect I think I'm
asking the questions here so the
question for you Mr speaker and
gentleman is don't state and
local government employees
already receive these types of
benefits isn't that what your
amendment is attempting to do.
My amendment.
Is.
Trying to.
Implement.
A.
Public policy.
That is in line with a hundred
and then months that I have
heard you stand in debate about
equality in treating people
equally.
So you may have in your right
you're asking questions but
there's nothing in the rules
that prevents me from us one.
The speaker and gentleman I I
appreciate that so.
I believe the bill in front of
us is to the purpose of the bill
in front of us is to.
Required.
Lawyers to ensure that workers
there workers or employees.
After working you certain number
of hours are able to receive.
Hey time.
To deal with sickness.
and while I appreciate the
interest in well I appreciate
the commitment to equity because
you're right I debate a lot when
it comes to equity the reason
I'm in the state legislature and
because of equity Mr speaker and
gentleman and I'm glad that you
share that
however to your amendment
what I'm asking is this still
don't have an answer.
Don't state employees already
receive a benefits package that
includes this type of benefit
that this bill is attempting to
extend to an entire class were.
In the answer to your question
is no Sir they do not enjoy the
benefits that are equal to this
bill that has been presented
today.
They did not.
And that's what I'm standing
here for today is the state why
shouldn't they twenty five
percent of the employees in New
Mexico are employed by the state
of New Mexico twenty five
percent and we are taking this
bill and excluding them so the
answer to your question is no
Sir they are not.
Mr speaker and and gentleman I
appreciate that I appreciate
that response now Mr speaker and
and gentleman you know I don't
serve
on
You know I I I don't serve on
the appropriations committee I
serve on the LFC and I believe
you do as well
you know I I believe that every
worker regardless of whether
they're in the private or.
In the.
public setting.
Are entitled to.
Working conditions that are fair
or in total to living wages are
entitled to benefits that can
help support them and and their
own families and in their times
of need.
You know I I.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Still have the floor no I
appreciate your support of the
of the of the amendment down
please R. Representative
Martinez you still of the for.
I appreciate that Mr speaker
thank you for that you know I I
would I would really appreciate
this body coming together and
you yourself gentlemen and and
I'll make myself available as
well to ensure that every worker
can get a living wage and can
enjoy the benefits that they
need in order to raise our
family and live healthy
successful and thriving lives I
believe that the amendment at
this late hour
is you know.
We need something that will
ultimately.
you know it's not a backtrack I
don't think the amendment is
Is relevant obviously our as the
sponsors have worked under bill
over the course of the last six
weeks.
you know I I I would love to see
this happen but simply this is
probably not the place for it Mr
speaker and gentleman I I
appreciate your time and and
I look forward to the rest of
the day.
Mr speaker if I might I would
just like to remind body M.
Representative said last night
on his bill that he presented on
the floor at the late hour at
the last hour he presented an
amendments as well so of again
if it's good for the goose is
good for the Gander gonna we're
gonna limit discussion to the
bill and it does point to the
amendment so I'll comment on the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman yield.
Be happy to yield thank you Mr
speaker and gentleman and I'm
hoping I can clear something up
so do you happen to recall a
gentleman Mr speaker that in
twenty nineteen we passed the
public employees
caregiver leave act.
I don't recall off the top of my
head I could go back and dig it
up but I don't
gentlelady thank you Mr speaker
and gentleman that was Senate
bill one twenty three.
And we passed the private care
giver and public care giver
leave act and in the public care
giver leave act
Mr speaker and gentleman
employees public employees were
allowed to use their accrued
sick leave for caregiving of
family members and family
members in that bill was
actually
greater than in the bill in
front of you because it included
aunts and uncles
that's.
That's all I have Mister speaker
and gentleman I I just want to
make sure that
somebody knows we do have it in
just a home and for public
employees we have the ability to
use cycling for care giver.
Speaker John Laing Preciado
church your answer but I would
remind the body if you're a city
employee.
That is temporary.
You do not get any of the
benefits that are in the bill
that's being debated today also.
The state employee leave but
these packages can be changed.
At any time.
With or without their approval
what I'm asking for is that we
put something in the statute
just like we imposed on all of
the company's employers across
New Mexico and say we're always
going to treat them equal.
Further debate on the amendment
gentleman from Lee
Representative Scott.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from Chavis the hello
Turrell you please be happy to
yield.
Mr Chairman.
To.
These benefits or already four
as has been represented here.
Two state employees.
What would be the disadvantage
New Mexico to provide those
benefits into statute do you
see.
Every impact on the state if
this budget or acted in till all
when it's Representative
already.
Being provided.
Mr speaker and online
I don't believe that they are
being
I don't I don't see state
employees.
And I believe I can prove the
state employees are not being
treated equitably.
And.
That however.
If I'm wrong and I would hope
that I am but if I'm wrong
adding that does do absolutely
nothing but ensure that they're
always treated fairly.
Gentleman from Travis to use the
dental side to acting yes mmhm.
No Sir I do not I think it's the
right thing to do and I think
the body should support it.
Mr speaker gentleman from Chavis
toward cynicism used.
A little earlier in this debate.
In a call to me that certainly
applied to the conversation that
we're having now.
Our constituents could we go
home look our constituents or we
are in state we required
disciplines that employers but
not thanks for working for the
state.
Representative Mr speaker
and gentleman.
I.
I don't believe
I would be able to let them in
the eye and I have I got a a
bunch of friends that work for
the state.
And.
And I've talked to a few of.
And they have
Insured me.
That although they enjoyed some
really good benefits it's not as
good as what's in that bill.
Mr speaker and gentleman all
one last question and this goes
to the previous question that I
had
of the gentle lady from Los
Alamos with respect to eighty
hours of paid leave in the event
of an emergency government
ordered shut down to state
employees.
Currently enjoy that benefit I
do not believe so Sir.
Mr.
The pro to support chairman
thank you Mr speaker.
Is there for the debate on the
amendment the representative for
other gentleman I'm sorry from
Chavis and Lincoln
representative on either thank
you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from Chavis said he
and Carroll County you'll be
happy to yield my friend thank
you Mr speaker thank you
gentleman just one or two quick
questions.
If I recall when I was a county
commissioner we didn't find any
benefits to seasonal and part
time workers yet this bill does
cover those employees as of not.
That's exactly right Mr speaker
and that's just one of the
issues that I have with the bill
in in not treating state
employees fairly.
And so Mister speaker and
gentleman notwithstanding the
representations of inmate.
The budget provided in this
bill.
Are not necessarily.
Going to be provided to state
employees particularly those who
are temporary part time or
seasonal is that correct that is
absolutely correct Mr speaker
and gentleman.
Thank thank you Mr speaker and
thank you gentlemen I will
support German.
R. is there for the debate on
the amendment.
The young lady from Bernalillo
Representative stable.
Mr speaker I move to table the
amendment.
There is a motion to table floor
amendment number two brought by
a gentleman Townsend so vote of
yes and the amendment will be
tabled a vote of no and the
memo will be then we will go to
a motion is to to pass on the
amendment so vote of yes the
amendment tabled roll call is
now open.
Thirty seconds to vote.
Electronic questions close the
clerk to call remaining members
Representative Anderson.
Representative Barreras.
Yes to table.
Representative Barreras votes
yes.
By a vote of thirty nine in the
affirmative and thirty in the
negative for amendment number
two has been tabled.
Back on the bill.
Representative Chavis Eddie the
gentleman from Travis city in
Ontario Representative Townsend
used on the floor.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
those that truly do care about
state employees and for the
their votes affirming that I
appreciate it.
There is further debate on the
bill the gentle lady from Santa
Fe Representative Romero.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentle lady from Los Alamos and
those other counties yield.
Mr speaker time Blaney from
Santa Fe yes I yield.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
I think a lot of the this sort
of.
Ins and outs of this debate has
kind of been loss as to why we
do this Mr speaker gentle lady
and why in our modern economy
today looking at the data and
the future of our work forged in
New Mexico that this is the
right thing to do for not only
workers but for our economy and
I just had so much fun looking
at into this because I care so
much about our small business
and I think everyone shares as
we've heard throughout our
session how many small business
recovery bills and how much
money we are putting into small
business recovery and why this
is focused on small business and
I think the workers that we're
talking about Mr speaker gentle
lady when I looked at the
statistics on
What the working set cost the
national economy it's two
hundred and thirty four billion
annually in lost productivity
and so my question not just to
the gentle lady from Los Alamos
is is my question to the
gentleman from Chavis link and.
On I'm and we are counties and
it also granted this year the
generated from their is would
you like someone to show up sick
to your place of work Mr speaker
gentle lady the point of this
matter is that when what happens
when someone shows up to work
they don't only put themselves
at risk for lost productivity
which costs the business a lot
of money where they are losing
that productivity because that
person is sick
they're also exposing the rest
of their workforce to that
illness Mr speaker gentle lady
and as we know what's happened
through COVID in the cost of a
virus running rampant through a
business that works with the
public thank it is an immense
cost not only to the public who
puts themselves at risk by going
to that business but of course
the entire work four sessions of
sick so whether it's your
babysitter or your dog Walker or
your domestic worker coming into
your house Mr speaker gentle
lady however you've set it up do
you want that person and showing
up six to that place of work and
the reality is that when we look
at the economy are the economics
of scale when picks paid sick
days are not allowed this cost
employers up to one point eight
billion dollars each year based
on the fact that I'm sorry two
hundred thirty four billion in
lost productivity and then the
added cost of.
Of that those sicknesses and
illnesses that they must treat
the reality you Mr speaker
gentle lady is that in a survey
of folks who have showed up to
work sick eighty six percent
have said that we because of the
lack of access to paid sick days
they're coming and coughing
vomiting having a fever other
serious symptoms Mr speaker
generally without this this puts
other folks at risk when after
these ordinances have been
basically provided within
businesses within small
businesses employers are saving
money that's that one point
eight billion each year that
of small businesses are saving
from fewer absences and reduce
spread of flu like illnesses
alone Mr speaker and gentle lady
I would want to work in a work
place that did not allow sick
people to come in our
legislature is not covered under
this will remind the body Mr
speaker gentle lady but for the
folks the gentle men and women
who have to fight that the the
worries of showing up to work
every single day and not having
a safety net of being able to go
home when they're ill and we've
if you've worked in any sort of
service work you know what it's
like for your friends and your
cold calling your coworker to
shop with the cough and then not
to be around them hoping that
you can get sick too Mr speaker
gentle lady this is a safety
mechanism for everybody who
works in that work place and it
actually saves our workforce and
our employers money in the long
run this is good for the economy
this is good for the invitation
of business in our state this is
good for the workers who want to
work at a given place knowing
that these precautions are in
place and to.
As I understand it replacing
these workers when they don't
show up not only do they not get
replaced of course right they
can cost anywhere from sixteen
to two hundred percent of their
annual compensation actually re
fill that position Mr speaker so
I just want the body to
understand that this is the
future of our economy at stake
when we think about the
economics of what we're trying
to do and thinking about you it
in those positions of any by the
that fast to continue this work
Mr speaker generating the body I
just wanted to add one quick
story that in my own mother's
workplace she unfortunately
contracted COVID in this
pandemic and without the
protection of sick leave she
that had come from the federal
government she in many of her
employees would not have been
able to go home and recover and
come back without those
protections and so with that Mr
speaker I just want everyone to
know that because we have been
in this pandemic we've seen the
safety nets that have been in
place but without those this
could have been a bigger problem
than we could have even imagined
Mr speaker gentle lady and our
small businesses do suffer when
virus spreads when illness
spreads and this is a huge
opportunity for us to keep those
folks who are most vulnerable
the forty percent of businesses
that don't have this coverage
currently we can be part of the
solution Mr speaker gentle lady
I absolutely support this bill I
just wanted to offer some of the
research that I've been doing
making sure that our small
businesses are covered by this
bill as well an absolutely they
are thank you Mr speaker gentle
lady for allowing me to offer
some comments further debate the
gentle lady from Santa Fe
Representative Serrato.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Los Alamos
field.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Santa Fe I happily yield thank
you Mr speaker I wanted it I was
curious I know we've had a
couple of bills come up already
about
you know like small business
loans or grants hold all that
it's a it's a pie for one
businesses applying for these
grants are these small loans on
can they include this as an
expense when they're filling out
these forms.
Mr speaker gentle lady I think
in general not there are
structured in a different way
we're things like expenses and
so on are not part of the
application process although
gentle lady I'm not an authority
on all of the programs totaling
nearly a billion dollars the
details of all programs to the
lady and speaker thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentle lady I
I understand that as well I mean
I also see this you know I I do
understand the the concerns that
I heard from a lot of the the
business community that have
come out because as we all know
you know the economic impact of
the pandemic has been pretty
significant on small businesses
in our state and luckily I have
some wonderful Santa Fe small
business owners in my district
that have been you know I've
communicated with through a lot
of these this this pandemic
period and before as well but
one thing I'll say Mr speaker
gentle lady is that this
legislation doesn't change the
real world people get sick kids
get sick people have to make
decisions about if they're going
to work or not and then
businesses are really forced to
to decisions do they allow this
person to take some time off to
get better or you know Mr
speaker and gentle lady or do
they to date thanks for the cost
of of hiring a new employee that
can be something like I think
it's like one point two five
times the cost of the salary or
how much they're already paying
people and so you know Mr
speaker gentle lady this is
already looking at these
decisions already and so I you
know I think one thing that you
know the generally from Santa Fe
before me already kind of
mention of that but I will go a
little bit is that I'm not just
thinking about this from the
from the worker standpoint which
I think is very valuable to do
and I can talk about that a
little bit but I think it's also
a bit about the small businesses
because we talk about this as is
to as if it's in a vacuum and
the reality is that are small
business owners are part of our
community and and as a result so
often they care about their
employees people that I hired to
help me gentle lady and and Mr
speaker.
On you know in various
capacities whether was out when
I was an independent contractor
and hiring folks and that
depends Department whether it's
done you know other worked I
have our folks that care for my
child we have a relationship I
think this the large chains they
don't have those those those
indefinite-delivery which
actually happened in reality in
places like New York City after
they pass their of paid sick
leave policy in that place for
example Mr speaker and we know
it's a very different market our
own but when the past at their
eighty five percent of the
business owners like eighty six
eighty five percent of the
business owners approved that
that policy and enjoyed it
afterwards because they were
able to work and everything else
so really allows into building
those expenses and at the same
time it gives protections to
workers who have come into this
pandemic also at a disadvantage
the pandemic one of the worst
gaps in wealth that we've seen
in our nation's history we have
a situation where most Latino
households and in New Mexico
avid thousand dollars in savings
when we entered the pandemic and
that makes me very nervous
living in Santa Fe Mr speaker
gentle lady where that doesn't
even get you an apartment
anymore and so they'd granted
four an extra apartment Mr
speaker late at colleges from
passion on this but I've seen it
when I was talking to folks
before the pandemic and I talked
about before the pandemic it it
was even more revealing and more
noticeable we should also know
that this is the second
recession our recent history and
and what that means for people
that are graduating into this
market is over the length of
the.
Course of their their lifetime
they're going to current
significantly less than those
who graduated not during the
recession and so that again puts
our workers at a disadvantage so
we've been heard harming the
economic potential workers for
so long this is a protection
that we can actually give them
for and it lightens the load and
it reduces the stress that they
may have people shouldn't have
to make a decision about their
economic long term you know well
being and their child's health
that is that's a struggle that
too many people deal with I see
my own parents when I was young
have to deal with those
decisions and I've been
fortunate enough when I've been
employed to have employed by
someone else agency Mr speaker
gentle lady to have the
employees that were
understanding and that would
jobs we're flexible enough to
allow for that give and take on
that Mr speaker only a lot of a
lot of this a lot of employees
don't have those options so I do
understand the economic tool
that this pandemic has taken on
businesses but again we are in
in in a in a national health
crisis we are in a pandemic that
that hopefully only happens once
in our lifetimes and and I think
we have to make sure that our
policies understand workers
within the day and so many Mr
speaker only so many people for
me to set this our policies are
Flickinger values and paid sick
leave means that we are
prioritizing New Mexico's kids
and our families and
unfortunately the policy that we
have on the books right now
incentivizes the spread of
disease and the virus and that
is a problem I will say Mr
speaker gentle lady and some of
the darkest days we've seen of
this pandemic in my own district
it has impacted from places
where people go shopping for
groceries places where people
you know are able to get their
essentials and that happens
because people have to come home
come with our state or when they
when they have a loved one that
may be sick and then they catch
it makes for their this will
decrease the number of
businesses that are overwhelmed
by the Corona virus or or by any
other sickness to make sure that
we're not only protecting
customer.
We're protecting businesses in
the law into so I wholeheartedly
support this policy not because
I believe that workers deserve
an opportunity to excel and and
and and the and the the the the
the call of economic security
but also because I know the
small businesses in my community
alright you're trying to manage
this already and if this is a
policy that's in place and it is
recognized that will enable them
to to make decisions that are
more long term considered so I
appreciate the the legislation
thank you so much Mr speaker and
gentle lady and and all yield
thank you.
There is further debate the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Stansbury.
Thank you Mr speaker to does the
gentle lady up.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo you.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentle lady I want to start
by first just saying thank you
to the sponsors for bringing
this bill forward and in
particular I was very struck
this evening with your opening
remarks and particularly the
gentle lady from down south
reading the testimony of so many
individuals who've been impacted
by not having access to you know
care for themselves and their
family members when they're ill
and I think that lifting up
those voices is so powerful and
creating space here this evening
to hear those voices I think is
really really important because
Mr speaker and gentle lady this
bill is really about our people
and about providing
opportunities for our people to
be safe for them to have equity
in the workplace and for them to
have dignity when they're sick
or they need to take care of
somebody.
So Mister speaker and gentle
lady I've been listening to the
debate tonight and I'm always
troubled when I hear.
you know arguments that somehow
and by protecting workers and
our people that our economy is
going to fail because of it and
so gentle lady Mr speaker and
gentle lady I wonder in your
opening remarks it was noted
that several other states have
adopted sick leave policies
including Colorado during the
pandemic and Mr speaker and
gentle lady I wonder if you
could speak a little bit about
has it cause catastrophic
failure in the economy here has
the economy actually been okay.
Mr speaker gentle lady I I very
much appreciate that question
because it it's something I have
been thinking about Mr speaker
and gentle lady and in terms of
the globe and the world and in
fact I think there are over
there about a hundred and fifty
countries at a minimum that
offer some form of paid sick
leave and unfortunately gentle
lady we are not there yet and I
believe we as a state senator
lady have an obligation to
provide this to the great
citizens of the state and.
As to your actual specific
question gentle lady now there
has not been a collapse of their
economies for example Arizona
California Connecticut the
district of Columbia Maryland
Massachusetts Michigan Nevada
New Jersey Oregon.
Rhode Island Vermont Washington
state Mr speaker gentle lady all
have some form of paid sickly
required paid sick leave and
gentle lady I think we can all
agree that those states that I
just listed listed are
universally considered Asselin
and productive and states we do
not agree to and the lady Mr
speaker.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady yes in fact they are in a
number of economic studies that
I've looked up as they've been
thinking about this bill and
considering it actually shows
that there is a net economic
benefits to an economy that
adopts these policies because
and there's actually significant
economic losses losses for
employers may lose employees
Senators turnover so it helps to
stabilize the workforce helps to
increase the productivity of
existing employees it helps to
keep the work force of a
workplace
actually safe so that people are
not getting second you have more
people getting second leaving
the workplace it improves morale
and improves overall equity
within a workplace and so Mister
speaker and gentle lady not only
is this at concept important for
advancing and the ability of our
workers to have rights in the
workplace it actually is budget
for the overall economy and and
the places where it's adopted
and particularly for those who
are most vulnerable and Mr
speaker gentle lady you know I
think one of the things I'd like
to go back to is some of the
testimony that we for deceiving
and you know this issue for me
really boils down to equity.
Our economy is hugely unequal we
have a growing inequality across
our economy where the rich are
getting richer and our workers
are increasingly seen or
reduction in their take home pay
and struggling more and more
especially during this pandemic
and Mr speaker gentle lady for
those of us who have been
fortunate enough to work in a
workplace where sick leave and
other fringe benefits for our
legislative we consider that
basic to our research invites
those workers but a huge
proportion of our economy is
workers who don't have for its
whose rights are not protected
who are working for low wages
and hazardous conditions who
don't have the ability to take a
day off who are struggling just
to live paycheck to paycheck and
so gentle lady Mr speaker and
gentle lady for me this issue
oils down to the most vulnerable
in our economy and that is women
and people of color people who
are working and the most
vulnerable positions within our
economy and don't have the same
access to basic rights in the
workplace.
And Mr speaker gentle lady I
think for most of us that had
the opportunity to have the
opportunity to be able to take
leave on where staff or even
taking paid vacation leave which
is something that of course who
you know would want that as well
this is about bringing equity to
workers especially to the most
vulnerable in our economy Mr
speaker gentle lady would you
agree.
Mr speaker gentle lady I
absolutely agree and I would add
to
the the groups that you I
identified as being
disadvantaged at our LBGTQ
community also tend to have
lower income and are heavily
impacted by the by the lack of
of earned sick leave and just
wanted to supplement your your
comments gentle lady but that
you I think you really hit the
nail on the head and I thank you
for that thank you.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady and I think you know
as a society we have to really
ask ourselves a very hard and
fundamental question which is
would we not want for every
family in our society to have
the same rights is the people
who are at the top.
And for me the answer is yes of
course and that's what this bill
is really about is just
providing a baseline of equity
for our most vulnerable workers
inside our economy so that they
can be safe so they can stay
home if they're ill so they can
take care of family members of
something is going on to ensure
safety in the workplace Mr
speaker gentle lady as we're
living through a global pandemic
why wouldn't we want to make
sure that if people are sick
especially as those deadly
viruses spreading through our
communities that they couldn't
stay home and make sure that
they are safe that their
workplaces are safe that they're
not spreading the virus inside
of our community this is a basic
basic human right as a safety
measure workers right and equity
measure and again it's about the
basic dignity.
Of workers and our economy.
So Mister speaker gentle lady I
I just want to say one more time
I want to thank the sponsors of
this bill for bringing this
forward it's a long over due.
And I.
A police support this measure
and every possible way and I
think it will be a benefit to
our people I think it will be a
benefit to our economy and I am
proud to support and will the
favor this bill tonight so thank
you for bringing it forward.
There is further debate the
gentleman from San Juan when he
gets done talking.
Representative Strickler.
You'll
Mr speaker and gentleman I yield
but I Mr speaker I'm having a
very hard time hearing the
gentleman from San Juan or
upgrade gentlemen if you could
speak way out we can barely hear
you well it cap out how about
now yeah that's much better
thank you I just I apologize
they didn't have my mic on the
on properly gentle lady
I come from a little different
background and and I understand
what you're bill tries to do.
And and I've I've reached out to
a lot of small business owners
out there in this pandemic and
this
shut down of the of nonessential
businesses have really you know
really hurt our state in the
whole country and in New Mexico
with I think we Senator little
greater when this
pandemic started last February I
actually March one employment
rate was four point eight
percent we're doing pretty good
we are still a little bit higher
than our surrounding neighbors
and the national average is
three and a half percent.
in the heat of the battle
fighting this virus our
unemployment rate rose to a look
twelve point seven percent in
July and that was a hundred
fifteen thousand workers
Representative were were
unemployed.
we came we came through that
businesses started to open
all that all that
you know.
Certain.
Senate just but they were start
open and and and and the
employees started coming back to
work we had a real good a summer
and fall in our unemployment
rate dropped to seven point two
percent which is really step in
the right direction again who
still a bit higher than the than
the national average of and then
we had another shutdown and the
unemployment rate edged
shot up to eight point two
percent that was another thirty
thousand workers are that we
lost in so from a year ago
February to twenty twenty to
February this year we have
seventy six thousand.
One employee thirty think thirty
thousand more folks unemployed
in a year ago so I come from a
small business owner.
I work for large companies Mr
chairman Mr speaker and gentle
lady from Los Alamos and I had I
had summer budget and I was so
thankful for that.
But reaching out to the small
business community the chamber
of commerce's throughout our
state of Hispanic chamber of
commerce in
in Albuquerque I I would like to
submit a a substitute bill for
for the bodies consideration
and if I may
Mr
Speaker and gentle lady may I
present that now.
It has been passed down John I'm
hang on just a moment.
I am for me with German read the
children number please.
Yes Mr speaker it's point two
one nine seven eight four point
two.
Government to explain it is a
committee substitute is that
what it is reforming the I'm
sorry say for substitute I
apologize Mister speaker it's
half for substitute for House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House labor veterans and
military affairs committee
substitute for house bill twenty
yeah gentleman I I yet you're
correct I stand corrected all
right so it's a poor substitute
gentleman to explain the for
substance thank you thank you Mr
Mr speaker and what this does is
is taking input from small
business owners that believe
this is a good idea they need to
they need some
some tweaks nations changes in
this this helps the small
business owners so with the
first thing it does it exempts
employers with ten or fewer
employees.
it also provides a two hundred
fifty dollar tax credit per
employee for those employers
that have between eleven and
ninety nine employees that the
facts about thirty six hundred
and seventy four businesses in
our state.
that that fit that category in
this kind of gives them a little
east eighty center but I I know
gentle lady in New Mr speaker
you mentioned other states that
that have done something similar
to this they've also done
something to help the smaller
businesses and that's who are
most concerned about in in San
Juan County we have a lot of
small businesses and they they
need a little bit of relief from
the overall scope of this bill
the next thing it does.
By an exemption.
From the bill for any employer
who already has a paid sick
leave policy that makes the
requirements of this bill so
that's pretty straightforward in
the big companies that I work
for had had some more
sickly policies requires a
workforce solution department to
conduct an impartial
administrators straight of
hearing we're both the employer
and employee can make their case
in regards to file complaint
that paid sick leave was denied
and that workforce solutions
department cannot make any
determination about a complaint
until the administrative hearing
is complete it delays the bill
effective date which is very
very important to July one
twenty twenty two this gives the
small businesses in our state a
chance to recover from this
pandemic and we're we're
thankful that the lot of our
counties are opening up for
rural counties are still still
closed in
down staff it accounting
Terakhir anti Dona Ana County
and in McKinley county up in my
area but they're they're getting
close they're getting real close
to opening up and then we'll see
these thirty thousand people
that were unemployed hopefully
they'll get back to work soon.
The the panelists.
And and police liability section
of the for service to are the
same in this committee steps
that we try to be as close to
your bill as possible.
In addition the committee
substitute provision of
occurring one hour paid sick
leave for each thirty hours of
work are the same that's if you
get that eight exactly the same
before substitute also follows a
committee substitute in terms of
not requiring doctors noticed
last the paid sick leave is
greater than three days and the
import must maintain prevalence
of.
Relevant records for the
preceding forty eight months the
force of state follows a
committee substitute in terms of
which medically related events
were paid sick leave can be used
of the four steps to follow as a
committee so student terms of
the employers are not permitted
to retaliate against employees
for exercising their rights
under the bill before substitute
also follows a committee
substitute provision regarding a
civil actions within three years
of it alleged violation so
Mr speaker and gentle lady this
was a
an attempt to make your bill.
Better and help the small
businesses get back on their
fate delay the timeline of this.
I'll offer a few exceptions
exceptions those those employees
of those importers lesson ten
people.
And we've got and also it
provides kind of a mechanism for
those that have eleven to ninety
nine employees with the with the
kid with the tax credit so I
think this is a cooperative
effort and we've got the
endorsements of the major a
chamber of commerce folks in in
Albuquerque and and the Spanish
chamber I know in my my home
county they they like to
flexibility of this.
It's it's a step in the right
direction I believe
those endorsements are important
lot of times we we we we try to
negotiate a good a good bill and
I'm I'm afraid our small
business community
they offered some changes but
this is this is a temp to get
those changes into the into law
so with that Mr speaker gentle
lady
that explains the for
substitute.
Gentlelady the sponsor is this a
friendly for substance.
Mr speaker it is not and before
I get to the exact reasons I'd
like to remind everyone this
body that this legislature has
done extraordinarily active in
providing support in release to
those businesses who are hurt by
the devastating effects of the
pandemic.
we have passed legislation just
and in this session that
approximates nearly one billion
dollars that does not council
bills that we passed in two
special sessions that were
designed to support businesses
as they work to re open and re
hire employees who are
unfortunately also works very
hard have we damaged by the
effects of the pandemic as well.
And with that said I do not
agree to the substitute that the
gentleman from San Juan it is
proposing largely do to this day
tax credit questions I know my
colleague on tax examines and
San Juan and Mr speaker of very
familiar with a tax what what a
cracked tax credit those
students it's a direct some
strapped service transaction in
the amount of money owed to the
got to the state and it
essentially is some of the
places the onus on the state for
pain for
what it's not a particularly
onerous
deal and for that reason I will
not need to I cannot agree to
the substitutes proposed from
the kinds elements from San
Juan.
All right is available for
substance.
Gentleman from San Juan
Representative on what.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman this gentleman from
San Juan my neighbor
Representative Strickler you I
yield.
Thank you Mr speaker and and and
gentleman.
So Mister speaker and gentleman
it was just stated that that
what we've done this session is
so we have spent a lot of money
trying to get employers some
relief and Mr speaker and
gentleman do you do you believe
that release that were trying to
get to them makes up for the
year of lost production lost
earnings
do do you believe that that gets
anywhere near where people were
at a prior to the governor's
health orders.
Yes Sir thank you Mr speaker and
and a gentleman from San Juan
this is exactly what we're
trying to do we in in the gentle
lady from Los Alamos right we've
got a four hundred fifty million
dollar loan program loans low
interest program this and of our
severance tax permanent fund
we've got two hundred million
dollars in tax relief to our
small businesses so you know
there's no now we we are we're
trying to help them and this
bill will do the same thing this
this this tax credit is vitally
important to them
it gives them a little more
incentive to hire people back
I'm afraid what this bill as
currently written.
Is going to a lot of our small
businesses are going to be hard
pressed to meet these
obligations there they have view
the specially the ones they have
fewer ten employees so this is
just another
this another burden on
businesses and in overall
they're in favor of it but small
businesses maybe a little softer
landing especially those that I
deal with in my community the
restaurants have been hard hit
we've got two thousand
restaurants five hundred five
hundred of them if shut down we
have to we have five thousand
employees out of work and thank
goodness these these County
surviving you moving into an at
partially opening and those
folks will come back to work so
small business owners it this is
this is a hard burden to bear
the bigger businesses and I was
fortunate to work for large
companies they had similar
benefits and rarely ever use
them I'm glad that I was fairly
healthy but
I hope that answers your
question Mr speaker and and
gentleman from San Juan.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman it did kind of answer
to my question I I guess what
I'm going for is.
So the amount of lost income
that.
Businesses or let's call and
employers and employees have
lost this last year.
is there anything that we're
doing is going to make them even
or eight with everything that
we're doing we're just trying to
help them hold on Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Well unfortunately the small
businesses is going to be
it's gonna be hard for them to
recover my taken five years to
recover from this this terrible
pandemic that they shut down
specially the nonessential
businesses I think every
businesses essential other
legislative job for someone and
providing living for their
families but that's that was the
rules of the game and so those
businesses are gonna take a long
time to recover and you don't
want to put more
of a burden on them weather down
and and I'm afraid that we we're
we're saying the light in the
tunnel Mr speaker and gentleman
I think this spring the the
pandemic is going to settle down
we we we see some good good
steps in that direction right
direction I don't overturn unity
I don't know what people's you
know get more resistance to this
thing but we need time to heal
and this this form and that
gives the small businesses a way
to do that.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Currently I believe the the
adjusted numbers are there still
over sixty five thousand
people across the state of New
Mexico that are still
unemployed.
Thousand.
Mr speaker and gentleman we were
over a hundred thousand there
for awhile what I'm worried
about Mr speaker and gentleman
is.
By trying to help these
employers get back to work and
employing people
we've we've we're giving one
incentive after another we we
we've worked very hard as a
legislator legislature trying
give incentives for them to hire
people back Mr speaker and
gentleman.
The more that we place burden on
these struggling businesses.
and we we go on offer to try and
put money in this pocket than
Mister speaker through the the
Current bill before us not your.
Floor so but the current bill is
before us then turns around and
looks to take money out of the
other pocket Mr speaker and
gentleman it just makes me
wonder why we even bother to try
and help them in the first place
because Mr speaker and gentleman
it seems to me the the the
underlying bill the the current
bill that we're going to be
voting on today is just another
disincentive to hire back
employees
for the for those who are able
to get to come back to work the
necessary ones that to to be
able to help sustain that
business Mr speaker and
gentleman of yes they'll have
some more benefits but the ones
who are out of work Mr speaker
and gentleman they will have no
budget because I have no job so
Mr speaker and gentleman I see
what you're.
Looking to do here with the
provision to provide a two
hundred fifty dollar tax credit
for employers per employee who
have between eleven and ninety
nine employees Mr speaker and
gentleman if if the state is
going to require this mandate it
appears that.
Two hundred fifty dollars will
by no means cover that expense
but at least it would be a way
to help so Mr speaker and
gentleman.
it was mentioned earlier I see
that your your your bill
exempts employees with ten or
fewer and exempt employers with
ten or fewer employees from the
requirements of the paid sick
leave act it was mentioned
earlier that.
The several states that were
mentioned have provisions that
require some forms I believe
what was stated over and over
some form of health care
requirement Mr speaker and
gentleman I don't believe a
single one of those states that
was mentioned requires and
employ a person who employs a
single person seasonally.
That's how far the bill that
we're debating goes is to
require someone who hire someone
in the house seasonally.
To pay for that Mr speaker and
gentleman that that we have a
perfect example of seasonal
employees right here in this
building
because we did not accept the
other of the previous amendment
that was offered by leader
Townsend what we're denying is
to the.
The staff that is here right now
those working for us in this
building as we speak we are
going to be denied what we are
trying to push on of a small
businesses and I mean very small
businesses a single employee the
I would imagine that business Mr
speaker and gentleman is does
not even fill out.
As a business fill out their tax
forms they I believe they would
just a fill out their tax forms
under their social security
number as a personal income tax
and that's how they would be
paying those employees but we're
gonna do that to ace to a to a
business has a single to right
to a person that Hiles hires a
single person it appears to me
Mr speaker John we're just in
current encouraging in that
person to either not resume
business or to do it on their
own and to not hire anyone.
Many times Mr speaker German.
What we do here that sounds good
in theory is not a simple last
answer sometimes a simplistic
answer it sounds really good in
theory.
Once the rubber hits the road
the people who get harmed of the
very people that it is stated
that we're advocating for and Mr
speaker and gentleman that's
what I see with this and you and
your
provision in your floor
substitute that would exempt
employers with ten or fewer
employees others is a very very
small businesses.
It appears that what you're
helping them do is stay viable
to where they can hire back
those employees.
And so Mister speaker and
gentleman this is this is a
pretty drastic.
piece of legislation that's
before us in regular times.
But right now when employers are
are either not allowed to be in
business at all there are still
major of the small businesses
are still not even able to open.
Across our state but those who
are not a single one is
Able to open at full capacity as
matter of fact I believe most of
the businesses across state
right now our act of twenty five
percent.
Of of the capacity.
So we have even allowed
businesses to go back to work
yet they haven't even been able
to apply for the.
Of loans or the grants to help
them somehow survive we can't
even wait till they're back on
their feet before we saddle them
with another huge government
mandate that is want to make it
almost impossible for those
small businesses to to not only
recover but even re open.
So Mr speaker and gentleman I I.
I even have a hard time
supporting your your floor
substitute because it's still
goes too far I mean we're still
requiring too much
so Mister speaker and gentleman
I'm I'm looking at your
amendment here it also are your
for substitute.
It also eliminates requirements
that additional paid sick leave
must be provided during the
pandemic so Mister speaker and
gentleman we're asking.
These businesses that.
Have had to shut down.
Many of them have sued.
To try to go back to work they
have sued the government.
Because of because they're not
employing people not out of any
fault of their own it has been
mandated by the governor's
health orders so Mister speaker
and gentleman I'm looking at
this and the the idea that we
would do this it seems to me
that if we're going to require
this that during the pandemic
the state should pay the entire
bill for that sick leave for
that person I think I'm I'm I'm
just flabbergasted that at this
time when when businesses
through no fault of their own.
Our our our
that we're gonna put these
mandates on Mr speaker and
gentleman I know there's others
who want to talk on this measure
but I was just looking at the
first three things that your.
That your.
Floor substitute would do is
not.
To further harm these people but
to less harm them as the
as the bill that is before us is
going to do so Mister speaker
and gentleman it just doesn't
make any sense that at this
moment we would try and help.
people of businesses to just to
stay open and and put some
programs for that would
encourage them to get a loan.
And trying to stay in business
in the meantime we would pass a
provision that basically says I
if you do vote we're not
encouraging you to hire back
going members so Mister speaker
John and I look forward to
supporting your amendment not
because I believe the provisions
in your for substitutes are are
good they're just much better
than what the provision that's
an echo of the forest this
evening so thank you Mr speaker
and gentleman I I I get back in
time.
Next generation granted ogle in
Sierra Representative.
All right let's not yes they
were calm down.
Generating granted Ofglen Sierra
Representative Dow.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from San Juan please
feel are yield.
Thank thank you Mr speaker and
thank you gentleman from San
Juan you know just a few things
that I've been thinking about.
Is that we've heard about all
the state that led the way
before us and that we should
join them but when you take a
minute at the rate allows and
you look at Colorado there law
just went into effect January
first this year and it has a
phased in approach over several
years and requires much less
than forty eight hours forty
eight hours then this bill
also.
Senator.
Sedillo Lopez introduced a
Senate bill three hundred this
year it had a similar idea and
it created paid time off tax
credits to Smith system does
is in providing to paid time off
less reduced hours means reduced
revenue and so what I really
like about your amendment is
that it is offering assistance
to the small businesses.
Mr speaker gentleman and that
your intent.
The.
Gentlelady Mr speaker gentle
lady.
From a to our state absolutely
and again the bishop to business
community watches overall
concept in comparing us to go to
the base station level wealthier
than we are and they needed some
relief and
the suggestions really help them
a lot
For money you know we we we're
constant reminded in this body
that where the forty seventh
poor state.
In the United States and so we
need need to be careful and and
take care of the small
businesses
in phase and then
it you know I like to phase in
aspect and and Colorado this is
what the business community so
they can live with a try to
stick it is close to the
original bill as possible with
these with these important
exceptions the help and the help
of a.
State business and in our other
people back thank you Mr speaker
and thank you gentlemen for that
answer I pulled up the data
there's been lots of mention of
how completely generous and have
a robust our aid has been to
small businesses during this
pandemic and last year we
stepped up and we provided a
range of financial relief
programs a small businesses
including the grant programs the
low interest programs and tax
deferrals so the small business
cares relief grant that was part
create a created by the
legislature received fourteen
thousand grant applications
totaling more than a hundred and
fifty five million in request
however since the grant funding
was limited to a hundred million
only six thousand seven hundred
and fifty six grants were
awarded the average grant size
building fifteen thousand these
requests served as the only
lifeline that many of the small
businesses received Mr speaker
and gentleman do you believe
that that was adequate.
Mr speaker and gentle lady it
just missed the mark in you know
we're we're doing our best as a
legislator to help the small
businesses the federal
government is is doing their
best to help the unemployed in
what not but this is really this
this this bill this substitute
it's really important to the
small businesses in our state
gentlelady we were thirty
thousand people unemployed from
our peak just a year ago and I I
I really believe that that our
economy ceiling up.
And that we're gonna catch we're
gonna those thirty thousand are
unemployed they're going to.
We're gonna come back quickly
but this this my heart of this
might hurt the small businesses
that employ these folks we need
employers we need small
businesses and we definitely
need the workers so they go hand
in hand and this is a good safe
approach especially the year
July.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
Representative I agree and I
think that it it aligns with the
federal standards which required
fifty or less employees and also
the federal aid provides a
dollar for dollar match for the
paid time off and when you're
looking at sickly requirements
of the legislation without your
amendment this increase the cost
for small businesses across the
state with fifty employees
making minimum wage could cost a
small business twenty nine
thousand four hundred dollars if
those employees make ten fifty
just minimum wage but I'm many
employers are paying more than
minimum wage the additional
costs created by this bill
completely wipes out official
says any of the financial
assistance they received early
this year.
It would put them in the whole
average receive fifteen thousand
dollars if they were lucky
enough to get a grant.
And this is double the cost in
sick leave pay even with the
passage of this year's two
hundred million rent and lease
relief package if maximize it
only reaches two thousand over
sixty four thousand small
businesses in the state sixty
four hundred small businesses in
the state.
So between those two programs we
haven't even help fifth ten
thousand out of more than the
than the small businesses that
operate New Mexico.
And yet we're saying we've given
them so much that they can more
than afford us it's simply not
true Mr speaker and
representative I like fourteens
supporting your amendment it's a
better deal option for small
businesses thank you.
These are for the debate on the
substitute gentleman from Lee
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you Mr speaker this kind
gentleman yield I yield.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
enter some quick numbers here.
And I just chose a company size
of fifty people.
An average employment the
fifteen dollars an hour.
The cost ratio of about forty
percent.
And so the run through those
numbers.
And that's about a hundred and
sixty eight dollars a day and
wages.
Which would relate to.
About six hundred and seventy
dollars.
Per day.
In lost revenue to ten percent
gross margin.
And so was running those
numbers.
Mr speaker and gentleman that
works out to about.
The the tax benefits at the your
amendment Committee substance
earlier for substitute would
offer is about twelve thousand
five hundred dollars for fifty
employees.
So as I continue to run on the
mass on this.
Lost revenue for company.
Running at a ten percent gross
margin.
Is about two hundred ninety five
thousand dollars.
Recalls.
This call.
What the company pays off of
profit is around seven percent
state taxes.
That works out to on the twelfth
I work backwards works out to
about a hundred and seventy
eight thousand dollars so
there's a hundred twenty
thousand dollar gap to the
company.
How do we rectify that.
Mr speaker and gentleman
you know what what we've done
just four substitute is is a
great step.
But just running through the
numbers that's a significant
gap.
Mr speaker and and gentleman
We have to remember that.
New Mexico is blessed with a lot
of small businesses fifty four
percent of all our businesses
are considered small that would
be that would be helped with
this amendment and where the
mall and I think with the north.
North of the nation that depends
on the small businesses and.
We we need we need this from a
bone that this will help.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Mr speaker and kind gentleman I
agree that this will help the it
what what the original bill
doesn't damage without this
amendment is is is critical I
mean we need to we need to
understand.
One hundred twenty thousand
dollar gap is a hundred and
twenty thousand dollars that
isn't reinvested back into the
business isn't reinvested back
into the community.
And
Can never be regained.
This is this the original
bill in itself.
Is is a huge concern with
respect to how a business moves
I appreciate the thought put
behind this committees substance
this for substitute.
just from.
The generic real quick math
standpoint.
Either way.
Are are are a small businesses.
And our employees lose
tremendously we may gain Mr
speaker and kind gentleman we
may gain.
On paper.
All of these benefits.
But when companies start in the
whole a hundred twenty five
hundred twenty thousand dollar
gap just clear off the whole
that doesn't help them stay open
and I do appreciate what you're
trying to do with your floor
amendment and that and I will
support it.
But I I think it's important Mr
speaker and gentleman the that
everybody on.
Listening right now understands
the the the damage that this
bill does to small business.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
kind gentleman I yield back my
time.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move to table the
committee substitute to House
Judiciary Committee substitute
I.
House Bill twenty some and.
The gentle lady has made a
motion to table the for
substitute voted yes it will be
tabled of no we back on debate
of the substitute the vote is
now open.
I've got some wrap up the any
comments just that the no the
next week or disincentive to pay
everything but that would be to
move.
Where.
That is not too close.
The clerk to call the members
without a recorded vote.
Representative Barreras.
Yes to table Representative
about us both yes Representative
Chasey.
Ask.
Representative Chasey votes yes
Representative Fajardo.
Representative Fajardo of both
know who's close by a vote of
thirty nine in the affirmative
thirty the negative the floor
amendment or sorry for
substitutes been tabled.
John for San Juan Jenny for the
couple.
Yes Mr speaker and and
ladies and gentlemen the house
You know my community where we
have a lot of small business
owners and and this is this is a
heavy left for them.
I think the numbers are clear
we're blessed with a large
percentage fifty four percent of
our our our businesses are small
and right north of the nation
with small businesses and
they're trying to get their feet
out from under them and this
this was a step in the right
direction and this is from the
input.
Of those of those business
community center and I'm sorry
that this
did make the approval of of of
the lady in general ladies and
gentlemen of this of of the body
and
I'm worried about.
And the I'm worried that this is
going to backfire is going to
have more this gonna do more
harm than good when they're just
trying to heal up and we need to
give me a chance to heal up and
your delay was certainly
important.
And in my the for such to and I
think that was originally
question also the exemptions Mr
speaker and and and gentle lady
thank you for your time.
The gentleman there is further
debate the gentle lady from
Bernalillo Representative
Thomson.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentle lady you'll
yes Mr speaker and yes gentle
lady from Bernalillo I do you
thank you and Mr speaker and
gentle lady I'm just gonna
remind the body that a mask is
to be worn on the bridge of your
nose not under your nose but
with that being said Mr speaker
gentle lady have you ever worked
at a school.
Gentlelady actually I have.
Mr speaker and gentle lady so
you'll know why they call them
Petri's the traditions of
disease don't you.
gentle lady I do children bring
in.
Illnesses that they share with
adults gentle lady and the
adults here those illnesses with
other adults and then they share
the illnesses with children
gentle lady and the it goes on
and on and I would say that
possibility gentle lady exists
and all sorts of businesses like
restaurants and nursing homes
and any number of places gentle
lady thank you for the question.
You Mr speaker gentle lady I
have worked in schools for for
probably thirty years and being
a traveling therapists some
years I would be at ten to
twelve different site and I will
tell you Mr speaker and gentle
lady that each school has their
own bugs for lack of a better
word and every time I would go
to a new school I would stand at
least a few days in my first
month their home sick because Mr
speaker and gentle lady because
families have to send their kids
to schools that because they do
not have any any place to take
them and I think Mr speaker and
gentle lady that the pandemic
has really pointed out how
important our schools are in in
having families able to go to
work Mr speaker and gentleman
I'm I'm lucky or not
The rooms that I worked in were
were usually fairly empty
because I'm a physical therapist
and we threw balls that we
skipped then we jump we ran and
we get all kinds of things but I
also had Matt like Jim at and I
can't count the number of times
Mr speaker and gentle lady where
I had a kiddo who was sick one
of my kiddos that I was working
with the came to school staff.
And I would state you know why
didn't you stay home and they
say well mom had to go to work
mom who lose her job if she
doesn't go to work so here is a
kid who is already obviously has
some sort of a disability
because I'm working with them
Representative coming to school
there is always fluids all just
make it not too graphic but
there are bodily fluids that are
all over the place the kids
feels like crap the the in fact
other kids they in fact as as
the gentle lady said they in
fact the the adults in the place
I have actually Mr speaker
gentle lady had you in classes
where essentially ninety percent
of the kids were out on any
given day because there was a
stomach bug.
Ravaging the classroom the
teacher was out the assistant
was out the principle is out
ninety percent of the kids in
the classroom are out Mr speaker
and gentleman gentle lady I'm
sorry.
That that's something that we
haven't talked about with this
bill is six children going to
infect other kids and in fact
the adults and and.
That's not really good on
learning Mr speaker and gentle
lady do you want to respond to
that.
We
absolutely I totally agree with
your statement about having the
cycle of illness being I'm not a
protective environment for
children and I would supplement
again my answer to you gentle
lady that it's not a productive
environment for employees in
general or for workplaces in
general to have people coming
and going and and not being able
to show up to work and gentle
lady I believe your point is
that in fact we produce we
increased productivity when we
give employees permission to
stay at home when they're sick
so they won't bring Ellis into
the workplace that helps
everyone it helps the co workers
it helps the public and it helps
the employer thank you
gentlelady for that question.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady and I I guess I didn't get
to my point I I did have a room
with Max and I sometimes I would
just tell the teacher I will
keep the students in my row all
of date because they feel
horrible they're buying their
head down on the desk there
knows is running on to the death
they're sneezing and coughing on
other people there so I I had a
lot of the kids in my room
because madam Mr speaker and
gentle lady a lot of schools
have if they are lucky enough to
have a school nurse they may
have one caught in the nurse's
office and when you've got these
these bugs running through the
population there are kids
literally in a in the corners in
their classrooms wrapped up in
their jackets because they can't
go home because mom cannot
possibly leave work because she
may lose her job and then they
will lose their housing and they
will not have enough food to go
around so Mister speaker gentle
lady just on that fact alone I
think that.
That we need to are we need to
support this measure I I
appreciate the Sanchez I think
it's time to do this and I truly
am in support and I hope that
the the members of this body
will be well thank you Mr
speaker and gentle lady.
The gentle lady there is for the
debate the gentleman from
Bernalillo Representative
Martinez.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady please you.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Bernalillo head will use to you.
Thank you the lady Mr speaker
first of all thank you for
bringing this bill forward your
lady I think it's about time I
think one of our previous
debaters.
Alerted to the fact that they
seem to have happened you know
thirty years ago and I couldn't
agree more Mr speaker gentle
lady let's of let's backtrack a
little bit we've spoken a lot
about
how this guy's potentially gonna
fall for small business.
We talked a lot about how we are
further punishing small business
particularly particularly during
the pandemic so I I just want to
make sure that we.
Come back to the thirty thousand
foot view and really try to.
clear up what it is that your
bill is doing house bill twenty
is that Miss speaker gentle
lady.
if I am an employee.
of of the store or a you know
center retail business how do I
accrued my paid sick leave under
your bill.
Mr speaker time gentleman of
unemployed the for any
businesses small business such
as the one that you've indicated
that employee would accrue one
hour pork for every thirty hours
worked.
Mr speaker delays one hour for
every thirty hours worked
so to for me to take.
A full day an eight hour workday
of paid sick leave say I have
the flu for state came down with
the Sniffles
or I have food poisoning
obviously I'm not going to take
two hours up and come back to
work it out to taking tire date
how many hours would have to
work to accrue enough to cover
that one working.
Mr speaker I'm excuse me darn.
I have to do math I think Mr
speaker comes I think it would
take.
I have if I did this math
correctly early on I think it
takes six weeks for employees to
accrue full basically isn't
gentleman from Bernalillo Mr
speaker please correct me if I
did my math wrong.
Speaker I think I think you're
about right Mr utility so upon
passage of this bill and and
signature of the governor and up
on it becoming the law of the
land businesses are not going to
have to provide me with see
three hours of paid sick leave
immediately upon being hired
that correct Mr speaker John
that's absolutely correct and I
would also reinforce the notion
that this law will take effect
for sixty days after
it accruing a sickly will not
occur until six sixty days after
the effective date of the of the
act of.
Miss.
Expected already what is the
effective date of the act.
What Mr speaker and gentleman I
it's the usual effective date so
if people correctly I think it's
ninety days from the date of
signature thank you Mr speaker
John.
And so much speculate you know
way because I've I remember one
of your men as a beginning at
stake was to remove the
emergency clause from the stake
in is that correct Mr speaker
Tallman absolutely correct.
So in a way the way the bills
drafted you've provided for a
phased in approach so you've got
ninety days until this becomes
ninety days after signature I
think until this becomes the
law.
and then sixty days after that
for employers to begin to
implement the law is that
correct Mr speaker daily Mr
speaker and gentleman that's
correct.
Okay and even then once it's
implemented I would have to work
thirty hours so essentially an
entire work week before I accrue
the one now correct Mr speaker
gentle lady.
Mr speaker talent you would have
had to of work thirty hours
correct Mr very well so I
appreciate I think the
thoughtfulness of all all of
what you are proposing here
Mister speaker related because
it is in fact faced in now.
We we talk a lot about we talk
we tonight we talk a lot about
you know of these some of these
businesses coming out you know I
would submit to you Mr speaker
lady that there are some
businesses that have remained
open.
As they have been deemed
essential whether it's you know
you know construction supply
stores or grocery stores those
folks have remained open
throughout.
These this these twelve months
of public health orders is that
not correct Mr speaker gently.
Speaker John that's absolutely
correct.
And so
many of those have remained open
the ones that have not
have been due to the fact that.
There are these public health
orders in place not to speak
ability can you remind me the
body and those watching at home
why it is that we have these
public health orders at the
governor has signed and it is
currently implementing.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Bernalillo it's to keep us safe.
Those borders are designed to
help
stop and slow down the spread of
this deadly disease that has
been ravaging counties cities
people across the country that
is why our governor Mr speaker
and gentleman have implemented
public health workers.
And Mr speaker gentle lady you
know what we're we're obviously
a separate branch of government
and even though the governor
might be you know at any given
point in time and member of our
own political party I think it's
safe to say Mr speaker and
gentle lady that this public
health orders really have been
grounded in science Mr speaker
and and young lady I mean I I
the that is a question for you
to maybe agree disagree with me
in a minute but it seems to me
that those public health orders
have followed the science the
science obviously has evolved
because these diseases this this
this pandemic that we're living
through.
You know we learn more more
about it right I mean it is
March first tomorrow I believe
it was March twelfth or
thirteenth when the first call
out went out that we have to be
careful you know school shut
down for a couple of days at
that point we're almost a year
into this and speaker JD in the
science has certainly evolved in
terms of how we understand is
this virus and therefore those
public health orders seem to
have evolved as well so we
speaker gentle lady
have any of these businesses
that have been shut down because
of public health orders have any
of those businesses being shut
down in your opinion four four
sort of just concretions reasons
listed shut them down shut down
the door shut down the business
or have they really been
grounded in what we know about
the virus at any point in time
Mr speaker gentle lady Mr
speaker and gentleman from
Bernalillo.
The reason for the public health
orders were to protect us I do
not believe they were
arbitrarily or poorly thought
out Mr speaker and I am I also
believe in and frankly confident
in the judgments that have been
made in terms of protecting of
the stores and the customers
that would have been entering
those stores had we not placed
limitations on ours and manner
of operation Mr speaker and
gentleman from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker Julia and I
appreciate that you know I'll be
the first one to to to to say
that I I have my share of
differences with the governor
absolutely on policy we disagree
all the time I we disagree
publicly up this is an area that
I think she really has gone
right and I believe that what
she has done over the last
twelve months to ensure that we
are safe and not only that but
the work that she's done with
our legislature to ensure that
we give back that we try to
support and prop up so many of
those businesses that have been
impacted by a pandemic that
quite frankly has been out of
our hands I mean the lack of
federal response for entire
years ten months was outrageous
you need to be this bad.
But it got this bad and thank
goodness for this governor in
New Mexico who in my opinion did
the right thing to keep us safe
and to keep us alive.
And to me as we think of all of
these workers.
you know when we think of these
workers of these these moms in
these these that these
grandparents raising grandkids
cleaning hotel rooms for the
minimum wage without that kind
of benefit.
Without the benefit of one hour
of paid sick leave for every
thirty hours worked.
It's a real shame and I agree
with the previous speaker this
should have happened thirty
years ago should happen fifty
years ago the fact that we are
debating this on the floor of
the house and twenty twenty one
is is absolutely setting and
maddening anywhere sec.
Yet here we are at the cusp of
one chamber of the New Mexico
state legislature passing and
approving putting their stamp of
approval on a paid sick leave
policy to ensure that all of our
workers.
Have.
The access.
And are afforded.
The dignity of being able to be
sick.
One hour for every thirty hours
worked.
Gentlelady I thank you and all
of your Sanchez I thank all the
advocates I know they've worked
very hard and very long on
issues for many years and I will
gladly cast my vote in support
of house bill twenty to make
thank you Mr speaker I yield
back the floor thank you John
the gentle lady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker this motion having
been debated for three hours I
move that the debate sees.
Hearing objection it is so
ordered.
Generally to close.
Mr speaker members of the body.
I so appreciate the debate on
this bill I think it's an
extraordinary
effort on our part to support
workers and employees in the
state and with that Mr speaker I
do now move that house Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
labor veterans and military
affairs committee substitute for
house bill twenty as amended do
now pass here on final passage
of House Judiciary Committee
substitute for us later veterans
military affairs committee
substitute for House Bill twenty
as amended the vote is now open.
The clerk to call the member
without a recorded vote.
Representative Barreras.
Yes Representative votes yes
Representative close revenue
thirty six in the affirmative
thirty three in the negative
house Judiciary Committee
substitute for House labor
veterans and military affairs
committee substitute for
hospital twenty as amended has
duly passed the house without an
emergency clause.
As you see there was paying
attention to all the contents of
that first floor amendment.
The numbers are in the one more.
I'm twenty one gentlelady from
Bernalillo Representative
Thompson are you ready on that.
Mr speaker I am can you give me
to that point.
The record reflect all action is
necessary for placing House Bill
one forty two on final passage
has been taken gentlelady to
explain the bills.
Thank you Mr speaker so that
house bill one forty two.
Have to do with Education it
creates the task force on sexual
misconduct Representative
requiring public schools and
public and private postsecondary
educational institutions to
adopt policies and procedures
addressing a permit to have
consent and prevention of sexual
assault domestic violence dating
violence harassment and stalking
it requires postsecondary
educational institutes to
conduct conduct by any all
sexual misconduct climate
surveys and it amends the public
school co to include a
requirement
for me to confess that as the
standard for sexual activity Mr
speaker both are a lot of fun.
It's kind of confusing but
essentially Mr speaker and
members of the body what this
bill does.
One of the most important thing
is that it
features it mandate to to permit
your consent as the basis for
sexual activity on in in our sex
ed classes and what that means
Mr speaker and gentleman Jack
and I'm sorry Mr speaker and
body is that only yes means yes
and we we have her we have all
heard for years about on campus
right and those kinds of things
where where the the person said
well she didn't say no or she
was she was asleep and so she
couldn't say no also all this
mad Mr speaker is that unless
there is a firm affirmative then
there is no sexual activity Mr
speaker.
And with that Mr speaker I will
stand for questions.
See no debate gentle lady to
close.
Mr speaker I move that house
bill one forty two as amended do
now pass.
We are on final passage of house
bill one forty two the vote is
now open.
What
was.
What is about to close.
The clerk to call those without
a recorded vote.
Representative about us.
Yes Representative votes yes.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
With the help of yes
Representative Hochman Vigil
votes yes Representative Lane.
Representative Lara.
Representative Lord.
Representative Pettigrew.
The vote is a close rival to
fifty eight in the affirmative
seven in the negative house bill
one forty two has duly passed
the house.
gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business hearing objection it is
so ordered.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker it now being eleven
fifty nine AM I move we adjourn
until twelve or one PM no
objections order Mr speaker I
ask unanimous consent that the
rules be suspended and that the
journal show all those present
in this morning session are
present in this afternoon
session no objections order Mr
speaker I ask unanimous consent
that the rules be suspended and
that the record show that the
general has been read in full
approved subject to revision and
approval of the rules a lot of
the business committee hearing
on section it is so ordered.
Members are there announcements.
Committee meetings.
Incidentally predictions.
Recipes Jennifer Leo
Representative Romero.
Thank you Mr speaker your house
Education Committee will meet
tomorrow at eight AM have a good
evening everybody thank you Mr.
next to the gentleman from
Bernalillo Representative
Martinez.
Thank you Mr speaker the house
taxation and revenue committee
will meet tomorrow at eight
thirty thank you and everybody
have a great night.
Members take note next the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
house judiciary will meet
tomorrow at one thirty and I
wanted to that the body know
that the sponsor of house bill
two eleven has asked that it be
rolled over into Wednesday so
that's the only change in the
agenda just.
Members segment.
Next to the gentle lady from
Bernalillo Representative
Armstrong.
Thank you Mr speaker house
health and Human Services
Committee will meet tomorrow at
eight thirty I think the agenda
is as posted thank you.
Mexico gentlelady from
Bernalillo Representative
Figueroa.
Thank you Mr speaker house
commerce and economic
development will be tomorrow at
one thirty the agenda is as
posted.
The gentle lady members take
note next we have the gentle
lady from Bernalillo
Representative Lewis.
Thank you Mr speaker the state
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee will meet
tomorrow bright and early at
eight AM the only change that we
have is that we will not be
hearing house bill three hundred
which is rolled per the sponsor
goodnight everyone.
The gentle lady Representative
