Here.
Representative Gallegos here.
Representative night birch
there.
Representative Ortez.
Here.
Representative Rehm your.
Representative Zamora your.
Representative Chasey.
Madam vice chair.
Madam chair.
Care.
You madam chair with that we've
reached a quorum with seven
members present.
Great thank you good morning
everyone and we are going to
begin with our first panel.
And trace we remind him pulling
up our calendar now.
It would be madam chair house
bill two ninety great House Bill
Tennessee.
Representative Rehm our very own
are you ready.
Madam chair we need to let a
couple people in
Representative Catherine brown.
And Kerry fresca us.
I don't see carry on just yet.
Karen you're on we raise your
hand please.
Texter.
Yes great you founder okay good
morning madam learning learning.
Go ahead and again when you're
ready.
Madam chair I'm and all of us
have experienced this
When.
The if we take just last year I
sent letters to everyone in the
district boats this is what I
got back as undeliverable.
And then.
These are ballot chasers that I
set out in this current election
and this is what I got back.
The purpose of this voter roll
cleanup is to try to determine
how we can get individuals to
change their addresses when they
move.
And you know Google look at
streamlining our process
anything that can be improved.
Why we're on the way in and then
this for us because also.
But this is that the clerks or
doing anything wrong it's just
individuals are updating their
information.
Welcome Representative Brown.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee so I've
been serving in the in the
legislature now for ten years
and like I think most of the
wraps hi send a letter out to at
least some constituents
near the end of the legislative
session and I've had the same
experience that Representative
Rehm has described when I
actually have another return
mail that would feel bankers
boxes and that probably Senator
maybe even for bankers boxes
stuffed with letters that
weren't deliverable they come
back with the yellow label on
them that says under liberal
undeliverable or addressee has
moved or if there are certain
messages that come on those
yellow labels and to me that's
just an indication that that our
voter rolls really are um.
Rather inaccurate and it's a
it's a problem that actually
compounds over time and so I
think the original intent of
this bill was that we we find
ways to make sure the voter roll
for more accurate for one thing
if people don't receive a valid
they're probably not any are a I
am a letter from either probably
not getting their ballots either
if they just give us the update
update their records so I think
we have a problem with this and
the the the bill with the input
of county clerks and others has
expanded a bit from the original
version and I think it's a it's
a truly much better bill and I
know we'll probably discuss
little bit more about what this
bill would would due for
elections in New Mexico thank
you madam chair.
Thank you and Representative
Rehm do would you like your
expertise expander are you ready
for the questions yes ma'am I I
would like agency for us because
to go ahead and speak a little
bit about all of this.
Great welcome.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee at good good to
see all this morning and first
off I would I would like to
recognize it and really send my
appreciation to the sponsors of
this bill and their their
willingness to listen to the
county clerks and the secretary
of state's office regarding
concerns on the first date
version of the bill and so this
committee sub being introduced
today really does reflect that
that work in listening and and
really think it's it's a much
much better bill and in this
form so I truly truly appreciate
that
and I'll say that election
officials in our county clerks
take voter roll maintenance
they're very seriously and they
follow the provisions in the
current law and there have been
a number of improvements in
regards to data sharing across
states to identify people who
have moved and
matched to a a social security
master death that file so we can
recognize voters who have
possibly passed away in other
states that information I'll
come back to us so there's
there's been a lot of gains and
improvements in recent years
largely related to big data
sharing with and our own state
government and with other with
other states and I think that's
really reflected in our rating
with there's a study that comes
out of after every general
election it's a nonpartisan
study conducted by in my T. its
the election performance index
and it's a it's a non partisan
objective measuring stick that
measures all of the States and
how they fare and managing their
elections in New Mexico.
Rated number nine and I really
think that you know the one of
the main reasons that we have
such a high rating in comparison
to
Mr art other states is because
our legislature really cares
about constantly
you know pushing of our
modernizing our our elections
looking at innovation and it's
it's always a kind of a
forefront topic in every
legislative session it's just a
topic that legislators really
care about and I think our
rating is a is a testament to
the attention that elections do
we get from our legislators and
I I think this bill and in
particular it stands to create
it and working task force of and
experts in in their respective
fields that can continue to kind
of look for for ways to improve
elections and and also you know
find ways to to better interact
with with the public I'm you
know what it takes to keep our
voter rolls are water
registrations current it you
know it seems like it shouldn't
be such a complicated process
but you know sometimes
government doesn't do the best
job at interacting with that
with the public always so by a
kind of creating a task force
that really puts of a group
together really focusing on
voter education potential voter
modernisations that that may
help us do an even better job
next time around it is a good
thing and I I think I can also
reports that it it is my
understanding The New Mexico
County clerk affiliate met on
the Committee substitute
yesterday and they voted to
support this legislation.
And I'm happy to answer any
other questions about election
processes or election Lara to
help the committee discuss bill
thank you for the opportunity.
Madam chair I want to think Miss
frescoes in the county clerk's
because I mean they're really
the expert in this area and they
helped draft this committee sub
to where it's workable we wanted
to get something that would
actually be able to do something
in it I think we're there thank
you madam chair I think we're
ready to answer questions.
When our or so you Sir are.
Two two zero two three one point
three and I'd like to move that.
Sign up now.
Okay thank you Representative
Rehm I'm just
concluded the sob and that
number is different so I'm
gonna.
Make sure I have the right one.
Madam chair is the Subban the
ShareFile is that where we have
to get it yeah and that's what
I'm looking but I see one that's
two one nine.
Six three five point four a ice
fees so I don't that's not the
number Representative Rehm read.
Sure Reese will you help.
The two one nine two two five is
the original bill.
Okay.
They it was about a week ago
that it was delivered or
Legislative Council told me it
was delivered to you all I know
we have a I think we just need
to come up with a better system
for getting out the old
here some and madam chair we do
have the original but we do not
have the electronic version.
Okay I can send it to someone
yeah we use please send it to
chair race.
Okay.
We are in here for a moment
trying to do that.
All I see with the CS is the
doctor or the word document and
that is about service.
Yeah we got it to our
analyst in Alice's chase.
Right we got it for analyst and
that's why I thought we have the
electronic version but now
looking in the Here file to.
And that we don't.
So as soon as that
Representative Rehm gets it in
there we can.
Get it distributed to everyone.
And Representative Rehm just
briefly will that Committee said
the fact the public comment.
it may.
Although the clerk's now have
seen at so you know
Hopefully that takes care of the
it is solved a lot of the
problem so I I had to and did
consequences in the first and
so since we move the committee
for discussion mistrust as we
you just tell us the differences
between the last version and
then that that's within the
committee substitute please.
Yeah absolutely I'll do my best
on on that
he the original version of the
bill created a the voter roll
cleanup task force and the focus
was very much on up at setting
up a task force that included
Some
Member from the assessors office
several county clerks
the secretary of state members
of legislature to look at why
the the voter rolls are not
clean and to potentially look at
the the
and just investigate ways to
investigate ways to potentially
change the laws in regards to
and in regards to voter roll
cleanup.
That that bill wasn't
necessarily settling real well
amongst the election officials
who do very much take the lawful
maintenance processes seriously
there there are federal laws
that that regulate eighty
uniform and non discriminatory
process for setting up a a
methodical program want
someone's identified two of
native to to.
Remove that person without it be
becoming you know overly
aggressive or or in.
Removing people in error
and then you know ultimately and
ending with the situation of
disenfranchise and someone so so
the first bill it it seems it
the election officials took it
is kind of a more negative light
I would I would say and so I
think this the substance to what
it does is really pro promotes
an educational aspect too that
that the intricacies of what it
takes to of course keep the
motor maintenance as a as an
important efforts
but also realizing that as as
simple as it seems it is
important to to carefully and
follow all federal and state
laws in regards to keeping that
the maintenance done and so this
added the the focus on helping
to educate the voters so they
can help all of us the they can
understand how it how it works
and how they can be helpful in
keeping the voter rolls claim
you know we have this you know
very kind of transient society
where people people are are
moving in the last thing on
their minds is keeping their
their voter registration updated
so this is away to help educate
people on and how they can help
us do that and it also continues
to keep in the in the bill ways
to look at election
modernisations are you know are
there things that could be done
better are there ways to relying
on some up some of our other
existing data in other aspects
of government they can you know
help us crosscheck and and keep
our address data clean you know
can we we tighten things up more
so with are really.
Insured with motor vehicle so it
it really sets up you know some
some experts and some space to
to evaluate whether there are
some modernization efforts so it
really does strike kind of a
positive balance that election
officials and county clerks are
doing a great job they're
following the law and they're
not doing anything wrong
you know are there are there
legislative efforts that can be
undertaken that would make
you know make things even
better.
Okay great thank you so with
that we actually have now the
committee set up within the
share file so everyone can take
a look at it and again the
analysis I believe was done on
that committee substitute as
well so Representative Rehm if
we're ready we can go to the
pool and collect public comment.
Yes you know one thing I should
have said is with all of these
these are people that requests
a ballot and did receive one if
you will.
And so that's really concerning
you know I don't want to
disenfranchise anyone and again
I really appreciate the help
from the secretary of state's of
the clerks to of go ahead and re
write this should be a you know
I wanted a positive committee it
wasn't to be negative again
standing one of it is the voters
to.
Need to go ahead and clean up
their address thank you madam
chair and with that will stand
for questions.
Great thank you so we'll go
ahead and open up the pole for
those that would like to raise
their hands in support or in
opposition to house bill two
ninety and it's open now will
keep it open for another ten
seconds.
Okay great so we have twenty six
in favor and eight against.
So let's hear from the
opposition first.
Again if you would like to speak
in opposition to the bill.
Raise your hand.
Okay seeing none of you would
like to speak in support of the
bill please raise your hand.
Kyle jam your now and it.
Thank you yes good morning
everybody I got to and it Kylian
**** I am from the community
chair Prof connect bill that.
The task force for community
cleanup is highly necessary
there has been a tragic of
illegal dumping happening all
around the community area and
it's just
There's dealing with the
jurisdiction with the with the
trash dumps happening that they
can only accept certain
individuals from certain state
saying given we do live in the
four corners region we have a
families that live with each
other and have different license
plates in so it's just horrible
to see TV's couches furniture in
the washes in the river and so I
feel that it's very much up to
the state to provide this
service and that it would also
be an opportunity for the
community members to be part of
this enforcement thank you.
Thank you king you are now and
made it.
Thank you madam chair this last
may I change my address I went
to my burger court voter portal
online during the lockdown
change my address because I did
revert crosstown.
When I send it said that all
I'll changes of address would be
sent through I believe first
week of July July came I got my
new card but when I looked
online it was now two people.
Was my old number with my order
history and I had a new.
Number with my new address I had
to ask someone else to ask
someone else in your somebody in
the county clerk's office to
help me resolve that to even
people who are trying to change
their address don't always clean
the rules.
Thank you Dana Christodoulou.
You are now and it.
Chair committee members and why
Representative Rehm thank you
for bringing this forward I also
ran for office and had a staff
just to stick it is returned.
Those cards I would definitely
like to see this cleaned up my
son who has not lived in this
house or nor voted in New Mexico
for twelve years now keeps
getting ballots and such so
let's go ahead and get this
fixed thank you very much two
passed on H. B. ninety.
Thank you.
Dale.
The Ramos you are now and it.
Hi my hand was not supposed to
be up.
Okay thank you.
Carl in New Mexico you are now
and made it.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee it's Leri Sonntag
here on behalf of the New Mexico
business coalition we fully
support HB two ninety our
election integrity which
includes the cleaning up of the
voter rolls is a nonpartisan
issue something that we all
everybody agrees with it is
important we appreciate the
Sanchez bringing this bill
forward
two passes well thank you.
Thank you that concludes public
comment committee members.
Representative Nibert.
I'm still working my way through
the through the bills but I do
have a few.
The national questions of
ramming if there's somebody else
that's gonna ask questions I
might continue reading the bill
by up some others after college
eyes for that it may be required
in the sense that.
The questions that came up the
in my mind what I was reading
the first the first bill was.
Madam chair representative are
there any existing data bases
available to the the state of
New Mexico that can be utilized.
To verify addresses.
Madam chair I'm gonna have to
kick that over to this friends.
Madam chair representative
Nibert
the probably the the best
example is
the motor vehicle department the
motor vehicle department
very often knows when someone
moves because they have the the
individual goes in and and
updates their address or updates
their driver's license or ID
card and so you know we
certainly have have some
integration with motor vehicle
to get that information and in
fact there's there's another
bill on on the Senate side that
makes that even at tighter
integration where
if someone updates their address
and motor vehicle it it is
automatically what update that
voter registration page right
now it's more of a choice
someone can't can't choose to
update their voter registration
when they update their driver's
license and and this would
integrated more.
You talk about motor vehicle
department but are the motor
vehicle department of.
Databases also tied in with the
regular tax and Rev databases so
for instance three people are
piling come tax returns
generally have an address listed
there are.
Motor vehicle department it
certainly advantage of C. within
the taxation and revenue
department do you do you know
whether whether they have
communication between their two.
Databases or not.
Madam chair it is my
understanding and the tax system
and the motor vehicle system are
are two different systems under
that the same executive agency
however we have had some
conversations with taxation and
revenue about their tax system
and it it sounding Y. eight
they do they collect a mailing
address which of course is is
important
It's an important aspect of the
voter registration system we
need to know how to mail Terry
I'll obviously to a voter but
what they don't necessarily have
is that physical address and and
so physical address becomes them
the most important address from
a voter perspective because
that's how we assign a precinct
and then determine that the
correct ballot to issue out
ultimately.
Madam chair and mistrust because
I've made a state.
Four years ago setting
are constituent letter out and
using.
They are addresses that were on
the.
Voter registration rolls that
are.
Elector there resident residence
address and I learned very
quickly
about three weeks later that I
had passed up because in Lincoln
County.
A lot of people there
residential address does not
have a a postal delivery are to
it and so I got back almost
three quarters of the mail that
I sent out to residential
addresses when I should have
been using the
mailing address for those
letters of.
And I learned a valuable lesson
she between the two at least FY
I think about it because the.
Everybody has a a.
Postal delivery address that's
different than their their
residential addresses in many
parts of our rural parts of of
what can County
up so I'm I'm aware of that I'm
just wondering if if the state
maintains.
Our existing databases if
there's some ability to
record date twenty those to at
least allow.
The secretary of state's office
to question whether a person has
moved or just change the the
location of the residents have
more proactive than sending out.
Notice Sir card that serves our.
Along the lines have you moved
that would you please update
your your registration files are
good because I think this day
and time.
the state has all a lot of
information all.
On us for variety of of means of
have the.
Maybe it's too too big a leap at
this point I get to get all that
point but the certainly there's
a lot of data compiled by the
state on on each one of us with
respect to our location of.
Turning to the.
We support of the bill the that
I.
Right now
a couple things jumped out
number one of and I don't know
your December new drafters the
old draft had
Representatives from the county
assessors office and then
utilization of county assessor
records to verify and ensure
residential requirements of
voter registration.
And if the new bill I'm kind of
interested in what what the.
What data of those the assessor
have.
That would be valuable for these
purposes because I.
The role of the assessors a
little bit the.
Different I I did see the
connection.
Madam chair.
Best for us is.
Stress test thank thank you
madam chair this this new
committee sub
does reflect a member of an
appointed county assessor to be
an advisory member on the task
force.
And so I you know my perspective
of of how that that could be
useful is in providing the rest
of the task force an
understanding of the data that
they do maintain an
understanding of potentially a
greater understanding of like
that the nine one one processes
and and just the data that they
maintain in their records and
you know maybe even to your
point how how we manage the that
like the re address seeing of
the rural
the rural addresses eight you
know I know there's been an
effort in in New you know I
certainly not an expert in it
but just the re address sing of
the of the very rural address
seeing you know county road this
that and the other mile marker
or whatever you know how all
that you know what's going on in
the assessor's office in order
to create a modernized addresses
that maybe you know geo geo
locating initiatives perhaps in
our in order to be able to kind
of map out rural addresses
anything the assessors might be
doing it you know if if we E. as
election officials have an
opportunity to to hear hear them
out we we need to provide the
kind of connection you know that
you're alluding to in order to
add to.
you know help help keep you know
the voter registration addresses
is as current as possible.
Our our thank I guess madam
chair I was wondering if you're
of the.
At least I spare answers that
the assessors office probably of
the one officer recounted that
the maintains pretty good
backups of each tract of land
within the county and
Are you know.
Pretty pretty well keeps up with
any transactions involving those
tracks
but.
What my experience with this the
assessors officers so that
sometimes they're not.
They're not the most willing to
do maybe.
Yes.
Get involved we're we're sharing
some of that data factored in
Travis county we have two
different systems one for the
assessors of one for everybody
else.
Problems so we tried to
integrated the cost a lot of
money but the.
That's the about four by one of
our there on the
Committee Sir bill.
I say the words.
Minority political party at
several places and I just want
to make sure that.
Now that we have of.
A member that state declined the
state would that be the one
member of a minority political
party were what's the context
of minority political party
because I think we generally
think of having a system that
has two major parties of them
may be a bummer of minority
political parties and I think
the intention here is to have
equal numbers from the.
Parties that are are
representative of house and
Senate.
The Democrat Republican Party
but the I see the work minority
political party and the I just
want some clarification because
I think it's you Senator I.
L. page page four line search
encouraging I why Senator goes
for just two examples of the use
of that word.
Madam chair if I may answer
that.
Right place through our
Representative Madam chair
representative bro thank you
madam chair representative
Nibert so there is some language
here that makes it clear it's
that with the two political
parties with the most members in
the state so that would be
Democrat and Republican.
Madam chair representative work
where is the definition hi maybe
I didn't get to it.
Turn just to turn chair
representative page three winds
five and six of their it's
referring to the four public
members with the two political
parties with the most members in
the state being represented.
And then I believe that language
is repeated.
You see to find it.
And also on page two we see at
one eleven page two
it talks about six members who
are legislators with the two
political parties with the most
members in the state being
represented in the numbers.
I'd say that but then I turn the
page I see.
I just.
Wonder if your maybe there needs
to be at the following terms.
Because we do have.
One member of the house that so.
Replied the state I I yes that's
not a political party at all
the.
Yeah we could have members from.
The Green Party with that
members from the Libertarian
Party get out members from a
variety of other
Register parties with the
secretary of state's office and
maybe maybe madam chair and
mistrust because there are how
many political parties are
registered with your office do
you know.
The thank you madam chair
Representative Nibert
March after a general election
is is actually the month where
all of that is re evaluated so I
it looks like it's some of the
minor parties may not continue
to qualify as a minor party here
shortly so I you know I think
we'll have
you know.
To to earn two minor parties
when all's said and done in in
our state here shortly.
Madam chair representative so.
I'm not going to propose a
member of the.
You all right one out look at
that just make sure captures the
your attention with respect to
the bill hi I certainly support
the.
The efforts to to do this our.
And I would assume madam chair.
Mistrust goes up the procedures
are players that.
If you.
If you.
Get information about the person
may have moved you don't drop
order rules till such time as
you follow up with the required
letters and and contacts that
are set forth in statute would
that be accurate.
Madam chair representative
Nibert now you're you're exactly
correct and and that that
process is dictated in in
federal law where we have to
find notification and
opportunities to update and
opportunities to vote and if if
a voter fails to respond and to
all of those opportunities then
actually March after every
general election is when an
independent border registration
meets in each county to look at
the list of voters eligible for
removal
based on those criteria.
Madam chair and mistrust so
basically this bill does not do
anything to change the
safeguards that are currently in
place to make sure that we don't
our our.
Correct terminology but boy the
registration of a qualified
elector for
prematurely and that we will do
everything within our
within the confines of the
existing wall to ascertain
whether or not that person still
resides at that address and and
give them ample opportunity to
responded sorry yes here I am or
yes that's me and I moved to to
the other address I need update
my voter registration so madam
chair.
Representative server mistrust
because thank you for bringing
this up our our I do support it
thank you.
Thank you Representative
Representative okay excuse me
vice chair Johnson.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members I would like
to move a do not pass on house
bill two nine zero and a do pass
on.
How state government elections
in any Affairs Committee House
Bill.
Substitute for house bill two
nine zero.
Thank you Mr Johnson and a
second by Representative Nibert
is there further discussion.
Is there any objection to the
past motion.
Madam chair John.
Yes thank you madam chair sorry
show me voting no because I need
to review it more carefully I'm
sorry I haven't done that yet.
Okay that's fine let's go ahead
and take the role just in case.
Chasey no.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative guideposts.
Yes.
Representative night part.
Yes.
Representative Ortez yes.
Representative Rehm.
Yes.
Representative Zamora yes.
Madam vice chair.
Yes.
Madam chair yes.
Madam chair with that you have
eight in the affirmative and one
in the negative.
Great thank you Representative
with a vote of eight in the
affirmative and one and the
negative you have a do pass.
Thank you madam chair.
Okay great so now we are moving
on to Senate bill eighty four.
Senator Stefano X..
And we do have the list of your
express provided so we'll get
everyone moved over to the
panelists mode.
Welcome.
Senator you can begin when
you're ready.
Thank you very much for got to
and you good morning everyone
madam chair members of the
committee
today we're here with Canadian
substitute for Senate bill
eighty four which is referred to
as the community solar act when
I first like to let you know all
the sponsors that we have.
We had in the Senate we have
myself senator Linda Lopez
Senator Bobby Gonzales and
senator bill Pullman and a few
others and the house we have
Representative Patricia Roybal
Caballero Representative Andrea
Romero and Representative joined
Ferrari
madam chair I also have two
experts with me today Rick
Gilliam who is the program
director for distributed
generation regulatory policy of
both solar.
And P. lark Thomas an attorney
work with quarrels in Thomas to
answer any of that tribal or
legal questions that come up.
So madam chair this bill is a
little bit different than
community solar that you've seen
in the past last year we had a
Senate memorial sixty three
which created a working task
force to look at every all the
pros and cons that
controversies what people would
like to have in the bill what
they didn't want to have in the
bill the goals were to bring
representatives from stakeholder
groups around the state to
to state to be inclusive of
everyone who wanted to
participate.
To find areas of common ground
and to minimize areas of concern
we had ninety people start in
July and then we continued for
six months every other week for
two hour sessions and we had
fifty to sixty people
participate in the six months
worth of meetings we had
trainings from the national
renewable energy laboratory we
had meetings with the investor
owned utilities with the rural
electric coops with developers
with advocacy groups some of the
National and also probably
missing some other ones and in
this group of people who
participated of course receive
these counties tribes and that
there was a specific tribal task
force that worked on language
that is in this bill and we'll
talk about why the tribes are
interested in this.
Wirth the working group was
survey twice once at the
beginning once at the end of the
six months after all the
educational meetings they were
surveyed on key issues the
annual program size the facility
sites utility participation and
many of the things I talked
about all the different groups
who participated we briefed some
interim committees and.
October and November you should
and we shared our written report
with legislators in December.
The bill was the result of many
consultations.
So community solar what is it
it's really set up to be shared
by individual community members
who would receive credits on
their electricity bills for
their portion of the power
produced.
It makes sewer power available
to everyone who can't access it
for reasons such as renting
finances apartment ownership the
type of home the available land
or not etcetera.
There is a special emphasis in
this bill on tribal communities
and low income neighborhoods.
We create options for all
consumers business residential
government nonprofits to lower
energy bills in shape renewable
energy.
The economic benefits of this
bill would be very high it
stress is job creation in the
solar industry it Lee it has
lease payments for the
landowners as well as other
sectors and economic benefits
the U. N. M.
bureau of business and economic
research bureau actually
undertook a study in which they
indicated over five hundred
million dollars of economic
benefits and up to four thousand
jobs in the next five years
could come from such a project
are set to statute.
There would be over two point
nine million in tax revenues
annually for the state funded
through private investments not
requiring any increased taxes.
Every county in New Mexico over
twenty million twenty year
period could benefit by almost
fifteen million dollars in
output and about a hundred and
seventeen new jobs over that
twenty years.
The local sectors hardest hit by
the virus that would benefit
would be the construction
restaurants and professional
services.
Now what's in our bill first of
all this bill is not taking over
the Energy from Rolex coops from
the investor owned utilities of
PNM el Paso electric or excel.
This bill it has many consumer
protections built into the bill
section seven specifically talks
about the consumer protections.
We have cost quite a bit of the
rulemaking to the PRC to be
completed in April of twenty two
the first deadlines that we had
they felt a little crunched so
in the very first committee so
we actually push the date out
further and we also are asking
the PRC to evaluate to review
and evaluate and recommend
adjustments after three years on
the annual cap the facility
sites the renewable energy
credits local solar industry
affects the bill credit rate.
Now the PRC also identified a
revenue need so we included a
feat collection authorization to
help them defray administrative
costs.
In this bill specifically we
authorize one hundred megawatts
that's a statewide cap per year
now that is one percent or less
than one percent of all the
energy produced by the large
utilities we also have limited
our projects to five megawatts
or lower.
So if you were to take the
hundred megawatts divided by
five we're only talking about
twenty projects around the
entire state there is no way
that we would be taking over the
energy of the that the large
I'll use our.
Producing but the reason we're
bringing this up is because
cities counties school tribe's
churches have said we would
really like to have the
opportunity to set up some
community solar that would not
only benefit us as an of
political subdivision or a small
business but also bring in some
of our residents and also offer
opportunities for low income so
our bill does have a thirty
percent goal for low income
residents to be involved.
Thirty percent of the statewide
cap would be reserved for low
income households by facility.
Renewable energy credits the rex
would go to the utilities and
pass bills this might not have
happened but we recognize that
it is the investor owned
utilities and our
Rural electric co ops that
really would want this.
Now we also work as I mentioned
earlier we worked very closely
with the rural electric coops.
And the board of the rural
electric coop association
actually came up with the
resolution that said they would
be neutral on this bill if we
had an opt in.
Appropriations versus an opt out
so our bill does include an opt
in provision so that.
The rural electric co ops could
determine when they are ready
and have the capabilities to
develop such a project.
Mexico location of our community
solar facilities could be hooked
up with other energy sources
such as battery storage but it
could not be hooked up with
another solar community solar
facility so you can take a five
megawatt added to another five
megawatt you would have to have
one five megawatt standalone.
The as I mentioned the cost
could opt in now the reason the
problems and the Indian nations
are very interested is there
exempt from many of our state
requirements because of their
sovereign rights but they do
need this in a billing
legislation.
Here in the state in order to
participate in some of these
Projects so at this point I I'm
proud I'm sure I left something
out and I would turn it over to
my co sponsors to the state to
see if they want to add
and a few words and then we
could go to the public.
Thank you.
Madam chair it's a.
If I may madam.
Morning good morning good
morning and thank you senator
you actually did not leave out
anything I just wanted to stress
a few things is this committee's
familiar with the presentation
of community solar as we come
forward several years now and I
just appreciate the way that the
the senator gave a really good
overview of why we are here
today and all the main points
this is a consumer bill and us
the reason why we have community
solar in its name because in my
belief and I all of our beliefs
it creates access and
affordability and gives the
opportunity with a broad base of
benefits to entire communities
entire communities
to be able to afford and share
renewable renewable energy which
is the prime objective objective
of when Y. community solar
versus any other kind of solar
and I think that's important to
note because what we're doing
and sharing and affording and
providing access to community
solar we're actually providing
an environmental justice model
which I believe is the best
model to introduce our
communities to the world of
renewable energy and so I want
to think on the Senator we went
through a tremendous amount of
months and she described of.
Broad community support which I
thought we had a tremendous
value to where we are today so I
I'm glad to have joined her on
in the Senate memorial and I'm
happy we are here today and I
encourage everyone to ask all
the questions you have or to
presenter support on encourage
your vote today thank you so
much madam chair and members of
the committee.
Thank you representative
Representative remarked Romero.
Thank you madam chair thank you
members of the committee I just
wanted to quickly under score
again the massive participation
over the course of the year
that's gone into this process
and secondly that this is truly
a win win for New Mexico both
economically with the diversity
that we're trying to encourage
within our state our with our
greatest asset which maybe our
son RCS symbol that madam chair
is that we have it's also women
being that solar is cheaper than
it's ever been on earth and
we're hoping to really
capitalize on that opportunity
here and this provides for that
thank you madam chair thank you
Committee.
Thank you and Senator Stefanics
would you like M. anyone else to
speaker are your experts
available for technical
assistance I think our experts
are available for technical
assistance and I know you still
have the schedule to go through
before your eleven eleven thirty
meetings so we'll go to the
public and answer all the
questions you have okay great
thank you so now we are going to
open up a pool if you would like
to raise your hand in support or
in favor of.
Senate bill eighty four we will
leave it open for ten more
seconds.
Okay we are closing that poll
right now.
We have a seven day that voted
for and fourteen have voted
against.
So let's go ahead and take the
opposition if you would like to
speak and opposition to the bill
please raise your hand.
And I'm Myers you are now in
muted.
I was in a position I raise my
hand to really sorry.
Okay Ricardo Gonzales you are
muted.
Hi chairwoman and committee
members good morning.
I
Want to let all of you know that
I'll pass a lecture is not
opposed to community solar per
se and we want to thank the
sponsor and the Senate for the
amendments that came through on
the Senate side
we have community solar inside
of el Paso electric territory on
the Texas side that the insurers
that there is no cost.
Leakage over to other consumers
that are on our system our
customers.
And we would just will ask that
you all carefully look at that
and and ensure that that
customers on that are not part
of community solar are not
bearing any of the cost of of
the system
thank you very much Madam
chairwoman and committee.
Great thank you Kerry call your
now and muted.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Terry Cole and I'm the
president and CEO for the
greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce we have a good
partnership with senator
symphonic so over the years but
on this particular bill we do
respectfully disagree and we
oppose the bill are chambers
stepped forward as a strong
early supporter of the twenty
nineteen energy transition act
increasing the use of non carbon
energy sources in New Mexico is
a worthy objective we cannot
however support Senate bill
eighty four we were in support
of the amendments on the Senate
side and we were sorry to see
those amendments are stripped
from the bill we believe this
legislation would raise costs to
consumers and businesses non
subscribers will clearly be
disadvantaged by picking up the
financial responsibility that's
a describers would leave them
with that thank you madam chair
and members of the committee for
allowing us to change comment on
the bill thank you.
Thank you Carla New Mexico you
are now and it.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee it's Leri
Sonntag here on behalf of New
Mexico business coalition in the
C. respectfully opposes SB
eighty four because of an
outdated initiative that only
serves to further complicate the
implementation of the Energy
transition act requirements New
Mexico already has strict
guidelines for moving to clean
energy which already has several
challenging requirements and the
state and energy producers do
not need the staff to further
complicate matters.
Biggest concern SB eighty four
as the impact of substitution on
lowincome in fixed income
ratepayers who are not
recipients of that substitution.
Subsidization of rates for some
required raising rates for
others there are many who simply
can't afford to pay higher
electric rates for the benefit
of others when they're currently
struggling to pay their electric
bills we are suicide now on H.
B. twenty thank you.
Thank you Michael d'antonio your
now and it.
Good morning that one that
remembers Committee Mike
d'antoni with excel energy our
parent company Xcel energy we
have to the largest community
solar programs in the country
one in Minnesota want Colorado
and drawing from the experience
from those programs we we want
to avoid problems like that in
New Mexico in in Minnesota for
example over three hundred
million dollars subsidies paid
by non subscribers to support
community solar and that and and
that eighty ninety percent of
those energy cells go to large
commercial and industrial.
That customers so some of those
the amendments that were put on
by the Senate to.
Floor we we approve up we were
we were disappointed student
taken off in your more customer
protections and we're not a post
community solar but we want to
be done just you done right
Mexico so we appreciate that a
no vote on the bill thank you.
Thank you.
Ashley Wagner you're now and it.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I'm Ashley Wagner
director of public policy for
the New Mexico chamber of
commerce and we respectfully
oppose this bill in twenty
nineteen our organization was
part of the Energy transitioned
Act supporters and advocates
that work hard to get the bill
passed we agree with the
ambition of governor Lujan
Grisham to make the transition
to sustainable energy at the
most affordable cost for all New
Mexicans today we need to again
strongly voiced our support for
this clean energy ships and as a
business community we are one
hundred percent committed to
doing everything we can to make
it happen but to date the true
cost of community solar for the
average family or business
hasn't been established adding
no cost burdens to our most
vulnerable communities is unfair
especially now we are
considering a number of measures
to help are most in need to to
comment we're also very
concerned about non subscribers
subsidizing it the subscribers
thank you so much.
Thank you Greg Senate bill you
are now immunity.
Morning madam chair I'm Greg
Sonnenfeld and engineer ward
winning Asalem this inclement
organizer I've done analysis of
the proposed HSA bill the result
is that increase increases
greenhouse gases it creates no
new additional solar increase to
six hundred million dollars
effective tax rate payers I
believe this bill may have been
co opted by the solar industry
from the start every ten to
reduce these problems blocked
repealed in the workgroup we try
to fix the economics by
incentivizing storage a
workgroup moderator actually
shut that down despite the
Brattle report showing his only
economic way for distribute
generation excuse me.
The Senate amendments protect
the rate payers from the six
million dollar taxes rolled back
with the word unduly was added
making the protections
meaningless we try to add PRC
oversights determine real costs
this was stripped out this isn't
a market solution at it really
feels like a corporate handout
to build a really inexpensive
and efficient solar and it just
hasn't been fixed thank you.
Thank you.
Matthew Hermio you are now and
it.
A good morning madam chair
members of the committee met in
the the public service company
of New Mexico as you all know
this legislation has been
considered for several years we
can then Senator legislation
Representative provides.
Work on this especially now that
New Mexico has a clear path
forward with the energy
transition act it is just for
that maybe just bills I've dated
will cause serious delays on
that you can what is most
important the clean and
sustainable energy future we do
support the Senate floor
amendments that were made
however the house energy
committee and then that's give
us new concerns and three of a
more it compromises the
stability of the grid just when
we most needed to be reliable it
threatens Keenum's ability to
invest in sustainable energy and
infrastructure required to
implement the energy transition
act and it diverts needed
funding from these investments
in sustainable energy grid
station making the transition is
not going to be easy and it is
very urgent for us to see we
need to all be rolling in the
right direction the concept of
community solar complete world
however it should be at the
expense.
Kyle jam your now and it.
Yes good morning everybody my
name is Kyle Jim and I represent
an introspective as the
executive director and I am in
favor of the Senate bill eighty
four as far as community solar
goes that we can extract the
greatest resource and relate
very much to our Z. as simple as
to Mexicans in that community
solar we could provide a
tremendous opportunity for the
community members to not rely
heavy so much on coal power
plants and nuclear power plants
and that all of this money being
saved can be utilized towards
housing towards food security
and the agriculture community
and that all of this will be a
great start to ramp up what it
is that as health equity and so
we very much need to support the
solar community and also the
nonprofit organizations I can
set up micro grids through solar
power thank you.
Eric Martinez you are now and
it.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee my name is Eric
Martinez I'm speaking on behalf
of all help New Mexico which is
New Mexico goes a largest
committee actually HSD we were
in support of the bill after the
US Senate floor amendments and
once those were struck we're
kind of on the fence on on how
this is going to safeguard of a
low income ratepayers so if we
were to add a add some stuff
back in from the from the Senate
floor amendment we would
probably stand support but we
still believe this is the the
right step for for New Mexico
and this is a great bill but
that that's pretty much our only
concern if we can find a way to
safeguard of a low income
ratepayers a lot and clarify
that a little bit better we
stand in full support
legislation thank you.
And we're still in opposition so
if you would like to speak in
opposition please raise your
hand.
Nita you are now and it.
I need a you'll have to and you
on your hand you're on your and
to speak in opposition.
Okay we're gonna move on to
support if you would like to
speak in support please raise
your hand.
J. D. Billington you're now and
it.
Thank you madam chair JD
Bullington long time registered
lobbyist for the public logo not
speaking on behalf of the Pueblo
people and governor John Antonio
the public is been an active
participant since the very
beginning in the stakeholder
working group and the tribal
community solar task force
community solar has been part of
the public Lagunas renewable
energy strategy ever since that
strategy was adopted by the
Public Council in the two
thousand sixteen.
The public gonna has multiple
opportunities for community
solar it has six villages that
could utilize systems ranging
from zero point two five to two
point seven megawatts in smaller
areas within the public could
also provide community solar to
a combination of residential and
commercial facilities the pueblo
believes that this legislation
is a protection for low income
consumers.
In that it's a protection
against ever increasing electric
utility rates and we strongly
support the bill as currently
worded.
Thank you.
Christodoulou you are now and
maintenance.
Share committee members my name
is at the increased to do little
and I am the Adelante
progressive caucus belittle cold
director and a member of that
working group that met this past
year.
We are in full support of this
bill as it has been read amended
and I would like to liken it to
a horse race we're in a horse
race and the IOUs are
thoroughbreds only these
particular thoroughbred stop any
gas I mean grant too much the
legislators are the writers and
they just at the ETA and the way
are that makes that writer go
fast enough and stings just a
little bit is SB port eighty
four community solar because we
need to bring us all over the
finish line and we need to go as
fast as we can with those who
can like the IOUs and go back
and help the laggards so let's
put this in place or we're all
gonna be to approve.
Do past things.
For now and maybe it.
Charles there is some background
noise so I think you're now and
it.
I thank you madam chair can you
hear me yes thank you madam
chair members of the committee
my name is Charles to sail and
I'm staff attorney with the New
Mexico environmental law center
and we stand strongly in support
of Senate bill eighty four the
bill would help us to transition
away from fossil fuels and to a
renewable energy economy the
bill would also allow local
communities including tribal
communities low income
communities and rural
communities even apartment
buildings to develop and solar
power generation and
distribution systems thank you
very much and I think the the
sponsors for the bill
thank you.
Thank you David Shelton you are
now in muted.
Thank you madam chairman and
self on the political and policy
director for conservation voters
New Mexico just a contextualized
quickly
That serve add some flavor of
what the Sanchez said the intro
really what we're talking about
here is sort of a three year
probationary program when the
state can crack the door open a
little bit to see what this
market looks like in New Mexico
in that three year pro the PRC
can.
Pretty wide ranging revisions so
all of the concerns that you
hear about whether this is going
to be in in resulting cross
addition or if it's going to
dismantle the ETA we're just not
committing ourselves the sort of
long term change that could
present those threats of the
state we always felt that there
were not there is a lot of
consumer protection in the bill
that cross subsidization is not
going to be concerned we've
added additional protections to
the process of this bill when we
talk about fourteen Senate for
amendments
really only about four five
those been often anyway so we
ask your support for the bill we
think it's great as is and we
urge you passed out thank you so
much.
Thank you.
Fires here now and it.
Morning madam chair and members
of the committee my name is Emma
Myers and I am a youth resented
of earth care a youth and
community development
organization on the south side
of Santa Fe that focuses on
environmental and social justice
issues we are in strong support
of SB eighty four because it
would benefit native American
tribes and historically
marginalized community members.
To help the economy to grow and
potentially create a lot of new
green jobs.
Recent study.
I found that.
Three thousand seven hundred
sixty job opportunities could be
created for the passage of
community solar in New Mexico.
One of the greatest strengths of
this bill that would make it
possible for all income levels.
To take action to help the
planet.
I think we should be able to
have choice.
Have a choice from where we get
our power needs or is a great
way to introduce an energy
choice and Marcos in New Mexico
I personally look at you solar
but like many youth and families
an organization I'm a renter.
Our community stands to benefit
directly from this bill we need
to make renewable energy more
X..
Okay folks just a quick reminder
we we only have sixty seconds
for each
Supporter or anyone calling in
to make public comment so just
keep that in mind and we can
move on Khloe Jake you are now
and it.
Thank now I'm glad to see thank
you madam chair for give me time
to speak today my name is Chloe
Jake and I'm speaking on then we
have today to urge the committee
to support the bill in reform
that passed in the house Energy
Environment and natural
resources committee.
Asians for tribal communities
are critical but it's equally
important to keep this bill as
friendly as possible to our
every need of residences well
I'm a descendant of the closed
loop with you know but I mean
citizen an enrolled member of
the contribution of Oklahoma and
a lifelong resident of
Albuquerque.
As such an eligible for many of
the tribal benefits there are
many like myself need of the
product difference tribal
backgrounds residing in New
Mexico's urban centers who are
also low income that deserve
inclusion this bill I do believe
that in its current form it'll
benefit urban natives and I
encourage the committee to pass
this bill and hold its W. thank
you.
Thank you just with another you
are now and it.
Good morning madam chair members
of this committee I am the deny
Energy organizer for neighbor
education project I live in
should drop New Mexico and I
respectfully ask that you
support just be eighty four the
expanded language will benefit
many tribal communities
including Navajo were many
communities you have Navajo
Housing Authority homes
government buildings such as my
daughter's head start in chapter
houses all located next to each
other this bill will further
give students from the energy
assistance program at Navajo
tech the the ability to get jobs
locally Furthermore you know we
we we definitely do have the the
capacity to build that workforce
for expressly at Bonneville
subjects enter into Cortland New
Mexico please vote yes on SB
eighty four he had thank you.
Thank you Paul Gibson you are
now and made it.
You'll need to and the under New
Mexico.
Click back I'm sorry.
Madam chair committee members my
name is Paul Gibson co founder
retake Our Democracy an all
volunteer statewide organization
with twenty five hundred members
we take it maybe the community
so solar act priority bill for
this session but we're deeply
disappointed with the amendments
made Senate tax and are greatly
relieved to hear the amendments
proposed and at the last
hearing.
They restore the intent of ****
for the framework developed by
stakeholder coalition Network
for many weeks to design it the
Senate amendments would have
essentially got **** for
creating let regulatory hurdles
that do not exist in any of the
other states operating community
solar these hurdles and other
restrictions on the bill would
have prevented states community
solar from ever being
implemented you are hearing from
cities tribes and
environmentalists all in support
of this bill and utility
industries and big business in
opposition retake stance in
support of this bill.
Ellen are Bravo.
You're now and it.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I'm
Eleanor Bravo chair of the board
of directors of new energy
economy community solar provides
an option not only to low and
middle income homeowners and
renters but to anyone who wishes
the option to utilize renewable
energy rather than fossil fuels
no one will be forced to
subscribe it is purely optional
and the subscription can be
cancelled at any time it is
simply market driven and can
provide a lower cost and
renewable option private
utilities will be paid for the
use of transmission lines
projects will not affect cost of
electricity obtained from the
large private utilities there
are stringent limits on
community solar at most would be
one percent of total actress
today on the market.
And would move us towards our
goals of a hundred percent
renewables please vote yes on
committee substitute Senate bill
eighty four as amended thank you
so much.
Jeremy Lewis your now unmuted.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Jeremy Lewis I'm the director
of the office of renewable
energy at the State Land Office
the stand at the State Land
Office stands in support of SB
eighty four in addition to
modernizing and diversifying our
electric system our community
solar would provide more and
better options for New Mexico's
diverse population
when community solar sided on
trust land the projects will
help support and funding Mexico
schools and hospitals we have
over nine million acres of land
to lease without
Office of renewable energy
specifically.
Laser focused on leasing land
for renewable energy projects
please vote yes for Senate bill
eighty four.
Thank you thank you Robert
Romero you are now in a minute.
Thank you madam chair can you
hear me we can't thank you madam
chair members of the committee
I'm Robert Romero registered
lobbyist for kickers electric
coop.
On behalf of Mr Louis Dreyfus
CEO okay question let you call
up we would like to thank the
sponsors for for working with
the collapse on on this bill.
Of K. Carson has completed a
very successful community solar
project with them degrees Pueblo
that works both of the Pueblo
and for the call up we fully
support this bill thank you.
Thank you.
You are now and made it.
Thank you madam chair I'm be
lost executive director of the
coalition and sustainable
communities New Mexico
representing Santa Fe city and
county Albuquerque and Los
crucis our member governments
are committed to increasing both
the quantity of an access to
renewable energy and believe
that all means of doing that
including community solar this
innovative program provides
access to all who want solar
energy regardless of the income
property condition or or
ownership rooftop solar is not
an option for renters or low
income households community
solar is and it has a
significant lowincome component
with only one percent of total
annual retail energy produced by
investor owned utilities to
annually this small program will
get evaluated and improved as
needed in three years please
support this bill as is.
Thank you.
Thank you Elaine Sullivan.
You are now and it.
Thank you madam chair and
committee my name is Elaine
Solomon number thirty year
resident of New Mexico and I am
excited about this bill as
amended because it is fair and
equitable this bill will give an
opportunity for economic
opportunity for all New Mexicans
and it will allow all of us to
be part of the solution as we
work to combat all the negative
impacts of climate change this
is an urgent matter and we need
to we need we do not have time
to move forward slowly and with
excessive caution.
Please voted to pass on this
bill thank you.
Thank you.
to missio Romero G. Carter you
are now and it.
Good morning members of
committee my name is autumn we
still remember we cover and I'm
here as a member of yucca youth
United for con the crisis action
to express our strong support
for just be eighty four okay as
membership throughout northern
New Mexico and all of our
community stand to gain from the
passage of this bill when we
organize the con the struck two
years ago community solar was
one of the first policy tools
that we advocated for in order
to address the climate crisis
it's a tool that would allow us
our families for renters low
income household residents and
small business owners the
ability to access renewable
energy for the first time while
also creating new sources of
revenue for local economic
development and small business
we've been waiting a long time
for this we are done being told
we have to choose between either
having money in our communities
for basic services or the
preservation of the verbal
planet our futures depend on
both.
Thank you for voting yes on SB
eighty four and bring solar to
the people.
Thank you and you know you are
now and it.
You'll have to and you on your
end.
And if you're okay great.
I need to go ahead.
Okay we're gonna move on to
Betty January now and it.
We can hear you you will have to
and meet one of your devices it
sounds like.
Yes.
We can hear you.
Kimberly rob your now and it.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee can you
hear me we can.
Thank you really Rothman I'm
representing myself a solar
industry employee and the
average family can and does save
money with community solar and
we've seen this as I've been a
part of the community solar farm
purees Pueblo community solar
does exist in New Mexico
successfully and it's in our
sovereign nations low income
consumers deserve access The New
Mexico people inside and outside
of the metropolitan areas are
ready to choose who they by
their energy from and how it's
produced as a community we need
these jobs in order to have the
quality New Mexico solar we need
to listen to more than the
voices of big business so please
vote yes on SB eighty four.
Linda is here now and made it.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I'm Linda Smith co
chair of the legislative
committee of the Rio Grande do
chapter of Sierra Club with
thirty five thousand members
statewide we strongly support
this bill in its current form I
was a member of the diverse
stakeholder groups involved in
the development of this bill and
I want to thank our sponsors for
all their efforts first of all
community solar will not burden
non participating customers a
new national study shows that
scaling community solar actually
reduces great costs and can
translate into lower rates for
all consumers the PRC will
indeed have an oversight role
including adopting rules include
consumer protections for service
subscribers ensuring Toadies are
fairly compensated for
interconnection and
administrative costs finally
community solar is not an
outdated idea it is it is one of
the fastest growing forms of so
there are New Mexico should
join.
Three PRG you are now and it.
Good morning Cherry committee my
name is Sanjay pale Jay and yes
Google Google a coda residing in
New Mexico for in the interest
of time and for all of the
reasons stated prior I would
like to stand in support of SB
eighty four and respectfully ask
for your consideration of the
past thank you to the Sanchez
and everybody involved in this
work and thank you for your
service top.
Thank you thank you for keeping
brief Chile you are now and it.
Madam chair and committee
members I am chilly Ozzy of
Shiprock I serve my community
in the nomination for forty five
years I am now a retired grandpa
former.
We all love our children and we
celebrate the great joy are
beautiful grand children bring
us I ask us all to look into the
eyes of our grand children and
truly pondered the future world
they will live in SB one twelve
holds great promise that we as
leaders and compassionate
grandparents well in fact make
measurable headway in addressing
the greatest dilemma of our
lifetime that of the climate
crisis by passing SB one twelve
we can be assured that our great
grandchildren look at future
will speak our names and think
this we're doing all we could to
prove to secure them a livable
and sustainable earth thank you
very much.
Thank you Andrew stone you are
now and it.
Madam chair and committee
members I am Andrew stone of
pace Fund New Mexico and on the
board of ari IDA and New Mexico
solar energy association.
Let's consider the speeches
scare argument that other
repairs will bear some extra
cost first it's just one percent
of the total load statewide
meaning for example PNM would
only see about one two hundred
of the loss of load so that
could not affect other repairs
other than providing the cost
benefit of providing solar
during peak loads.
If they honestly cared about
lowering rates for rate payers
would they pay over four million
dollars in bonuses to PNM CEO
every year I stand in support of
common sense and community solar
thank you.
You are now and made it.
I'm cert manning I I'm speaking
for myself I live in Albuquerque
and I am now living in the
second house on which I have put
solar panels and part of our
democracy requires us to make
sure that everyone has access to
the process please of not only
legislation but the process of
saving our planet and to
participating with however in
the very many different ways in
our solving our climate process
and crisis.
Solar panels solar energy solar
farms solar gardens are a huge
part of our future we need to
make this a democratic alright
please support this bill as
amended
it by this house.
Thank you.
So C. Pena you are now and it.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is B. auto
soci Pena and with two women
United's environmental health
and justice program and also a
member of Santa Clara pueblo and
I just want to urge you to
support the community solar act
and thank you for those who put
forth this bill.
Anything that encourages tribes
to have increased self
determination on supporting
local renewable energy resources
in our communities.
I think this is a good thing you
know we've it's so I've seen a
lot of barriers around our
dependence on oil and gas and.
The nuclear industry in our
state as economic resource and
it's time to really start
shifting that in a serious way
for all of the reasons stated
before.
And
For needy families to have more
options on our sovereign lands
you know of what we can.
In our own communities to have
that that sovereignty with our.
Steep ways per year now and it.
Good morning madam chair and
representative as an informal
educator for ten years I gave
out nine thousand solar powered
cars to children from low income
families throughout the state
while assembling the cars the
children learned about clean
energy Albert Einstein's
photoelectric effect and
engineering careers they were
delighted to play with the cars
but their families had no way to
participate with the benefits
and the benefits of solar and
real life just be eighty four in
its current form will do just
that so please vote in favor of
this bill and pilot program
thank you very much.
Thank you Victoria Roberto you
are now unmuted.
Good morning chair and members
of the committee my name is that
correct Senator assessment with
Senator face and Amanda County
we strongly support SB eighty
four because the work to
cultivate an equitable and
sustainable food system that
exists in harmony with our
desert ecosystem not one that
extracts from it we use solar
panels that are important to us
that our energy costs and know
that everyone should have this
opportunity SPT for help
establishing equitable
transition away from fossil fuel
dependency we're also grateful
for the recent amendments from
the Energy Environment and
natural resources committee that
restores SB eighty four to its
original intent including the
removal of regulatory roadblocks
or community solar projects
removing limitations on large
anchor tenant subscribers and
fix language requiring proof of
zero crescent city should we ask
you support and three eighty
four as it is for the health and
economic well being of our state
thank you.
Thank you that concludes our
public comment so we will now
move to the committee
Representative Rehm.
Thank you madam chair
But I guess in the beginning
that I heard a lot of comments
about the of floor amendments in
the Senate and they were
stripped out of the house energy
committee I just I'd like to
understand what those amendments
were that they stripped out and
the rationale Ford if you know
yes thank you madam chair and
representative every question
I'm going to make a general
statement and then I'm gonna
talk turn to Rick Gilliam first
of all of the house energy
amendments had clean up errors
so for example they put in the
in the house and the Senate
floor amendment there was a
reference to the energy
transition act which really did
not have renewable portfolio
standards so they meant to say
something related to our PS not
to the ETA so that was corrected
it reinstated a broader
participation of subscribers who
would not otherwise be able to
participate including nonprofit
organizations churches tribes
pueblos the help the Senate
floor amendment narrowed it from
the original bill and it removes
the additional burden burden on
subscriber organizations and the
commission the PRC to regulate
subscriber subscriber
organizations as public
utilities whereas the PRC does
regulate the utilities and we
were not asking the PRC to
regulate these subscriber
organizations so when you have
if you want to add
clarification for the
representative.
I'm sure thank you R. madam
chair and representative.
the other provisions that are
are probably important to note
are that the.
The issue of cross subsidization
has been a you have.
Important one it's been
discussed.
Quite a bit during this process.
It's important to understand
that.
It it's for twenty impossible to
have no cross subsidization and
rates are utilities any time
there's more than one customer
on a right that what actually
both of those customers that all
customers will be subsidized
because nobody pays their exact
costs are are receiving service
from utility so in order to give
the commission flexibility to
to be able to address.
Are those relatively minor
differences one rates are
developed we inserted the word
on duty which is a term of art
that's used in regulation not
only in New Mexico but across
the country.
Are so that's that's an
important one to understand
I think the the I think the
senator address the other ones
are more than adequately so if
you have any specific questions
I'm happy to try to help.
Madam chair and senator
The the what you've described is
basically cleanup language and
what I heard from the opposition
is that these amendments that
there were amendments that
caused individuals to support
the bill.
What amendments were removed
that because the support to go
away.
I'm thank you madam chair and
representative I'm gonna turn
back to Rick on that.
It was not in the house energy
committee I do have a a print
out but I think it be better for
somebody who is there to
actually talk about that.
Right.
Thank you madam chair and
representative
I think the concerns that we
heard and
The house energy committee dealt
primarily with the that the item
I just mentioned which is that
the cross subsidization issue
and the other import while two
other important ones where the
one that senators to phonics
discussed regarding the
regulation of subscriber
organizations and the third one
that
people are expressed some
concern about what is the
addition of our.
That certain types of non profit
entities and government entities
to our the list of types of
organizations that can and and.
Customers that can be
subscribers to a community solar
facility
Those we feel are all very
important to the workability of
the bill without those the the
community solar act century
becomes a public utility only
our.
ET so our process and that's not
the intent of of this bill the
idea here is to bring it to the
community to allow local
ownership and not have the the
big I. O. U.'s use their
dominant market power to to
overcome the budget and and not
allow the budget that local
solar can provide to community
members to exist so those those
are the three points I would
point to specifically I I can't
speak for every individual
member of the committee but
those were the ones that were
discussed.
Madam chair and.
Struggling you speak about costs
sub is so the vacation would you
explain what that is.
Madam chair and representative
what we have heard from other
parties is that to the extent
that our community solar
customers or subscribers are
receiving a bill credit from the
utility our that bill credit is
our is paid for by other
customers and as we've explained
and I think every committee that
we managed
that's just not the case there
are many benefits are the end I
can go into a lot of detail but
I think our suffice to say that
I think we've address those
questions thoroughly.
So I'll stop there.
Madam chair and Mr Gilliam
I I think I'd rather hear the
detail on that because if you
will if I build a power plant
whether it's a solar
payroll or you know I builders
whatever power plant may hook
into the grid and I'm not keen
for the maintenance of the wire
not telephone poles is that what
you're talking about.
Madam chair and representative
the the point about community
solar is that the
the addition of solar at the
distribution level reduces the
need for those transmission
lines and those power plants.
Madam chair and of you Mr
Gillian I don't see how it
reduces that I mean you still
have to have a wind from point a
to point B. I don't so I don't
see how it reduces that.
Madam chair and representative
when.
I don't want to deep into the
regulatory process but
essentially what happens is
costs are signed to different
groups and to different states
for that matter based on the
load of customers to the extent
the load of the residential
class is reduced your costs are
signed to that group it may be
that our customers in Texas end
up paying a little bit more
because New Mexico is using a
little bit last of our of the
COVID facilities for the for the
utility but the point is that
our the utilities saves money
their costs are reduced as a
result of deployment of
community solar facilities.
Madam chair and Mr Gillian I
think you you made my point four
if the line's going to for cell
and energy to taxes you know
point a to point B. let me move
on a little bit so what does it
cost to develop.
A five megawatt system.
Madam chair and representative
To be honest I don't know
precisely the.
The cost is probably on the
order of four to six cents per
kilowatt hour to subscribers
you know costs have come down a
lot over the last few years I
can't say precisely how much
each individual project will
cost a little bit more than
utility scale but it's less than
putting solar on your roof
but in any event the subscriber
still pays for the distribution
system which is how that solar
gets delivered to customers.
Madam chair in Mr Gillian I you
know I've spoken to some
individuals who have done the
rooftops solar and you know
they're not even at a megawatt
but they're spending in the
twenty to thirty thousand dollar
range so I'm I'm concerned
If it was just pick a number and
was pick a hundred thousand was
say it cost a hundred thousand
to develop a.
Five megawatt system forty
percent ownership is going to be
the builder of that system and
then it you know the idea is we
get low income individuals to go
ahead and
if you will by the end of shares
or you know by the end of this
system and
What I'm concerned about.
And I could see that.
Those individuals could be taken
advantage of.
Let's assume that we have a
lightning strike or the panel
catches fire now we've got a
repair cost.
And that's going to be shared I
assume equally based on your
percentage.
And you know the are are low
income people may not have the
discretionary funds to go ahead
and do that how's that going to
work.
Madam chair and representative
our.
So a community solar exist in
over twenty states and that kind
of problem you're raising to my
knowledge has not happened
anywhere not to say that it
couldn't but I also point out
that the same thing happens with
utility rates utility rates are
are ever increasing and they
seem to our.
Not take into account or at
least not reflect the low cost
of our utility scale solar I
don't think god any of the I'll
use in New Mexico have had a
rate decrease and the last ten
to twenty years and yet you we
hear that utility scale solar is
low cost so I hear what you're
saying but low income customers
will not or any customer for
that matter will not buy into a
subscription solar project
unless they can save money they
can save money that's great I
don't I don't see the issue
maintenance that you're
describing being a problem those
those costs is expected costs
are all built in to the the cost
of the subscription I'm sure
that each state community solar
owner has insurance on the types
of issues that might come up as
you describe that insurance
costs that premium would be part
of the subscription subscription
price so I I believe any
customer not just low income
customers would be protected
under that
that concern.
Yeah madam chair and Mr Gillian
what I foresee is that the
bigger owner of who has the
money is you know it it'll be in
the contract if.
You know for emergency arises
when we have to
do a repair cost you're gonna be
assessed certain amount of money
and and it'll have whatever
interest added department of and
I think it you know we've dealt
with other issues up here about
Lente
it of we call it predatory
lending to mostly low income I I
think that's an issue
and that is concerning I'm
surprised that
you haven't heard of the issues
of lightning strike or or fire I
actually know an individual that
sells a device that a point are
and so we're able to.
Rebuilt the spread of the fire
across the solar panels so
that's a that's a real
possibility but we move on
what do we ask you madam chair
Mr Delia why can't let's let's
just assume it's Walmart thank
you Walmart one of these.
Solar gardens up over their
parking lot.
And say and by the way we're
gonna go and get some low income
people because it would be a tax
advantage for us to do so.
Madam chair and representative.
That type of scenario would be
would make more sense for
Walmart to just net meter that
system and not to our
and I'm not sure what tax
advantage you you have in mind
but that let me suggest also
that our other expert witness to
LAR Thomas might be able to to
had something to that Madam
chair on that point that's not
this bill Walmart's on included
in this bill and I'm nervous
that we're gonna run out of time
with these long answers and I
don't mean to be disrespectful
of anyone but that's just not
this bill thank you madam chair
thank you Representative and
yes senators to drugs I think if
we could have our experts just
answer the questions and also
briefly we are
getting close to time so we'd
appreciate that thank you.
And so perhaps I'll I'll try to
answer the question if I can.
It
Madam chair in senators so
We look at some of my notes I
have over here we've.
Spoke about some of them.
Let's go to a page for in
unfortunately I've got a
document of amendments in
context.
And so
C. twenty four twenty four
twenty three.
What section because I have
several copies Senator version
as well.
It.
Page four section L. yes when we
get down towards the end of that
it says a public Housing
Authority and I'm trying to
figure how that works because if
if it's a public housing the
forty.
The individual store there there
all.
Mr or madam chair and
Representative reading for
example Santa Fe County has a
few public housing authorities
within their jurisdiction they
could in fact create a community
solar for that public Housing
Authority and then allow
residents in the neighborhood in
the same utility service area to
also subscribe and then they
could also offered to other low
income subscribers in that chair
in the territory so.
Public housing can become it's a
it's usually connected to a
public political subdivisions
they could become the anchor
tenant that would have forty
percent of the Energy.
madam chair and senator when we
go over to page five we go to
section them.
When I see subscriber
organization to me that means a
large out of state.
Corporation or or company.
I'm really worried that you know
this is not set for individuals
at sept for big companies to
come in.
You know I know I I had spoken
about Walmart but that type of
individual the come in and put
the solar over their parking lot
because one I.
Did some research one megawatt
is equal to seven acres so.
When we look at.
Five megawatts we had a a thirty
five acres.
Yes.
Are the last phrase that section
M. is entities authorized to
transfer transactivation this in
New Mexico so the qualifying
utility would have to still be
authorized in New Mexico so for
example el Paso in excel are
over borders lines so are some
of our what over border lines
but they are authorized to
transact here we're not allowing
anybody that's not in New Mexico
to participate in New Mexico.
Okay.
Madam chair and senator.
So
when I looked over on page six.
And section three when I started
working at the facility at the
beginning.
The builder of the system is
going to although not a hundred
percent of it and then he's got
to provide thirty percent
overall he's gonna find.
You know a minimum of thirty
five percent of people are here
and or get shares of it.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative Rehm the anchor
tenant would be of major to any
developer to make sure that the
project would occur then they
need to have at least ten
subscribers in order to continue
the project and they can go up
to a hundred subscribers in the
state of Colorado there are
sixty some projects twenty nine
are fully subscribed and after a
year you have up to a year to
get full subscriptions and then
that energy has to be sold
directly to the utility.
Chair and senator when I get
over to
page seven and section four.
Why don't we what the PRC
involved in this.
We are determined we spent some
time with the PRC.
In our six months asking them
what they wanted to see in the
bill and what they didn't and
they did not see the subscriber
organizations as being a utility
they will be are authorized to
of course they do have oversight
over utility rates but they did
not want to take on the
subscriber organizations as a
utility.
This side we're talking about
the current and the future P.
Garcia.
Thank you for that.
Madam chair in Senator when you
go over to page eight of in
paragraph section six
and paragraph Hey we require the
utility to
purchased a hundred percent of
the output of the solar.
What if they don't need to why
should they be required to
purchase a hundred percent if
it's not needed at the time.
Well there is there is a few
reasons first of all if they are
not if it's not a full
subscription thank purchased the
energy at a much lower cost and
secondly they're going to
receive the renewable energy
credits that are going towards
their.
Prescribed goals of the
renewable portfolio standards so
it's spending spending that
utilities in two ways lower cost
energy and the R. PS standards
the rex.
Madam chair bear with me a
minute I'm looking at my notes
that I wrote on this.
Madam chair I guess one of the
things I see is the co ops can
opt in.
Other than opt out I think
that's a good idea.
Okay madam chair I think that'll
do it for now thank you.
Thank you very much madam chair
representative.
Thank you representative
Representative bagels.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you senator and representatives
for bringing this piece of
legislation I am.
On this bill before I and I I'm
definitely working
for
Community solar in fact I have
solar panels on my house and
definitely enjoy getting the
benefit of that so I just want
to put that out there I do have
some concerns that I like to
just talk through with you if
that's okay today
and one of the reasons I've got
these concerns madam chair and
Senator Representative is that
there was a bad actor
with with some of my lower
income
Constituents and so I I actually
had to become involved and I
just I just also predatory
And I would be I'd like it's you
know I would like to walk
through some of that and so when
as describer slash constituent
purchases solar from community
solar facility do they need to
sign a contract.
Yes and the contract is
transferable the subscriber
organization and the developer
work out the bonding for twenty
five years so that it covers the
equipment and the energy that's
being produced I've been asked
what happens at the end of
twenty five years the solar
panel still have about eighty
percent of the Energy left in
those panels but senator video
it is building a new house he
wanted to make sure he could
transfer that energy to one of
his children if he in fact.
Love to to them and we and
absolutely.
Thank you for that and when we
bought our house that's how we
did with our solar panels so I
do understand how that works and
and I appreciate that the the
incident that happened down in
Anthony is this bad actor was
going in and really talking
about how
they would go in and and sell
you would have to pay for
electricity more and so I think
they got it they were able to
get plenty of subscribers that
way
twenty five years is a long term
investment and I think sometimes
for lower income people
work are hard working people and
their you know bay times
especially during like the
pandemic we have seen that they
they had they under went a job
loss and you know problems with
with their finances and so
that's when I started seeing and
hearing from my community that
that was a problem
could you could you talk about
that a little bit for me please.
I'm low income subscribers are
not asked to put money up front.
It is about the credits that are
being put on the your their
utility bill so the anchor
tenant the church the school the
city the county that's us
working with the developer to
set up the project they would
have some subscribers some
residential subscribers who
would actually buy and and the
low income.
Would meet requirements or some
other requirements similar to
had and they would not be
purchasing in they would just be
attached as a subscriber and
receiving the benefit.
Thank you madam chair and and
thank you senator
I'm so who oversees the
contracts and you know make sure
that customers are not being
taken advantage of because
that's what I did see in that
situation.
Thank you for that question and
section seven eighty seven there
are there is a consumer
protection section.
Okay I'm sorry at.
And what does it say about that
could it provides consumer
protections for subscribers
including a uniformed madam
chair sorry madam chair and
representative it provides
consumer protections for
subscribers including uniform
disclosure forms that identifies
the information in both English
and Spanish and when appropriate
native or indigenous languages
to ensure fair disclosure of
future costs and benefits of
subscriptions key contract terms
security interests and other
relevant as well as the
grievance and enforcement
procedures so every subscriber
has access to a grievance
process.
Okay.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you senator so can you tell me
how much a non subscriber will
be paying for subscribers.
Madam chair representative it is
not intended for any non
subscriber to pay for the
subscribers of a project.
Okay we've been asked several
times in different committees.
Non subscribers will not be
paying for that project.
Okay.
And.
You know throughout the bill it
really talks about the PRC and
what they're you know how
they're gonna be regulating did
the PRC weigh in on on the bill.
Madam chair representative
during the working group of the
six months we actually have the
chair.
This week the chair of the PRC
come and present to the working
group what he would like to see
in the bill what he didn't want
to see for example the PRC has
no authority to mandate that
there be low income
participation but he said you
need to put that in the bill in
order for us to oversee that
that will happen so he told us
how prescriptive to be and how
not to be and once we started
the bill this session they are
also talked about the cost and
that is why we put in a section
to set up the.
He.
To just.
Find that my notes.
One of the members we put in the
very first committee substitute
was to accommodate the PRC's
need for some money for a fund
to take care of some of these
oversight rules.
Madam chair and and the Senator
is that still part of of the a
member of the state in yes that
was not Madam chair
representative that was not
taken out by any Senate floor
amendment okay.
Okay
I think the way you know I I
started off by telling you I I
like your bill I'd like I like
this concept I I'm a I'm a
consumer and I and I is like it
I am and I I plan on voting for
your bill
I do have some concerns
regarding consumer protection
and so if there's any way we
could put some type of safe
guard in there I would feel much
are much more I I'd be much
happier about thirty great on
the floor but like I said I am
voting for your bill today I do
have those concerns and if
there's anything you can do to
to relieve some of those
concerns I would sure appreciate
it thank you madam chair thank
you senator.
Thank you.
Thank you and before I call on
Representative Nibert to
Senator I just want you to know
that we do want to move forward
with the bell but we might not
be able to finish today so
that's the case will come in on
Sunday morning.
Representative Nibert.
thank you madam chair
I have some general questions
and then I have some specific
question of what the bill.
M. X. so I think I'll probably
get through.
By specific questions on the
language of the bill are.
Before I just need to run off
to.
Judiciary the.
So I'll start there.
if there's time your into some
of our general questions.
Madam chair and and the Senator.
I'm working on.
Well maybe I should ask the
question would you prefer for me
to to use the amendments that
context birds for the.
Senate tax business and
transportation committee
substitute for Senate bill
eighty four.
Virgin that has a line first.
Madam chair I do have
if we're talking about the same
thing for the amendments in
context I have point two one
nine six three five point four
amendment in context okay that
would be fine if I'll just refer
to page numbers at paragraph but
I'll be looking at on that page
for.
Paragraph L..
Almost the the toward the end of
that the.
It talks about our subscribers
and this is the definition of
subscriber.
And it's a retail customer and
it includes.
State educational institutions
public school and this as a
public Housing Authority and and
digests my question is.
Yes a public Housing Authority.
A retail customer or do the
authorities just simply.
Oversee and and manage our maybe
some of the programs that do
provide housing to traditionally
low income individuals.
Thank you madam chair
representative Nibert.
We discussed this a little bit
with Representative Rehm so let
me go back to that concept of
some of the public housing
authorities are under cities and
counties and some of them are
set up as separate political
subdivisions.
They can in fact be the
anchor tenant and be the
developer are you you know how
that work with the developer to
set up the entire project so
they can be.
The entities that spreads out to
other residential customers and
to other low income to the
public Housing Authority itself
would be the political
subdivisions.
Okay so there are actually a
retail customer an existing
retail customer of water for the
utilities yes it.
From your perspective but I was
under the impression that public
housing authorities were
somewhere as you.
Management
organization and setting policy
what are your and doctor relate
the the ones that were the
consumers of electricity except
for maybe the.
Well office
So let's go over to page five
paragraph you know.
The definition of subscriber
organization.
And
madam
chair and senator.
Who would you anticipate would
be serving in the role of
subscriber organizations.
Well as indicated madam chair
and Representative Nibert as
indicated in this
section it could be a political
subdivisions for example the
City of Santa Fe and the county
of Santa Fe on the Buckman
direct diversion they have a
solar system just for that but
they wanted to expand that to
bring in residential customers
right now that project is just
for the water project so in this
case when I was on the Santa Fe
County commission madam chair
representative we had a
resolution to explore a
community solar project with
PNM.
Two budget residential customers
who could not either for this or
didn't have the property to put
solar on of PNM resisted doing
such a project now we are not
talking about.
The entire county we're talking
about perhaps under a hundred
subscribers to a project so any
entity that's listed there a
city and county of for profit or
nonprofit entity an Indian
nation tribe or pueblo a local
tribal graft governance
structure would be who are who
is authorized to transact
business in New Mexico could
become the subscriber
organization and I'm not sure
I'm answering your question.
You're you're helping me
understand it basically if I
read this correctly madam chair
and senator it's everybody other
than a person.
Correct a subscriber
organization would not be a
single person.
So so even though a.
Person that have the financial
where with all to put in one of
these would be unable to be to
put it one of the worst I would
have to incorporate or create a
business organization in order
to become a subscriber
organization.
Correct madam chair and
representative in this bill was
intended for organizations
established who would like to
create a project.
And and and other political
subdivisions could be a small
mutual domestic association and
acequia up north.
A land grant.
And then it says a man to the
authorized to transact business
in New Mexico it's not
necessarily limited to New
Mexico introduce but it could be
virtually any organization that
Representative the files the
appropriate paperwork with the
secretary of state's office to
be authorized to transact
business state which is a very
much.
Is that correct understanding
madam chair Senator I'm.
Madam chair representative.
I would assume so but I can't
say definitively.
So I'm thinking in my mind about
an Amtrak station.
I think that's a question I'm
not sure about.
Madam chair center I'm I'm not
quite sure I understood the
Amtrak the.
I was just wanted to get out the
fact that that any out of state
business file the appropriate
paperwork in the state of New
Mexico specifically with the
secretary of state's office and
be authorized to transact
business in New Mexico last
very.
Are you know are unable to
meet the prerequisites of of
doing so but but virtually it
opens up to any of us.
That could be.
Thank you.
Mexico do it so it is not just
limited to the Mexico businesses
this opens it up virtually to to
everyone as I stated except for
individual people.
Fort madam chair and senator.
What why did we specifically
include this why did we
specifically exclude.
People.
Madam chair representative nine
birch.
This bill was set up to have.
An anchor tenant.
That then could and on
subscribers.
And the.
okay.
Interacted I'm sorry I lost my
train of thought.
The thank you so the anchor
tenant was not envisioned.
Could be one person who had the
wealth.
To set up such a project it was
really set up to accommodate
entities that are asking for
such projects such as cities
counties and tribes.
By the I would presume that
there are a number of.
Entities that are involved in
the solar industry that would be
interested in becoming a
subscriber organization group do
those topics US.
Senator yes and madam chair and
sat and Representative it does
say eighty for profit entity or
organization so if a solar
company wanted to set up
an entire project I don't think
that this bill would prohibit
them from doing that.
Yeah I I just I'm still a bit.
Use why we would.
Not just let.
Seoul proprietorship which is
really a person
Become a subscriber organization
you would force that person to
basically
Either create another business
entity to to become a subscriber
organization or
In order to to become.
Anchor tenant if you will or
the.
I see the subscriber
organization as the developers
will that be an accurate
service.
Hi simple way of putting it.
Madam chair and representative
my neighbor it could be both the
City of Santa Fe might not be
the developer they might need to
contract with the developer to.
Create the project.
The subscriber organization it
is one that owns or operates so
your Santa Fe simple it would be
our the City of Santa Fe would
be the owner maybe not the
operator somebody would have a
contractual relationship for
somebody to that operated but
they would be the owner so where
you have thank I guess looking
at the definition sorry R. Santa
Fe entered into a contract with
X. Y. Z. solar company to
operate the community solar
system.
Or community solar facility
would both the City of Santa Fe
and X. Y. Z. solar the game to
be a subscriber organizations
for the same project.
Madam chair representative
Nibert I think I need to re
referred to one of my experts
since they have been involved in
projects in various states now
Mr Gillian or miss Thomas could
one of you briefly answer.
R. madam chair and
representative.
Okay I'll give it a shot my
understanding what I've seen in
other states like Colorado is
that an entity a developer can
also be the subscriber
organization but is not
necessarily the same and so I
think your understanding is
accurate if I understood it.
So so madam chair and senator if
subscriber organization means
either one are there provisions
in here that would only deal
with the owner.
Or provisions that only deal
with the operator
And what I'm getting at do we
need to break out that
definition a little bit.
Thank you madam chair
representative Rick and you want
to Mr getting do an answer that.
Madam chair and representative.
I don't think you have to break
it out any further the
over side of the PRC for
instance is all about the
subscriber organization and that
the subscriber organization is
really the center of the
universe for community solar
projects.
And those are those the PRC
regulatory authority over Indian
tribes and nations.
Madam chair representative I'm
very I'll refer to miss Thomas
for that she's the expert in
that tribal relations.
Thank you madam chair and
representative of color Thomas
so the short answer is no the
PRC does not have regulatory
oversight over tried and tribal
projects to the extent that a
tribal project might be quote
unquote off of the tribe's
reservation then it would but
for projects that are located on
Indian lands the PRC would not
have that authority for projects
of the tribes themselves do.
Madam chair representative or
senator if subscriber
organization and subject to PRC
Authority and they tried this a
subscriber organization do we
not have a problem there.
Madam chair representative
additional and this
Bill is primarily in a billing
for the tribe's.
Right and I'm gonna get to that
moment.
But I I'm just I'm just looking
at the definition of the words
and I think we need to make sure
we get it right I think there
may be an issue there.
Madam chair and representative.
Since the coops have a opt in
provision now.
Our.
How many tribal
Government governments are.
Within the territory right
public utility in the state of
New Mexico.
Madam chair representative I'm
going to refer to people are
Thomas because some of the
tribal entities actually share.
Different.
Utility territories you are
could you answer that.
yes ma'am madam chair
representative so I understand
the question how many tribes or
pueblos are within the public
utility service territories the
short answer is all of them are
with the exception of one of
that I'm familiar with and that
would be act up well below the
stood up and own tribal utility
in the northeast northwest
corner of New Mexico a portion
of Navajo is served by the
Navajo tribal utility authority
I and then hickory patchy has
its own tribal utility authority
all other tribes and pueblos are
in somebody else's service
currently served by a public
utility in the state of New
Mexico.
Madam chair and senator that's a
lot different answer them what
I've been told.
By the public utilities are very
right now oh wait.
Nine of the tribes are on their
systems
and I don't know what that means
individual members of the tribe
or whether that's the public or
the tribal
buildings or what have you but
there
are I received word that there
was possibly nine of the twenty
three tribes are received there
are electricity from from the
public utilities Mexico and that
most of them receive their
electricity from our the rule
like trick cooperatives and your
if I'm wrong I'm wrong but but
the that's the information that
I've been provided and so that's
the.
But I think affects us a little
bit because the only ones that
are are are forced.
Into this are the public
utilities and so are a lot of
the public comment well we're
the budget to to tribes nations
and pueblos but if they're not
survive public utilities
that this is not the vehicle
gets sent.
So let's let's talk a little bit
about the one vehicle that that
has been our.
I guess put online that that
Sir a great example of our
tribal involvement with so that
and that's a big groups but what
thank you Mr Carson role like
trick coop get Carson spoke in
favor of this legislation.
But that.
Particular.
Facility.
Maybe I should ask the question
are madam chair and senator once
that the
person coop.
Arrangement with rigorous Pueblo
done.
Under the confines of a bill
such as this or was it the was
it just a private agreement
between the are well below and
the role elector cooperative.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative and
Mr Gillingham I miss Thomas to
answer that.
Yes this is miss Thomas I can
answer that I'm sorry if I could
I I apologize madam chair
representative if I go back to
my last answer when when you use
the term public utility I assume
that included the world elector
cooperatives and so that's why
my answer was that they're all
served by a public utility under
state law and so the
representative is correct there
are eight or nine tribes in the
investor owned utility systems
and the remainder are in public
I'm a rural electric
cooperatives so I I interpreted
that term public utility very
broadly so I apologize for that
fusion with respect to pick a
reserve the answer is yes that
is a private agreement between
the Pueblo and the cooperative
that had to be negotiated in a
bilateral way and the Pueblo had
to negotiate with the
cooperative over almost a year
period of time to come to that
agreement the purpose of the
including the tribes and pueblos
in this bill is that all the
tribes and pueblos will be
treated equally and fairly when
it comes to developing community
solar projects regardless of who
their utility is so that each
tribe that wants to do a project
with its utility should not have
to negotiate from scratch to do
a project and so this that's the
rules that applies to all
utilities and all tribes and
pueblos so you don't have a one
off negotiation like quick
Greece had a with a kid Carson
and which by the way was very
expensive to engage in so it
also reduces transaction costs
for the tribes and pueblos and
for the utilities and entering
into a community solar projects.
Madam chair miss Thomas are.
I'm not familiar with the
contractual relationship haven't
read the contract but I'd be
interested in knowing whether
that contract
Provided for.
Maybe some exclusivity in other
words are another.
Solar project.
Could not.
Interfere with or be put online
that would compete with the our.
Tribal solar project that they
in order to look at Carson are
are you aware of any charms
along those lines.
Madam chair representative miss
our refer that to miss Thomas.
I'm Madam chair representative
I'm not familiar with the
explicit contract terms in the
interest of full disclosure when
I would at the department of
energy I find it technic my
office provided technical
assistance to Pickering Pueblo
in that contract but we were not
familiar parties to the actual
contract itself so I'm not sure
what the exclusivity aspect of
that you're speaking with that
you're speaking to a
representative of the key issues
in that contract as with any
agreement to to interconnect is
the interconnection itself and
then the the agreement the
tariff agreement on how much of
the credit the tribe or pueblo
would get and that's another
benefit of this bill that
Picuris pueblo and arson didn't
have available to them and that
is a uniform wait to determine
how much of a bill credit the
pueblo would get and so I've got
a good deal of the negotiation
was around issues like that.
You madam chair and
representative or senator miss
Thomas thank thank you for that
the answer is yes districts in
that regard you know I think it
does point out of and I think
that's a right example of the
ability of our tribal entities
to
are not just two five megawatt I
understand that's a one or two
megawatt facility but with the
tribal entities could good the
interim to contracts with.
Maybe the cooperatives and even
the public utilities for much
bigger projects are are
commercial scale projects that
the.
Would have benefits to the our
tribal government as well as our
the ability to
cell that that energy to the
Cooper to the public utility and
so I think they're in a.
You know a pretty good position
to take advantage.
Under this act but just general.
To accomplish sure many of these
goals that I would suspect that
this time I you're going to see
a lot of work projects are
particularly Arabia.
Tribes what was the nation's up
want solar facilities all their
lands there may be opportunities
that arise because of the.
Outside of this.
The provisions of this bill I
guess right the.
The effort is to make sure that.
There are a number of people
that that our subscribers and
and I think some of that there
was some state provided the
for a certain percentage should
be low income people and as I
understand it you what with the
subscription so what one person
cannot subscribe to over forty
percent of the our power that's
produced from the project is
that correct.
Madam chair and representative
that is correct.
And.
Even though someone may be are
producing or receive a benefit
of forty percent.
Right to would not be subject to
regulation by the public utility
act is that a correct
understanding as well madam
chair and senator.
Madam chair representative the
public regulation commission
still regulates the range the
end the credits that the
utilities have.
I'm not the subscribers with
utilities
and you said not the subscribers
and not the utilities.
I find that not the subscriber
organization either what that be
correct as well.
That's correct.
So they.
The entire solar facility is not
really subject to.
The public utility act and the
only way the public regulation
commission comes that is by
virtue of whatever provisions
are in this act senator setting
rates have the doing some of
that the that work but but not
all will fall under the public
utility act
far right are that's on page
seven.
LFC.
What was inserted by the energy
and natural resources.
Representative and senator I'm
gonna jump in right now because
sorry I didn't want to continue
on with questioning that we've
had about twenty five minutes
from representative Nibert it
and so there are five of us that
have to get to house judiciary
and then I I believe that leads
to more that have to get to
commerce and I believe those
have already started so what
we'll do is that we are going to
roll Senate bill eighty four
Senate bill one twelve and
Senate bill one sixty to our
next meeting which will occur
this weekend and will just pick
up and Senator step on X. and
and others we will have to
restart Committee assistant
reach out to everyone to find
the time and will pick up and so
until then we well I Jr thank
you everyone.
Thank you madam chair.
