And that is now.
Representative H. B. L..
How the hell are you know sorry.
Representative Matthews.
Here.
Representative small.
Representative Zamora here.
Representative vice chair
Herrera.
Your.
And chair.
Senator.
Reach.
Thank you madam secretary so I I
know in the past that I have
seen Representative is also an
under Jack Chatfield is screen
name I'm not too sure if if if
that's if that's you
Representative is out in the
attendees bracket you raise your
hand analysts you in if other
you never mind.
Please note Representative is L.
as here.
Mr chairman can this lake be
sent out prior to meeting I had
to go back and find and I've got
over a thousand emails right
now.
you do do.
Absolutely so I I I think it has
been a practice that inner a
reminder email is sent out an
hour before this meeting but in
any event will we'll just
continue that practice to make
sure that we're all on the same
page I'm gonna log in patiently
so good morning committee
members good morning those that
are joining us on the attendees
list happy to have all of you
this morning just a quick
announcement a couple
housekeeping rules is that.
This morning house bill thirty
water lease and you can affected
Bates.
Representative Chandler is built
by the whether quest of of her
the sponsor we have a roll that
bill so we will not be doing
that bill this morning and and
that was a recent update
yesterday so just let everyone
know that we will not be re
house bill thirty two state
and.
We will nonetheless be still
going through our list of bills
this morning and so house bill
forty eight will be first on our
agenda statewide weather
stations Representative is a
more items of the more is well
aware that that he is up first
on on the agenda so
Representative where you have
the honor of being our first
bill in the twenty twenty
legislative session for house
agriculture water resources so
congratulations
but does that are attendees that
that page to make public comment
a couple of housekeeping rules
is that we're gonna have we're
gonna go through the explanation
of the bill from the sponsor the
sponsor's experts and then up
until the time when I ask for
those that may be in favor of
that I ask that you raise your
hand those that that that are
that are anxious and and just
put their hand up before I
called them up with all those
down.
So that we can no of those that
are in favor once we go through
all those then again same call
of those that are in opposition
raise your hand and then we'll
go to that as well so with that
being said I want to make sure
that the attendees this the euro
you're more than welcome to make
public comment you're more than
welcome to to participate with
us what I do ask is that for
those that wish to make public
comment that on your screen name
or on your attendees names that
you list your first and your
last name just so I can call you
wouldn't keep perfect record of
for our records within the
committee as well so with that
being said I also see some folks
doing this morning good morning
Senator Woods happy to have you
Sir let's then without further
ado go then to House Bill forty
eight Representative Zamora.
Do you have a do you have a
other.
Expert witnesses are they all
already in this in the panelists
so we have several leads to Mr
chair and committee we have a
Senator several expert witnesses
one is Jim Lacey at four Sumner
we have Dr David Wallace which
is with the with the university
New Mexico State University we
have Kerry Jones with the No all
and we have a lease augment
which is a former cattle growers
president and a rancher and then
Senator Pat Woods okay
Representative was at Kerry
Jones as she at I do not see her
it's a he
it is is he is he in the to any
attendees list.
I believe so and and if he's not
we we can do without Mr Jones if
we have some kind of a.
Some of the understanding you
know going on hate word we're
okay without him okay absolutely
so it looks like you have the
majority of your experts already
on the call so with that being
said Mr Zamora Representative is
a more excuse me the floor is
yours Sir part of me
Representative is out.
Mr chairman thank you very much
I'm sitting here with you house
bill forty eight to the sponsor
please right is the two one
number please.
So.
All up all refer that to to
Senator Pat Woods the the reason
that that there is that you're
probably seeing two candy is is
we have the original HB forty
eight and then we did a
substitute just yet.
The.
The numbers were a little
miscued somewhere along the way
and and Senator Woods can
explain the okay that's the need
to know which one I need to be
looking at two different
amounts.
Representative which is the
original bill what's the total
number of the original bill the
original is point two one eight
two five all point one.
When are we going to be working
today that one or the two one
nine four eight three point one.
Four eight three point one.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
So representatives of more or
less than begin by.
If you if you have a substitute
then.
Okay thank you Mr Mr chair and
members of the committee gladly
morning little nervous a main
first on the list and means that
it up though have hit that will
do the best we can.
H. B. forty eight is whether
expansion bill for the state of
New Mexico.
What we're trying to accomplish
here is to get more weather
stations throughout the state in
New Mexico for the state
climatologist to work with the
the state of New Mexico is
responsible.
To measure the rain fall in the
state and that affects the
agricultural community and and a
lot of programs.
In the farming industry in
ranching industry there there
mostly livestock forage programs
these come down out of
Washington.
The their federal programs the
farmers and ranchers work with
all the time there's a insurance
policies that get sold to
farmers and ranchers in the
state.
And.
It it's the state's
responsibility to measure the
rain we can't allow the farmers
and ranchers to measure the rain
that might.
dump out the rain gauges and and
show less rain so they're on
their policies are worth more
the so what we what the the
state needs to step up.
To measure the rainfall so that
the farmers and ranchers can.
The represented well and these
policies that they buy.
In two thousand nineteen one of
the worst case scenarios we saw
on the state.
Is that.
Ranchers in in Guadalupe County.
bought forged policies and then
the because the state had very
little rain gauges.
Working in in in place there was
a rain gauge used in read also
to measure rainfall in Guadalupe
County.
Well that put the policy holders
out of it out of any claims that
they had on their policies some
of these policies that are are
pretty expensive I've heard of
policies cost as much as sixty
thousand dollars.
And the rancher just one up
losing out on his money's a paid
the premium he paid for this
policy and not getting any kind
of a back for for a claim so
we're looking to fix that
it's gonna take three point five
million dollars.
on the substitute bill it breaks
it down and or there's a couple
of years a recurring money's.
For the for the program to be
put in place this bill has
backing from cattle growers
we have a support letters from.
so water conservation broadband
died we have a a letter of
support from a.
Our land commissioner Stephanie
Garcia Richard we have a letter
of support from farm bureau.
So that community is is well
behind this bill.
We worked on this bill with the
governor in the last sixty day
session.
I personally work with the
governor on this
Because of the situation with
the money's
The money's out of capital
outlay were some money from a
capital outlay we're gonna go to
this bill and some money from
the governor and and it didn't
happen because of the financial
situation of the state the
governor is well aware of this.
Problem.
We hope to get this bill on her
desk and and get it signed by
the governor and get this
program.
Implemented and with that all
stand for any questions.
Thank you Representative Zamora
so I understand that you have a
bill substitutes.
Yes Sir Mr chair can you please
read that to a two number for
the bill substitute.
I don't have that in front of me
that I believe it's the the the
last four digits for the forty
three point one.
am I am I correct in saying that
Senator Woods.
Mr chairman.
Sent representatives of more I
don't have the bill in front of
me either that we had to do a
committee substitute Mr chairman
of I'm carrying a light bill in
the Senate
Senate bill one oh four and we
got a FIR or that stated that
the three point five million was
a recurring expense.
And we never meant for that to
be so we wanted to reward the
bill and I'm sorry Senator Wirth
before you before you do to
explain the the the substitute
we all need to be on the same
page what do we need we need the
two oh two number for the bill
substitutes for money used
Sanchez.
Mr Mr chair yes Sir.
Representative what we just got
that Bill rode out yesterday
Smith do you can you can advise
me as to how we can do that
right quick I don't is it would
be the bill that candy has in
front of her well Representative
so so we have a strict twenty
four hour rule in this committee
that when there's a bill
substitute it to come to the
committee secretary twenty four
hours in advance for our review
not only just the the the
members review but the analyst
review for the majority and the
minority and our and our
committee analyst and so I do
know that the the substitute was
sent over and didn't meet that
twenty four hour rule and so I'm
gonna ask R. or W. secretary
committee secretary.
Can you then please Mr chair yes
Sir Mr chair the I just got a
Texan and the number is a point
two one nine four eight three
point one.
Okay so for the reference for
the committee then.
This the bill substitute is read
the number of overtime
Representative what it's point
two one nine four eight three
point one.
Very well so then
so would someone like to move
the substitute for discussion I
see I see representatives L.
like to move or discussion and
the second by Representative
vice chairwoman that up so now
you and your bill substitute
Representative Zamora so
Representative Zamora and
Representative Senator Woods
please explain how the substance
of the substitute is different
from the original bill.
Mr chair and members of the
committee I will let Senator
Woods explained that.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Zamora
it is the fact that we had a if
our come out on the regional
bill that was claiming that was
stating that it was three point
five million.
Reoccurring funds and we never
meant for this bill to be that
kind of reoccurring phones we
actually meant for to be two
point eight million of one time
purchase hardware for weather
stations and installation.
later on seven hundred million
R. seven hundred thousand
dollars for a recurring expense
to maintain and Administration
for these weather station the
weather station for all over the
state our will be all over the
state we're going to have to
We've already got a program
started at New Mexico state with
weather stations and and our
state climatologist Mr got the
ball will explain that.
And the I just want to.
Let him explain the program a
little better too yeah I just
wanted to explain why we had to
have a substitute because a F. I
was not a what we were expecting
was all about recurring nineties
Mr chairman thank you senator
woods thank you Representative
Zamora so at this point time
with the both of you gentlemen
then like to go to your experts
for further details on the of
the bill.
Yes Mr chair I would I would
like for a Dr David law to
explain the bill further and and
explain how the weather stations
would work in the state and and
how he plans to strategically
place these weather stations.
Thank you Representative Dr do
what.
Yes good morning Mr chairman and
Representative Zamora thank you
and members of the committee
that my name is Dave to bomb the
state climatologist for New
Mexico and that this project is
building on our existing network
of weather stations we
Representative currently
Right now we've got twenty six
and so what we're trying to do
is build us so that we have an
adequate network that fills in
the gaps between the federal
networks we have a.
Another network out there that's
run by the department of
commerce and those are usually
at.
airports and and then they also
have a volunteer program the
problem is that we don't have an
adequate number of of these
stations and it's not just for
precipitation that's one of the
really important things like
safety emergency management for
transportation.
Other users out there and this
is for providing it
up to the minute so basically
every five minutes we will be
sending this data out statewide
and that'll be available to
people who are decision makers
and getting that data into
people's hands to make wise
choices for work for a hat when
weather impacts New Mexico so
this is a capacity building
right now we're behind other
states for instance state of
Oklahoma has a hundred and
twenty of the stations we have
twenty six even the states that
are smaller like North Dakota
have ninety one stations and I'm
so we're trying to do is is get
caught up and provide more
information that is needed for
forecasting and providing public
safety.
Thank you.
Thank you well Representative
Zamora who would you like to
call on next your expert
witnesses.
I'd like to call a Jim Lizzy
please Mr chair thank you.
Thank you Mr let's see the floor
is yours Sir
and members of the committee
good morning Terry
I'm at four Sumner's beautiful
day here in fort Sumner in the
New Mexico so I'm an insurance
agent here in.
Arts under and I still different
agribusiness policies throughout
the area so this on a testimony
is I started seeing in that we
had these rain gauges in New
Mexico and these rain gauges
we're not in a in a radius close
enough to where you're areas
that or any area in New Mexico
so we were given as
Representative Zamora had.
Stated in also Senator Pat Woods
is stated that we have a circle
we have a circle that these rain
gauges a go ahead and pick up
about six rain gauges in your
circle you're in the middle that
circle so we had rain gauges
that around a hundred fifteen
hundred mile sixty eighty you
know a hundred ten so we have
this giant circle is picking up
rain gauges that are you know
getting rainfall for manta
Rideau's in New Mexico Las Vegas
New Mexico did they get about
especially not read also about
thirty inches rain where our
area gets about ten to twelve
inches right so it was
calculated a heavy rainfall in I
started seeing these these rain
gauges a started doing some some
digging around us like we don't
have enough rain gauges compared
to the other states that we have
or in surrounding us and as Dr
David boss stated Oklahoma state
university as the of messing it
up over there since the nineteen
ninety four but what about the
to conclude on what I was
talking about so I saw a giant
gap in New Mexico so currently
right now we do have some rain
gauges out there is Dr Moffit
stated and there is some call
national weather station
cooperative members out that
they have they have some rain
gauges what these rain gauges
are run by humans but in this
the weather station expansion
that's going to be run by the
New Mexico State University
these are live data daily data.
What these people from that are
humans that are some are
reporting daily but over half of
them are reported on the paper
reported by the end of the day
and they put it on this piece of
paper at the end of the month so
go ahead and pull that piece of
paper and stick it in the mail
and then they send it off to
give the historical data that
doesn't do any good for a lot of
these governmental programs
there's money out there the US
farm bill that New Mexico is not
getting that money from that are
built since two thousand
nineteen that poor built for
this this next five years.
So what is what is happening is
I feel that each county that
could be given up to million
dollars of money from the
federal government to the US
farm bill we're not getting it
there's thirty three counties S.
thirty three million dollars
that we're not getting so what
this three point five million
expansion is minimal compared to
the to the outcome in the
payments that will be given to
these ranchers and not only
ranchers you we got a look at
transportation how this is going
to help the safety of you as a
doctor the boss has that stated
so.
What what I'm explaining it is
from what I've seen through the
years chair and representative
in the committee this is
something that New Mexico will
benefit tremendously and not
only now for years to come due
to the lack of data that we need
daily for New Mexico Sir.
Thank you for that presentation
Representative what do you have
one final expert witness yes Sir
Mr chair at lease option if you
could please give your testimony
Lisa thank you Mrs was yours
good morning good morning
chairman Lente and members of
the committee I do farm and
ranch in southeastern New Mexico
and my family has been here over
a hundred and thirty years of
one of my ways of being a little
more aware of what's going on in
the whole state of New Mexico I
currently serve as the state
chairman of the farm service
agency committee and so as even
though I'm not here in that
capacity it has broadened my
knowledge of how the effect of
the sort of lack of rain gauges
throughout the state of New
Mexico has had on that not just
the agriculture industry but all
of the industries in New Mexico
but for me after culture the
agriculture industry is number
one the other thing that I
wanted to say and and emphasizes
this is real time every five
minutes there is information
going out as to what the weather
conditions are if there's a big
storm Nate with this information
you can put out safety are not
that information like when we're
having these big wind storms or
heavy rain storms or hail or
tornadoes whatever but for the
farmers and ranchers people in
agriculture in New Mexico this
information is vital for them to
be help eligible to receive
program payments or insurance
payments whenever they are
allowed to have on some of the
programs that I generally see as
mentioned I participate in and
I'm very well aware of the fact
that you know they say I've had
more rain than others in twenty
twenty on our farm and ranch we
had to.
Three inches of rain so when you
don't have that much here when
you're when you don't have much
rain then it really depends on
everything and I'm a member of
the cross medication district
and we're looking at having
three inches of water to
irrigate farms with this year so
having this kind of information
having the ability to access
insurance programs is vital for
the state of New Mexico.
This this thank you so much for
that this morning we appreciate
you this morning Representative
Zamora and that's that would
come to the end of your list of
experts anything else to say if
we go to the audience.
I'm I'd like for for everybody
in the committee and in the
audience to understand that this
is a vital tool that the act
community in the state of New
Mexico needs.
Every corner of the state needs
is we're looking the better the
Ag community and the tools that
they have the so we can have a
good successful and community in
the state of New Mexico thank
you Mr thank you Representative
Zamora so with that we will now
go to the attendees listened so
all of those that are in favor
of like to speak on behalf of
this house bill forty eight
please raise your hand and we
will work down the list as I see
folks popping up right now and
as that continues then I will go
to our first person Johnny went
away a.
Mr Montoya good morning good
morning Mr chairman and members
of the committee on Johnny
Montoya the state director of
government affairs for New
Mexico State University and we
strongly support this
legislation would like to thank
the sponsor of both the Senate
version in the house version for
for caring this important piece
of legislation and without
getting too repetitive I know
they've discussed the benefits
of it but I I mean I think it's
important to know that there is
a real time a great need to
provide with real time weather
data to support citizens living
throughout the state but
particularly in rural areas and
so again Mr chairman we
encourage our commission support
we thank the sponsors and we
stand strong support.
Thank you Mr Montoya.
Let them go to well Walter
Bradley Mr Bradley a with us.
I did just fine Sir thank you
very much Mr chairman members of
the committee and representative
Zamora I serve on the I'm here
representing very farmers of
America and is point of
information I serve on the
Advisory Council for the
Ogallala aquifer.
group study that is a USDA five
year study ten million dollars
worth and we're about to
concluded this year and this is
a we're behind the times in New
Mexico several of the state so
all the way from the back the
grant good to the end of New
Mexico.
Covering the Ogallala most of
those states already have this
instant weather and it will be a
vital tool in farming in that to
get this instant readout and and
not your neighbor maybe five
miles from you may have more
rain than you do but you don't
need to use the same amount of.
Washer or irrigation in order to
farm so it helps out the whole
farming and and is a great tool
for helping us preserve what
water we have in the Ogallala
and how we stand firmly in
support of the these two bills
thank you Mr Mr Bradley thank
you for that comment appreciate
you being here that this morning
that's that now go to have a
little boy this boy you are you
are up welcome.
Representative Lente a and
committee members thank you so
much for the opportunity we at I
am right representing not
pharmacy in our New Mexico
chapter we stand in full support
of of this bill really
appreciate the Sanchez bring it
forward
and appreciate being able to be
here to speak on this on on on
this issue thank you very much
thank you very much then now go
to a Representative vandyke Mr
Van **** you are live with this
good morning.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the community Committee and
Representative some more print
and I
but to producer in southeastern
New Mexico member of the Lee
County solar water conservation
district and as the conservation
district representative on water
transport I understand the value
in up to date correct data and
if we're going to manage our
natural resources in New Mexico
expressly during drought we have
to have that accurate up to date
data and this is one tool in
that toolbox this gonna help our
New Mexico agriculture and the
general population of New Mexico
so we absolutely support this
bill and thank the sponsor for
bring it forward thank you thank
you Mr Van **** Good morning so
good morning to Beverly I don't
want to slaughter your last
name.
It seems that of Beverly you are
let's see you are with us good
morning.
Good morning Mr chair you did
pretty well as Beverly in sync
executive director of dairy
producers of New Mexico we also
stand in full support of this
bill and thank the sponsors for
bringing it forward thank you.
Thank you Beverly nexus go to
Jonas Jonas your live with
that's good morning good morning
Mr chair and members of the
committee and Representative
Zamora my name is Jonas more
yeah I am I am with the New
Mexico will growers association
and we sat in for support of
this bill it's gonna provide
some really great data in real
time to help our producers as
they make planning decisions as
well as take advantage of
different insurance
opportunities that there's that
are available so thank you very
much for your time this morning
you guys have a great day.
Jonas thank you very much thank
you for joining us let's go then
now to Paula Garcia agency
Garcia good morning you are now.
We'll see you with follow up
this morning.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Paula Garcia and I'm
executive director of the New
Mexico sic Association and also
a rancher and what I County we
stand strong supported this
legislation we think that data
will be beneficial to
agricultural producers around
the state as a planning tool and
also for those who are
participants and and federal
crop insurance programs and but
we think the Sanchez for
bringing this far thank you for
the opportunity to be here to
speak in support thank you and
have a good day.
Thank you Mr Garcia next on the
list we have different Rivera
Tiffany good morning you're live
with us.
Chair Lente and committee
members thank you for having me
this morning Tiffany Rivera
registered lobbyists for New
Mexico farm and livestock bureau
we thank the sponsor for
bringing this bill forward this
piece of legislation will
further benefit New Mexico
producers in the agriculture
community by adding additional
weather stations for increased
and more accurate data reading
statewide this bill is extremely
important because it'll our
producers to fully reap the
benefits of the farm bill
programs in which they sign up
for and we are extremely
appreciative for Representative
Zamora and Senator Woods
preparing this piece of
legislation thank you guys.
Thank you Mr Vera let's then go
not to lower in Paterson.
Lauren you you are now with us
good morning.
Thank you chairman Lente this is
Lauren Patterson president elect
New Mexico cattle growers as
previously stated for and for
those reasons New Mexico cattle
growers family supports this
that this house bill we thank
the sponsors and for bringing it
forward and ultimately it
trickles down to our rural and
agricultural based economies
this is a risk management.
Programs in the farm bill in
those economies are are
protected through accurate
application of those safety nets
and ultimately we would like to
see this spread throughout the
state and we at thank you for
your time and and hope your
consideration is favorable on
this bill thank you Mr Paterson
thank you and have a good
morning that's than going out to
Debbie Hughes miss Hughes you
are now live with this good
morning.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Debbie Hughes and I am the
executive director with the New
Mexico association of
conservation district and we
would also like to support this
bill this bill not only helps
farmers and ranchers this bill
helps the entire state economy
any time were Brady millions of
additional dollars to New Mexico
it's helping the entire state
economy this of program also
helps keep the farmers and
ranchers on the land and the
only way they're going to be out
there to do all this
conservation work that that that
we do with the salt water
conservation district is to have
them out there on the land and
then just a final comment that
you support locally grown food
you should also support this
bill because this is another
tool to help keep our farmers
and ranchers all over the state
locally so that we can continue
to grow food for the state's
economy thank you Mr chairman
and members the committee thank
you misuse good hearing from you
less than then out to it looks
like we have the state engineer
John the Antonio.
In here you are you are with us.
Good morning representative
Lente committee members John in
twenty oh state engineer this is
a valuable tool for water
management within the state of
New Mexico we currently the
state engineers office an icy
use the state network of
existing weather stations to
gather water weather data that's
needed for the agency's Water
ministration activities and
modeling this would only enhance
that.
It would be valuable Mr chair if
we could work with New Mexico
State University to and citing
some of the news stations.
Because we're interested in a
lot of the operating area and
area if apple transpiration
novels will help as and I get a
more accurate measuring notes of
our existing and future water
resources so we stand in support
of this bill thank you.
Thank you did you have a good
morning this Madam go now to
Bruce.
Bruce you are now with us good
morning chairman Lente members
of the committee thank you so
much for the opportunity to
support this vital needed bill
you know information is what
drives all the decisions that
all of us make on a daily matter
and it's most important that we
have the data necessary to make
the necessary decisions that are
created by whether so we do
support this bill thank you.
Thank you Sir have a great day.
And and for the folks
information in the ten is this I
I'd like to have be able to call
on folks have both their first
and last name presented but
being that this is our first
meeting I will then allow us
zero week to make public
comment.
So we are you with us.
Yes thank you thank you chairman
members of the committee and so
we think I'm here to our land on
Bernalillo county
in Albuquerque New Mexico and
I'm with the national young
farmers coalition as our State
organizer and young farmers
coalition strongly supports this
piece of legislation thanks the
sponsors for bringing it forward
for all the reasons that have
been stated.
So thank you for being with us
this morning have a great day so
the now we will go to all those
in the ten these lists that
maybe in opposition to this
piece of legislation.
Let's wait a few seconds.
Nobody.
So with that being said let's
then move them to our committee
members committee members first
on my list I have Representative
is L. then then we will go to
Representative Matthews and then
vice chairwoman Herrera and then
Representative brown so this
then go to and then
Representative Allison so then
let's not go to Representative
is out Representative is out the
floor is yours.
Mr chairman thank you very much
representatives as the more
thank you for bringing this bill
forward I do have a couple of
questions for you why did the
governor vetoed this bill in the
first sixty day session.
So
Mr chair and representative
result.
I was a newcomer in.
I didn't.
I understand and and follow
through with getting a bill in
early enough okay then I am I
work to on the Senate floor and
on the house floor and put the.
Capital outlay monies together
in terms of half a million and a
half million dollars.
The governor
With three hundred thousand
dollars.
And for whatever reasons.
Which I don't care to try to.
Step in front of the governor
she has hard decisions to make
the money got out and I
understand and Representative
more Mr chairman you were a
freshman and so was she at that
point I maybe she did not
realize the full impact that
this will have on our state as
especially as being able to
garner some of the money from
the farm field because this is
the risk management part of it I
was really excited one of ours
result analysis all of the
office of the state engineer and
to me that's a huge win because.
We as the state ten censuses
that agriculture water committee
we do have there have to be very
composition on our water
delivery to other states that is
required by law and this gives
them the ability along with the
Interstate Stream Commission
decide okay we can do a release
now because that particular area
of the state has received more
rainfall let's get some down to
those farmers down in Carlsbad
that are going to receive three
inches of your guys should water
this year we have seen.
Several of our lakes in the
northern part of the state go
dry and it's impacted.
Farmers down south and
obviously our debt that we owe
to the state of Texas Mr
chairman.
Representative some more I don't
know if you can right this this
is CMS mesonet expansion and put
out by New Mexico State
University got.
Down here in this may have.
I live in Travis county I have a
ranch west of the airport
exactly five miles west of the
control tower I also have
in partners with my brothers on
the family farm down here in.
That area of Travis county.
Mr chair I'll tell you what we
need to this particular bill to
go through.
We were in the middle of the
drought situation seems like
it's never ending for us.
But we were in a drought
situation.
Whenever we're going into church
the next morning after.
We everybody from Roswell had
been calling joke it right
deduct it right.
We picked up the newspaper in
Roswell and it said officially
out of drought.
The rules will International
Airport had received five inches
of rain.
We got zero.
It's important that all these
weather stations do give a
complete and total picture of
what is actually happening out
there whenever you're talking
about the weather station at rid
of rid us of having to report
the conditions at a.
In the county that's Robert
stated what would that be close
to a hundred and seventy miles
away.
That's unconscionable to me Mr
chairman.
I'm looking at all the people
that stood up support this I
understand the need for this.
It helps with the crop insurance
it helps with the grant
insurance it also helps such
entities as the office of the
state engineer whenever they
they're talking about
I'm not going to go into the
damn damn discussion but yeah
that's part of it as well Mr
chairman of I have one more
little note back over here.
I was really excited to see that
University of New Mexico was on
board with this as well.
Because it does affect our towns
also.
Flooding situation if there is a
big event okay like happened
several years ago and rid of so
there was a big event it rid of
so and it inspected everybody
downstream because of the flood
situation up there and we had no
notification of that if there
was a wet weather station that
would have been provided.
The people downstairs would not
downstream would not have been
impacted.
To the extent that we were were
washed out stadiums Water gaps
Ince's you name it and then hit
the if the city of Brussels.
And it would have made a huge
difference so I'm really excited
to see the schools that are
supporting this bill and I wish
you the best of luck with that
and thank you for bringing that
up and I look forward to working
with you.
This.
Committee says two two one nine
four eight three point one Mr
chairman thank you very much
thank you representatives L.
next on our list we have
Representative Matthews
Representative Matthews good
morning.
Good morning.
It's nice to be here is nice to
be hearing built on this
committee.
and this is such a wonderful
bills start with
I'm really really interested in
the I hope I say it right you
that PO trans spur rations
program it is provides a decent
stations provided I say the
phrase correctly.
anyway my mute now okay
so my question is a couple
questions are all the stations
that are going to be installed
in this process our they will
all have the capacity to measure
the of the depth of the water
in this system is that right.
Mr chair and and Representative
Matthews started nine click
quick enough on the on me to
come your first question okay.
But and and that question was
would you would you ask that
question again yes I'm so all
these new stations that are
going to be installed are they
all going to have the capacity
for this water and the the
company user I. trace ology and
I'm sorry
The drought assessment the the
the ability to have sensors in
the soil to check the amount of
moisture and and Mr chairman and
Representative Matthews all of
the deferred to to Dr David wont
answer that question.
Yes thank you.
Yes thank you Mr Mr chair a day
and Representative Matthews and
yeah that the question is asking
about soil moisture and okay yes
so all the we will add so
moisture to all the existing
sites we've got twenty six sites
and then there's the proposal is
to add ninety seven new
locations across New Mexico and
then we will also put soil
moisture sensors at each one of
those stations right now and
currently there's only a handful
of soil moisture for sensors
across the whole state and
Primarily only's at the USDA
is soil stations in there may
mainly just in central New
Mexico as well as by a cold air
a city at the end of or not us
so we don't we have very few in
very little information on soil
moisture and you mentioned also
if apple transpiration these
sites will also calculate you
evaporate transpiration to that
can be used for a irrigation
scheduling and water use so it's
it's it'll provide a really nice
resource for for everybody who
uses that information thank you.
Thank you Mr chair Sir Mr chair
of.
it does it I've heard the phrase
precision precision agriculture
is that related to this ability
to have the soil moisture
sensors available on giving
feedback to the to the ranchers
and farmers.
Mr chair and and Representative
Matthews that's a term that's
used in in agriculture as as we
get more and more technology
When we talk precision
agriculture we're talkin guiding
systems on tractors it's it's a
pretty broad statement okay you
know guided systems on tractors
being able to measure the rain
fall so we can make better
decisions having soil
moisture
being read by monitors is
some technologies that we can
stick a monitor in the ground a
a sensor in the ground and and
read our soul more research
feedback to our computers and so
so when we say
that that's pretty that's pretty
broad statement as to you know
just using technology in farming
and and how we can better
farming communities.
Our farm.
Practices.
Thank you thank you for that
answer at Mr chair of one other
question
With these additional stations
is ninety seven new stations.
kind of following up on what
Representative is out was
talking about in the distance.
Of that.
I quite even sure how to ask
this question but but with all
these additional stations with
all this soil sensing water
sensing so I'm always your
sensors.
What.
What size area will they be
providing information for each
one of you will be like a
hundred mile radius or a fifty
mile radius or that that's what
I'm trying to ask so so we would
to Mr chair and and and
Representative Matthews we with
the.
Have to take this workers square
area of the state and divided by
the number of weather stations
to come up with that figure and
and and I don't know exactly
what that figure is a.
We might could have a drive to
water lab right on that more the
the issues with the.
Insurance programs that come
down from the federal level when
you buy an insurance policy from
the are in may which is a risk
management
programs that come from from DC
they're they're cutting in the.
Grades down the sixteen square
mile I believe and when when
they cut these grades down to
sixteen square mile and then the
in the policy it states that
they will read.
The weather the the rainfall
amount.
In the gauge closest to you.
Or the next closest available
rain gauge.
So what's what's been happening
in that is that is in that that.
When when they did not have a
working whether gauge in
Guadalupe County.
According to the to the way the
insurance programs written.
For the fourth livestock program
well then well then they went to
the next closest rain gauge and
our our rain gauges are so
sparsely located that we need
more rain gauges so we can get
closer to you to that point.
Where the policy was not.
This will not put a a rain gauge
and every on every ranchers
doorstep and is next to
impossible to do that we're
looking to better represent.
The rainfall so that so that the
state of New Mexico can can
benefit from that and it's like.
Jim Lacey stated earlier in the
in the in his testimony is is
that once we do this we will be
bringing.
In federal
monies back in the state in New
Mexico which will be new monies
for the state.
Which will be good for the state
of New Mexico thank you.
Thank you for that answer.
Senator Mr chairman of the is
there a now if.
Is the money for the state's
share of the money for this
project in the budget now and is
it sufficient to cover the
installation across the state.
Mr chairman and and
Representative Matthews that's
what we're looking to do with
this bill.
Is a.
Get these monies funded through
through H. B. two
so that this can be a good
sound.
Program for the state and and
and have a future.
In the state and and we can.
Keep this program going in and
and it needs to be a good solid
program that we keep going in
the future and and it's it's
something that's needed to to be
stable in in sound with the
state.
Thank thank you for the answer
Mr chairman I'm I'm still not
sure though is it actually in SB
two now or is that still in
negotiation no it's it's still
in negotiation Mr chair
representative at thank you and
I we are now.
Thank you Representative
Matthews pushing your questions
and comments that's move then to
vice chairwoman headed up
question woman the floor is
yours.
Thank you Mr chair I and I
appreciate very much Senator
this bill I'd like to
compliment the Sanchez the
Representative Samara Senator
Woods it looks like you had
everybody but god call in and
support this legislation so that
was a pretty impressive that I
let me I guess I I obviously
Representative rural New Mexico
would through a request so I had
the same question that
Representative Matthews and I
wanted to know if you would.
This through the House
Appropriations and Senate
finance so you're both still
working on that at this point.
Mr chair and representative yes
ma'am we are okay
that's probably the most
important work that we all have
to do if if we want to pass this
legislation I can just tell you
that and and could you spend all
this money in one year I guess
that's what I wanted.
Mr chairman and and
Representative and.
I will say in in my thoughts
that that it's going to be hard
to install everything get it all
done in one year and all that Dr
David boss elaborate on that.
Yes
Mr chair and vice chair had era
yes the question is and on how
long it's gonna take to install
these you have.
so are we have a plan that I'm
drafting if this gets funded and
so since there are ninety seven
new locations will have a
contractor
do that digging in the
construction so hire them and so
my my and I anticipate this to
take about a year and a half.
and then hiring new staff to and
that's with that seven hundred
thousand is the hire staff who
are professionals who do this
work and to to build this the
electronics and all the
communications and all the
sensors and that's gonna take
the the the latter part of the
second year
To to get started and so and
then we'll have that
you know it is gonna take about
two years to to build this and
to test it out and so is a lot
of equipment out all over and
recovering about between three
to six stations per county some
counties are bigger so they'll
get more station so we're spread
out but but yes about about two
years to build this thank you.
Mr chair and Representative
Zamora and Mr do bond Senator
wet I I just know we said on
House Appropriations a couple of
us on this committee so if
you're asking for two years
worth of money for the for what
in all for your asking for one
years money for at a project
that spread over two years I'm
always looking for a way to get
you money and if you can come
down and do that a year at a
time might be might be something
you want to think about doing
I'm just saying that and then
because we're certainly gonna
trying help on probation they
certainly will that but I think
you have to think about that
plan to I would just suggest
that and I guess my second
question is I'm not hi I
represent a rural district but I
I I have to tell you I'm not a
farmer and I'm not a ranchers so
I learned so much on this
committee from fellow members
I'm very grateful for
Representative the sale she
always kind of lays it out like
it is and it's very helpful to
me would somebody take me
through the loop I guess this
would be Mr listing would you
take me through the loop of the
insurance
you know this bill insurance and
the farm bill in and tell me
tell me how that brings in the
amount of money people are
talking about.
To a sickly real New Mexico
could you could you do that for
me yes.
Representative Representative Mr
chair and David and the vice
chair said in a Representative
headed out thank you for that
yes ma'am so on the insurance
industry in our farm and ranch
in in my years prior and then
did in the insurance right now
so on on these insurance
policies what activates it.
Not only on the policy that I
have but they're also from the
USDA farm service agency there's
a multitude of of different
programs out there.
So every program in just like we
haven't out we all count on
right rain is pennies from
heaven and when we don't have
those pennies is trickle down
into the the the rancher the
farmer and then also it trickles
down economically within your
community that you Sir are we
Sir we live in.
For some it's been devastated
and in a lot of these
communities out in the in
district cap so how does that
money come from where does it
come from so it's all measured
on right fall when you you don't
have that right fall on your
average rate policy of ten to
twelve inches of rain in you
like right now in twenty twenty
we had fifty percent of that
rainfall so with that rainfall
we know it the ranchers at that
live in it know that it's that
rainfall is not there and it
happened in nineteen and they're
saying oh no you had seventy
five percent of your right we
like wait a minute we have no
seventy five percent of rainfall
we had fifty percent we had less
than that so in at that.
With with with that policy is to
be triggered is not getting
triggered because they're saying
oh you have seven five percent
rainfall no ma'am or no Sir that
I have been talking with Dr to
blog National Weather Service
Washington DC the climate.
Whether the climate prediction
center in Maryland in state I'm
sorry with we don't have it and
they say GM.
The problem with you Mexico
we're going to be up front with
you this came all the way down
from the the.
The risk management agency USDA
administrator Martin Barbary
that I had multiple phone calls
with along with the
Representative arms amada that
we went back and forth this is
Jim quote unquote.
New Mexico does not have enough
for engages in order for these
programs to work efficiently
with the New Mexico and I ask Mr
Barbary what can we do to get do
you have get these weather
stations in a since Jimmy are
just gonna have to date to get
it once you have it your your
different programs from the USDA
and other programs of the risk
management agency will start
populating and start functioning
like they're supposed to this
collector car not having all the
this is run on if you just read
off of for what he should be
running offered you know eight
of on so or six that would
depend on when you drive it so
that that's our main.
Downfall New Mexico the gap that
I stated earlier in in my
testimony.
Vice chair representative head
at us so I feel like how how
this money could arrive more
there's money from again from
the US farm bill that that money
is not getting trickle down into
New Mexico part are counties
your County everybody else is
county that serves on this
committee is getting hindered
all over you know all of the
state of New Mexico the thirty
three counties if we could get.
The full impact of money to come
back into New Mexico from that
farm bill that's thirty three
million dollars thirty three
counties price new million that
we could possibly arrive to come
back to New Mexico.
Thank you thank you Mr chair
thank you Mr this is so just let
me get this straight farmers and
ranchers by crop insurance or
insurance to protect them from a
draft okay that they have a
drought it's measured on these
stations I and then they can go
get money from the farm bill
that will come into the state
that's how it works right.
Am I missing Mr chairman and and
Representative.
In a yes ma'am that is correct
we know when that money would it
triggers that triggers off on
those payments claim insurance
payments either either USDA
program let me one that I'm the
sale or the others from the farm
service agency yes ma'am that is
correct okay thank you thank you
for our Mr chair everybody thank
you for this presentation it's
been very helpful to me and I
will support this legislation
thank you.
Thank you representative this
and move then I went to other
folks looking for comment next
we have Representative brown
Representative brown the floor
is yours that.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Well in strong support of this
bill I think it's probably a
really very long overdue.
In terms of square mileage New
Mexico was the fifth largest
state.
So to have only twenty six
weather stations for such such
an expansive area really not
adequate in a I understand that
this bill would take is two
hundred and thirty eight
stations.
that may not even be enough
given our our size but it's it's
at least a in improvement
I grew up in the Pacific
Northwest and when it rained up
there it rained and it was
pretty measurable but here in
New Mexico and I've been here
for a long time now it can be
raining in my front yard but not
in my backyard.
And so the more stations we have
the the more accurate picture we
get of of our precipitation.
I do have a bit of advice for
the sponsors of the house and
Senate more bills and that is
when we get to House
Appropriations with the bill
this is a appropriation bill
the the protocol is to table it
we'll hear a little bit about it
but then there will be a motion
to table it and that doesn't
mean that that it's all over at
that point but it means it's
really hard to get a bill like
this past because here in our
legislature we tend to build our
budget even before we get to the
session we have a legislative
finance committee
number we look at for particular
agency or or or whatever and
then we have the executive line
and we end up with one of those
to start and usually it's the
lower of the two but for bills
like this to get through it's
very very difficult so my
suggestion is that the Sanchez
right a letter to the governor
and to the chairs of the Senate
finance committee and house
Appropriations Committee and let
them know about not only the
value of the information we get
from these additional stations
but the return on investment
because if we spend three point
five million and the return on
investment we can pretty well
calculated thirty three million
and then there would be
additional benefits that would
play out economically I think
that's a really strong argument
for this bill I would also
recommend that that the sponsors
take a look at the governor's
veto message on the previous
legislation veto messages are
very very good information and
help help us know how to proceed
the next time so if you haven't
done that yet I I would
recommend it it is possible if
if this isn't programs anywhere
that maybe want to get with
David Abbey and and the chairs
of the finance committees and
see about possibly getting this
in as a special appropriation
because we do have an
opportunity in house bill two
which is the.
The general appropriations act
to to do some of that type of of
funding and I don't know what
the odds are for this but I
think it's it's a very much
needed piece of legislation and
I will supported every way I can
thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Representative Brown
this and now go to
representative Allison good
morning good morning thank you
Mr chair.
Thank you for the presentation
representative and senator.
My question has been partially
answered by the presenters and
by Representative Brown of my
question basically was in your
first bill you were asking for
three point five million
appropriation and then I thought
I heard you say in your amended
bill that you were going to ask
for two point one of million.
Just a one time expenditure
and.
And listen to Representative
Brown of I would encourage you
to maybe clarify if which amount
you you would want to submit and
I agree with the but
Representative brown said that
it's might be a little bit hard
to get that through
appropriations but with proper
of documentation it should fly
and I too will support your bill
thank you Mr chair.
Thank you representative Allison
the no one else on the list I do
see Representative as though
their hand up you wanna make a
motion.
Mr chair and now meant that the
house.
Culture water resources
committee substitute for house
bill forty eight S..
Very well made by Representative
is L. that's a second made by
Representative Allison if I may
ask
madam secretary.
Please call the roll I'm sorry
before you.
Representative Rapp.
Thank you Mr chairman I I think
maybe we should move it do not
pass on house bill forty eight
but I do you pass on the
committee substitute for house
bill forty eight.
Good catch thank you so much for
for for being here.
Let's then go then if you would
please representatives L. then
that
Bush Mr chairman I now move that
house go for water resources
committee house bill forty eight
did not pass but that house
agriculture water resources
committee substitute for house
bill forty eight to pass very
good thank you Representative
was L. and Representative
Allison the second second.
Very good that being said madam
secretary would you please call
the roll.
Representative Allison yes.
Representative brown yes.
Representative is now.
Yes Representative Hochman
Vigil.
Representative Matthews yes.
Representative small.
Representative Zamora yes.
Vice chair Herrera.
Excuse me chair ninety yes.
Okay.
Seven zero.
Okay unanimous decision thank
you Representative Zamora thank
you Senator Woods The
presentation and all your guests
this morning thank you all for
in landing us with with
everything of this bill is about
and hopefully we do get money in
this gets off the ground thank
you all very much at this point
in time we will now move to
house bill eighty nine which is
the healthy soil tax refund
contribution option this bill
will be presented by
representatives Chattfield
representatives Representative
Gail Armstrong so.
Either it or madam secretary if
we could please bring in
Representative Chatfield
Representative Armstrong.
Representative Armstrong if she
can raise her hand so I can move
on I don't see here either
Representative Chatfield good
morning Sir.
Representative Chatfield.
Madam secretary can you call his
office and that a misstep away
from his computer but I don't
know that he is is on right now
all right.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative is L..
Mr.
I was just informed by the LA
for Representative Chatfield
that somehow he got
disconnected.
And he is working trying to get
back on as we speak.
Okay because we we we see him
he's now in our in our panelists
lists with the rest of us.
There yes.
Good morning I we're gonna send
you meant.
I've been a little more I guess
whatever you so it's read that
we yes no worries Representative
Chatfield did you have any
expert witnesses with you today
Mr chairman I have rob harsh.
Okay.
Usually may lead.
Possibly Secretary witty.
Part of our culture.
Okay so then are those expert
witnesses if you and attendees
list please raise your hand so
that we can let you in as a
panelists join us this morning.
It see I S. I see rob.
Who else do I see.
I always see rob so far.
And G..
Okay.
Do you feel comfortable
Representative moving for with
with these folks.
Sure is is the right move on.
Yes Sir okay.
so Representative we are now
presenting house bill eighty
nine healthy soil tax refund
contribution option this is your
bill so the floor is yours Sir
thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee it's good to be
back else along for a little
while
You know what what house bill
eighty nine those very simple it
gives you the option to Hey
check a little box in the in
give your
the tax refund lost you to the
healthy cells Act The New
Mexico.
Administration in New Mexico
State University there are
currently sixteen other funds
that you can check your check
your often give you a tax return
to the animal care from the the
our shelter rescue phone The New
Mexico housing trust fund share
with wildlife fund sixteen
different forms you can but you
can check it often this will
just allow you to.
They would one more box on the
income tax form that you checked
yet to
get to the healthy soul Act and
what this what the hell do so
program does is it encourages
agricultural practices that are
that create healthy so all's I
know whenever also the least
right are my grandparents that
you.
In my Grandad would show me some
of the.
So all the come down out of the
mountains and flooding after the
and that that would be a good
place to plant a certain kind of
crossing and later on as a
rancher operate your Ortiz to
New Mexico we learn about how to
take care and slow growth of
grass for House you know we want
to see a lot of leaf litter we
want to see any of our roof
crashed close together that up
which carbon back into the so on
page organisms that grow and
help the Rangers Norman to the
soil there's a variety of things
that the that makes the soil
healthy options to retain the
mortar that falls on that sort
of your grass across the border
we have so that's what this
program is about and I'd like to
call my first with the small
personal talk a little bit.
Thank you representative rob so
is your Sir.
Make yourself.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee
I'm Roberson co founder of the
grassroots oriented healthy soil
working group.
And I just also want to
acknowledge the sponsors of the
bill including Representative
Chatfield Representative small
Representative Armstrong
Representative Stansbury and
Representative Chandler we
appreciate the bipartisan
support the healthy so program
is so vital for our state for
many reasons I'll just mention a
couple the program honors
farmers and ranchers around the
state by supporting their
stewardship and innovation.
The program on our soil health
principles white including
keeping the soil covered in that
supports greater water
infiltration
which is one of the solutions to
our state's water crisis
meaning we keep more of the
limited rainfall we do get in
the ground instead of it running
all and the program also
supports.
Greater public health by growing
foods with greater nutrient
density which helps prevent
autoimmune diseases and diabetes
and obesity and other such
conditions which have made this
pandemic so much more
consequential.
Of the NMDA department of
agriculture does a great job of
implementing this program and
their their budget right now the
for this year includes an
allocation for the healthy soil
program and this is so essential
to the success of the program
it's also important because we
get leverage resources from
USDA and NRCS so we all
encourage you to support and
MDA's budget fully
and though the healthy so
program deserves even more state
resources this year because
there are so many urgent
requests in such a constraint
budget the thought was for this
bill was to provide an
alternative way to increase the
revenue stream for this
important program by enabling
people who qualify for a tax
reform to voluntarily donate all
or part of it too
the new MMDAs healthy soil
program
just really briefly the healthy
soil program contribution option
would would add an agriculture
program to this list of
seventeen programs currently
there's no agriculture related
program and so that would be a
great way to help the taxpayers
support if they wanted to our
farmers and ranchers in our
state and.
The more promotion of this
opportunity should this past we
would intend to promote this and
that would help raise more
funding for it but even if it
worked out to be just the
average annual amount of
donations from the public that
the other programs get that
would be enough to support at
least one more grant for farmers
and ranchers while raising
awareness public awareness of
the importance of soil health in
our state and so my last point
would just be that there is so
much greater demand around the
state for this program then
there is funding about thirty
five percent of the applicants
around the state get funded so
we definitely could use more
resources to support the
requests that are made and just
to close we really appreciate
the current and longstanding
bipartisan and broad support for
this program thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you Sir Representative Mr
chair if I could get the
maintenance to speak just a
little bit about what programs
has been this money then you for
past absolutely.
I'm good morning
Mr chair and the Representative
Chatfield thank you for having
me
we produce and executive summary
I think that Representative
Chatfield has access to it
discusses the types of projects
that we've done and where
they've been done around the
state
we've managed to find twenty six
projects I'm and let's see.
And.
On many different counties see
with that we through the
eligible entities in the way the
program works is that eligible
entities are able to receive
requests for funding from
Farmers and ranchers and
eligible entities include so
more conservation districts land
grants thank you has and the
eggs are because of the
cooperative extension service
which has a slightly different
relationship to the way in which
we do business we're doing a lot
of education outreach with them
a total of seventeen counties
are represented within the
numbers of projects that were
funded so we've had in the in
additional year eighteen pilot
projects on the ground I'll prob
pilot projects were funded in
twenty six projects were
selected this year for funding
which are getting under way now
I'm let's see what else I'm
sorry I'm trying to look at two
screens at once to give you and
that's information that you can
make sound decisions in addition
to having funded those projects
the how this all practices that
have been funded some of them
are include planting diverse
crop cover.
reducing or eliminating tillage
introducing compost and mulch
integrating animals increasing
biodiversity and planting on
a range lands in twenty twenty
we funded twenty let's see
thirteen.
Farms including orchards of farm
and ranch three ranch alone zero
and community gardens to and in
twenty one in FY twenty one we
funded eighteen farms are six
farms and ranches out and those
are combined so farm and ranch
operation and then two ranches
and one Community guarded the
program in selection of the
projects we stand up a technical
review panel that includes
scientists and our people
knowledgeable and healthy so
practices as well as
knowledgeable in terms of
farming and ranching and.
Through that process we select
and bring to the secretary of
agriculture the slate of
projects to be funded and that
he makes the final decision if
you will and we do this also in
consultation with the soil water
conservation commission and as
well as other stakeholders
including how this will work
group of which Mr Hirsch is a
member.
And we have done a number of
education outreach projects in
the last year including a train
the trainer for soil health
practices which is at a project
that's available for review
online so in other words a
series of days of training that
can be accessed online so that
is also there's a link for that
that can be provided if
anybody's interested it's it
will reside on the NMDA website
as well.
I believe.
many things going on with
website these days and projects
were interestingly then we
managed to be relatively
successful even under conditions
of COVID which obviously has
constrained many different kinds
of activities.
And I stand for any question
thank you.
Thank you very much
Representative in the US we go
to the audience thank you Mr
chairman.
I just like to say that this
doesn't ask for any money from
status just allows people will
make their own private funds
this as one box to the the
income tax refund and a lousy
job make sure our monies that
are set for questions
Representative thank you Sir
with the number of the audience
all those in favor please raise
your hand I'll call on you want
to time let's go first to
if you misuse.
You're not with us good morning.
Mr chairman members of the
committee yes Debbie Hughes
executive director with the New
Mexico association of
conservation districts we
strongly support this effort
all of us are in favor of
healthy food and healthy soil
also helps make healthy food
this is another one of those
bills would just add some more
dollars to your to our state
economy and it does so so many
more things such as improving
water quality so there's just
numerous benefits and we really
appreciate your support today
thank you.
Thank you very much this move
then now to all of our CM miss
Garcia you're now with this
morning.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee Pollock
RCA with the New Mexico seconds
Association we strongly support
this legislation because it'll
provide resources for healthy
soil Act of program which is
already demonstrated success
with numerous projects around
the state that that show the
practices on the ground which we
think is a really great way for
for our fellow farmers and
ranchers to learn from each
other is played by supporting
actual projects so we send a
strong support and we think this
Sanchez for bringing this
forward thank you Mr chairman
thank you Mr Garcia have a great
day let's move into Pamela Roy
miss Roy.
Your with us good morning.
Mr chairman thank you so much
and committee members of for
hearing this bill and we really
want to say thanks the sponsors
as well for bringing this
forward the healthy soils Act is
amazing as as Maitland said from
the New Mexico department
agriculture really appreciate
the departments support in
putting this program to get
together and managing it and for
the healthy soil workgroup for
bringing for in first place and
so I can't I'm here Roy and
executive director for and table
and I'm here representing also
the New Mexico food and
agriculture policy council in
the rocky mountain farmers union
and we stand in absolute full
support of this bill and look
for a and really appreciate the
brings forward the public you
know really ask public to get
involved as well and that it's
not asking for an additional
preparation
and so I think it's just got a
wider wider reach indoor
Committee and thanks so much for
this for this committee.
Thank you miss Roy this then go
to get a pay raise to pay and
you are with us good morning.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is Gary
Payton representing the
coalition of sustainable
communities New Mexico it's a
coalition of the elected leaders
the city's a Los crucis
Albuquerque Santa Fe and Santa
Fe County these elected leaders
serve approximately forty
percent of the population of the
state of New Mexico.
We strongly support this
bipartisan bill H. B. eighty
nine I think it's particularly
fitting that this bill is come
to the committee medially
following the discussion of
weather stations and drought
healthy soils program in the
augmentation from this bill will
be able to provide for greater
water retention as well as
carbon sequestration we are just
part of this bill thank you for
the opportunity today.
Thank you Sir let's move them to
different Rivera activity good
morning.
Mr chairman members of the
committee took near Avera
registered lobbyists for New
Mexico farm and livestock bureau
thank you for the opportunity to
comment this morning I stand in
support of house bill eighty
nine healthy so tax refund bill
New Mexico farm and livestock
bureau fully supports the New
Mexico department of
agriculture's healthy soil
program which provides farmers
and ranchers resources to
continue to maintain and improve
soil health well utilizing
productive and beneficial lands
we believe that this is an
extremely innovative way to
collect funding for this effort
especially when the budget might
be tight this year as original
investors of the land New Mexico
producers are extremely
appreciative of the sponsor
carrying this piece of
legislation thank you.
Thank you Mr this move then
Development Act.
Read good morning you're with us
good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee Brett that died
immediate past president of the
national association of
conservation district and as
spokesperson for three thousand
conservation districts
nationwide for two year period
of time.
Seoul Health and soul Health
initiatives were a priority of
the national association of
conservation district and as
others have alluded to the
drought situation New Mexico Dan
this is just another tool in the
toolbox to help New Mexico
producers grow that vital food
and fiber that's necessary for
New Mexico thank you Mr chairman
and the sponsor for allowing me
to speak thank you Sir have a
great day this movie to get it
all in get your with this
morning.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee thank
you for for hosting us this
morning I'm Gerd Altmann
representing Santa Clara pueblo
in the forestry department we're
tribal entity responsible for
managing ninety square miles of
lands in the upper middle Rio
Grande basin and we stand in
favor of this bill Santa Clara
pueblo has long recognized the
role of healthy soils and
sustaining the tribe's natural
and agricultural resources the
importance of healthy soils have
become even more significant
following the devastating loss
conscious fire in two thousand
eleven due to the catastrophic
flooding and widespread
sentiment deposition that
resulted following the fire our
staff is work relentlessly to
restore the forest and
agricultural resources are
tribes relied upon since time
immemorial The New Mexico
healthy soils program continues
to provide a critical resource
for New Mexico land owners as
well as tribes to proactively
manage our soils by providing
supportive resources and
competitive grant funding do the
utmost value this program sent a
clear pueblos in support of
house bill eighty nine and we
support the New Mexico healthy
so those problems program thank
you.
Thank you Mr Altman this move
then that is always always with
the earlier will allow to top so
eight.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee again my name is
that we think and I'm a
registered lobbyist with the
national young farmers coalition
we stand in full support of
house bill eighty nine we've
seen tremendous success from
this program funding really
innovative projects across the
state on a wide range of
operations over the last two
years and would love to see more
funding for the program to
further expand
projects that are doing great
work to improve soil and water
health across the state and
thank you thank you very much so
we moved into a million vocal
million.
You're now with this good
morning.
Good morning and thank you my
name's Emelia Vogel I am of a
farm manager at rocket punch
Farm in deland New Mexico I'm
also a member of the healthy
soil working group so health
champion if you will
my farm received one of the
twenty six of requests for the
twenty twenty healthy soul
program one of three that were
received implants yet County
working cooperatively with the
Valencia salt and water
conservation district my project
is already underway in
preparation for the growing
season and just want to say that
the healthy soul program is
making the the world for us
really
Norma's help so thank you please
support this bill.
Thank you million this movie to
the bone okay goes.
Hello are you there.
Hey there I'm hi.
Can you hear me.
Yeah you're you're you're kind
of support this body but go
ahead.
Okay hi chairman and members of
the committee my name is not on
a day ago so I'm also a US soil
health champion with the New
Mexico healthy soil working
group I'm a native New Mexican
and the farm for many years in
quay county and recently moved
to Rio Arriba County to a
farming okay and as well and
also received a healthy soil.
To do revision control work and
start stab us in orchard and
that grant money it has been
tremendous and we're really
looking forward to the future
food that's going to need to our
our and the surrounding
community service to avoid my
support for this bill and eight
there are so many different
benefits that cascade outside of
just the funds that this bill of
facts but also to the
surrounding ecologies the
the wildlife center and the
water and all the surrounding
communities and this is a great
way to get the public involved a
lot of people who asked me how
they can get with the help
paying bills so I'll if they
don't have access to land and
this is one way they can do it
thank you.
Thank you for your comments this
gonna Camilo Mero.
Hello are you there.
Yes good morning Mr chair
committee members Camilleri with
the State Land Office the State
Land Office stands in strong
support of house bill eighty
nine by adding this option into
the income tax form makes it
easier for individuals to fund
the healthy soils program this
bill not just benefits those
working in farming and ranching
but as a wise investment that
benefits all New Mexicans thank
you thank you Mr Mehra
appreciate your comments are
there any folks in opposition to
house bill eighty nine.
Seeing none gonna go to some
questions from the committee I
have first of this
Representative Matthews and
let's uh let's keep in mind
we're the committee members that
we have one bill that and that
we have four sessions starting
at eleven so keeping that in
mind let's move through then
Representative Matthews and I
have Representative Russ
Representative Matthews the
floor is yours thank you Mr
chairman and and thank you all
for the presentation.
Including Representative
Chatfield and all the sponsors
of the bill I'm in I am in
strong support of this my
question couple questions is
I'm when I was reviewing the
materials for this apparently
there was an appropriation
request in twenty nineteen but
the program has never been
funded by the state so my
question is
where is the money coming from
for the grants that are being
made and is there any plan to
ask for state funding for.
I mean to me this is a critical
program healthy soil is key to
being able to grow things along
with water so those those are my
questions.
Representative muted stir.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for Representative that question
in the past a we have what's
called has been year and some of
the legislators individual as
legislators prepare
of discretionary funding into
the this bill and the that shows
for.
Thank you Mr thank you
Representative and Mr chairman I
I'm told that we're likely to
have an HB junior this year also
and will there be a and the
ability to contribute to this
fund because I would like to do
that.
Mr chair the really hope that's
true most of both cases that.
House Bill to and I hope some of
us would be able to help solve
the.
And I'm Mr chair and
representative field just
quickly
Is this is wasn't funded before
and but as such it seems to me
such as an incredibly important
program is there any plan at
some point to again make and a
request for an appropriation
maybe not this year
and I I have to say that only or
if you having heard two bills in
this committee so far I'm kind
of struck by the fact that we
seem to be doing as a state a
pretty poor job of funding our
agriculture
community.
Thank you Mr chair
representative what were some of
us out there than working every
day to the body of a place
programs and help for which our
agricultural community forward I
think it's so.
A lot of the other.
They bring money into our state
rely on or act community for
their very existence and not
only that we heard loud for so
The investment makes go out your
culture.
Mr chair at Representative thank
you for that answer thank you
for the presentation and
yeah I'm on becoming a
supporter of agriculture in a
big way just hearing how we're
not supporting it in the
important thing to our doing so
thank you very much thank you Mr
thank you Representative
Matthews let's now move to
Representative brown
Representative brown floor's
yours thank you Mr chairman
Representative Zamora off I'll
be very quick here
I see from the analyses that we
have sixteen accounts that we
can donate to personally if we
wish other a tax refund and the
amounts every year really not
very large.
It was a hundred thousand or so
in just a little over that in
fiscal year twenty and that was
a divided up among the sixteen
existing voluntary account so I
don't know how much will come in
if this bill passes but I I hope
it's considerable what I like
about this is that it is and I'm
not trying to be funny here but
it's a grassroots effort it's
people donating their personal
funds to up to a really good
program are really good idea.
I recently listened to a
documentary called back to
eating it's a gardening
documentary and it it really
talks about all the things in
the healthy so programs that are
important why keeping the soil
covered you know we think
telling things rotor telling is
the way to go but the better
argument is to keep the soil
covered and don't disturb it
anymore you know if if if you
can help it and what's of things
go into that and so what I'm
really getting at here is that
during the COVID period we've
been all pretty much home bound
and a lot of New Mexico Family
started gardens and started
producing their own food and I
would just like to be sure that
what we're getting the
information we're getting from
the healthy so program gets
transmitted to families as well
not just farmers but to New
Mexicans who were interested in
in a home garden and I hope that
maybe that's happening maybe
it's not but I think that would
be a valuable
offshoot again another punt
outside of this program so
that's
I think a good way to go and I
definitely do support this bill
thank you Mr chair.
Thank you representative will
open this morning Representative
brown so this movie into other
any other questions or comments
from the committee if not what's
the pledge of the committee.
I see these requests.
Representative more as motion
to do passes their second.
Representative all of you seems
like a representative will be a
second if you would please madam
secretary called the roll.
Representative Allison yes
Representative brown yes
Representative these L..
Yes.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Representative Matthews yes.
Representative small.
Representative Zamora.
Representative Zamora.
Yes.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Representative small.
Vice chair Carrera yes.
Chair at ninety yes.
And seven zero unanimous
Representative Chatfield thank
you for your presentation yeah
do pass create you being here.
Thank you.
And we base.
Thank you let's now move to
house bill ninety two which is
the safe drinking water testing
excuse me Representative is L. I
see it state we yes ma'am.
Mr chair I'm gonna be very brief
in regards to the last bill that
we just past year several of the
members commented on the need to
keep our soil covered in yes I
do with that.
Unfortunately what we have seen
in the past and I hope that we
do addresses this committee
through the efforts of the
Interstate Stream Commission to
fulfill the needs of our compact
obligations to the state of
Texas they bought farm lands.
Along with the Water Rights.
And unfortunately these lands
were stripped of their water
rights before cover crop could
get implemented on the skin the
soil to get established to hold
that door down what we have seen
in the efforts to try to get
some sort of cover on those
lands and has been kind of
feudal.
Of.
In two thousand nineteen and two
thousand twenty in my particular
area of the world and this is
all those ranchers out there
along with the farmers.
We have received at less than
one inch of rain in the past two
years those lands have.
Eroded to the point that you
would not recognize if we have
palm trees we could call of the
desert a real dancer because of
the blow sand that has come in
so Mr chairman and members of
the committee and anybody
listening.
Some of us are low.
We feel the rain and other
people just get right wit Mr
chairman I want to encourage all
members that are listening get
all participants that are
listening in please play pray
for rain thank you Mr chairman
well said Representative thank
you so much this Madam now moved
to and house bill ninety two
safe drinking water testing fund
this is represented as a result
of my children it is bill and
vice chairwoman do you have
expert witnesses you like to
have you join.
Your muted Representative.
Sorry sorry Mr chair yes we do
have the we do have the expert
witnesses that we would like to
be added to the to the panelists
and that's Rebecca Roose said
the water protection division
director Joe Martinez of the
drinking water the drinking
water bureau chief and now
fourth day the executive
director of the New Mexico
municipal league and I am the co
sponsoring this bill and the
person who's actually carrying
the full bill is is
representative during thank us
so I think she's going to start
our presentation today Mr chair
where you are majority whip good
morning.
Me thank you in thank you to you
into the committee I am I used
to be on this committee several
years ago and so I've been
listening all morning and just a
really good reminder of the
important work that you all are
doing and just the direct impact
it has on our our citizens so
thank you for that
thank you for having me today so
with that Mr chair if I can get
started.
Please okay Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'm
pleased to present and co
sponsor the safe drinking water
testing bill house bill ninety
two that will ensure communities
across New Mexico continue to
have clean drinking water the
best way to protect our
communities.
from contained from contaminated
drinking water is to test the
water regularly this bill would
ensure the fund use used to pay
for administrative team water
testing in New Mexico remain
solvent without getting testing
services to water systems large
and small urban and rural over
the past twenty seven years the
water conservation fund has
benefited hundreds of public
water systems throughout the
state by supporting their social
work to provide safe and
reliable drinking water to New
Mexicans essentially this bill
does three things it increases
the current fee for the first
time in twenty seven years from
three cents per thousand gallons
of water produced two of the
five cents per thousand gallons
of water produce this translates
to an increase of about forty
cents per month of an average
New Mexico household water
utility bill utility bill less
than five dollars a year.
Number two it requires the
environment department to
prepare and make public an
annual summary of revenue and
expenditures.
And and finally number three it
changes the name of the fund for
the water conservation fund to
the safe drinking water testing
fund so the name is reflective
of the services that the fees
provide to drinking water
systems across New Mexico and Mr
chair at this time I would like
our co sponsor to be able to say
a few words as well that's the
thank you representative
Representative but I showed
Representative please thank
thank you Mr chair and it's a
pleasure to introduce this bill
and like my colleague I am proud
to co sponsor this legislation I
believe our communities deserve
to have a government that is
committed to doing everything it
can to ensure that they have
safe water to drink if you read
the newspaper well you all read
the newspapers when we've heard
we've heard the stories of like
Michigan and we've heard the
stories in New Jersey they're
they're currently dealing with
issues of contaminated drinking
water and communities and it's
in these are huge huge
Problems to overcome serious
health issues spending the
people living in those
communities especially young
children and the large financial
impact to already tight budgets
are just two of the most visible
ramifications of not ensuring
safe drinking water I want to
thank the New Mexico municipal
league in New Mexico association
of counties in New Mexico rural
water association really the
rural communities assistance
corporation and the New Mexico
environment department for
making sure safe drinking water
for H. citizens is a priority in
the state and with that we close
our our presentation thank you
Mr chair representative would
you let your expert witnesses to
make testimony at this point.
Thank you Mr chair I shoulda
said that now I'll turn over the
the floor to Rebecca Roose.
Miss Ruth good morning welcome.
Good morning good morning Mr
chair members of the committee I
R. Sanchez Representative
Herrera and K. goes it's a
pleasure to be here with you
this morning I am about to
resume the director of the water
protection division at the
environment department and we
work tirelessly day in and day
out to support water quality
issues across the state and
support public water systems
that are in our communities
throughout the state over one
thousand public water systems
that we work with and coordinate
with and oversee safe drinking
water delivery to New Mexicans.
At its core H. B. ninety two is
a public health bill.
We need this bill to support
at the solvency of the funds
that water systems rely on to
meet their requirements for
almost ninety contaminants that
are tested for monitored for in
their pursuit to deliver safe
drinking water to members of the
state.
Notably at representatives of
the public water systems that
pay the fee and also benefit
from the services delivered from
the fund support this bill.
The bill reflects the
environment department's
commitment to providing maximum
sampling and testing services to
public water systems as well as
our commitment to on going
transparency and accountability
for how this fund is managed and
how that the dollars that
systems pay into the fund return
to those systems in terms of
testing and sampling Services.
After extensive analysis of
historical revenue and current
and projected future
expenditures the environment
department calculated the need
to increase the speed to five
cents per thousand gallons and
as R. Sanchez said this will be
the first fee increase in the
twenty seven year history of the
fund.
Without this bill and we do will
be forced to increasingly cut
services in the coming years
based on insufficient revenue
and when we cut services that
means the burden to pay for the
testing and collect the samples
since back on to the public
water systems themselves and
many of the systems especially
small system some that serve a
hundred people or fewer have a
little to no ability to increase
the revenues to that cover the
testing costs themselves we see
this as a critical bill to
continue to to provide safe
drinking water to one point nine
million New Mexicans across the
state.
And to ensure that public water
systems are getting the support
that they need consistently on
an ongoing basis through the
services from this fund thank
you.
Thank you Mr groups
Representative you want to go
then to aged forty four for the
come up.
You're on mute Representative
at.
Sorry again sorry again Mr chair
first I'd like to go to jail
Martinez who heads up the
drinking water bureau chief is
the chief for the drinking water
here right C. Martinez was
arrested.
Thank you Mr chair
representative I I appreciate
the opportunity to be here in
front of you and the rest of the
committee are we strive every
day like director who said to to
provide the these testing and
other medical services to water
systems across the state there
are a number of small keep
community water systems that
really rely on these funds to to
ensure that their water is
tested and and ensure that the
water is safe for their
communities to during so without
all close and comments and I
look forward to your questions
we forward.
Thank you Mr Martinez.
Representative and the last
expert witness but not early
certainly is Mr Alfort the from
the
Of the he's executive director
of the New Mexico municipality
Mr forty good morning.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee at the Sanchez
that economic job explaining the
bill and.
For us this is this is a
partnership with the with the
executive with the environment
department and also tax and
Representative and I can't
stress the amount of time is
gone into updating this
partnership our organization is
had no less than a dozen
meetings with just the
environment department with
Rebecca and her team the
secretary are you able our
barman quality association which
is a subsection of the league
When do our resolution policy
process of the minutes fully.
The department adopted the
majority of of our requests the
tax Representative department
has a has a major
The duty in this bill they do
all the auditing compliance they
do the collection
In years past.
We can all agree that this could
have been managed better but
what I will tell you in every
meeting that I've had this is
the team that you want making
sure that we all have clean
drinking water I have absolute
faith in the Environment
Department teen Tax
Representative team that is
doing the audit and compliance.
In like Rebekah touched on this
is something that.
If the fund runs out of money
they don't have the ability to
do the testing current statutes
that they can just reduce the
testing because they don't have
the money so this is something
that did we recognize that needs
to be done.
Yes there is it is I think
increase.
But we're gonna rate either way
either this is run through the
partnership with the department
or we have to do the testing on
our own at in an inefficient
what so we choose to update this
and supported.
Because it's the more efficient
way to run the program thank you
Mr chair of the committee thank
you Mr they Madam web settlement
of vice chair anything else that
we go to the audience.
No I think I believe we're ready
to go to the to the items thank
you Mr chairman thank you chair
just to recognize I think I said
L. for Terry instead of aging
for days so I apologize for that
all dis Mr chair all dis.
Thank you so let's go to the
audience I see that there's that
there's already a hand up let's
lower that real quick and then
we're gonna go I'm gonna call
for folks that are thank in
support of house bill ninety two
will begin that list first and
then we'll then we'll go down
the list and then I'll go to
opposition so first on support
for house bill ninety two I'm
looking at Debbie Hughes misuse.
Good morning.
Mr chairman and members the
committee once again thank you
very much Debbie Hughes with the
executive director for the New
Mexico association of
conservation districts in the
soil and water conservation
districts definitely stand
behind this bill impact some of
the conservation districts do
help with water testing of
drinking water wells in
different locations in the state
and anything we can do to help
the environment department the
the better it will be so thank
you very much and thanks for
bringing this bill.
Thank you Mr new that's going
not to build Connor Mr Connor
you're with this good morning.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee thank you for the
opportunity to speak I've
executive as I just mmhm my name
is bill Connor and executive
director of New Mexico rural
water association.
We stand in support of this
bill.
As it's been stated several
times this morning the bill the.
The three cents per thousand
gallons is been charged has been
in charge since the inception of
this program back and I believe
his night nineteen ninety four.
Has never been increased since
that at so it's long past to
having an increase and and this
fund it's it's it's absolutely
necessary to to help keep the
fund solvent and stable and
doing what it's supposed to do
helping helping fund the testing
to provide safe clean drinking
water for New Mexico so we
support this fund thank you for
your time Mr Kirk thank wanting
us this move then up to joyous
partisan.
Joy are you there good morning.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee joyous person
deputy executive director for
New Mexico counties for the
reasons that have been stated
we're in support of this bill
New Mexico Environment
Department was incredibly
conscientious in their approach
in addressing this problem they
looked at both proposed input
changes output changes they
evaluated what would need to be
in place to make the fund
solvent and this fund really
support some of the four hundred
and thirty five smaller rural
community systems that support a
hundred people a thousand people
are less at the end of the day
this helps maintain compliance
and we certainly agree that this
is a public health and safety
issue and with that we think the
Sanchez for bringing this
forward and stand in full
support thank you for joining us
this moved into Ramona Cerro.
Good morning are you there.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee from
the New Mexico regional field
manager with the rural community
assistance corporation we
provide technical managerial and
financial technical assistance
to some of the smallest of
public water systems across the
state we agree with the the US
there are some of the
information that has been said
and that this is a public health
bill and we strongly support
come in support of the bill we
thank the sponsors for bringing
it forward.
Thank.
Thank you Senator for joining us
good morning to John the shop
John are you there.
Yes thank you John to share on
the public works director for
the city Purtell some also the
president of the New Mexico
environment quality association
and as a as previously stated we
stand in support of this bill of
the environment department has
been incredibly cooperative with
this and in dressing some of the
issues with that also this bill
is incredibly important to
securing the safety and security
of our water supply the testing
that we're doing is absolutely
critical and while it's
difficult enough for some of the
larger communities to do this
fund makes it possible for the
smaller communities to say
compliance as well.
The
end of your comments yes all
right thank you W. joining us
this then moved to
Franciscans all as Francis.
Morning welcome good morning
thank you Mr chair very nice to
finally meet you Dr Linda and
members of the board thank you
so much for having us my name is
Frances Gonzales I'm actually
from grants county in the
southwest part of New Mexico I'm
also the district twenty eight
coordinator for our retake our
democracy and also the CD to
chair for other Lante caucus
I'm also from a rural area I
live in actually what we call
the mining district are we have
one of the largest copper mines
with our open tickets and for us
this funded getting funded
staying solvent and and the fact
that we need to keep testing our
water over here I grew up here
and our water has been
contaminated many times the EPA
and organizations and lost like
what we're trying to pass your
are so important to our
community we have you know we we
salt we the water is provided
within five municipalities and
we right now are actually having
problems in her early with I
didn't wells for the water has
not being contaminated from the
copper mine so this bill is
really important that it's
funded state funded and I
appreciate the the legislators
are brought this forward thank
you Mr chair and thank you
legislators.
Is also joining us this morning
I think that's it for those in
support is there anyone in the
attendees list that is here to
oppose house bill ninety two.
We'll bit.
Not seeing any hands then this
then moved to our committee for
questions and comments committee
members anyone with questions or
comments Representative Zamora I
see with your hand up if others
want to comment please raise
your hand on the
on the deal presume so
Representative is one of the
floor is yours Sir.
Yes thank you Mr chairman and
and Representative a.
I have a question on individuals
being able to test their water
is that going to be the
something that this bill
provides individuals having a
private piece of land out in
rural New Mexico or something
like that.
Mr chair that over to Rebecca
I'll let her answer that
question thank you thank you
Representative Senator is a
more.
Thank you Mr chair
Representative Zamora this bill
is exclusively focused on
supporting the testing that's
conducted by public water
systems systems that serve at
twenty five people or more I for
example the at members of our
state who have private wells who
rely on private wells for their
drinking water there are some
other resources on related to
this bill and related to this
fund to help them get their
drinking water tested and I
would be happy to share that
type of information with you us
after the meeting today but this
bill in particular will support
the public water systems
themselves and and how they're
testing is conducted and paid
for.
Mr chair and the.
What what what why would this
not go into individuals what.
I mean safe water for New Mexico
safe water for New Mexico so why
why would it not go to
individuals being able to test
their water.
representatives more Mr chair I
there is another agency that I
think helps individual wells and
you can get it tested I know
they come out and I know and in
our community they've come out
if an ounce of the community
that there can be a sampling of
your individual wells and I'm
again given there are this was
to protect our public our our
public systems all of our small
mutual domestic water systems
the one thousand different water
systems that we have in the
state so this bill was set up to
start with that the I think I'll
turn this over to Rebecca
because I think it's another
agency within betterment that
covers individual wealth and
sampling their Rebecca would you
answer that these.
Sure thank you Mr chair
representative Tamara that at
Representative will represent of
hers that is correct this this
fund established in in nineteen
ninety three to support public
water system testing is tied
into a much larger of regulatory
framework around the delivery of
public water by public water
systems stemming from the safe
drinking water act a federal law
and then our state laws that
that are implementing that
federal safe drinking water
programs all of that applying to
public water systems that serve
multiple people not covering the
private well so I think
initially when this was created
in nineteen ninety three it was
meeting that that the needs for
required sampling under
regulatory requirements that
don't apply to private well
owners is so I think that's
that's to speak to the scope at
to elaborate on what
Representative Ferrer was saying
the environment department does
have a program for what we call
water fares it we hold
periodically in different
communities around the state
allowing at.
Community members who are on
private wells to bring a jar of
their water and get it tested
for a number of water quality
parameters the department of
health also has a private well
program providing some support
as well and I'd be happy to
provide more about both of those
programs as a follow up.
In the Mr chair and
representative and I maybe maybe
if what the.
I guess I'm I'm trying to ensure
this thing and and and water
safety water quality for for the
whole state of New Mexico and
like here ugh I'll give you a
little example well it's not
really a little example to big
example here in Clovis we have
had a water contamination issue
with the air base and P. fox as
you've all probably heard and
read across the in the
newspapers so what some of the
first wells are not
contaminated.
By the P. false were probably
private wells and seems to me
like if we would all work
together
maybe this this contamination
would have been picked up
quicker maybe or or.
Maybe NMED is is the the.
Link that I'm thinking about in
between it's it's somebody gets
it.
Some kind of contamination but
if we could open this up
individuals and their maybe that
would more freely tests and and
as more often in.
seems like it it's for the state
will allow individuals to also.
but I understand that also that
that there is other.
Basically where individuals
could go for testing wondered if
you might get the same quality
of testing.
Seems like we're investing one
point four million.
Into the state funds for this.
Things like that it would be a.
But quite a lab together to do
some of the testing the makes me
wonder some of the individuals
would would get the same quality
of testing done.
Just just thoughts going through
my head
thank you for bringing this bill
up.
And that's all my questions Mr
chair thank you Representative
Zamora next on the list we have
Representative is out
representatives of the Florida.
Mr chairman thank you very much
when the time is appropriate I
would like to leave the motion.
Sorry that time maybe now I
don't see any other hands up and
no one else on my list so before
we do that it looks like
Representative Brown.
Has her hand Representative
Brown it'll come back to
Representative is Representative
Brett.
Thank you Mr chairman I had to
step out for a minute for a
phone call that I and I hope
this question has been asked and
if it has just let me know Mr
chair I'm wondering if someone
if the environment department
could give lists just a little
list of how many bills are being
proposed by NMED that would
involve a fee increase on on
anybody if we can get a listing
of all those proposed the
adjustments that would help me
get a better sense of what we're
asking our constituents to do
so if if that's okay I I don't
need it right now but at some
point soon I would like to have
that thank you Mr chair thank
you Representative Brown I'm
sure they will be responsive in
getting us that information so
without further ado
representatives L..
Mr chairman I know that house
bill ninety do you pass motion
made by Representative Ezzeil is
there a second.
As the second by Representative
Allison if you would please
madam secretary please call the
roll.
Representative Allison yes.
Representative brown yes.
Representative is now yes
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Yes.
Representative Matthews yes.
Representative small.
Representative Zamora yes.
Representative small.
Representative vice chair
Herrera yes.
Chair Lenti yes.
Zero thank you and with a
unanimous decision we have a due
pass on house bill ninety two
thank you madam whip thank you
question for the presentations
and for your guest thank you all
so much for explaining this to
us we come to the end of our
agenda so thank you all for
joining us in the ten days list
the meeting agenda for
Thursday's meeting they were the
fourth is already online so you
will look at that and again if
anyone has any amendments
substitution for that meeting
your bill will be heard get it
to us twenty four hours in
advance so that we can give it
to our members and to our list.
That being said
So move their second I see you
all in your hands it looks like
we're we're done with this and
we'll see you all in the floor
session thank you all and have a
great day.
