us.
Representative Torres Velasquez.
Vice Chair Chavez.
Chairwoman Royal Caballero.
OK
We have a quorum.
Thank you.
All right, so we're gonna go
ahead whenever you're ready,
representative with House Bill
331.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
Houseville 331, um, establishes
within the case between
employees and employers. Um,
this only that's big business in
New Mexico, as we know, um, uh,
and essentially allows um for
this agreement to take place. So
we want to be a part of Madam
Chair, um, and with me is my
expert, and I'll let him
introduce himself.
Delta.
Um, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I'm Stephen Curtis of
Utz and Valdez, I am a labor
lawyer in Albuquerque, New
Mexico and an occasional adjunct
professor of labor law at the
University of New Mexico School
of Law. And just briefly, um,
the bill is relatively simple.
Um, as a condition of licensure,
it requires that these um
facilities enter into a labor
peace agreement. The essential
terms of which are set forth in
subsection G on page 3 of the
bill.
And the essential quid pro quo
between the labor organization
and the company is that the
company will not disrupt the
labor organization as it
attempts to talk to its
employees.
Um
And allow a reasonable access um
to engaging talking to the
employees and in exchange for
which the labor organization
agrees that it will not pick it,
engage in work stoppages,
boycotts, or other economic
disruptions during the
organizing campaign. And one
thing I want to emphasize is
this um labor peace agreement
applies only during a labor
organizing campaign. This is not
a collective bargaining
agreement between the union and
the company setting forth terms
and conditions of employment.
the employees. The same normal
processes for an NLRB sponsored
election would be required for
um a union to be certified as
the exclusive bargaining
representative and the employees
are still free to choose or not
to choose to um uh a vote for
the union once that process has
beengun, um, but it's a bill to
create labor peace during the
organizing phase of um the
relationship.
Uh, with that, we'll stand for
questions, Madam Chair.
Thank you. So, uh, we will go to
the zoom.
For opposition, those in
opposition.
In po
What is the
OK.
All right, um, in opposition, we
have one hand up, Jaime
maintenance.
Hi, this is
Yes, my name is
Sorry.
Uh, my name is Matt Kennicott.
I'm the CEO of the plug. We're a
can, we're a cannabis industry
group that supports small
cannabis businesses. In
addition, I'm a micro licensee
out of Socorro, New Mexico. We
are opposed to this legislation.
Currently workers in New Mexico
enjoy all of the protections
under the National Labor
Relations Act as well as
National Labor Relations Board.
They already have the right to
organize and this legislation is
not needed.
Further, there are 8 legal
states with some sort of either
LPA in place or uh with a
suggestion of an LPA of those
states, 2 are currently facing
lawsuits. Oregon's was just
filed last week in New York
State is soon to have a lawsuit
filed on LPAs as well. We do
stand opposed to this. We
definitely support the right of
workers to organize and
unionize, but don't.
See this legislation is
necessary. Thank you.
Thank you.
Next, we have Jessie Hunt, and
I'm just going to remind
everybody, um, you have 2
minutes and if you would like to
do it less than 2 minutes,
that's. Hi. Can you hear me,
Madam Chair?
Hear you. Thank you.
OK, thank you. Um, Madam Chair
and Representative Romero,
thanks for allowing me to speak
today and as a former labor
organizer, it is weird to be
here, but on behalf of my
clients, Field of Dreams and
Critical Elements, I must
respectfully stand in opposition
to HB 331. I think it's
important to note that no other
industry in New Mexico is
required to have labor peace
agreements as a condition for
licensure.
This place is an unfair and
unique burden on the cannabis
industry, potentially stifling
growth and innovation in this
emerging and sort of tenuous
sector right now. Um, industries
such as hospitality,
construction and manufacturing,
which also have significant
labor forces are not subjected
to similar requirements, and
this discrepancy could be seen
as discriminatory against the
cannabis industries. So I'd
really like to consider that
this is just not the right time
for this and the fact that it
would
put an undue burden on the
industry and ask you to oppose
this legislation. Thank you so
much for the time.
Thank you.
Ben Lowinger.
All right. Next we have Ben
Lowinger.
Madam Chair, committee members,
Ben Lullinger with the New
Mexico Cannabis Chamber of
Commerce, our organization
stands in respectful opposition
to House Bill 331.
We've had adult use cannabis for
less than 3 years in New Mexico,
and the industry is currently
experiencing significant growing
pains.
With cannabis still classified
federally as a Schedule I
substance, cannabis operators
are not able to write off
business expenses.
Many possibly most cannabis
businesses with 10 employees
remain unbanked.
As the monthly percentage fees
for a canvas-related checking
account are exorbitant. In
December, 65% of operating
storefronts reported less than
50%, $50,000 in monthly revenue
and 41% reported less than
25,000.
The illicit and gray market,
including the huge illegal
operations near Estancia and
water flow that were recently
busted, continued to exasperate
a playing field that is not
even, especially for small and
medium sized cannabis operators.
There is currently a section in
rules that encourages cannabis
businesses, excluding micro
licenses to maintain a labor
peace agreement. Unfortunately,
there's no provision in the
proposed bill that would exclude
micro licenses, which is the
entry point and pathway for
small businesses to come into
the cannabis industry. Many of
these micro licenses have 10
employees or more.
As Matt Kennicott mentioned,
states that have tried to
mandate similar LPAs as a
requisite for cannabis license
licensure have been met with
lawsuits on both constitutional
grounds and based on a US
Supreme Court decision.
Other states like New Jersey and
Virginia have taken approaches
to incentivize larger cannabis
operators to engage and reach
agreements with unions, so we
know that there are other
avenues to explore. Our industry
is not against labor, but the
scope and timing of this bill
would potentially hurt small and
medium sized cannabis businesses
that are bare barely staying
afloat in the current market.
We urged the sponsors to work
with the cannabis industry to
determine a path forward that
will protect workers' rights
without hurting the homegrown
cannabis operators that the
state should be looking to
support and safeguard.
Thank you.
All right.
Um, those in favor that are on
Zoom.
Raise your hand, please, if you
are in favor of House Bill 331,
and if you are on Zoom.
There are none in favor on Zoom.
So now we will go to the
audience, and if you would, if
you're here to speak in
opposition, please raise your
hand.
In opposition. All right, if you
would step please to the mic,
and the mic will be held for
you.
Thank you.
Of the committee, I didn't want
to speak. I am in opposition of
this bill now. My name is Gloria
Doherty.
Thank you. Those in the audience
that are here to speak in favor,
will you raise your hand?
Right. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Andrew
Palmer. I'm secretary treasurer
of Teamsters Local 492.
We represent 2800.
Warehouse workers as well as
drivers throughout the state of
New Mexico. We stand in support
of this bill. We believe it
would.
create an environment of harmony
between both.
The owners of the owners'
business owners as well as the
labor organizations during the
organizing process.
So we asked for your support.
Thank you.
Thank you. Any others?
All right, thank you. So now
we're going to committee and
first on the list is
Representative Ree.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative, um,
My concern is the legal issues
here, um, and the research that
I've done that seems to say
that.
As I think some people have
actually preempt on point on
that and then required labor
peace agreements.
closer?
closer? OK. Is that better? And
there are other states that have
uh attempted to require landnius
license, and there are lots of
lawsuits now challenging that.
So, um, Madam Chair and
Representative, could you
address the, the legal issues
with the federal law and then.
The concern that we might be
just.
Having all kinds of law.
Um, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Representative Reed,
um, the concern I think that
you're probably expressing is
federal preemption under Garin,
um, preemption. There are
various forms of preemption
under national labor Relations
Act, however, for example, there
have been lawsuits in Oregon
against another.
The captive audience bills that
have not gone anywhere. There
are currently
To my count, 9 states that have
something akin to this bill. I
don't want to suggest that they
are all the same. Some of them
are fairly identical in that
they mandate it. Others are um.
Give you points on your uh
license your application if you
have them. There have only been
to my knowledge, 2 lawsuits, um,
none of which are, they're
currently.
Um,
haven't, uh, processed very
much. Um, one of the states, uh,
by the way, Oregon, it's law
came into effect only recently
in November, pursuant to um
It was a voter initiative that
actually it was uh elected with
57% of the vote, um, in the
state of the citizens of the
state as opposed to through the
legislative process, um, but in
my opinion, there is room for
state regulation of, of labor. I
mean, we're here, we do some
very much so, um, for example,
minimum wage laws, that sort of
thing, regulate subjects of
collective bargaining but are
not preempted. Um, so while
there's certainly a
I mean, I'm someone could file a
lawsuit. Um, it is probably in
my estimation, it is not.
preempted and also the uh
7 other states that haven't even
faced lawsuits suggest that as
well.
And so, Madam Chair and
represented experts. So, um, how
do you address the, the federal
lawsuit that the building and
construction trade counts and
how the min preemption doctrine,
there are two preemption
doctrines under federal law.
That's the Garment preemption
one. but like I said, it does
recognize that there are areas
of state regulation of labor,
even though there is a national
Labor Relations Act, and this in
my estimation would be one of
those areas in which the state
is permitted to engage in
limited re
of labor relations.
Right, and Madam Chair, and
representatives, so.
To me, this bill doesn't really
do anything to really materially
improve working condition
workers. Are we having issues
with it or?
Um, why to me, Madam Chair
Representative, I think we're
just gonna be opening up
lawsuits and
Yes, why, why, uh.
Well, why is, why now? Why are
we trying to do this now? Is
there issues etc. um, so it was
already at the uh the intent of
the original legislation. This
was actually, um, as proposed in
2021. Um, we struck it because
we wanted to make sure that
there was a balance between the
interest of what labors, um,
organizing principles were along
with this 200 page bill that,
um, legalized, um, recreational,
um, and medicinal cannabis
further. So we're really
intention
about how we thought that
through, understanding that as a
new industry, we certainly want
them to be proactive about
certain things, including um how
labor, uh, relations take place.
So this timing on this is
actually well timed, having had
a few years, um, to understand
what the industry is doing and
certainly to provide the
opportunity, um, for these peace
agreements to be in place. Um,
we think it's a, as a principle
of, of organization within
employees and employers that
Um, we should try to bring them
together in every context, um,
in which case this just helps us
promote that in a in a budding
industry within and so I guess.
Why
Why not apply this then to
alcohol or any other thing, why
now cannabis um to me it seems
like we're just kind of, you
know, a little concerning. Why
not alcohol? Why cannabis? Uh,
thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, representative. Again, this
is on principle, something that,
um, with the is still up and
coming um for our state. We're
looking at every opportunity to
try to create that environment
for industry still, um, to have
that, that footing, um, that we
think
is appropriate when it comes to
um labor peace agreements for
this account. And again, we're
not asking them, um, to do
anything uh permanently we're
just asking them to put these
agreements into place as that
You
Next we have Representative
Hall.
Madam Chair, Representative
legal expert, um.
I noticed on
If I'm reading this right, page
deuce, page 2, sections D and E.
Um
that you had mentioned in the
opening that it takes a minimum
of 10 employees.
Under this legislation, this
would prevent a business from
being licensed.
If they refuse.
A business with 10 or more
employees, yes.
Oh sorry, Madam Chair, members
of the committee.
Madam Chair, and Representative
and expert, so.
In a burgeoning industry or one.
Obviously, the state has made a
decision to
Legalizing and would like to
see.
If we are
Inhibiting growth, a business to
Get an LPA isn't that?
Somewhat counterintuitive.
Um, Madam chair uh
representative Hall this in a
way inhibits the industry. In
fact, it encourages um.
Excuse me, discourages uh
interruptions to the industry.
For example, if you take a look
on page
3, section G, which provides the
contents of these labor
agreements, the major thing is
that the labor organization has
to agree not to engage in
picketing work stoppages,
boycotts, or any other economic
interference.
With the cannabis
establishment's business. That
is a big thing, um, if absent a
labor peace agreement if
organizing gets rough.
That's when you have pickets,
that's when you have strikes,
that's when you have work
stoppages. That's when it's
really disruptive to the
industry. So this labor peace
idea is meant to prevent what
can otherwise be uh disruptions
um to a new and burgeoning
industry.
OK, madam Chair, so, and
Representative expert.
I'm just
with small businesses trying to
grow and then you bring in this,
the, the
Have to agree that they will
allow this.
And then, but my understanding
is the individual employees do
not have to.
Joined the labor union, is that,
is that?
If all that is, I'm sorry, man
manager Representative Hall,
yes, that is correct. This is
simply an agreement between the
labor organization and the
employer to engage in a
respectful and peaceful process
during the organizing campaign.
There still needs to be a
Uh representation process under
the National Labor Relations Act
administered by the National
Labor Relations Board for an
election to determine if a
majority of the employees in the
bargaining unit.
Uh support being represented by
a union or not, and that nothing
in this interferes in any way
with that requirement.
Madam Chair, representative
legal expert, how did we reach
Um, the
The number if if someone, if you
can answer that, ma'am. Uh,
thank you, Madam Chair. Um, as
we were drafting this, we
wanted, we talked to folks in
the industry and just we wanted
to hear from them, you know,
what is the impact to your
business. We consulted with um
economic development department
as well as to the threshold that
they have um for other labor
peace agreements that have been
put into place, and the small
business threshold for New
Mexico, um, that they saw what
it would be an undue burden
would be um up to 10.
employee, employees. That's why
the threshold starts at 10 and
above. Um, so we consulted with
them and a number of folks, um,
you know, at a certain point, we
thought, did this apply to
everybody? And that's
Madam Chair, representative uh
legal expert. How many
Just so I can kind of get my
head around. How many cannabis
businesses in the state of New
Mexico have 10 or more.
Employees, do we know that,
Madam Chair?
We do know that. I just have to
pull up the data to, to figure
that out. Um, we do take
collect, um, a number of uh data
pieces that are available
website.
Um, which
And
Madam Chair, Representative and
legal expert.
This is just for my personal
clarification. I'm not organized
labor works.
Does this cost when, when
At the 10 or more point in the
business has to sign.
Um
That they're at that point.
Does it cost them?
The the
Um
Organized labor to come in.
And
Um
Do their thing for lack of it
it's not a very good way of
putting it, but does that, am I,
is that makes sense, um, Madam
Chair, Representative, I think
you, I think I understand the
question and the answer is there
is no upfront cost, it just
requires that they provide
access at reasonable times to
the employees. Um, so that could
be.
Shift breaks, you know, lunch
breaks, that sort of thing. So
and there's certainly not an
upfront cost because like I
said, these labor peace
agreements are not collective
bargaining agreements. They are
not setting the terms and
conditions of employment of the
employees that would only come
if the employees.
Elect to um have a union
represent them and then engage
in the collective bargaining
process.
So Madam Chair, so if they meet
at lunch or whatever, that's
Completely if a labor
representative is gonna be,
let's say we're having lunch
together. We're all having lunch
and you all come in.
Um, it's purely an option if we
want to listen to.
Madam Chair Representative Hall,
that's correct. Again, if you
look at section G1 on page 3 of
the act.
It requires that they not
disrupt efforts to communicate
with the employees and to
provide reasonable access to the
employees. Nothing in this
requires that they force the
employees to listen to the labor
organizer uh to the labor
organization. It's just that
they can't disrupt the
organization organizing efforts.
Thank you. That's all I have for
now, ma'am.
Representative, next we have
Representative Therasas. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you Representative, um.
A couple things I, I'm gonna
start out with.
I mean
So I got to understand that, so.
This basically, Madam Chair
Representative is, is a, an
agreement so that
The visits themselves cannot.
Directly
dispute or concerns directly
with their employees.
You want to take that away and
you want them only to go through
a union.
Or an organization. Can you
explain that to me so I can
understand this better.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative
Tarassus, that's incorrect. Um,
if you look at section G1, it
sets forth again the
requirements of the labor peace
agreement. It's simply that they
cannot disrupt efforts of the
labor organization to
communicate.
An attempt to organize the
employees, and they have to
provide access at reasonable
times. That is the only
requirements. It isn't setting
forth any form of requirement
that they can't communicate with
their employees directly or
anything like that. Now, under
sort of black letter labor law,
if there is a labor organization
that has been certified, which
again is several steps removed
from the labor peace agreement.
Um, then they are expected to
negotiate with that organization
rather than directly with the.
OK, so, um, Madam Chair
represents what you're saying is
I
That
This just gives access to the
union to step into your
business.
And have me, you know, have
these gatherings or meetings or
conversations with employees.
And just basically they have to
open the doors to you guys, make
that happen, uh, if they have 10
or more employees.
Madam Chair, Representative Tim
Ras says, yes, they have to, and
I'll quote from the, the
statute, provide access at
reasonable times for the labor
organization to meet with
employees to discuss the right
to representation.
Employment rights under state
law and terms and conditions of
employment.
And Madam Chair Representative,
why did you feel that we needed
to do this?
What, what caused this?
This legislation, you feel that
it is very important and why
only this industry?
And why wouldn't it be?
If this happens here, why can't
it happen in other industries.
Uh, and, you know, I, I think
this opens a, a can of worms,
but.
Let you answer that?
Oh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative.
Again, um, to encourage, I think
the practice of employees
engaging with them to create in
an environment, being that we
about 3 years ago for
recreational purposes, being
that it's a brand new industry.
We'd like to encourage this
practice, uh, within the
industry, it was in the original
legislation, um, we wanted to
get it right, and we see the
industry moving forward, what's
happening. We feel that the
timing is right for something
like this, um, having the
opportunity to organize is not
just limited to cannabis. We see
this in a number of the building
trades, we see it, um, across,
you know.
Numerous industries and we see
national news about this almost,
but this establishes, is that
right?
Um, and ensures that folks feel
um safe in having that
conversation with I'm sure,
but right now collective bargain
bargaining to my understanding,
can't be they can't.
Stop it as it is, it's basically
just takes.
The employees are a petition and
then join the, the union that
you want. Does that sound
accurate?
To my knowledge, uh.
Madam Chair Representative, what
this provides is that when we,
when we see stoppages or
boycotts or other economic
interference where you see
workers in agreement about that.
This is what that prevents. So
it, it establishes the
opportunity to ensure that they
can have a dialogue without that
interference, without that
disruption. Um, so it actually
prevents any problems, um, for
to take place. It doesn't
require that you have
negotiations. It doesn't require
that you unionize it merely puts
in.
So Madam Chair Representative, I
think, I think, I mean, I.
I, I, you know, it probably
happened when you, when you put
in the bill, they're like, this
is too much, and they didn't
accept it, obviously, that's why
it happened in 21, so it works,
Ward Smith did or whatever
between now and then and but I
anyway, my, my, I think my
problem is, is, I think that
already happens organically in a
business. And, and you know, I
think we, we tend to hear this,
it's always, you know, um, that
businesses aren't taking care of
their employees, and I think
there's a lot of employees,
employers that do.
Um
I think um when we do this.
Legislation like this is just
wipes across the board, says
everybody that has this has to
do this now.
I think that already happens
organically and I don't, I don't
really like.
When we government gets in and
starts saying, you have to do
this.
Um, now I'll go a little
further. It says my under from
my understanding is.
It uh preempt state laws on
peace agreements.
Um
I think there's legal precedents
that directly points uh on, on
point.
Holding that the states cannot
require private businesses to
enter into peace.
Labor peace agreements. Do you
know anything about that, Madam
Chair Representative?
Madam Chair Representatives, we
addressed that with
Representative Reed. There is
some preemption of state laws as
it relates to labor relations.
In my opinion, this is not one
of those areas.
So, um,
I think it, I think Madam Chair,
I think this.
Interrupts that and I think in a
in a.
Oh, I'm an employer, so I know.
What we're dealing with when it
comes to um.
Labor participation rates, OK?
And
It happens organically because
you, as a, if you're a good
employer.
Somebody's always trying to take
your employees if you're not
taking care of them.
So if you're not paying them
well, you're not working with
them with their schedule, if
you're not, uh, if you're not
meeting the, the, the needs of
your, of your employees.
And that sometimes is money,
sometimes that's time, sometimes
it's a combination. It, it, it's
not just one thing.
And what works for one employee
doesn't necessarily work for the
next employee.
I've got, I've got my share of
employees and have had many
employees.
One of those guys that haven't
fired very many people because I
work with them and I always try
to.
Um
Get them to, I, I, I don't lose
hope in them and I try to work
with them to find what is their,
their strengths and what are
their weaknesses and I try to
place people that way. But I
think, I think when we have
Legislation like this that
interrupts that.
That communication and forces.
Third parties to come in.
Is, is dangerous.
Um, in that.
You lose that one on one knowing
your employee.
I know my employees, I know
their kids, I know their, their
spouses. I mean, they come to my
house. We go to their birthday
parties. I mean, we, we run our
business like many other small
businesses in, in New Mexico and
America, like a family. That's a
working family and we're with
them sometimes more than our own
family.
Um, and so, you know, I, I was,
I was, um.
Looking that, uh, looking at
this in, in another aspect
because I saw that there was in
in Oregon there.
They're in a lawsuit similar to
this and, and their position is
that um.
That basically not even the, the
these types of agreements kind
of force where employees don't,
don't even get a choice, and
You know, they're just find
themselves caught into the, in,
I'm just reading what this is
not, this may not be exactly
your legislation. Uh, I'm just
kind of expressing what I, what
I read here. Um, and so,
It, it just, it just goes
through here and, and I was
reading this article and it says
that
Um
Licensees found that it's
It's uh the lawsuit was
basically the provision, uh,
mandating cannabis licenses to
contact a bona fide labor
modified labor organization
under a peace agreement in order
for them to give you the
license.
And, and so they're, they're
struggling with that.
And as you go along here and you
read, it says uh.
Um, if the bona fide labor
organization and licensee cannot
agree to the terms, lawsuit
claims that the licensees,
including the payments are left
out without choice, bargaining
power in order to renew their
their licenses. And so it just
causes a lot of, uh, you know,
in my opinion, you've seen other
states that have had similar
legislation that is now stifled,
um, if, it further goes to say,
it fails to recognize the
employee's right to choose.
Or not
They're, they're actual union
representation on their own.
While commanding the licenses to
enter into these mining
agreements.
Um, and so in pro um, anyway,
that's, that's where it goes,
it's, let's see here, what else?
I, I don't want to burn us with
every little detail in here,
but, you know, I think, I think
it, it really interrupts their
ability to have that one on one,
communication with their
employees. I think.
It almost implies to me that
that.
This is like putting your toe in
the, in the door to try to
Create more um.
Union membership.
Um, and you know it, it's, this
is what this is, I mean, um, you
guys, you know, unions are
losing members. It seems like
this, this, this, um, from what
I, what I've seen some, they're
losing some of their
memberships. It seems like
we're, we're, we're trying to
Leaned toward Madam Chair
Representative, we're giving
them an advantage and, and, and
breaking into business. I think
what scares me about this is
where will it stop? Um.
Can it, can it, Madam Chair,
Representative starts at 10 and
maybe it gets, you know, um,
Down the road or next year or a
couple of years from now.
Reduce that to 0 or to 5.
Um, I'm, I'm afraid that.
Let me just finish that way I'm
not, I don't make it long and
I'm trying to get, OK, no, it's
OK. And so, Madam Chair
Representative, I think what,
what happens is when we um we do
this, it just
It just stifles the, the organic
process of how business is
supposed to be done and um.
I think it can be changed in the
future. I mean, those people
that are agreeing to temp tempt
people today may find that in a
couple of years, it goes down to
5 or 0, and, and so I just, I
just have those, those.
Um
Issues with it.
The last issue I have is if they
do it for this industry.
We come 2 years later and let's
do it in another industry, and
the student in another industry,
and I don't think, and that's
what you're not even, that's
your plan. I, I mean, that's
what you're doing. You're not in
yes exactly. So anyway, um, so,
I mean, that seems to me like
you're putting your
foot in the door and you toe
maybe your little toe, but just
saying, just a little bit, and
then we end up doing each sector
this way, and that's scary, uh.
To me that we're forced to do
that when, when in the process
is very simple, Madam Chair
Representative. It's a, it's a
petition.
They'll sign, they can become a
member of, of an organization to
represent them. Thank you, Madam
Chair Representative.
Thank you, Representative. Are
there any other uh questions
from the committee?
All right, so what's the wish of
the committee?
Adam Cha I'll move it to.
Thank you. There's a motion, do
pass motion by representative
Ana and seconded by
Representative Chair Ortez and
we'll do um.
Representative Anaya, yes.
Representative Garcia.
Yes.
Representative Hall.
Representative Johnson.
Yeah.
Representative Mejia.
No.
Representative Ortiz, yes.
Representative Ree. No.
Representative Trazas ma'am.
Representative Torres Velasquez,
yes.
Vice Chair Chavez.
Chairwoman Roy Caballero.
Thank you, Representative, you
have 6 to 4. Thank you very
much.
So next.
We have
House Bill 337.
Yeah, nice to see you,
Representative Herndon. You may
begin at any time.
So the pleasure to be here with
you to introduce you
to House Bill 337. House Bill
337 creates a healthcare
whistleblower Protection Act
with the intent of protecting
any whistleblower.
From retaliatory actions by
healthcare entities when the
whistleblower acted in good
faith, reports wrongdoing.
And and Madam Chair, members of
the committee, I do have an
expert with me today. Her name
is Mary Felblum, and I will have
her introduce herself now.
Good afternoon, former academic.
Um with the health security for
all too many decades largest
coalition in the history members
from around the state,
representing them, I
participate.
Russ
is the consolidation bill.
They added a section on
whistleblower.
So
it.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
So we will go now to um the zoom
and I asked uh, going to the
audience, anyone here who wishes
to speak in opposition?
All right
So you may come forward and the
mic will be held for you.
Good afternoon. Sorry, thank
you. Sorry, good afternoon,
Madam Chair, I didn't mean to
yell into your bike. Uh, my name
is Al Parker. I'm the registered
lobbyist on behalf of the
hospital association. Thank you
for the opportunity to visit
with you briefly this afternoon.
Um, we spoke last night, I think
it is, with Representative
Herndon, and we stand, we
understand what the intent of
the legislation is, but, but
there are some really important
issues. Some technical and some
are policy, and I want to try to
address them briefly. Um, one of
the technical
issues, Your Honor. Sorry, I'm
in court a lot, so uh Madam
Chair, is that we think that the
definition of unlawful or
improper acts is overly broad,
it needs to be tightened up, uh,
in addition, Your Honor, we
believe that it is problematic,
the inclusion of patients and
consumers into the definition of
whistleblower. That's entirely
unnecessary, Madam Chair. Uh,
patients are already protected
either one, they can make
complaints.
through the medical board, the
nursing board, or if they would
like, they can make complaints
by filing a lawsuit under the
medical malpractice.
Um, statute in addition, uh,
Madam Chair, uh, currently the
bill as drafted as a prohibition
that if a complaint is made by a
patient against a provider,
it's, it prohibits the provider
and the patient from no longer
being a relationship, and
sometimes when you're in a
doctor-patient relationship, if
it becomes so frayed that you
don't trust one another, this
law would mandate that you
actually still have to continue
to provide.
care, and I think that is
inappropriate and that I think
would be actually detrimental to
the provision of care for the
patients, we believe, uh, Madam
Chair, and I'm trying to go
super quick. 2 more last points,
which is that we think the
confidentiality exception needs
work, needs definition, and
finally, and then I'll stop
after this, Your Honor. The
definition of health care
provider, uh, in the proposed
bill is not the same as the
definition of health care
provider in the healthcare code.
Is there anyone else in
opposition?
All right. Um, may I see who is
here in favor, who would like to
speak.
All right. So if you could just
line up in the uh mic will be
held for you. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Naomi
Valdez. I'm a registered
lobbyist for the New Mexico
Trial Layers Association. Uh, we
stand here today in strong
support of this legislation. We
feel that it's in very much in
line with patient and consumer
protections under the law. And
as New Mexico works to become a
more uh uh a state that attracts
high quality providers, uh,
under a national provider
shortage. We want to be sure
that those folks are also
protected in providing the type
of care that they
fit for New Mexico's patients.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Gloria
Doherty. I am here on behalf of
the New Mexico Nursing
Association and the new Mc
organization stand in strong
support of health Bill 337, and
we hope that you support it.
Hello, Madam Chair, members
Committee. Thank you for
allowing this comment. I'm
Doctor Rick Madden, a family
physician, rural family
physician, now retired.
And I stand in support as a
primary care physician, because
I think we need this to help
organizations get better and
serve the needs of their
patients.
Good afternoon. I'm Dana
Middleton from the National
Organization for Women chapter
here in Santa Fe. Thank you all
for being here. Um, we stand in
support of this and think it's
not only, you know, freedom of
speech, but to people to have
that kind of protection would be
very important.
Right.
Thank you.
Seeing no others, and we go to
um committee, anyone have
questions?
Representative
Madam Chair,
Representative expert, um.
Why do we need this?
And thank you, Madam Chair, uh,
Paul.
It's needed to make do report
violations as they see them, do
have some protection so that if
indeed um they report something
that no discriminatory actions
or other actions can be brought
against them simply because they
raised their voices for
something wrong that they saw
happening within a health.
Madam Chair Representative and
expert, don't we already have
Protections for people if they
come or heard a representing for
the trial lawyers.
Come out if you complain about
the physician or the service you
got.
Is there something not and I'm
genuinely asking. I don't know,
I sure.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Representative
Paul, what's in place right now
is the provision that protect
employers in that type of
setting. So that in a public
employer cannot uh discriminate
against a public employee. So
you're right, you could go with
respect to other individuals,
they could go to court, they
could file a lawsuit they could
uh file against the uh medical
malpractice, I mean, the medical
board against someone, but in
this particular instance, we're
talking about
Allatory actions against an
individual, and we're trying to
prevent those from happening,
simply because I go and I file a
lawsuit or I file a complaint
with the medical board does not
protect me against a, a
retaliatory action. What it does
do is allow me to file a claim
with respect to the, with the
violation that I saw that is
being presented, but it doesn't
protect me in the re
And in reading through this,
does this affect
It
Every hospital in the state, but
state-owned hospitals.
So, um, Madam Chair, members of
the committee, Representative
Hall.
What we focused on here were
large uh hospital entities that
are involved, we specifically
excluded smaller entities, you
would see nursing homes, other
smaller entities, right away,
but more than likely what we are
facing are individuals in a
larger hospital situation that
does have more authority and
power to create a discriminatory
action against an individual. So
those are the individuals that
we're looking at initially, we
can
come back later and, and amend
the bill at some other time, but
right now those are the people
who need to be protected in the
environment in which they need
to be protected. And I want to
make sure that I'm leaving room
for my expert to provide
information, but I wanted to
make sure that people understood
the bigger picture and
understood why this piece of
legislation was so incredibly.
Thank you Madam.
Do we know of any within the
state of New Mexico where
there's been retaliatory.
Action. OK, Madam Chair
Representative, um.
There was a recently a big
scandal and memorial in Las
Cruces. There were 13 patients
and they were their physicians,
uh, requested that they get
treatment at Memorial.
And they were denied for reasons
that they were, they had
insurance.
That the insurance wasn't paying
enough.
And the attorney General got
involved. He went down there. He
talked to the, he's
investigating. He may shoot.
Um, but what really also shocked
him was he talked to the staff.
And the staff was really
terrorized about talking to him
about some of the wrongdoing
that's going in that hospital.
Um, the problem is, and this is
B is a social scientist, as the
studies that I've seen with the
growth of.
Um, the corporatization, private
equity companies and chains that
are taking over our hospitals,
um, there is not only an
increase in price with those
mergers and acquisitions, but
there's also deterioration of
patient care.
There's the studies are clear
and uh and more and more states
are looking at, I, I just did um
the Congress just did an
analysis of.
whistleblower protection bills,
not just healthcare, but other
types of wisdom, OSHA, you know,
other kinds of things. And I
noticed that 31 states had
specifically healthcare,
whistleblower protection, and my
family comes from Texas and
Texas has a whistleblower
protection bill. So it's, it's
not just a, a liberal
California, they're also
conservative states, uh, Senator
Grassley from Iowa is very
concerned.
About what's going on and talks
about how poor profit.
You, Madam Chair, so I'm from
San Juan County.
A community hospital, but under
this bill would affect.
My understanding again and and
may have been asked and
answered.
This is going to affect my
hospital in San Juan County.
As well as any other.
In the hospitals, not that the
representative addressed earlier
but our hospitals.
This called Madam Chair.
So
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Representative Hall,
will affect them as long as
there's no mouthpiece that's
going on, no gross
mismanagement, no waste of
funds, none of the items, no
misrepresentation or abuse of
authority. It wouldn't affect
them if uh none of those things
were happening. But the fact you
just raised a very important
issue. If you're San Juan
Hospital is the only hospital
that's present in the area and
it's engaging in these items and
there was a, an issue raised
with respect to some of the
items I just mentioned.
And then that hospital
retaliated, so we don't want
that to happen. We want to make
sure people are protected. So
that's what we're looking at.
Thank you and then just last
comment my.
My concern is, of course.
We're the only big hospitals in
Albuquerque or flying to
Phoenix, Salt Lake City, and I
understand protecting people. I
just want.
Somewhere along the way we're
not further impeding the
hospitals. We're already losing
doctors to.
Are
Legal processes that we have
here and the ability to sue,
we're losing doctors every day
up there.
And it just, I just wanna make
sure this doesn't.
Representative next. Thank you,
Madam Chair, Representative of.
I'm trying to work my way
through this out, so just so I'm
understanding, it would, it
would apply to those hospitals
to make sure I'm talking about
the right. So, Madam Chair
Representative, uh, I mean, the
members of the committee,
Representative Reed, Remember
what we're looking at is we are
looking to protect them. So when
you said it's applying to doing,
there's nothing that's going to
apply to them. But what we do
want to make sure is that we
have the highest level standard
of care for everyone, and if you
are not obey not providing that
high level of care.
you're providing some gross
mismanagement just because
you're in a small area doesn't
exclude you. We want you still
to provide that high level of
care for those individuals who
would be involved in receiving
it.
And, OK, thank you, um, Madam
Chair for the question of, I, I
understand what you're you are,
you're in this stew. So I, I'm
trying to look at the idea of.
In.
So, let's say,
I'm also struggling with why is
the patient
Thank you, Madam Chair, members.
So what this does, this piece of
legislation, it broadens the
federal legislation that already
is in existence, which remember
only applies to public employees
and public employers. So what
this does is this looks at what
if I'm a smaller person? What if
I'm the janitor, uh, who is
coming in on a voluntary basis,
but I'm seeing that you are not,
for example, uh, you're doing
something that is not um
Up to par, something that would
involve gross mismanagement,
something that would involve
waste or malfeasance with
respect to employees. I mean,
uh, patients, and I report that
under the original statute, it
doesn't apply, but under this
statute, what rituals? And if I
do indeed report that and I am
one of those people, and you
don't retaliate against me and
fire me because I reported it.
So that's what this does. It
doesn't do anything other than
to protect individuals who see
things that are not right.
And they report them and it
protects them from retaliation
and discrimination.
OK, Madam that's the consumer,
right? Is that how you're the
janitor situation, I'm sure.
Trying to get the definitions
understood first right so we
should go back to the, we should
go back to the to the statue
itself. And if we look at those
who are uh uh who are um
Who this statute applies to is
specifically uh details,
individuals, and I don't think
the word consumer was used
except in a bigger broader.
Yes, madam, Madam Chair,
representative.
refer to the pages and lines
that you're referring to. Thank
you. So I'm looking, Madam Chair
and represent on page 5 or so
that's where I'm seeing consumer
and patient, so I wanted to
first understand what the
consumer was, Madam Chair, tell
me that, as it could be the
janitor who witnesses something.
Was that what you were referring
to as far as the consumer,
madam. You just point out it's
page 5
and 23. Yes.
Uh, Representative Reed Texas
that includes their guardians,
their families, um, and the, the
term consumer, some third
parties is sometimes used, but
that's not included in here. The
idea is that um people in
hospitals, not just the janitors
and the healthcare may
experience things that they in
good faith, because that's very
important and to be able to
concept
Again, we're including patient
and I think.
Man what and representative.
Why are they included in in
this. I'm assuming I know, but I
just want to ask you, Madam
Chair Representative Reed, um,
family and um.
That is, it's, it's um it's
interesting that several states
have broadened.
They're whistleblower
protections to more than
hospital employees.
The remedy.
Right, so the remedies are
different.
But, um, but it is very
important, um, and in fact I was
in the.
hospitals um chair and.
And representative and
Let's say I'm a patient, let's
say, how's that affect the
relationship, Madam Chair, and
between the doc or the, yeah,
the doctor and the patient and
so we're.
I would assume that relationship
would have to end and where we
get the care they needed. I
don't know.
Let's just take Presbyterians,
they have little clinics here
and there. So then that
relationship severed.
And I'm worried about aspect of
it. Am I gonna be require
Amarillo to find a new doc. I
have a doctor's in my town
because they've all been pretty
much chased out of the general
might have a clinic and, and
they're just, they, there might
be one. So how would you
anticipate or just that
continued
So Madam Chair, members of the
committee the situation that
we're trying to protect. If I am
Madam Chair, if I am the person
who's complaining because that's
the only hospital in the area.
It doesn't mean I need to now go
to Lubbock. I should still be
going to the same hospital. You
should not be retaliating
against me because I have
described something that was
perceived and reported as
something that was either
malfeasance, gross management,
gross mismanagement, a wasteful,
a misrepresentation of the way.
in which, uh, services were to
be presented. So you have just
described exactly what this
piece of legislation protects.
Why should that employ, why
should that patient now have to
still be there because if they
don't,
then you got a chair and I that
I'm sure representative I
understand is the hospital gonna
make sure to it Albuquerque's
Presbyter or I mean, I'm, I'm
concerned about the patient, you
know, just because there aren't,
I understand what you're saying.
Yeah, that should be reported.
But then, then do I go if I'm,
let's say there's lovis, which
there, I think there might just
be one area.
And my OBG where do I go as the
adequate care and, and how does
that work if I may step in
because I've heard you phrase
it.
And asked the question a couple
of times and.
Um, it's been answered, but I'm,
I'm trying to see if I can help
out,
so.
I understand that you don't have
to go in this bill offers you
the protection.
Um
From any retaliation, so you
shouldn't have to be, if you
were involved in a complaint.
And patient, they're in the
hospital.
that nothing should happen to
you with the enactment of this
particular legislation. You're
protected.
If you or your family.
Opted or chose to file a
complaint because of whatever
you deemed was um done to you in
whatever fashion this this bill
will protect you from any
retaliation, which then means
you can remain as a patient. You
shouldn't be affected by any
retaliation, and if you were,
then there's recourses for you
and this protection Act. So I
don't know if that helped
clarify, but I was trying to
hear.
How it
What the difficulty in
understanding, but anyway, if
you'd like to further um
Thank you, Madam Chair. I, I
think I understand what you're
saying. I guess my concern is I
have to go, and I understand
they would, you know, it
wouldn't be mine, but.
I really would have like the
point I think I'm making is that
it um it could inter
Anaya, did you have a point?
So that,
yeah, well, the process that you
Difficult situation where the
doctor did them, but under this,
to that and I'm assuming Madam
Chair Representative, if, if I'm
the patient or I'm not gonna
want to be with that doctor
anymore. So whether they know or
don't know is kind of somewhat
irrelevant to me, um, and I
understand what this bill is
trying to do, Madam Chair, on
the confidentiality part.
But that, that part concerns me
too because
I mean, who's obligated to keep
this.
from whom?
Um, so how does that work when
you're
My understanding, your name is
out there, no one can retaliate
against you, um, but yet it
gives the other party a chance
backwards to me as far as uh
representative Anaya stated.
I wouldn't want to stay with
that myself. Uh, I wouldn't want
to retaliate against him, but
I'd want.
That
That protection can't even seem
to investigate.
Uh, thank you, um, Madam Chair,
members of the committee,
Representative Reed.
If we look at this was one that
we're describing here, where
confidentiality is key.
With the reporting go to, it
would be maybe to the head of
the hospital, maybe it would be
to the medical board, but
whomever wants this uh bill
passes, the confidentiality of
whoever receives the information
has to be protected. And so it
doesn't mean that you can't do
an investigation. That doesn't
mean that both parties that the
person or whomever is doing the
investigation can't listen to
both sides and make a
determination. That doesn't mean
that at all. So this through
rulemaking, determining exactly
how that would be set out. It
would be put in very specific uh
items in terms of, in terms of
how those uh types of
investigations would occur.
Those don't need to be put in
statute, but this statue has
been broad enough so that they
can be madam to be written out
with more.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Representative Reed.
Under this particular statue,
the, the information can be
given to any authority. It could
be given to as the head of the
hospital. It can be given to the
Attorney General. It can be
given to the head of the medical
board, someone who would be
receiving information that would
be overall responsible for
healthcare within the state. All
of those would be responsible
and as indicated, I do believe
that this was written and we, it
was written with respect of the
broadness for which a uh
specificity of rule.
making can detail exactly how
that would go into place. I
don't think it would be a
mystery, and I do think it would
be well known. But what's also
what's gonna happen is that
this, this law, once it is
enacted, will be placed in every
single medical for something
that is incorrect or wrong, and
they do have the ability to
Madam Chair.
All right, thank you
Representative. Next on the list
is.
Thank you, ma'am. Thank you.
Representative, um, I also have
some issues and, and I know what
you're trying to do. I, I think
we're all trying to find how we
can have more access for our
patients. I get the, the idea
and protect them and all that.
I also know that when we live in
a small town.
Everybody knows everything about
everybody. It's very hard to
hide things, but
Um
And I think this, we'll start
out with, do you think I, I
believe that this will affect my
My, uh, Ga Regional Medical
Center in Silver City.
Yes, no.
I'm sure a representative.
Madam Chair, uh, members of the
committee, representatives,
Raus, maybe you should explain
how you think you would be, I
mean with this legislation.
Um, cover my hospital with my.
Let me rephrase this. Madam
Chair Representative with my
hospital, the hospitals in my
district fall in the category
that would need.
This leg that would fall into
complying with this legislation
if it passed.
So, Madam Chair,
misrepresentation of these
hospitals because we want a high
level of, of care and Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
we have retaliation. Thank you,
Madam Chair. So the answer is
yes. So the last question is, or
not last in this section. Uh,
quick question. I'm just
teasing. Quick question, man.
I'm your representative, you
know, I think I, I'm trying to
wrap my mind around the
confidentiality part of this. So
you go in your report.
who in that process.
Has to keep it confidential,
because at some point, it's got
to be reported somewhere and
then
How do they address
That and who, you know, at some
point something, the information
has to go to the next step or
whatever. How does that process
work?
So, Madam Chair, members of the
committee represented Terazos
right now, and they don't, they
are reporting it. They can be
kept confident and to whom it's
reported is to weigh what
they're seeing and to, to
determine if something needs is
focused on preventing
retaliation against any bad or
malfeasance or wrongdoing. So
yes, it's really, it happens
right now all the time in terms
of keeping things confidential
and with uh this who engaged in
the.
activity.
Thank you. I, I just wanted to
understand that and I know
that's probably gonna be.
figured out in rules and all
that because they, they have to
stay within cer certain
employees.
are going to be able to disclose
that to.
A particular person or entity or
whatever, and because if I tell
Bill, Bill tells then it just,
it defeats the purpose. So Madam
Chair Representative, the, the,
and, and here's the thing is it
kind of duplicates what, you
know, the medical, uh, Medicaid
false Claims Act and the Federal
False Claims Act of, you know,
this is kind of a duplicate.
Um, I'm sure representative, I
think.
We
Well I have a problem with this
is that this opens up the
language opens up, litigation.
Um
Litigation possibilities of
litigation.
Um
In in some ways because of the
way it's structured, um, and
I'll explain that here in a
minute.
And, and I, and what worries me,
Madam Chair Representative, is a
lot of our hospitals are hanging
by a thread.
And if we aren't careful and we
open ourselves.
To
The to more liability.
And more litigation. It just
costs more and it's just gonna
hurt us in the long run.
And I think the reason I'm
saying that is, is, is like I
have conflict with.
If you, you, you go to your
doctor and you complain about
him.
And, and you still
And let me tell you, I mean.
Let me back up here a little bit
and explain. I, I had a, a, an
individual who complained one
time about one of my employees,
super good employee.
And it was a strange.
There was a strange, uh, um,
complaint, and I'm chair
representative, and I thought
it's out of character for him to
act that way.
So I called the person and I
said, and this to this point,
OK? And so I called the person,
I said, how can I help you? I
understand you have some, you
know, some questions, some
issues. How may I help you? And
she starts to go on and.
Explain things and, you know,
She was, she says he did this,
this, this, and I was like, wow.
So you know what, uh, ma'am, I
said, the nice thing is in that
room, we, we have cameras and
it's got sound and all that.
I'll review the.
Uh, the video.
As soon as I said that, Madam
Chair represented, then the
story changed. Well, maybe it
was me and maybe and it
completely changed the dynamic
of that conversation.
And so what happens is when
somebody does that, they
sometimes can, it can be the
opposite way in retaliatory
to the doctor, that person or
whatever, and, and
I think it just kind of muddies
up the process of how that's
handled, right? Um, and I think
what, what.
We're in such some of these um.
Communities are in such small
areas of certain things that are
taking place in a small area,
you're gonna know who they are,
whether they tell you or not,
Madam Chair Representative,
because it's just small. You
walk in, I can in my business,
you walk in, I saw a lot of
families, but I can remember
things that happened throughout
the, the, the deal and I said, I
remember this family, remember
that, uh, situations because
we're just too small.
And so I think, I think the
problem that I, that I could see
with this is forcing the
provider.
The provider themselves, the
doctor, right? In the small, a
small setting like that when you
know you only have so many
patients or whatever to
recognize the complaint, and you
can say, oh yeah, I remember.
This person came in and that
happened and whatever, you're
gonna be able to narrow it down.
And I think it's tough, anytime
we do that.
to
That provider then.
Subconsciously, if she is gonna
be like.
Uncomfortable with the situation
and depending on the, on the uh
complaint.
What worries me is sometimes if
the
Complaint is major, like you're
like you're specifying here,
Madam Chair Representative.
It can actually
Your counsel may tell you, you
know what, you need to not have
contact at this point, not
answer the question, not do
this, not do that.
And there's where I see some
conflict in that. There's going
to be some situations, Madam
Chair. How do you, how would, I
mean, would you agree that
sometimes council will tell you,
you need to stop, um.
Contact with that person.
Uh, when a, a, a big situation,
a grievous situation happens.
Would that be fair to say that
that could happen? So, um, Madam
Chair, members, you've presented
a scenario.
Where action that they are
saying is involving these items
that I have described
malfeasance, gross management,
misrepresentation, all of those.
So it's gonna be reported and to
whom it's going to be reported
to an authority. They give
someone who about what is
happening. They're not gonna
automatically presume that you
are guilty of the things and
it's not just doctors, it's the
hospitals themselves. What if
they're not keeping uh things
clean or a patient area is not
being kept clean. So those types
things because we want to make
sure, one, it's that somebody's
gonna look into it, they're not
gonna say, OK, well, you're
guilty automatically. We see
that all the time as a, as a
person who is in licensing
procedures where there have been
lots and lots of MC, the the
viability of information that's
brought before a decision is
made, but also one of the
things, Madam Chair, members of
the Razos, there, if there is
something that is done, that is
incorrect, that is improper.
The person should be reported
because not only your health,
but a number of other people's
health is affected. So we want
to make sure that that person
who brought it to the attention
of the appropriate person, and
it was determined and that these
allegations are true, that they
are not retaliated against. That
is what is involved here. So I,
I, I think it's the bigger
picture of not just that a uh
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, representative
torazus that in
g ation was brought forth, and
we also want to protect the
person.
And Madam Chair Representative
Herndon, you and I have always
had good debates.
clean debates
Nice, respectful, and, and I
appreciate that and you've
always been that way ever since
I've known you since you came
here. So, but Madam Chair
Representative, I, I think what
we, what we both are stating
here, um, those situations
sometimes if they're in the
gray.
It can be proven one way or
another, whatever. Sometimes
take time, right?
But this legislation, the
problem that I have with it,
it's, it's not the
whistleblowing, it's not the
protection. It's the, the
forcing of that.
Of that provider to continue
doing service.
And if it is in question whether
it is something like, he said,
she said, and their irony out
these things, which isn't gonna
happen right away, most, most
times.
And it goes into a litigated
situation.
Sometimes the other party is
told, stop contact.
And so I think what, what, what
where I'm going with that is
they're gonna find some
situations that are gonna create
new litigation.
Because now you're forcing me to
see a patient and my counsel's
telling me not to do this where
I could maybe possibly refer
that person somewhere else, and
I know that's hard in New Mexico
because of the.
Our rural situation,
I think are the also the problem
is that makes it conflicting for
you, for me is that in
Uh, I think Representative Reeve
said it right. I mean, we only
have one provider in that area.
And so that's why I think the
conflict could happen where,
where, you know, something major
happens cause this is major.
This isn't just, you know, some
little, they didn't throw the
trash can on Friday night. This
is a major situation that
they're, that they're reporting
and, and if, if
They can narrow it down because
of of of it being a small town
and they know who it is, and
they're forced to continue that.
I think that's a problem.
Anyway, I, I, um.
I think, uh, again I think the
big thing is that I, my big
worry is that this opens for
more lawsuits when, when we
already have problems with the
medical malpractice insurance, I
think the rates will go up.
Um, and
The, the last thing I was gonna
say is I always tell my kids I,
I tell my, my staff, my kids.
I have a rule I don't, I don't
send food back or anything like
that. When I have a complaint.
Just eat it or I won't eat it,
and because I'm always afraid of
retaliation. I've always been
like that. I'm like, no, it's
OK. It was fine. But I also tell
my, my staff, I said, you know,
if you have an issue with a a
person because we're not all
perfect.h happen sometimes.
People just have different
personalities and they just
don't, man, um.
Sometimes we have to step in and
this is where I was going with
this. And that person just
cannot.
Connect with that person.
Even if I don't do that. I, I
reassign that.
And possibly to myself or
someone else, so that we can
address it and have a fresh
start, and I think that's what.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Representative. Next
we have a representative
representative uh
for bringing this forward. Um.
I feel like I'm sensing a bit of
a disconnect as well in the
During a session when we're
talking about crime, there was
the general
Uh, feeling that bad actors
should be held accountable. So
Madam Chair, Representative, it
feels a little disconnected, but
we're not OK if they bring um
Madam Chair and uh
representative.
Um, we have actually seen uh
legislation in this committee
that I believe runs maybe um.
And it uh to the gentleman's
point earlier, um, Madam Chair
and Representative.
We actually have legislation in
front of us, like safe staffing
ratios, like your whistleblower
protections that actually stop
repeat bad actors before
something bad happens.
And of course, when you mitigate
risk, it actually prevents the
insurance industry from raising
your rates. And so I just wanted
to point that out, Madam Chair,
and Representative as we're
talking about litigation, as
we're talking about malpractice
rates on things that help
prevent injury to patients that
help prevent, um, bad managers
from, you know, repeatedly, um,
going after their employees,
then we can actually
a lot of um, not only the, the
injury to patients, but also, we
would have a better chance of
retaining employees if bad
parent representative of order,
Madam Chair, I don't think any
of our members are implying that
we shouldn't, um.
We should hinder um
Reporting, that's not what we're
doing. I think what we're, we're
saying is there's some
Gres in the language.
Of how this would actually work
in process,
you did say that. So thank you
for the gray area. Yes, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
um.
And sponsors and representative
Herndon, thank you for providing
this bill.
Um, I think it's a really
important one for people like me
who go to the doctor and expect
everything to be good and safe
and professional.
Um, I wish there had been a bill
like this in two specific
incidences.
That affected my life.
Um, one,
I stopped going to the doctor
for about 10 years.
Because of some very abusive.
Behavior on the doctor's part.
And there was no whistleblower
act.
Um, I did eventually convince
myself that he was, if he was
doing this to me.
He was probably doing this to
other people too.
And so I, it took a lot of
courage and I was in tears when
I did this, but I actually
reported him.
Um, I, I got notification.
Months later
That he was no longer
practicing.
And, and
But it took me forever.
To trust another doctor.
Um, it was only because of a
recent incident that I had that
I started going to the doctors
again and trusting.
And I just wonder how many
people don't go to the doctors
because of that same fear.
Another incident which is more
dramatic.
was when I was younger and I was
helping take care of my
grandmother, and she was in the
hospital, and she didn't trust
the medication that she was
taking and she tried to tell me.
She didn't want to take it and I
and I told her no, she needed to
take it.
Well, that medication was bad
for her and she died within a
few minutes of taking the
medication.
Later on, I found out, like I
didn't report anything, but it
just didn't seem right.
Later on, I found out that nurse
that she had had been doing this
to other patients as well.
And it was because they were
elderly and that particular
nurse had decided that they
didn't want.
Elderly people to be a burden to
their hospital.
And I know that's a dramatic
case.
But I just wonder how many lives
you would be saving.
by passing this bill.
So I thank you for introducing
the bill.
Thank you, um
Thank you both, um, expression
and for your clarity before I go
to committee, uh, I wanted to.
Along the same lines, um.
State
That
I literally had to wait.
3.5 years.
Um
A number of reasons, but
primarily because.
physicians, the providers
described.
Under um in in line 15, which
describes the healthcare
provider.
Healthcare providers in this
particular facility.
Several of them had um.
Complaint conditions not being
safe in.
Not one physician, 2 physicians,
3 physicians.
One of those physicians took it
upon themselves to go through
the complaint.
And do whatever was necessary.
Um, to take and
In doing so,
Um, they had to expose the
conditions they have to expose
other.
colleagues
But they had the permission of
the other, the hospital
administration.
chose to take retaliate all the
other providers.
Um
Through their whatever
mechanisms they use or whatever
they use, um, someone to.
Relay the name.
And consequently,
They retaliated, and gave them
notice, did not withdraw their
complaint.
Um, they would be fired.
Well, what happened is that one
complaining that um
Walked.
And then all the others.
Um, consequence suffered.
The patients that were in line
waiting for surgery.
Suffered because it took the
hospital administration,
literally years.
4 years to be exact.
To re-establish a relationships
and rehire and.
Because the
Staff that had to work with to
feel safe.
Secure, but more importantly
that they.
Um, could work within the
hospital. So I say that because
I really appreciate there are
these stories.
Across the board, stories that
we hear on.
Personally, uh, that come to us.
And so I, I just wanted to
relate that because it strikes
right at home, um, in, in not
just my circumstance, but other
um
for bringing this forward um.
Representative Herndon and I now
go to committee, Representative
Ortiz Madam, would you pass?
I have a
representative Ortiz, seconded
by Representative.
Anaya, thank you. We'll do.
Representative Anaya.
Yes.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Hall.
No
Representative Johnson.
Representative Mejia.
No.
Representative Ortiz, yes.
Representative Reeb, no.
Representative Terazas I'd like
to explain.
Representative Torres Velasquez.
Yes.
Vice Chair Chavez.
Chairwoman Royalgabalo
I'll do a short, Madam Chair,
just real quick, you know,
congratulations here Bill, but
you know I think my opposition
to this is not the, the, the
actual act of them.
Reporting an action, I think
that needs to happen. I think we
already have those. It's the um
gray area that I have in the
process, I think it's, it's,
it's, it's too great for me. And
the last thing is, I believe,
Madam Chair, that it could hurt
my hospital that's hanging on by
a thread. Thank you very much.
Thank you. So Representative on
a vote of 64, you have a due
pass. Thank you very much. And
there is no further business, so
we are. Thank you. Oh, thank you
for a reminder we have committee
dinner and it's gonna be a real
treat.
At the bullring, 6 o'clock.
So, um, if you haven't RSVP
please let um our committee
assistant Alyssa Madrino and
