Okay we are now officially on.
So agency but quite a few would.
Probably just start from the
top.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee again
my name is Alice Lucroy and
executive director of the New
Mexico developmental
disabilities planning council or
the DPC we have is the office of
guardianship as Representative
Matthews stated H. B. two thirty
four to four things first makes
crucial changes in the way this
guardianship functions when I
came to the PC in August two
thousand nineteen I was keenly
aware of the history of turmoil
in the agency because I was one
of its biggest critics before
arriving here I still am off the
guardianship is a legal services
program and yet the agency had
lost credibility with the courts
the legislature thank you
community and the public.
Since I arrived at the PC we
have conducted comprehensive
service reviews of every one of
our professional guardian
service contact providers and
are continually conducting
protected percent welfare visits
to ensure our protective people
are provided appropriate high
quality services.
This bill will required offs
guardianship to conduct these
crucial oversight and monitoring
activities the bill also
requires stops guardianship to
publish an annual report to
ensure transparency and provide
important data about
guardianship.
Second this bill establishes a
court visitor program to give
the court much needed resources
to monitor guardianships on the
ground.
Visitors are typically a sign
when a petition for guardianship
is filed but what's a guardian
is assigned courts must depend
on the guardian's annual reports
on my grievances and other
letters or requests for hearing
for guardianship issues to be
brought to the court's attention
the issue is not brought to the
court cannot be.
This bill creates a volunteer
court visitor program within the
office of guardianship so that
we can provide the court with
that resource we would recruit
and train where visitors to do
that work and provide them as a
volunteer resource I'm during
the pilot program the courts
will select several
jurisdictions across the state
and the sign where visitors to a
random sampling of cases.
Our visitor will speak to the
protected person or home review
to the guardianship and do you
have
the work of a court visitor and
file a report to the courts and
they will be the eyes and ears
on the ground for the courts on
those particular guardianship
cases if the pilot is successful
I we envision a system where
where visitors will be able to
at some point visit every single
case in across the state of New
Mexico I'm to give the courts
that information that they
really need I'm to to do what
they need to do for monitoring
and oversight of guardianships.
Third the bill requires the
consideration of less
restrictive options I'm this is
a very important part of
guardianship it is where
guardianship is moving it is the
future I'm so less restrictive
options can be a whole ladder of
options but what this bill does
is at the outset it requires
certain consideration of whether
or not these options are
available so for example it
requires Office guardianship to
inform and educate applicants on
alternatives to guardianship
before petitioning for the
guardianship it requires the
guardian Adlai item assigns the
case to report all available
less restrictive options for the
court for the court's
consideration.
It requires a guardian to
actively seek out and support
less restrictive options if it's
appropriate for active person.
I'm I think for us at the office
of guardianship we are already
doing that as part of our
protective person welfare visits
if folks are eligible to
graduate out of guardianship
then we help create a network
support network for them to to
to regain iconomi and so.
Decision making capacity I'm and
one state have reached that
point that we do petition the
court for termination that
guardianship and and when we do
that we free up resources for
folks to do need that high level
support the guardianship
provides.
It's the best way is the best
use of state resources and and
it.
The tax people being in
situations that are overly
restrict.
Endorsed the bill requires New
Mexico to implement this wings
program or again the working
interdisciplinary network of
guardianship stakeholders this
group of stakeholders led by the
judiciary will include
representatives from the
legislature and state agencies
from the professional
guardianship and conservatorship
aging and mental health
communities as well as protected
persons and family members and
because wings is a national
program we will have access to
and support from I'm this
national network of folks who
are working on improving
guardianship and by putting this
into statute we will ensure that
we're continually improving
guardianship I'm and and that we
are getting input from a broad
variety of folks who are
affected by check the wings
program.
Especially is a big priority for
this administration and we
believe this will be.
The the vehicle where we can
continually review guardianship
and make it a better system
thank you very much madam chair
members of the committee for
allowing me to talk about this
with today.
I stand for questions.
Thank you.
So I Representative we're now
ready to go to the audience is
that correct or do you have
other experts.
You're on mute Representative.
It doesn't the letter we're on
the floor the harder it is to do
these to remember all the
buttons you have to put a fish.
Of the we we do not have other
experts were ready to go to the
audience thank you very much
thank you so now we will open
the poll for those that want to
raise their hands in support or
opposition of house bill two
thirty four.
And we will keep it open for
five more seconds.
Okay great we have eighteen four
and one against.
So let's take.
Public comment from those in
support if you would like to
speak in support please raise
your hand.
Katrina hot from Lopez you are
now and made it.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Katrina
how can Lopez on the cabinet
secretary for aging and long
term services I have spent much
of my life's work dealing with
guardianship issues long term
care issues and health policy
and guardianship issues have
have been
A number one priority in the
state to fix for years since I
was the long term care about
spent several years ago and so
the changes that are being made
to the statute are much needed
and much supported and we
appreciate the passage of this
bill thank you.
Thank you judge Nancy Franchini
you are now and it.
You'll have to and then on your
end yeah can you hear me we can
wonderful thank you very much
madam chair and representative
I'm here on behalf of the New
Mexico judiciary I am a District
Court judge at the second
judicial District Court and I
personally have over two hundred
guardianship and conservatorship
cases so I'm pretty well versed
in this field I want to make
sure that I'm very clear that
the judiciary is for this bill
we have to concerns at this
point that I think can be fixed
fairly easily there's a portion
in there regarding the duties of
the guardian and it talks about
several items that the guardian
has to be aware of such as
importers consent it says
standards for decision making.
These restrictive alternatives a
self determination of the person
and diversity and personal
preferences of the person and I
just want to make sure that this
is something I don't think
regular guardians would
understand what it means it's I
think it's important to say that
it's for
at a plus professional guardians
number two in terms of what the
Supreme Court has to provide it
with with wings we need to have
a change so it says that we will
provide reasonable
accommodations and not
appropriate because we can't
provide any legal basis for the
term appropriate but the most
important part is this is a good
bill it is going to forward
guardianship is going provides
Benefit and support to the
District Court judges to handle
these cases but it is all
predicated on the required
funding the funding has to be
recurring if it is not recurring
then this will end up being an
unfunded mandate thank you.
Thank you the answer Lancia you
are now and made it.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee Dion's of the
Lynsey I'm to advocacy director
with a A. R. P. New Mexico we
stand in strong support of this
committee substitute A. A. R. P.
New Mexico is fighting to
protect New Mexico's vulnerable
seniors who rely heavily on
legal guardians and others to
help them make their vital
decisions we are especially
supportive of the wing's
component and look forward at
your key to being one of the
national resources as part of
that group we also would urge
the fully funding of this
program for the judiciary to
continue their good work and
thank the sponsors for bringing
the sport thank you.
Thank you.
Just take a close you are now
and it.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my
name's Jessica some general
counsel for the office of the
state auditor the office of the
state auditor supports and
appreciates the intent of HB two
to thirty four believes the
committee steps to present some
solutions to concerns with the
original draft we also agree
issues with the guardianship
conservatorship system existent
knowledge the need for
improvement which will require a
collaborative effort however I'm
particularly as it relates to
section ten of the committee
substitute would appreciate the
opportunity to be engaged in the
drafting process as their
portions of paragraph H. of
section ten any careful
consideration from the audit
perspective paragraph H.
requires all conservatives
reports to be sent to the office
of the state auditor for review
and determination whether
further audit is necessary in
the context of public
accountancy for any audit review
underlying records are key as a
result merely reviewing the
conservatives report comprised
of representations made by
fiduciary without supporting
documentation to make it
extremely difficult to identify
where risks exist and where
further audit review as
appropriate as drafted this
section does not contemplate any
authority for the office the
state auditor to audit or review
cases where conservatives failed
to file required reports which
seems like an area of concern
from what our office is seen
with regard to late and no
reports additionally the
proposed statutory deadline
found out a report within ninety
days of receiving a conservative
support is most likely not
practical in many cases in the
context of obtaining and
renewing necessary records
particularly were there many
different financial counsel
subpoenas are necessary to
obtain documentation I do the
level of detail necessary for
any object respectfully section
ten would have benefited from
the perspective of the office
the state audit during the
drafting process finally the
fiscal impact report mentions
there are four thousand nine
hundred and twenty act cases
were guarding or conservatism
appointed on behalf of
protective person yeah I was the
state auditor does not have data
on how many conservative should
cases exist but we could
potentially need additional
staff and resources for both
review of reports and to conduct
subsequent audits depending on
total numbers we are willing to
assist in any efforts to get
this legislation to where it
needs to be in thank you for the
opportunity to provide feedback.
Thank you.
Jim Jackson your now and it.
Thank you madam chair Jim
Jackson here for disability
rights New Mexico I haven't seen
the final language of the
substitute but we certainly
support of what the office of
guardianship is trying to
accomplish through this bill
as you know that the courts are
appointees guardians and they're
responsible for oversight and
reviewing the reports but they
don't have a lot of the
resources to do that and they
certainly aren't in a position
to be doing a site this it's the
weight of this bill would have
the would propose for the for
the office of guardianship to do
we think that's really important
to monitor the situation that
the guardian and they're
protected persons are in make
sure that that still appropriate
and reasonable for them.
the the we do have certainly the
potential for financial
exploitation or simply
arrangements that are no longer
necessary for the people of the
office of guardianship has the
expertise and interest to
conduct that kind of the review
and monitoring and we encouraged
and support then in this
initiative and the urge the
committee to support this bill
thank you.
Thank you Laurie Hendricks your
now omitted.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I am
the president of the New Mexico
guardianship Association I'm
also an attorney practicing in
the area guardianships and we
stand in strong support of H. B.
two thirty four.
For a number of reasons but
particularly because it
encourages deliberate thinking
of least restrictive
alternatives which should
formalize what should be
happening anyway in protective
proceedings it is our hope that
it will result in less
guardianships being granted
where there are alternatives the
use of limited guardianships
where a full guardianship is
unnecessary and termination of
guardianship.
In cases where it's no longer
necessary secondly.
We appreciate the that it
formalizes the adoption of the
National guardianships
Association standards of
practice which reflect as
realistically as possible the
best or highest quality of
practice which only indoors to
the benefit of those folks that
we are trying to protect
again we stand strong support
thank you very much.
Thank you for lease rail you are
now and it.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Felice rail I'm a private lawyer
in Albuquerque and I practice in
the area of older line to state
disability law and I am very
much support and encourage you
all to support house bill two
thirty four at two things that I
found really noteworthy where
where the working into inter
disciplinary nap work I think
that's important because I think
historically it has been
primarily lawyers who've been
involved in the policy making
process and establishing the
rules and stuff I think that
there are plenty of health care
providers and social workers
other professionals as well as
just laypeople of family members
and who as I think we all know
have been really desperate to
have their voices heard I think
they deserve a voice and I think
that that I think that that can
only help us I'm the other thing
that I think is a really
wonderful about this is the
pilot program for where visitors
I wish we had it long ago I
think that that has the
potential to real I mean
honestly I think it has the
potential to save lives you know
you never quite know how
something's gonna involved and I
just I think that that's a
really wonderful thing a really
positive movement so as a
private attorney I'm I am in
support and I I urge you all to
support as well thank you.
Thank you Elon pines.
You are now and it.
Thank you madam chair Ellen pods
on behalf of the disability
coalition we advocate for the
interests of persons with
disabilities who are often
protected persons under
guardianship and we therefore
support measures that strengthen
oversight of guardians and
guardianship and therefore we
stand in support of this bill I
have not seen the committee
substitute so I'm going on my
understanding of the original
bill and the explanation of the
changes which we do support and
I particularly want to express
appreciation for the
requirements that would
emphasize least restrictive
alternatives to guardianship
that's extremely important we
urge the committee support the
bill thank you.
Thank you Pamela Stafford you
are now in muted.
Madam chair thank you for the
opportunity to provide public
comment I'm with the ark New
Mexico we find we are not for
profit that provides
guardianship services under
contract with the.
Office of guardianship we stand
in strong support of this bill I
also have not seen the final
draft of the of the committee
substitute however I am familiar
with the wings program will
welcome them to the state.
And I think the ideal of a
really formalizing least
restrictive options goes nicely
with the discussions that we've
been having around supported
decision making and so for those
reasons we stand and support.
Thank you real Hamilton.
You're now and it.
thank you madam chair and
members of the community in July
of twenty nineteen my mother and
I went to a lawyer to gain power
of attorney neither of us signed
a document or working agreement
with this lawyer three days
later the lawyer submitted an
emergency petition that was
signed by a judge in the third
judicial court without a hearing
the day after the signed
petition my mother's bank
accounts were seized three weeks
later there is a police body cam
footage of officer record
putting my my my ninety two year
old mother into a police vehicle
and taking her to the hospital
in August of twenty nineteen the
last part of the footage
captures her guardian saying
don't take her to Mountain View
they let them out there taker to
memorial the first court hearing
was in October of twenty
nineteen where my mother's court
appointed guardian proceeded to
slander incriminate in salt and
exaggerate my mother's
personally appearance and
condition of our family home she
also indicated that my ninety
two year old mother was a flight
risk and so therefore was
justified in keeping her locked
up in a memory care unit all
rights support H. B. two thirty
four these people need to have
oversight.
Thank you.
We will go to opposition if you
would like to speak in
opposition of the bill please
raise your hand.
This Trujillo you're now
unmuted.
Good morning my mother is
I I share a similar story to
Rios's in that are my my mother
got of court appointed a
guardian and up I'm I propose I
I I agree with a lot of the
things that are set in this that
all however a lot of the issues
they're a major loss in the book
that say that you need to
consider the needs and wants.
Of the the person in
guardianship.
What I propose about this is it
gives more power to the
judiciary.
You know that the employee more
court decisions with also in the
court.
And of.
The judge in our case he didn't
really use the rule of law he he
didn't follow any of the the
laws that are actually in the
books in H. B. nineteen H. B.
three nine five.
So of.
Somebody needs to oversee the
judges to make sure that that
they are enforcing laws that are
already on the books.
And and we is just like the.
The wolf will guard the hen
house it's like more judicial
oversight
actually I believe the problem
is really that the
somehow Office of the
guardianship needs to be able to
intervene and somebody's court
appointed guardians.
And right now my mom was taken
without noted the regarding us
reporter wishes were which which
would have stay at home and she
could afford to do that instead
they put her in a nursing home
and she's being drugged with
tranquilizers thank you.
Thank you that concludes our
public comment now to the
committee representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair.
I do have some some questions
and concerns Madam chair
representative.
Where are you generally see.
Guardianship issues come up.
Is at church.
I'm sorry.
Someone at the the church I
attend
Comes up and says.
Rag Mr Mrs so and so asked me to
be there guardium and then maybe
a year later another elderly
couple assets nine percent to be
their guardian.
And as time goes on
Well we prepare powers of
attorney that that have
provisions that in the event of
the principles and capacity that
the the R. the the attorney
impact on them petition the
court to become guardian of the
person and let's say that the
fund goes off by advanced in age
and it's necessary to to them
our implement that clause and go
to court get the person
appointed guardian of these two
couples.
If I understand this bill
correctly that person.
Trying to do a good deed to to
their friends all the sudden
becomes a professional guardian
that are correct under this
bill.
Madam chair of.
Representative Nibert if if it's
based on the definition assuming
that there's no relationship
it's an independent relationship
by I believe that would be
correct but Alice you want to
check me on that please I
believe and I'm double checking
now that it's more than two.
Yeah two couples two times two
is for.
I see.
Okay.
So you would agree what a would
you know the person now is
deemed to be a professional
guarding.
Under the current definition in
place yes Sir yes madam chair
representative okay and under
that definition
The the person.
Would require to fulfill all of
the things that that you set up
for it that this bill would
which is not.
What.
Then Madam chair representative
all of these things meaning.
Could you be able a little bit
more specific I'm not I mean
there's a lot of things in here
that don't necessarily apply
simply to a A. L. professional
guardian.
Well there's no provision in
here that what's the
professional guarding get out
from under the
requirements said that are set
forth herein they have to do the
reports I have to have to to our
you know.
Look at all the other things
that that are set forth in here
and my mic by real concern Madam
chair representative is but
that's.
Probably are not what they
signed up for five years ago.
They're they're doing their
their friends a favor.
A grain to be their guardian if
things happen.
And all the sudden the good
Samaritan if you will is also a
under this.
Statutory framework that's going
to require much more of them
that what they anticipated
website told their friends five
years ago that they would serve
in that capacity.
And that's where I have a real
concern I think.
If I read the bill correct we
and if I can't imagine what
you're trying to get out is.
Really services that hold
themselves out as being
guardians and probably do many.
People because it looks to me
that the framework.
Only of existed if you're doing
this for a living.
There's a lot of stuff in here
that you have to do that go
beyond what I see as the one
most.
Guardians the.
You know they're just chairman
for their next door neighbor
they're making sure that that
the.
They're fat they're making sure
that the their houses where
they're making sure that the
they they get to the doctor
things like that
They're not filling out reports
they're not having to go to
court yeah and do annual reports
of all that stuff but all the
sudden because of that.
Designation as professional
guardian you're now putting.
A great deal of statutory
burdens on that professional
guardian that.
It.
Recognize at the time that they
were going to be a professional
guardian they were just trying
to be a friend.
And that's my real concern and
Madam chair representative I
think your expert wants to
comment.
I am sure I deferred Abbas I
think she can explain this
better than I can.
Thank you madam chair
representative Matty's
Representative I write for your
questions or comments I do want
to clarify that in the law as it
stands every single guardian
whether you're a family member
whether you're a friend whether
you're professional guardian
they all have to file
professional are they all have
to file annual reports there's
nobody who is exempt from the
annual reports requirements and
this bill doesn't seek to change
any of the existing requirements
or or guardians I'm the only
thing of this bill seeks to
change is to require guardians
to consider on an ongoing basis
whether or whether or not this
level of guardianship that this
ticket persons under is
appropriate and if this is a
person who's eligible for you
graduation out of guardianship
or lesser restrictive
guardianship or even termination
guardianship that the guardian
does bring that to the court's
attention that's the only thing
this bill seeks to change
otherwise the requirements that
are already in place in the law
no we're not we're not proposing
to change any of that but I just
do want to clarify that these
reports are required by every
single guardian whether or not
your family member or whoever
you are.
Madam chair representative miss
parkway
I'm not sure your statement that
all guardian staff the file
reports to the court because
there's many a guardianship said
excess that the don't go through
the courts.
Those people do not have to file
anything with the court.
So.
If I may madam chair and
Representative divert so these
guardianships that we are
talking about are specifically
guardianships that are put into
place by a District Court I'm
under the probate code and so
that that authority to put these
partnerships and the place is
this but all particular law the
probate code and so all of our
All of the changes that we're
proposing are in these
particular type of guardianship
I'm not sure what other kind of
guardianships and you mean
Representative Viber but the
ones that I'm I'm considering
are these adult guardianships
who are you know which are under
the probate code and they do
have to be put in place by a
District Court I'm if we're
talking about powers of attorney
or other documents that give
people decision making powers
those are outside of this
particular law so those are you
know those are not governed by.
Well there's wheels being
drafted every day that the we're
a younger couple that has
children they appoint
Usually a family member but so
they appoint someone to be
guardian of the children in the
event they passed away and very
rarely do those situations go
through our court appointed
guardianship there they become
guardian by virtue of the terms
of the of the last will and
testament
But.
I am concerned about.
People who have told their
friends.
That they will serve as
guardians.
And now all of a sudden they're
going to be professional
guardians subject to a lot of
things that I'm not sure that
that they really signed up for
so.
You know I recognize that there
has to be a number.
But I don't think three.
Which is the the the number here
I don't think three is the right
number because I see people.
At church or or in my community
and it's usually
One of their friends.
That.
House.
Some organizational abilities
they're they're friendly people
they they.
Sign up for the stuff and you
know it's not uncommon for them
to have.
Two or three couples that they
are
you know taking care of for all
intents and purposes and at
thank you some of those
decisions so so it's not far
fetched permitted to to.
Thank think of those signs of
I myself have.
I haven't been appointed but I
have.
Taking care of a couple windows
at at at church and I know that
the.
It's it's time consuming and of
itself that is this bill would
have affected me.
I would have done it.
I would have had to go to a
professional guardian in the
sense that they would be paying
a lot of money for for those
services.
I'm concerned about the.
Overall page for.
One sixteen.
You know the the word protected
persons only applies to our
adults by Representative this
correctly.
Or maybe I should just a
question of protected persons
are adults right they're not
Myers.
And.
Here at Representative Nibert
yes that that is correct it is
is that right hours.
Yes madam chair representative
Matthews this the probate hope
code provisions that we're
talking about this particular
law only applies to adults for
children's guardianships are are
governed by another area of law
in another code the children's
cut so this is this is only
applies to.
And always has been.
over on page to.
Lines twelve and thirteen this
gets into the less restrictive
alternatives.
M..
Madam chair representative so.
I I I I grappled with that.
Terminology be because so.
It says less restrictive
alternatives to guardianship and
so it seems to me that the
courts have to make the
determination that that person.
Was either capable of handling
their affairs or they're not
capable of handling their
affairs and so.
I'd like to flesh out what what
is the court looking at the
garden have lines going to have
to consider these things but
what what other alternatives
exist in law that
Accomplish this less restrictive
alternatives to guardianship.
Madam chair.
Representative Nibert
it can be things as simple as
living arrangements and so forth
but again I'm going to defer to
to miss a she is far more
experience in this that I do.
Thank you madam chair
representative Matthews send my
part I have we are for example
we have powers of attorney that
health care decisions making act
also contemplates decision
making supports and the purpose
of of considering less
restrictive alternatives as the
reality of our guardianship
system is that folks often seek
guardianship when they have no
other way of getting support or
help and guardianship should be
a last resort option and courts
are when they are doing best
practices for guardianship do
you want to give those options
but they can't if they don't
know about them so what this
bill does is give the courts the
broad array of options available
to that person every case is
different every person has a
different set of support systems
in place you know some folks
have family members who live in
town and can be really good
decision makers and support some
folks don't
some folks you know have assets
that were they can hire
professionals to take care of
for example
You.
Things around the house or to to
move into a home with more
supports you said everybody has
difference
situations that the Courts need
to consider and what this bill
does is require the guardian
Adlai item when they do their
review of that alleged
incapacitated person's situation
to lay out all those options for
the court and the court does
make that final determination
this this person's capacity rice
the level where they absolutely
have to have
a guardianship there at the
office of guardianship every
single person who calls us for
guardianship Services needs help
they need something guardianship
isn't always the appropriate
Avenue for them to get the help
that they need but we need to
make sure that we figure out
what those options are what
options are available to each
person and and retain a person's
autonomy and and dignity of
choice as much as possible.
Well are these words meant to.
Modify the.
The issue of guardianship or are
they met to.
Provide instruction to the
guardian that.
It all they have an obligation
to to give the our protective
person as much
We weigh in handling their
affairs as that person can
reasonably handle those are two
different things as I see.
because ultimately the court has
to determine.
Is this person capable of
handling their own affairs or
not.
They either have a guardian or
they don't.
Am I wrong on this.
Madam chair representative
Albert so that once the court
order does is lay out exactly
what when when a person gets a
guardian I'm a court orders
principal place the court order
will say exactly what the person
needs help with and so the court
order gives the guardian powers
to make specific decisions and
so in the past what's what was
very common was four percent as
you say representative Nibert to
be a guardian or not if your
guardian that means you have I'm
control over everything and you
have decision making capacity
over everything and what's the
guardianship work is moving
toward our limited guardianships
and now I believe best practices
in New Mexico courts is to lay
out in the order exactly what
the guardian does have I'm
control over so a a guardianship
ship order for example may say
discarding has control over
medical decisions and financial
decisions
but nothing else and so if they
only have control over those
decisions and the person retains
control over the other subjects
I'm you know Canary or full
guardianships are still
appointed because people need
them and so it's up to the court
to make that determination how
much authority to they need to
give I'm the guardian Sir to
make sure that that person is
being protected and that person
gets the support that they need
depending on their level of
capacity so again every
individual is different every
situation is different and court
orders are supposed to Pete the
at.
A personalized individualized to
meet that person's the.
Madam chair representative this
record you said a couple things
that.
Our.
I find a little confusing number
one I did not realize the
probate code to change to allow
our guardian to conduct the
financial affairs of of the
person I thought that was
generally service that handle
the financial affairs the
guardian was really the one
responsible for handling the
persons are physical well being.
and and so that but that's a
surprise to me
Thank you.
Guardians or the guardians that
that the.
But I've been familiar with that
they all owe a fiduciary duty to
the principal.
And part of that to be sure duty
is to look out after the best
interests of that individual
meeting that if that person is
capable of attending to certain
things.
It's in the best interest of the
of the person to allow them to
to do the things that they're
capable of.
And it's in the best interest of
the person to have the guardian
take care of things of the
person can't build where and
that you know the the lawsuits
substitutionary duty to the
guardian to.
Force those issues are treated
well and so you know I the
guardian Adlai item so identify
present all available less
restrictive alternatives to
guardianship.
I.
I think at the end of the day
the court has to determine
whether our guardianship whether
someone should be appointed as
guardian or whether this person
is capable of handling their own
affairs of.
Right I'm I really grappling
with the with that because it
seems to me that the guardians
job.
M. D. chair W. is to all works
followers.
Try to figure out what's in the
best interest of the protected
individual and that.
Necessarily includes looking at
the least restrictive
alternatives looking at what is
going to to help that person the
most as as they continue to live
their lives and and finding ways
to to create.
Enjoyment and and stimulus and
and all the things that that
people need to thrive that's a
job regarding and so I'm I'm.
Confused by by that term of
because at the end of the day
record either appoints a
guardian to take care of that
person or the court finds that
that person is capable of taking
care of themselves
On the.
That so.
That is.
Information.
We heard a little bit from the
judge about the.
Providing reasonable
accommodation.
Instead of appropriate
accommodations you might
consider.
That word I will right with the
judge of that regard
Federal overall page brought up
fifteen and sixteen.
Again we have the
least restrictive and that's
where the word all alternative
years of.
These restrictive alternatives
so again if you have a fiduciary
duty to that principle I would
think that that all goes hand in
hand of.
You know if they're looking out
up to the best interest of our
do those.
The paragraph on page eighteen
paragraph G..
I'm.
The surprise of the way this is
worded because it looks to me
like this sentence.
Worded a lot better but.
It says the guardian for an
adult.
What are we using the defined
term protected person in that
instance.
You madam chair the
representative.
Already established a protected
persons of all.
Correct and it also.
Del presupposes that a guardian
or conservator has been
appointed in the guardian Adlai
item may be functioning at a
point prior to that.
Having an Kurt.
This as a guardian for.
Protected persons the defined
term what we ought to use of it
guardian for protected persons
so so you can support.
Restrictive option.
Because if you choose defined
term the Senate bill lot
shorter.
Basically take out protected
person in every instance
thereafter.
Madam chair representative
Representative Nibert I think
that that's correct we are
tweaking some of the language
still according.
As such as the courts have
indicated a few changes and I
think that we will certainly
look at that as a possibility on
page eighteen section G..
You want to write this down I
would suggest this paragraph
state a guardian for a protected
person Chelsea can support weeks
restrictive option.
Consistent with the court's
guardianship order of
appointment.
Comma including developing
adequate supports.
And requesting.
Guardianship termination less
restrictive alternatives are
appropriate.
Probably take out two lines by.
There are
sh.
We're on page twenty one and
twenty two regarding the state
auditor my my question is.
How the state auditor become
involved in
Guardianship matters.
And let me just give you more by
I thought the state auditor job
was to audit governmental
entities and make sure that they
were.
Performing their tasks properly
I did not realize that the
auditors would be reviewing
relate
Private type relationship so
could you tell me why it's
important to have state auditor
all.
If this this matter.
At Matt Madam chair
representative Nibert
the legislature in a prior time
of created some of FTE ease in
the state auditor's office in
order to of serve this purpose
and miss I may want to add to
that but that that has been
established for some time.
Thank you madam chair
representative so a few years
ago a pilot program was proposed
for the state auditor's office
to look at I'm financial records
and look at guardianship and
conservatorship financial
records
and at that
pilot program developed into an
MO you that's in existence today
between the auditor and the
courts to do these financial
reviews of these cases and they
are doing that now this what did
this just puts it into law this
existing MO you and gives the
auditor the authority they need
and I I just want to note that
the state auditor's office did
have some comments about
subpoena or subpoena authority
and other records access
authorities and we are working
on that language we haven't
amendments I'm already in place
it just wasn't that
Put in enough time to make it to
this committee but we will be
fixing that language to requests
the state auditor's office for
power and authority to subpoena
records from financial
institutions and these cetera
but again this is a power that
our state orders this already
has no power but at the task
that they already do very
important I just wanna clarify
to that that statute doesn't
change anything as far as
financial powers of a guardian
or conservator I'm conservatives
are only appointed when a
person's assets are rise to the
level of needing a conservator
and if your person for example
who lives on and social security
income you have no other
announcements and you don't have
the server in your case I'm
typically and so guardianship a
guardian does have to have some
financial powers to deal with
those kinds of things if your
person with a disability who
doesn't have any assets who has
social security income and may
get for example a part time job
and you need help with your
handling finances I'm your
guardian would be doing that so
this bill does not contemplate
changing any financial powers.
Well madam chair and.
This record.
Where do not generally if the
person has.
Limited assets or only have
social security whatever.
With the order of the court not
a point the same individual as
guardian and conservator you're
only getting appointments of
guard.
Yes madam chair representative I
birds in those cases very rarely
is a conservator appointed.
Okay I can't think of a single
case where and his server is
appointed for a person who
doesn't have significant or some
kind of assets I'm to to manage.
Say I'm at the other end of the
spectrum I can't imagine doing a
guardianship without appointing
someone else as a conservative
because we generally would want
those functions separated
Right so so you know.
That that may be the difference
between the people you're saying
but this bill unfortunately
deals with both the ends of the
spectrum.
And that's part of my service.
So you know we talked about
guardianship.
For basically our entire life my
entire career up here of around
else and there was definitely a
need to.
tackle.
Some very agree just issues at
and I thought we did a pretty
good job a few years ago and you
have.
Beating are those demands and
trying to come up with a
framework that protected the
protected persons but still
recognize that.
Guardianships are critical.
For many people in our society
and and that we didn't want to
raise that bar so high that we
discourage people from from up.
Seeking the appointment of a
guardian to take care of them
particularly later in life where
where they found themselves in a
position of not being able to
care for their their own well
being.
And I thought that that I'm a
little concerned about the
breadth of this and the
definition obviously of
professional guardian and I
would just encourage.
Madam chair representative to
take a take a look at that
because of.
There's there's at least one
woman that I know well at the
church I attend who is probably
in this situation where she
takes care of two maybe three
couples and I assure you are
things are progress she will.
Sincerely questioned whether she
will be able to do it yeah and
provide those services if she's
having to do additional things
that the the the annual reports
that usually go for our are are
pretty pretty simple
straightforward for so what I've
said what I've.
But
this this contemplates a lot
more of.
Work on their part and and
they're busy enough taking care
of the person and we don't want
to.
We don't want to create barriers
for for people to a point people
who truly love them and will
take care of.
M. I don't think those are the
people you're talking about
you're talking about.
Companies that do this for
a living and professional truly
professional guardians are and
I'm afraid the definition
captures some some good loving
people that that are just trying
to do
Favors for their sometimes
lifelong friends and
I'm I'm a little concerned about
the breadth of it madam chair I
I have no further questions
thank you Representative for
bringing that allowing me to to
ask questions.
Thank you Representative Nibert
Representative Gallegos.
Thank you madam chair and.
Thank you Representative for
brain as this piece of the
legislation to as I am.
It you know I think you've
tackled you're you're tackling a
big issue and I appreciate what
you've done and I know that
we've had several conversations
I'm I am particularly interested
for a couple reasons
there's a very high profile case
going on in Los crucis and I
think there's been definitely
some some
With some concern risen by by
the family bye bye commute the
community of how the the
particular case is being handled
and is brought to light of that
it's that several cases and
several bad actors are out there
is always you I think there is a
big need for this type of
legislation
so I I just want to start off by
saying that I'm very much for
the legislation I just want to
make sure we get it right I am
concerned and if you could talk
to me a little bit about I see
that that and the substitute
that there was concerns
regarding.
And.
That would it was taken out of
the bill of the licensing
requirements is that correct.
Madam chair Representative
Gaydos yes and there was a
problem with and.
The courts had a problem in the
sense that this would be a
Of the create a conflict between
the separation of powers
conflict
because state the courts appoint
guardians.
And so having.
They were fairly adamant that
that was something that we could
not.
Do appropriately and so we took
the licensor licensure out we do
have the certification and the
certification is a national
organization there is a yes
and that that certification is
identified by the New Mexico
Supreme Court as the one to use
and the office of guardianship
make sure that that this
certification is obtained in and
maintained
and if again if the if I get
this get this wrong I I just I
just ms McCoy to please
correctly but I think a pretty
right on that.
Thank you madam chair
Representative yes so we do you
ensure that the.
Guardianship service providers
that work with the office
guardianship maintain
certification and just for some
statistics in the state of New
Mexico we have about a hundred
and five give or take a few
depending on what happens happen
the last few weeks I'm but a
hundred five certified
professional guardians working
in the state of New Mexico and
over eighty of those our office
a guardianship im service
providers and so the majority of
them I'm.
Have a an agency that insures
that they're certified there are
still about twenty or so
guardians there outside of our
authority in purview but the law
does states that they do have to
be certified and I believe this
court visitor program will go a
long way in ensuring that all
that you I's are dotted and TS
are crossed what the court
visitor will be able to do is
pick up a guardian reports and
then go talk to the protected
person the guardian you know
talk to whoever they need to
talk to the person service
providers and you know if they
live in a group home for example
talking to the staff and they
live in a nursing facility
talking to those staff to just
see if you know everything in
the report I'm is as it says and
and I think that the corpus will
also be able to insure that we
you know we're working with the
guardian that's I'm that is
certified in this is of course
just for professional guardians
the R. is that the current
reports that are being filed
our twenty plus pages or maybe
not plus but about twenty pages
it could be a little less but
they are out far more extensive
than the courts that the reports
that were being filed a few
years ago Representative Nibert
mentioned a few years ago the
legislature had made some
changes and one of the biggest
changes.
was ensuring that these
at the reports were being filed
timely and that there would be
these ten year annual reviews
that were that were being done
on these cases I'm again these
twenty page reports are
unnecessarily filed by every
single guardian whether your
family member or a friend a
professional guardian everybody
for those that these twenty page
I'm doctor this bill does not
change that requirements
requirement that sorry.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you for that that response I
guess I'm not sure that twenty
pages is insurers that it's
quality work and so that you
know the number doesn't concern
me
I just want to make sure that
the people that are certified
have the training and background
to do that and madam chair and
representative
I am.
I read a program I ran the
across the program and that's
court appointed special
advocates and I think that what
you're describing is wanting to
do this as a volunteer court
visitor is essentially what we
do for for children from zero to
eighteen of age that are in the
child welfare system so I I I I
think it's the same type of
training program because its
volunteers that we train one of
the things that I'm very adamant
about our program though is that
we have adequate and appropriate
supervision of those volunteers
and madam chair which you're
going to find is that you know
we.
Having volunteers is
Just like our legislator you
know there you know they all
come from different backgrounds
they're sometimes very hard to
supervised and you know they
they all out when I I kind of
just when I when I say this I
have they have type a
personalities they're go getters
they want to go out there and
and and do good work
but sometimes you've got to keep
people within the the current
the constraints of following
rules as well and so is there
going to be that kind of
supervision and monitoring that
we make sure that the people are
doing what they're supposed to
be doing.
Madam chair representative and
madam chair chair.
Representative a is we we are
going to be doing that our first
place that we're gonna look for
volunteers I will be at higher
education institutions social
work students for example and
the reason we're going that
direction as we like this
bouncer corpus program to
actually turn into a pipeline
for high quality professional
guardians no there are is some
turnover and I think at this
moment in time were actually
seen wires number or a growing
number of professional guardians
I'm retiring out of the system
and so we need to be able to
bring new folks into the system
and I'm you know the difference
I guess between chair the cost
program and the court is our
program is that where visitors
are already a at you know
required person in these
guardianship proceedings
typically when a court visitor
comes and they come in at the
very beginning their rate
professionals I'm somebody pays
for them whether it's off the
guardianship for our basis or
for folks who have private pay
basis they're paying they're
paying for that out of pocket
and so they have a very specific
rules that they have to follow
they have specific
I'm legal obligations that are
already set out in the probate
code and so we will be ensuring
that quality assurance I think
it's what you're asking
Representative Craig is that
folks are not only I'm trained
in what they have to do but that
there is oversight to make sure
they stay within the bounds of
what they're supposed to be
getting.
Thank you madam chair and I I
appreciate that response because
I I will tell you that it is
hard to maintain that that
supervision and so I'll be
watching to I think that's
important you know I I know that
The last Representative had some
some questions region regarding
statutory burdens
you know I guess I just want to
add that you know I know that
that there was a number put out
there and I get is that number's
three Representative
madam chair.
Is that correct three of you
three people that you would be
able to have guardianship over
is that.
Yes right yes so yeah it's more
than two individuals and this so
I actually was privy to this
conversation you know we there
was a
And still is at the Supreme
Court have two groups who've
been looking at I'm guardianship
issues for a few years and one
was the rules and one was the
steering Legislative steering
Committee and between those two
groups it was determined that
That if you have if you're not
related to folks and you have
more than that particular amount
of people that you're watching
over that there are just if
there's just a higher standard
of care that you have to follow
and in order to make sure that
at that you are doing I'm right
by these folks and so I didn't
you know.
I'm not sure where exactly the
number came from but it there
was sort of this consensus from
all of these different
stakeholders that this is a good
number to happen is I think what
folks were afraid of was you
know they wanted the law to
reflect and making sure that
people are protected and not
taken advantage of and not
exploited I'm the law wasn't
necessarily to and make the life
of a guardian easier thanks.
And madam chair and and
Representative and
you know I I what once again
referring back to my cost of
program I don't want to
volunteer usually to have more
than two families that they work
with that time because a family
can have you know five kids or
they can have you know so I I
think to make sure that you're
really looking at the individual
needs of each person you know I
know that the cut the guardian
doesn't necessarily isn't the
one necessarily implementing the
the treatment plan or what is
happening but they're having to
coordinate those services and I
think when we talk about some of
the
That would need
these type of services we're
definitely talking about I think
you know it may start off is
just making sure that you're
helping coordinate services or
making sure that you know they
have a right to the the grocery
store I think you can start off
very
Maybe at a lower level of need
but I think that those needs
continue to rise through the
through the process of
guardianship and I think that
that.
A cap on how many people.
Can can be involved and how many
people that you're helping in
that guardianship role is really
important because I think the
the the people of that
Representative nitrogen is
talking about we're right the
sound like all very good
intentional people and but many
times other people get involved
into the system and I think
specially with companies
there might not be that
oversight or maybe just the
ability or not even ability they
don't have that connection with
these families that the agency
that Representative Nibert is
talking about so what we're
talking about companies I think
it's important that we really
look at how they're doing that
job and that's where I'm
concerned that the monitoring is
going to happen and that's the
piece that I really want to
drill down on and and I want
this bill to go through because
I think it's very important I
think that we're gonna have to
keep working at it once we see
how it's implemented on the
ground because I suspect what
will need to tighten of language
and say oh maybe that didn't
work we need to try it better
this way because I think with
this population we need to get
it right and we have seen many
people who have who have been
taken advantage of and that's
why we feel the need to to do
these laws and so I am going to
support this bill but I want to
make sure that it I am on record
and and telling namely the
sponsor but the the you know
we'll be telling the body that
we this is needs to be a work in
progress because you know our
our.
The our constituents are demand
that so thank you madam chair.
Thank you representative
Representative of a chair
Johnson.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members and
Representative Matthews hi
moving too fast thank you.
Thank you we have a deep pass
motion by vice chair Johnson.
And I will second that motion is
there further discussion.
Okay the clerk to call the roll
please.
Representative Chasey.
Yes.
Representative Eli.
Representative Eli.
Excuse me madam chair I'm I
wonder if we should have of the
not to do pass the route the
first bill and then pass the
committee steps.
Thank you Representative
Matthews we will have the motion
reflect to I do not has on house
bill two to thirty four and a do
pass on house state government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee substitute for House
Bill to thirty fourth thank you
thank you.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Gallegos yes.
Representative Nibert.
Representative Ortez yes.
Representative Rehm.
We might go to.
Representative Zamora.
Madam vice chair.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Yes.
That we have six in the
affirmative and three and the
negative.
Representative Rehm to explain
your vote.
Thank you madam chair I I think
that this is moving in the right
direction but I don't think it
moved all the way and there were
several concerns not only from
the public from that committee
members I think we need to
address those thank you.
Thank you Representative
Representative Matthews by a
vote of six in the affirmative
and three in the negative you
have a do pass on your committee
substitute thank you.
Next we are moving on to house
bill two fifty with
Representative Serrato.
And if there are experts please
raise your hand and we will also
promote you.
Welcome Representative Serrato.
Your muted.
Thank you madam chairwoman I may
present the bill yes please
thank you house bill two fifty
is the long term care and
facility dementia training act
and as a long overdue bill for
so many New Mexicans who are
facing dementia or those that
care for them on H. B. two fifty
ensures that all direct service
staff and administrators
employed by long term care
facilities would be required to
have additional training in
caring for patients with
dementia and putting Alzheimer's
this training would be developed
and overseen by the department
of health I also have a
committee sub with me if I may
I'd like to discuss that as
well.
Thank you we'll move that
committee sub for discussion
purposes thank you madam
chairwoman of the committee said
it is two two zero four zero two
point one and the committee
substitute basically does three
things it came about from
conversations with the
department of aging and long
term care notices also thousand
was association and the New
Mexico health care association
and the New Mexico Center for
assisted living and the three
things does wanted simplifies
and clarifies the language so
that the duties and
responsibilities are laid out
very clearly and it also asked
that the deal H. does this work
in consultation with ale TST on
and finally it adds that the
training is a minimum four of
four hours which fits in line
with national best practices and
so this overall is a really
important issue because that
department of aging and long
service long term services
department on identifies having
a dementia competent workforce
as being important for
communities and this issue goes
all the way back to twenty
thirteen when the New Mexico
state plan for Alzheimer's
disease and related dementias
stated this is one of their six
goals and now eight years later
this this bill is actually
addressing that concern any
specifically looks at those that
that are facing early stages of
dementia you know we do have
facilities would have memory
care units that are able to take
care of the help assist those
that are living with I'm more
severe advanced stages of
dementia but this would ensure
that even those early signs of
liberal or trigger to detect or
otherwise would have that care
those memory care facilities
memory care units are only in
twenty percent or less than
twenty percent of all long term
care facilities and so the the
broad number of of folks that
live in long term care
facilities that those staffers
there would not be have that
same kind of training on three
quarters of those living with
Alzheimer's live in long term
care facilities up forty percent
of those with dementia little
long term care facility so get
this.
Is an ongoing issue we want to
make sure that everyone is
trained and then feels ready to
take on the those unique
challenges and partially because
New Mexico's elderly population
is growing the average age the
median age in cap Catron
county's fifty eight years old
and and in in Sierra County and
majority of more than fifty
percent of households have
someone who is over sixty five
years old living in them and not
that there's a direct link
between the two that the the
that that's the entire
populations impacted but we
above the age of sixty five a
person's risk of developing
vascular dementia or Alzheimer's
disease doubles every five years
and by the time somebody's AT
you know one in six folks over
AT we may act will have dementia
or be affected by it so I became
involved in this and I got a
great training on this one of my
constituents brought this issue
forward really a both sides of
it but not only that the
patients that are living with
Alzheimer's but also the the
staff members really want to do
their best to care for them and
do what they can we just wanna
make sure they have the tools
and ability to do that and so I
would love to introduce my if my
witnesses I have Secretary
Katrina Hodge from Lopez with
the aging long term Services
Department on on that's been
second that'll with ale TST is
also here to answer technical
questions about the committee
sub and Tommy Hernandez with the
Alzheimer's association and so
if I may madam secretary madam
chairwoman I'd like to have the
secretary speak as well.
That's right welcome secretary
thank you thank you madam chair
members of the committee we
really appreciate that the time
that you're getting on this bill
and really thank the sponsor for
bringing this forward it's very
important to us all it's it's
approximately eighty percent of
individuals who have memory loss
in any sort of long term care
facility and certainly in the
state of New Mexico we're no
different what we saw during
this pandemic time was it
individuals who are isolated and
the end facilities who didn't
have themselves recognizes an
Alzheimer's or dementia facility
we sat and had lots of of As
staff who were not trained in
how to deal with people with
memory loss this is such a
critical and important piece of
training that we believe that
any sort of direct care staff
need to have in terms of the
basics of understanding what to
do this would be no different
than understanding mental health
and having mental health first
aid training which is now very
popular around the state of New
Mexico and so we believe that
the basic sort of training for
anyone at the from the front
desk on how to divert people or
how to engage individuals with
some sort of memory loss is
critical to the mental health
and well being of these
residents in addition to that we
were happy to be able to partner
not only with the Alzheimer's
association but also with the
industry and come up with more
solutions in order to promote
this bill and to move this
forward we understand that not
every facility has recognize
themselves as a dementia or
Alzheimer's unit or that
specialize in this type of care
but we also understand that the
industry is taking on these
folks that have memory loss
people are going into long term
care facilities because they can
take care of themselves they're
going into this facilities
because they need at those.
Additional supports and the most
important support they need yes
because they have memory loss
and so this additional training
we believe is going to provide
the critical support aging and
long term services has at the
department that focuses just on
Alzheimer's and dementia and so
we believe that we can work with
the department of health which
we have a very close
relationship now in order to
have the best practice training
and and to implement so that our
residents are safe our staff are
trained and we believe that this
will actually result eventually
and lower turnover rates for
long term care because they know
how to handle and how to
interact and engage with
individuals with memory loss so
thank you for letting me speak
thank you Representative for
bringing this bill forward and
we stand for questions.
Thank you and if I can also have
on Tommy Hernandez with the
Alzheimer's association's
because well welcome.
Yes thank you madam chair thank
you Representative Serrato.
Morning members of the committee
my name is Tommy Hernandez I am
the public policy director for
the Alzheimer's association's
New Mexico chapter I would like
to begin by in thank you Mr
chairman and distinguished
members of the committee for
considering house bill two fifty
but I would also like to thank
Representative Serrato for
sponsoring this important bill
H. B. two fifty addresses a
state level public policy
priority of the Alzheimer's
association and it addresses of
a priority that is included in
the New Mexico state plan to
address Alzheimer's dementia as
Representative Serrato mention
their opening remarks the
Alzheimer's association is the
world's leading Health
Organization in Alzheimer's
dementia our substation eight on
growing concern and awareness to
scientific research on it you're
at a national level care and
support programs and services
and of course advocacy as we see
today for federal and state
level legislation that addresses
the most critical issues those
with this disease face the
public policy priorities that we
advocate for are identified with
robust data collection and
evidence based analysis H. B.
two fifty does both Alzheimer's
and other forms of dementia are
among the ugliest most
devastating diseases that
seniors are at risk of
developing as they age many
believe the symptoms are simply
forgetfulness memory loss and
random displays of confusion
sadly this disease is much more
than that it also includes
sudden mood swings irritability
behavior changes social
withdrawal other chronic
conditions are also associated
often those other symptoms mask
the dementia which really speaks
to the need for the training
that is proposed in house bill
two fifty today there were forty
three thousand New Mexicans
living with Alzheimer's and
dementia the state data strongly
suggests that the majority of
them are already living in long
term care communities these
figures one way over the coming
years the data projects that New
Mexico of the fourth largest
population of people sixty five
and older by twenty thirty this
is an important data point to to
provide the committee because we
know that while also I'm.
There's an aging is correlated
it is not healthy aging is not
part of it healthy aging process
so consequently we know that the
number of people moving into
these communities for this
critical care will increase if
there's been any hard lessons
learned from the pandemic which
we know there have been many is
that residents that are your
preparation for these long term
care facilities is absolutely
critical and we can address that
by setting a standard baseline
standard practices of training.
What a families discussing
moving a loved one into a
community there are many things
they look for madam chair
members of the committee however
one of those things that the
love family should not be
looking for is if the staff is
adequately trained interact with
their loved ones.
Get house bill two fifty would
fill that gap.
Simply put the prevalence of
dementia is too high and so it's
appropriate to raise the
training standards of direct
service staff need is evidence
based and data driven an
alarming number residences we
heard from the others for me is
that this the statistics speak
but the prevalence of dimension
these long term care community
specifically to hire one data
point I want to share with the
committee madam chair is that
seventy five percent of eighty
year old residents in nursing
homes have this devastating
brain disease so again given the
strong prevalence of dementia
and the current absence of
standards of training
demonstrate that H. B. two fifty
makes good policy sets lastly
when our association advocates
for improving the quality of
care we are exclusively speaking
for the residents we most
certainly aim as the secretary
pointed out to improve the
readiness among the staff were
delivering this quality care
again as it was pointed out when
staff is adequately trying to
care for the residents to better
understand the residents that we
also understand that it could
have a positive impact on their
on their longevity of their
employment in this in these in
these facilities so I'd like to
close madam chair members of the
committee that this bill was
included with robust discussion
with the New Mexico health care
association AT Department of
both entities we are extremely
grateful for to have their input
their feedback on behalf of the
Alzheimer's association madam
chair members of the committee
we please ask that you do.
Move this bill forward with a do
pass recommendation of clothes
thank you.
Thank you madam chair that's
what we have I want to also just
think my co sponsors on this
Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong Marian Matthews and
Roger Montoya who also
supporting and again similar to
what Tommy was saying I want to
thank the NM HCA and and C. A.
L. for on their their ongoing
conversations with our our our
conversations of the witnesses
here so thank you so much I'm
sure when we're more open for
commerce for questions thank you
so we will open up the pole for
the audience if you would like
to raise your hand in support or
opposition of house bill two
fifty.
We'll keep it open for another
ten seconds.
Okay so we have eleven and
support and one against.
So if you would like to speak in
support please raise your hand.
Senator Vargas.
You're now unmuted.
Yes good morning madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Senator Vargas and the
executive director for the New
Mexico health care association
in New Mexico Center persisted
living.
more association represents
sixty four nursing facilities in
over seventy system living
facilities across the state of
New Mexico.
We very much support the intent
this as a legislation has
Alzheimer's and dementia care
training is necessary for all T.
for long term care providers who
are not currently being trained.
We are grateful to the agent
longterm services department for
facilitating discussions between
stakeholders so that this bill
achieves its intention and we
think the sponsor and the
Alzheimer's association for
their willingness to collaborate
with stakeholders in an effort
to align this legislation
existing New Mexico laws and
regulations.
To that point though there isn't
there is outstanding question as
to whether the committee
substitute has indicated
consequence that impacts and
existing an existing state
funded programs.
And that also improving the
quality of care in long term in
long term care facilities we
look forward to continuing to
work together with the sponsor
and the agent long term Services
Department as well as the
Alzheimer's association to
resolve this question so that
the eventual statute is as
effective as possible thank you
again to all those to the state
and to the sponsoring
Alzheimer's association and I
appreciate the time madam chair
members of the committee thank
you and the Valencia here now
and get it.
Thank you again hello madam
chair members of the committee
Dion's of the Lancia I'm the
advocacy director for AARP New
Mexico air P. as you likely know
represents the interests of New
Mexicos fifty plus who have been
the hardest hit I think in this
pandemic of the last year we
first wanted to say thank you so
much to the bill sponsor for
bringing this forward and also
the good work of Secretary how
to Lopez and the Alzheimer's
association and prepping this
important bill and the committee
stop we stand in strong support
of the committee substitute we
support the comprehensive
training approach in educating
long term care staff who are
caring for people with dementia
A. R. P. believes that training
in recognizing the treatment of
dementia in patients is
essential for better outcomes
for patients and their staffs
and we strongly urge your
support for this committee staff
thank you.
Thank you Stephanie tell it's
here now and muted.
Good morning and thank you madam
chair honorable members of the
committee appreciate the time to
be here this morning my name is
Stephanie Davis I am the twenty
twenty one co chair for the walk
to end Alzheimer's and I am also
an Alzheimer's ambassador six
years ago at age sixty five my
mom was diagnosed with Lewy body
dementia and overlapping.
Alzheimer's disease Lewy body
dementias would perform some
dementia and one of the most
debate devastating symptoms of
Lewy body dementia are
hallucinations there have been
times when I sat down to speak
with my mom and she'll share
with me that her old high school
boyfriend came over and we had
lunch together or that my
grandma just got she just got
off the phone with my grandma.
Both of those scenarios are
impossible but I don't care
whose nations as fun memories
for her it's a difficult disease
to watch and economic suffer
through like everyone people
with dementia need meaningful
social relationships direct care
providers need training and
support to understand how to
have good relationships with
people who have dementia a
person with dementia consents I
care providers lack of interest
or in patients without training
it's not uncommon for caregivers
to become frustrated which
negatively affects the quality
of life for them and their
patients and loved ones the best
way to mitigate unnecessary or
unintended harm is by preventing
problems before they arise which
is why specialist training is so
important I stand in support of
this legislation and the
substitution in honor of my mom
and in memory of my grandparents
and for all of those were
impacted by this devastating
disease thank you.
Thank you sandy Johnson your now
and maintenance.
Sandy you'll have to and then on
your end.
That should do it yes I'm here
members of the committee my name
is sandy Johnson of all and here
on our walk committee for
Alzheimer's and I'm also
M..
Ambassador with the Alzheimer's
association.
I know the committee is unless
it affects which should lead to
moving HB to for forty to fifty
forward.
My fact is that during the eight
during a is a here is my mother
was living with Alzheimer's in
five different facilities with
increasing care giving is needed
where the staffs well good in
many ways some didn't have
enough training specific to
dementia care giving.
I needed to.
Learn new ways to address my
mother.
When several years since the
disease she looked at me and
said god you're ugly.
Also also facilities large and
small need training the bills
this puts forward.
When nutrition and I order
dressed individually from my mom
and her weight went from a
hundred eleven pounds she
weighed since I was a child two
hundred fifty.
so that area needs training as
well.
The New Mexico state plan to
address Alzheimer's and related
dementia has a goal of dementia
training at all on term care.
lower paying it beyond memory
care specific settings so the
need for two fifty is great the
pandemic has magnified this need
and so now is definitely the
time for HB two fifty thank you.
Thank you doctor Ronald Latino
you are now omitted.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee I'm doctor
wrong looking on I'm emeritus
professor of physiology and
former directors and the
gerontology a college in upstate
New York and prior to my
retirement here in Albuquerque
last year I shared Florida's
governor's provided a test for a
board on developing policies for
Alzheimer's disease and state of
Florida.
For my twenty five years plus
working with on part of policies
and programs and research in the
community in long term care and
else I was Izzy's we have found
one of the most outstanding
problems is again the training
of staff on how to deal with and
cope with behaviors associated
with Alzheimer's disease the
COVID.
Of the damages as proven that we
thought we find the frustration
within these facilities this
lack of training of the staff
and behavior issues results of
how I frustration and
Representative and high target
turnover of staff resulting in a
reduced quality quantity a could
I'm sorry thank you we do this
continuity of care which reduces
the quality of life of of
individuals with Alzheimer's
disease it increases amid health
issues of physical health issues
and also increase
hospitalization costs.
And that was so therefore I I
support the House Bill to up to
fifty because of the critical
important to now begin to the
training of staff on these
behavior issues of social else I
was disease if you want to
increase the quality of life for
these individuals in the latter
stages of their life thank you
very much.
Thank you Alice makori your now
animated.
Thank you very much madam chair
members of the committee New
Mexico developmental
disabilities planning council
strongly supports this bill New
Mexicans living with dementia
make up a significant portion of
the population under
guardianship inadequate training
of all individuals serving folks
living with dementia and other
neurogenesis diseases is crucial
many of us have witnessed first
hand from family members friends
and people in our lives how
horrifying it is to live with
dementia ET PC greatly
appreciate the cooperation of
aging a long term Services
Department in a broad range of
stakeholders practices bill
thank you.
Can.
Sorry we lost to Alice.
I'm I'm done thank you very much
madam chair thank you is there
anyone that would like to speak
in opposition.
Okay seeing none committee
members.
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair just two
questions the first one is who
pays for the training Madam
chair and representative.
Thank you madam chairman thank
you Representative for the
question I'm actually on my my
witness secretary our look this
spring it over however this
would be built into it would
this be within the department of
health overall but.
Secretary sure so
you madam chair Representative
Nibert the training it would be
incorporated in the training
that is mandated already every
facility assisted living
facilities and nursing homes
have a core set of training that
they have to complete in terms
of nursing facilities there is
also some regulation federal
regulation that talks about
Alzheimer's and dementia
training we would simply
incorporate best practices to
make sure that a person so
there's really no additional
costs we were looking at
additional funding maybe to
aging and long term services in
the future just so that we can
stay on top of the best practice
training and what we had offered
was a hundred and fifty thousand
in order to develop that that
most comprehensive training and
be able to roll it out it's
important to note here that we
did not mandate that all
training has to be done in
person that it can also be done
online in terms of their regular
curriculum.
Thank you M. Madam chair
representative madam secretary
of.
I think we're all getting more
familiar with service is some of
the training capable of being
conducted via electronic means
and secondly
Is a training done within the
facility ordered the people to
go to Santa Fe or Albuquerque to
attend the training.
If I may secretary that's an
excellent question Madam
chairwoman Representative and we
actually outlined in two
sections that this can be done
online for that particular
concern we want to make sure
that you know that the county
that I mentioned early catch and
and Sierra are not you know
super close to either
Albuquerque or Santa Fe we want
to make sure that those folks
that are than those areas on our
our anywhere in our state are
able to access this the duty of
the facilities to offer access
to that training to their staff
if they are contracting with
someone and that contractor has
to provide certification that
they the first they've done this
training to the facility but
they have to provide access to
the department of health and in
again consultation with ale TST
will provide a list essentially
a create
a list of of the programs that
they can that that have been
approved and and and are located
centrally also know that no one
would have to come you know to
it that that the court or to it
to receive that training.
Madam chair representative thank
you very much that's a lot of.
Thank you thank you
representative Representative
vice chair Johnson.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members I move a do
not pass on house bill two fifty
and they do pass on state house
state government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee
substitute for House Bill two
fifty.
A second.
Thank you we have a deposit
motion by a a by sure Johnson a
second by Representative guy a
goes is there further
discussion.
Okay the clerk to call the roll
please.
Representative Chasey yes.
Representative Eli.
Representative Eli.
Representative okay goes yes.
Representative night Burt yes.
Representative Ortez yes.
Representative Rehm yes.
Representative Zamora yes.
Representative Ely yes.
Madam vice chair.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Yes.
Madam chair with that you have
nine in the affirmative.
Great thank you you have a due
pass Representative Serrato
thank you madam chair of the
committee.
Thank you and now we are at
house bill three hundred.
Resented Stansbury.
In part if there experts please
raise your hands as well and we
will promote you to panelists.
Please begin when you're ready.
Great thank you thank you madam
chair and thank you to the
committee for hearing the bill
this morning I do have just a
substitute a committee
substitute for the bill that and
changes the lead agency on the
bill and so if it's appropriate
to do so I'd like to see if we
could not have the substitute
moved for discussion.
We can move the substantive for
discussion thank you.
Great thank you madam chair
thank you committee so house
bill three hundred actually
originated over the last year as
a result of a lot of discussions
with various agencies about the
need to really help our agencies
build leadership and leadership
pipelines and to help with
recruitment and retention of
talent within our state agencies
so this bill is really a good
government bills and the intent
of it is to help replicate
leadership programs that exist
in other states and state
government as well as the way in
which our federal government
institutionalized leadership
through the federal senior
executive service so the bill
borrows language that and I
would is used by the office of
personnel management the federal
government and the civil service
Reform Act of nineteen seventy
eight and creates a pilot
program that will be led by the
state personnel office for the
purposes of helping to bring
greater leadership more
innovation to state government
recruitment and retention to
help address vacancies and two
overall help improve the
leadership of our state
government
so the idea here is to pilot
this program work with the
agencies through the state
personnel office and then
institutionalize that in future
years through the bhajan statute
and without a stand for
questions.
Thank you Representative we will
go and we'll open the call for
the audience if you would like
to raise your hand in support or
opposition of house bill three
hundred.
And we'll keep it open for
another ten seconds.
Okay great we have three people
in favor and zero opposed so if
you would like to speak in favor
of the bill please raise your
hand.
If you would like to speak in
opposition please raise your
hand.
Okay seeing none committee
members Representative.
Nibert.
Thank you madam chair of.
Yes I felt to stay ready so.
I am the co you take away a
trusted of learning what the the
secretary of the General
Services Department.
Would have to say about the
committee said because in the
FIR.
he points out that the.
That agency is not
Representative to to deal with
this issue and the state
personnel office like waters are
criticized the the bill the
original bill will just
For
The direction the bill was
taking and I don't know if the
committee so address both
they're both their concerns and
I don't know whether both of
those agencies are our favorite
that are not the.
seem significant a lot of the
really strong language at each
of them up with their FIR is on
this this deal so Madam chair
representative
Does Mr Ortiz and the secretary
of the state personnel office
now support your legislation are
they still approached.
And thank you madam chair and
representative Nibert I spoke
with both secretary Ortiz and at
acting director Serna and worked
with them on the substitute
my impression from those
conversations is that they are
in favor of and support and it
looks like I'm acting director
Serna is actually here so.
Madam chair if you would allow
me
she is here could we bring him
up to the panelists so I asked
him a direct question madam
chair.
Yes Representative he's here.
Madam chair and Mr Serra in
light of the FIR that the but
you presented to us have all
your concerns been addressed and
have you been in discussions
with Mr cheese
about this issue can you and
like nest on on that.
Madam chair representative yes
thank you very much for the
question for for those of you
who might have been but yet my
name is Ricky sort of the acting
director of state personnel
office thank you to answer your
question we did have the
pleasure of speaking with
Representative Stansbury about
this legislation we were very
appreciative that she reviewed
our initial FIR and in the
committee substitute address the
concern that both secretary or
and I shared about the training
building more appropriately
assigned to the state personnel
office so secretary Ortiz and I
did come before submitting our
FY are we're on the same page
that moving the training and
appropriation to the state
personnel office makes most
sense we're in the process now.
Amping up in our training
division so that the state
personnel office can prove to be
a up for state employee training
as you may be aware there are
other pieces of legislation
moving through the session that
will similarly be asked or
required training thank you race
among state agencies state
employees so are anticipating
that some of those things well
will receive a approval by the
legislature sure we're gearing
up to be able.
Requirement thank you.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Mr Sarna
Madam chair Mister chair to the
the.
Does your budget allow you to to
conduct this or.
Are your concerns that were
expressed in the FIR still are
valid with respect to fund it.
Sure madam chair Representative
moving the appropriation over to
the state personnel office as.
A seventy five thousand dollars
appropriation to pilot and
develop the program we believe
is reasonable we're we're not
supportive of a recurring
appropriation because of course
the expectation is that we pilot
training to determine how
effective and efficient it'll be
in the state so we believe with
that appropriation to the state
personal office will have the
resources that we need to
develop the curriculum and start
rolling out what we would this
be to train the trainer program
so that the sole responsibility
doesn't fall on our training
staff we of course would work
with other trainers and other
agencies to leverage their
expertise to cross train on our
behalf that group right now
exists as the under a group
called parameters unite in fact
we're meeting this afternoon to
discuss this and other training
priorities are coming
legislature so we would leverage
the collaboration of other
parameters to help us
achieve the expectations of
thank you.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Mr Sarna.
Madam chair of.
Representative.
Yes I'm going to change my mind
regarded by support for this but
R. I will be calling Mr Thiessen
just double check to make sure
the yes all board with the the
and the have a discussion with
him but
I I was initially opposed
because of the the HSD is
strong.
concerns it appears that you
address those so all although to
move it out of committee of but
I I would like an opportunity
here for for Mr teas thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative.
Thank you thank you
representative Representative or
tass thank you madam chair and
thank you Representative
Stansbury for for bringing this
forward I read this and I
thought this is what we should
be doing at in in the nonprofit
world we talk a lot about
succession planning and you
engaging all staff and
stakeholders in you know in in
understanding their she plans
and and and implementing them
but in particular you know who's
going to take the helm and I
think that that's important
important conversation for
nonprofits and it's an important
conversation for for state
government as well to make sure
that the history the knowledge
the just the ways of of knowing
is is passed down and you need a
plan for that so thank you for
for bringing this forward
I'd like to move madam chair a
do not pass for H. B. three
hundred and eighty do passive
house state government election
collections in Indian Affairs
Committee substitute for House
Bill three hundred.
Thank.
Thank you Representative
Representative sh can we go
Representative Eli first.
Make the motion so we're get I'm
sorry okay all right thank.
So we have a do not pass for
house bill three hundred and to
pass on health state government
elections in the Indian Affairs
Committee substitute for House
Bill three hundred.
By Representative Ortiz and a
second by Representative Eli
where to call role please.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative guy it goes.
Yes.
Representative Nibert.
Yes.
Representative Ortez.
Yes.
Representative Rehm yes.
Representative Zamora.
Yes.
Representative Chasey.
And madam chair madam vice
chair.
Yes.
And madam chair blue is excused
madam chair with that you have
to excuse and seven in the
affirmative this is
Representative Chasey.
Hi.
Is it too late to vote.
Go ahead with your vote please.
Yes thank you thank you madam
chair with that we have one
excused and eight in the
affirmative.
Thank you Representative
Stansbury you have a do pass
thank you madam chair thank you
committee.
Madam chair one follow up are
very.
Please.
I did get that text from
secretary or to some he does
confirm that that he supports
the legislation now thank you.
Thank you.
Okay next we have house joint
memorial one as amended.
Senator Pinto.
Okay I see Senator can tell good
morning.
Good morning
you may begin.
Your presentation.
Thank you.
The witnesses are experts have
been let through.
They have to be identified.
Yes who are here let us know who
your witnesses are and if they
could raise their hand and then
our staff will come out and vote
I think you're obligating will
probably be a one.
Note that they are probably
participating from the
reservation so that probably am.
might might just be a phone
number.
But I'll go ahead and go board
with the bill are the Joint
Memorial so the Senate Joint
Memorial one requested Mexico
legislature to urge Congress to
Four four funding.
Of the higher education.
Higher education scholarship
grant program for Indian
students there are other
entities that already receive
point funding from the federal
government so this is just
taking it a step higher
including higher education
especially when there is a
budget issue that there will be
a gap in the funding.
So the bureau of Indian
education will be supportive of
it and the tribes and rely on
these funds
the navigation scholarship
offices the main entity that
came forward with this Senate
Joint Memorial and it did ask
unanimous means read the last
thirty day session although we
ran out of time it was.
For.
Or so and here we are again.
Thank you and stand for the
questions.
Okay thank you we will now
conduct a poll.
Okay we.
Have started to pull.
Okay we have three people who
have voted in favor of the whole
and several guests we will now
go to public comment.
If you would like to expressed
support for the bill please
raise your hand and we will call
on you.
Seeing none we'll go to
opposition if you are close to
the bill and would like to make
public comment please raise your
hand.
Then we will go to committee
members representative Nibert.
thank you madam chair of just
one comment I'm looking at the
last paragraph of the amendments
that context version
One down in that paragraph.
I see the words the Navajo
Nation office of the president
vice president and.
I think we're just awaited
budget up the tribal leadership
of all twenty three Indian
nations tribes or pueblos New
Mexico.
It seems to me that if we're
adding the language at the end.
We should delete the words the
Navajo Nation office of the
president and vice president.
Last the other Indian nations
tribes and pueblos are get upset
because we're singling one out
and not recognizing all of so I
I think you will be read side if
we're just out the.
have it right in our goes to the
present United States Senate New
Mexico congressional delegation
the tribal leadership of all
twenty three Indian nations
tribes or pueblos in the Clasico
and the secretary of for.
so.
I do hear the Senators comment
on that and then it's
appropriate but motion.
Madam chair representative this
memorial was already drafted and
it's already been
this is the second time it's
gone through and supported by
the Navajo Nation and also all
the other nations had the
support resolutions in that
sense and the pueblo the council
of governors state all have been
contacted the Mescalero Apache
to hickory in all the tribes
nations or pueblos with in New
Mexico have been contacted and
that is why that was the last
amendment as far as the language
and they all agreed on the
language.
And we're in support of the
language of the bill of that.
R. again it doesn't make any
sense out.
Representative Navajo Nation
office the president vice
president well we have it
covered in the latter part of
that sentence
Right.
I don't know that so.
I mean this is a.
This is a of.
Moral of the Senate house and
it's just saying that the copies
to go there
and I just don't want to some of
the other tribal leadership the
ups that was with us for for
specifically mentioned
mentioning the Navajo Nation
that not that shooting of the
other twenty two that may that
plagues us.
So.
Madam chair I I would move that
we strive for the Navajo Nation
office of the president and vice
president.
Comma.
From the last paragraph.
And I'll second that motion.
Okay we have a motion.
To amend the bill.
To call world please.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Gallegos.
Yes.
Representative night part yes.
Representative Ortez.
Yes.
Representative Rehm yes.
Representative Zamora.
Yes.
Representative Chasey.
Madam vice chair.
Look.
Madam vice chair.
Yes and I will explain about.
And sure Lewis is excuse madam
chair with that you have to
excuse and seven in the
affirmative.
Okay so Senator Pinto we have
they do pass on the motion to
and then.
The latter part of the bill to
include all tribal leadership an
Indian nations.
And we will continue the
discussion of the bill.
Thank you madam chair
Madam chair and Representative
can you put that on the screen
like to see the hard copy.
There is no hard copy.
It'll be done by lying Committee
I might Representative madam
chair and representative can
agree that line by line for me.
All right the whole purpose.
Be it further resolved that
copies of this memorial be
transmitted to the president of
the United States.
Comma.
The speaker of the United States
house of representatives comma
the president of the United
States said that comma.
The New Mexico congressional
delegation comma.
The tribal leadership of all
twenty three Indian nations
comma tribes and pueblos in New
Mexico.
And the secretary of Indian
Affairs period.
And.
Three four is that the.
Language and with the ended the
secretary of Indian Affairs
Department was there was a
discrepancy on the other
amendment as far as one of the
tribes in conflict with what was
written that's why that language
was said the way it was.
So we were trying to come up
with a
I would choose
More that legislation that would
be supported by all the tribes
nations and pueblos that that
that is but that's fine.
At the gravel of the amendment
thank you.
Representative Chasey.
Okay is still my for okay
Representative Nibert you still
have the four thank you madam
chair of I I really appreciate
the of this and I know that
there's another memorial running
around to.
Secure of.
Or to request the federal
government to step up and
fulfill its role through the
Indian nations tribes or pueblos
of New Mexico.
At this time of those issues are
are tremendously highlighted so
all support the Senate Joint
Memorial one and thank you
senator for bringing.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative Chasey.
Thank you madam chair and I
apologize I'm trying to do
something a sort of emergency
for my law practice so I'm not
looking at it but when
Representative night was
breeding were you talking with
you when you said the secretary
at the Indian Affairs which
you're talking about in the
state of New Mexico.
Madam chair and Representative
yes.
That she works with okay it
wasn't talking about and that
she was notified of the language
and it was in the that the
others were in agreement with
that language that was that
presented their thank you okay
that wasn't the secretary of the
interior and then undersecretary
for the department of Indian
affairs yes Terry Utley trick
you okay great thanks thank you
very much that's all.
Thank you I have further
discussion committee members
madam chair all who they do
passes Senator more one is.
Just then I'll second that.
I have a motion for do passed by
Representative Eli and a second
by Representative Nibert to call
the roll please.
Representative Chasey a better
chair before you take the vote
yes and.
Twice amended yes the amended
twice amended thank you.
Representative Chasey.
Yes.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative guy it goes yes.
Representative night part.
Yes.
Representative Ortez.
Yes.
Representative Rehm yes.
Representative Zamora yes.
Madam vice chair yes.
And journalists is excused with
that you have one excused and
eight in the affirmative.
Okay thank you Senator Pinto
earlier I called to big sister I
think I'm older so I thank you
again two days if we're bringing
this bill forward and I think
that we wanted to be all
inclusive with the entire tribal
nations and deck levels within
our state as you know the Navajo
Nation hickory Apache and the
Mescalero Apache we all come
from one lineage the Athabaskan
lineage and I think it was
better to either list all the
nations in the pueblos or to add
general generally list them as
tribal leadership.
Of that twenty three nations
tribes and pueblos so thank you
for bringing this
Memorial forward and we wish you
the very best going forward.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative it's thank
you members of the committee.
And madam chair what one low
point of order of the Senator
said twice amended actually are
Our committee only amended it
wants the prior amendment
occurred over the Senate so our
report you just say as amended
by our.
Do we know.
Thank you.
Okay we are moving on to Senate
bill four as amended.
Representative us Senator Ivey
Soto.
Madam chair I do not see Center
Soto locked on.
Which you give them a quick call
please thank you.
Madam chair did you do this all
purpose have Daniel Ivey Soto
right before lunch.
Right.
These.
Well his quarters that's right.
I just want to point out I've
got bills waiting in his
committee.
So
well he's got two of them may
be.
We might want to all consider
that before this.
It's a workable it.
Is are you are you suggesting we
roll these two bills.
tending some action.
You know I think we should try
to do a little persuasion while
he's in front of us.
Same score among.
I don't think so okay I'm asking
at chairwoman Lewis
If we could roll these bills if
we don't hear from the Senator.
I think we should try to get in
touch with them for sure.
Chair you just reach senator
Ivey Soto and he's logging in
right now.
Okay thank you.
Senator Ivey Soto are you with
us.
Madam chair is in the process of
logging on and not with us just
yet okay thank you.
Madam chair this is the quietest
Daniel on the soda was ever been
I now I think we should all get
ready and brace ourselves.
Calm before the storm.
I am laughing.
Our.
Is everyone feeling as tired as
I am.
Yes I just got a text that the
the the senators seven trouble
walking.
Sure Reese is it.
Possible the tax and then log in
number maybe.
Yes madam chair.
You know it's hard for senators
to figure this stuff out.
We better be careful what we
desire we won't have any of our
bills are sent.
This all the record.
That's right go back to the web.
Hello madam chair thank you so
much for your patience.
When it was at seven or eight
votes to table Senate bill four
we are.
One person excuse I'm sorry
Senator welcome.
Welcome Senator you may begin.
Senate Bill for several for very
well thank you very much madam
chair and members of the
committee R. and again I do
appreciate your patience fall
I've been struggling with some
technology issues in order to be
able to come and.
Well what Senate bill four does
is it deals with the timelines
for the redistricting process it
also provides a little bit
greater clarification for local
governments in terms of how they
do their district thing this
bill is not related to the
matter how the legislature does
is distracting that is in a
different bills although
So the issues are are related
but in this case legislatively
distinctive with that madam
chair out will also note that
this bill does opal act as one
of the issues that the
That is to be on the standard
base maps for the for each
county is in the nation tribe
improbable I'm Chris and with
that madam chair I'll be happy
to stand for questions thank you
senator we will now go conducted
whole.
Okay those in favor of the bill
will vote for or if there are
opposed will vote against.
If you are.
In the public audience and you
would like to make a comment in
support of the bill please raise
your hand and we will call on
you.
Richard Mason.
Madam chair members the
committee my name is Dick Mason
Care the action committee of the
league of women voters of New
Mexico want to think Senator Ivy
Soto for bringing this bill it's
very important to adjust the
dates to deal with the like this
are the census data coming and
also we were very happy to see
that Senate the state Judiciary
Committee eight at a addition
amendment that noted that map
should show tribal but
boundaries on the map that are
submitted by the secretary of
state we paid a lot of attention
to tribal representation
redistricting process in this
related so we stand strong
support SB four and Judy given
to past thank you.
Thank you next we have Mario
Jimenez.
Hello madam chair members the
committee I would simply like to
echo with the words of of of our
Mister Mason from the league of
women voters and I too would
like to thank the committee
sponsor outside the bill sponsor
for considering and then making
the amendment as mentioned
Senate Judiciary that's
definitely something that that
we felt to be an important and
integral part of the piece of
legislation and again just thank
you for for bringing forward and
we urge the committee to
strongly support this piece of
legislation as we do thank you.
Thank you do we have any
comments in opposition of the
bill please raise your hand.
CNN we will go to committee
members representative Ely.
Madam chair Senator
So I fully support this this is
not something I have any
problems with it but I trying to
figure out as these bills make
it to Judiciary.
What are you know kind of
putting the pieces together
would you mind if you're if you
can do this today just for our
edification so we can start
thinking about it for Judiciary
walk through the time line for
me if we're talking about ninety
days that puts us to December I
mean just you you know what I'm
trying to think about I'm trying
to think through if we've got a
citizens council or whatever it
is we're gonna be talking about
how does this all gonna work
have you thought about that can
you walk us through it and not
today can I get you start
thinking about.
So it it it may surprise you are
not that I'm actually spent a
fair amount of time to think
about it.
And and I will tell you
madam chair and Representative
Eli that that what
so so let me let's let's kind of
put together the various moving
parts are happening are included
contingencies Senator so of this
bill operative all when we a
couple years ago did.
Four oh seven one of the
discussions that was filed in
the house
with Representative Nibert why
is to ensure that if there were
changes that needed to be made
adjustments to precinct
boundaries after the
the census outreach level
results have been received that
it was important that the local
government be given the first
option to make those adjustments
are that if they fail to make
those adjustments that then the
secretary of state could make
those adjustments as necessary
in order to comply with with the
law but but that but that really
what you should be doing is
advising local governments and
then allowing them to manage
their own communities so so
that's the thirty days and and I
will tell you that that in all
of the different iterations that
thirty days remains a hard
thirty days and I'm not departed
from that in the new version of
an effect the the so so
basically.
The way that that this was
originally set up.
What we're supposed to get the
street level results by April
first we know we're not going to
this year.
And then the secretary state
would finish her work including
doing additional review a
learning the counties given them
thirty days and then doing her
post review by June thirtieth
that's about ninety days so what
we did is instead of using
calendar dates we just went to
ninety days now that is no more
than ninety days what is
happening this year we'll we'll
talk about the the the
commissioner of the committee or
whatever and just second what's
what's happening this year this
is because we know.
Wet weather timelines are and
and and we know what's going on
research and polling was on
contract with the state
legislature has already
identified twenty two different
counties where there needs to be
some some modifications to
to the precincts just based on
the number of people who voted
in the last election and so
they're already working with the
counties to do that and they are
doing their best to project
where we may end up having some
precincts that would have more
than twenty five hundred people
in a present that is going to
significantly because we're
working with a partner that has
been doing this for many many
years and they know the
territory of New Mexico Health
I'll the the land of New Mexico.
They.
We we anticipate that the
frankly they're gonna take care
of about ninety percent of all
the judgments even before we get
the street level data.
That means then that when we get
the street level data the
secretary state should be able
to really within about ten days
to two weeks be able to to
figure out what additional
precincts need adjustments maybe
less time than that alert those
counties that starts their
thirty day clock.
Yes if I could that might be
helpful to the committee we're
talking about just we have a
starting point terms dates yes
working at getting the census
data the end of September
Representative that is correct
all right I'm sorry to interrupt
not owner that's that's correct
yeah so so what we get at the
end of September actually it's
it's helpful to put accomplish
right so so we get our medicine
chamber damn the secretary of
state should be able bye bye
let's say October fifteenth.
I get the get the information
and and that's actually we we
think that'll be the the R. it
could be as much for your time
that unless less safe October
fifteenth that's right the clock
on the on the counties so then
you go to November fifteenth it
comes back she makes whatever
other justice before the end of
November we actually then can
come in in December and have our
special session on
redistricting.
And our and and and and the
medical researchers with Michael
sharply from research I'm
calling from with a Jon Boller
Legislative Council Service we
all believe that that is a an
eminently doable time frame once
we get that street level data to
be able to expedite given all of
the all of the work that we're
doing that's front loaded and
part of that precluded work by
the way is front loaded work
that was done as a result of
house bill four of seven.
Where not only did we put in
this the thirty day time period
for local governments but we
also in hospital for a seven we
adjusted the the parameters for
precincts so that private house
before seven we had about
fifteen hundred precincts today
we have just shy of two thousand
present I was going to make
redistricting mentally easier to
do.
By the time we have three level
data will probably have most of
the other adjustments done so
that we're only gonna be looking
at about two dozen places in the
state we're going to need to
make adjustments so so now let's
talk about what would happen in
terms of a commission.
A citizens commission or a
legislative committee
so here's the thing what are is
there any is M. one
congressional district or two
congressional districts does not
depend upon getting the street
level data that's a community of
interest issue.
What are not whether or not we
should maintain De Baca County
as a whole County investors and
and what what we're looking at
at various different maps.
I'm that much upon the street
level data.
So we can actually do the more
macro.
Discussions of communities of
entrance of of historic
boundaries of of of all of those
other things without the street
level data from this study.
We can actually come up with
proposed maps that have general
boundaries.
Without the street level data of
this census and then once the
street level data comes and we
just simply plug that in and
instead of having a broad swaths
here it goes you know down not
like that I mean it's it's it's
really it's it's eminently
doable but there's but there's
no reason to delay getting input
from the public the input from
the public should start
late spring early summer so that
we have plenty of input from the
public and we know what the
public wants us to look at our
and in particularly if it's a
citizens redistricting mention
so that they're able to put
together the independent maps
and submit those to us up so
that they can be considered and
so that so that that would
actually of the the time lines
are very tight but they do work.
Yes madam chair and senator I
appreciate that because I am
trying to put together my hat so
what you're thinking is is that.
After we.
Our adjourn with that this
session is finished are the
current legislative session.
The council or commission or
whatever this could start
meeting late spring early
summer.
Have meetings with out having
the census data.
Then they get the census data.
In September and I think what
I'm hearing you say is on both
of them that you would do kind
of eight for macro analysis and
then a more microneedles just
once you get the sense of state
that you have by an outline that
would be true most of the
council or the commission and
for what we're doing in terms of
you know our own discussions
I mean am I saying that right
I'm M. M. D. F. A. and then you
could make that more finite in
the the council commission would
continue to be coming up to the
legislative session December
seven that's what we do.
Madam chair and Representative
Eli they would so there meetings
really this they should be able
to finish their meetings are by
they should be able to finish
their meetings really by
September.
And then at that point like in
the details from those meetings
including the proposed maps.
Like in those details and that
is especially made possible
because we now have have up
significantly more three six.
Because the problem we had
before because we haven't really
read them precincts for over
forty years the problem is if
you moved there there are
certain precincts that were that
were twenty percent of house
district.
You checked that one three state
from one house to another that
reverberates from corral us all
the way down the aisle to.
But because we have actually
adjusted the size of the
precincts.
Now you address that in in
Kerala's it's it's not going to
go any further than that maybe
the answer Torrance County we're
gonna be able to to better
manage those changes that would
happen.
Well and madam chair and senator
a it certainly helps that we
have a kind of institutional
knowledge with research and
polling with Bryant's General
from Michael sharp I I totally
agree with that as well
okay so you're so at least if
this in theory if this works we
don't really have to change we
have to change filing deadlines
don't sound like.
Our our madam chair and
Representative Ely I've been
asked to look at filing
deadlines I've been asked to
look at the date of the primary
at the moment I don't believe
that will be necessary at all.
Yeah and madam chair and senator
I'm just telling you I have
actually talked about with the
primary I I'm I'm gonna come
from around to the notion it's
that simple.
Yes so I mean I'm just I I'm
worried about it but I I'm
encouraged by I am and so I I'm
gonna listen on I appreciate it
Madam chair and senator I I'm
just trying to the moving parts
together and and it's helpful
for me just your your
explanation so I appreciate very
much thank you madam chair thank
you sent.
Thank you Representative Chasey.
Chair I'm sorry.
One other question that I can
not you just obviously my notes
and I apologize.
What is litigation.
What happens in that situation.
We are madam chair and
Representative Chasey the if
there's litigation right to life
K. it was called.
Michael.
I if the so here's the thing
what we what we have in here is
that the is that is that we
release the.
Our petitions what's the
legislative work is done.
Because we cannot account for
the litigation but if there
eight if we do it right that
we're not gonna have projected
litigation if if there is
litigation that that point
if there adjustments that need
to be made those committee made
I think
In the context of that
litigation because because you
can't file for an office where
you don't know the boundaries
with runners are true.
Okay okay I'm good I just wanna
make sure that we're kind of
thinking through the issues okay
thank you madam chair center
from someone do that again
certain objects.
Okay now Representative Chasey.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Senator Ivey Soto.
You know what I would love is if
before this comes to Judiciary
could you make this a little you
can drop us a little picture
with the time lines on it for
taking the legislative in
Turner's staff person who could
do that thank you so much better
when I have
Graphic that I can look at.
And but let me ask you this
We're contemplating and I mean
I'm I recall the Legislative
Council meeting and
both December and then in
January we were talking about
when.
We would gather for
redistricting and we're looking
at December now right madam
chair and senator Ivey Soto.
Madam chair and Representative
Chasey that is correct we're
looking on the December time
frame for when the okay right
and.
What you're talking about is
everything that's going to occur
between the final presentation
these data to us.
And.
session.
Madam chair representative that
is correct.
Essentially I don't know if
you're going to be a projecting
before that or not but and this
work is going to be done
primarily by her.
So madam chair representation so
first of all I'm I'll I'll I'll
be happy to to the discussion
after you guys I will let you
know that my seven year old
daughter does a better job of
staying within the lines that I
do
not just in drawing the probably
in life she however one of us
will get that done and
so so the work.
Total there's there's two
aspects to what needs to be done
and and again we're we're very
fortunate because we've got the
the legal team that represents
the legislature on this in terms
of whether they pass legal
muster is the same legal team
that we've used for the last two
districts thanks so so nobody
has to learn the process and and
like wise with the that with
with the demographer's in terms
of research and polling so so
the there is the public input
aspects of the work.
And that public input aspect
does not have to depend upon the
street level data.
And then there is the micro
work.
And that micro work in terms of
the finite of the final maps
does.
But we will we will have that
information in sufficient time
for us to be able.
to utilize that when we get to
our special session.
So I'm thank you madam chair
Senator you just faced an issue
that
quite frankly not occurred to me
and I think it's because I have
too many things going on too
many balls in the air right now.
But you're saying we can go
ahead with public input prior to
having all these final figures
madam chair and representative
that is correct and we should
proceed before we have the final
figures okay.
Yes.
Madam chairman Senator Ivey Soto
my last question is that really
about your bill but I I wanted
to inquire how things are going
and Senate rules and when House
Bills might be
On your agenda.
Madam chair and Representative
Chasey we are planning a
beginning Monday to have a
relatively aggressive
scheduling of house bills that
are sent to the rules committee.
We're anxiously awaiting word of
those I only have one but it's
one that you like to.
The chair and representative
just it is one that I like quite
a bit and we will you will we'll
have a conversation on on on on
some of the issues related that
including
the up of some of the amendments
that were made in the house on
that but we can discuss that
offline.
Actually I don't think we
amended it.
So yeah okay.
Okay government.
Thank you madam chair thank you
next we have Representative
Nibert.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator I agree that the
timeline would really help and.
Madam chair and senator.
As I understand that.
You you you said something about
we can draw the precinct
boundaries sometime.
Late fall I guess early winter
Based on the data we already
have a baby just making some
minor adjustments after the
sunset the census data is are
actually released it is up are
an accurate understanding.
Your muted.
But we were butif.
Madam chair representative
Nibert that is that is correct
so here's the thing is that is
that there are there are two
things that will that will cost
recent boundaries to be Justin
twenty twenty one.
No the first is whether more
than seven hundred fifty people
voted.
Are from eight recent the second
would in the last general
election.
The second is one of the more
than two thousand five hundred
people residing in a precincts.
Well we already know the first
answer of those two we've
identified every single precinct
were more than seven hundred
people voted in the last general
election.
So so consequently we don't need
to wait for the state level data
in order to make those precincts
adjustments and in the process
of making those precinct
adjustments we I wish to think
about three fourths of the
precincts that existed presents
that may have more than twenty
five hundred people residing in
them will also end up getting
adjusted at the same time so
that so that we will just simply
have a little bit of cleaning to
do with the.
And as a result of that you can
move line slightly to take care
of their actual since the state
of right later on when we get it
but it is a true that we would
have a hard deadline of maybe
the end of January of twenty
twenty two where we're kind of
locked into the precincts right
I just precincts after that date
unless you get some court order
right.
Madam chair and Representative
Nibert.
No there's there's no hard
deadline enters Jareth twenty
twenty two to do that we there's
a hard deadline on adjustment of
precincts beginning of prior to
a census where where we have to
reside the precincts prior to
census and then and then the
census takes place we get that
free level data and then were
able to make the additional
adjustments and so and and and
so part of what happens madam
chair and representative Nibert
is that so so what we get when
we get the street level data is
we get the data based on census
blocks so just as a our
districts are made up of
precincts.
Precincts are made up of census
blocks
want to quickly when we get the
census block data.
R. that actually will fit in to
where the precincts are and even
if we made adjustments research
a polling can can plug in the
correct census blocks where the
prisons are to in order to have
all the demographic information
we need to have.
Madam chair and senator may not
a passport question correctly
At some point.
And I think it's so.
Four months or so.
We can adjust the priest sex
before an election I would
assume that would apply to a
primary election as well and I
believe it's four months so that
means sometimes January
whatever.
Of twenty twenty two we have to
really have things in place
there were not.
Madam chair representative I
would that is correct without a
court order you are correct
under article three of the
election code we cannot make
adjustments to of the precinct
boundaries within the four
months prior to election I'm and
but but that but although the
the election does provide that
with a court order would be
allowed to do so.
And so really once the census
data is released in September.
We really have a lot of work to
do between the release of that
data and.
Through January
to to get this all done and and
it sounds like.
The heavy lives going to be for
us in in December.
And we have to get the get that
done and have everything in
place and then talk a little bit
about the madam chair Senator
talk a little bit about the the
nominating petition portion of
that and how that's going to.
Affect candidates running for
office during the twenty twenty
two election cycle.
Shortly madam chair
representative Nibert so first
of all by the way that the
sexual auditor talking about for
the four months is up on sexual
industry that I subsection B..
R. that the fox about that we so
R. when.
The state for us at the
legislature will be in the
November December time frame.
That the listing for the
demographer's and for the for
the county clerks in the county
commissions actually a lot of
that was done in two thousand
nineteen and the rest of it is
being done as we speak right
now.
In terms of of most of the heavy
lifting that is happening
there's only going to be some
micro adjustment that will need
to take place once after after
September when we get that
street level data if at all and
so
so that's so so we talk about
having left it all depends who's
doing the heavy lifting.
R. but then
but yes otherwise you are you're
correct that's that's that's
what we're going to focus on on
the on the
on the nominating petitions.
It only for different offices
with a nominating petitions
would be held until the
districts are are completed from
the legislative perspective not
the litigation perfect we'll get
ready for statewide office where
there's a higher number of
signatures required there's no
difference you still get the
nominee petitions October you
still get the full amount of
time because we don't district
the statewide offices.
Right so it would it would
simply be for the if you're
running for district office
because of the things otherwise
you have somebody who goes out
in good faith tries to get a
bunch of signatures and then
they end up getting senators for
for a district that they did not
live in at the time or from
neighbors were no longer in the
same district.
And so and and then that just
encourages a lot of litigation
and it knocks people off the
ballot who who who thought that
they have the the senators of
the need to have.
So I guess your estimate would
be that those petitions would be
available maybe they are.
Middle to late December or will
we be talking about January
maybe about your work
ops madam chair and
representative Nibert certainly
no later than January first and
our filing deadline is the
second Tuesday and March.
right so that would give us
three and a half months I will
tell you every single time
someone has run against me they
were recruited literally the
weekend before the deadline I
happen to think the requirement
of petition signatures is way
too low for our offices.
R. but for the number of
petition signatures of people
needed it it it certainly.
If if they're recurring someone
and in the five days before the
deadline it didn't I don't think
that was budget report.
And are there any impacts on.
Municipal elections that would
be occurring in the month of
March and maybe other local
elections that would occur of
March and and how does this are
this bill are affect those
elections.
Madam chair representative what
this bill clarifies if that is
that if you are as as as far as
local governments are concerned
if you are election is held
during the regular local action.
Then you do your districting
during calendar year twenty
twenty two.
Because you're election is
November of twenty twenty what
we don't want to do different
things in any circumstance in
the middle of your election if
your election is not held during
the regular local election and
that that would be I tease.
And that would also be
that would also in in addition
to counties because there with
the general election that would
also then be those are actually
it's like twenty some
municipalities that have not
opted into the regular local
election.
Maybe they will need to get
their district in done during
twenty twenty one R. and they'll
be able to do that enough times
before nominating B. R. before
the filing deadline is going to
be for their March
twenty twenty two Alexion and
the and so and and one of the
reasons why we have it set up
that way is precisely to avoid
unnecessary litigation on those
and we don't want local
governments making a decision
all we don't need a district all
after the election or we should
try to jam in a just a
districting when when it would
be disruptive.
So for those entities I really
need to be on top of that now
and not wait till.
November or whatever to start
they can this issue up
Representative.
Madam chair and senator you
mentioned something about
district some and we were
focused on state type elections
but we also have three
congressional districts that
will be up for election and
those are distracted and its
potential that the lines were J.
sure there's been some
discussion about that in the
news and I was wanting that
those cents they have petitions
that are do much before our
state petitions are due how will
it affect congressional
candidates
in their ability to get
petitions signed things of that
nature.
Madam chair representative so
that is you know given the size
of those districts but people
who run for Congress that tend
to have
a larger organization behind
them in order to be able to get
their their their petitions
signed and and so even though
there are deadline is going to
be the beginning of February
given the number of positions
that are required to run for
those offices but I did think
it's too low
I'd that I don't I don't think
that that will be a problem
because because you know for
four percent legislative seats
and certainly for most local
seats it has to be the candidate
going around asking people to
get the the petition for the
right for Congress there tends
to be more of a party
organization behind of that
effort and and or or or other
get all legislative volunteer so
so I don't I don't believe that
that will be an issue in terms
of people being able to comply
with that requirement.
For the madam chair are the
petitions that federal
candidates go out or those state
generated forms that would be
subject to this act or are those
federal generated forms that are
beyond the scope of this fact
Madam chair representative
Nibert those are states
generated important subject to
the side.
So so even the federal elective
offices that would be running
those petitions would not be
available until such time as all
those workers that as provided
this bill Madam chair
representative Nibert that is
correct and and and all the more
reason given that that that that
it bears out that there's a big
question find somebody to get
signatures you want to make sure
your with the press conference.
Right.
Madam chair and senator.
Thank you for thank you about
all these things and and trying
to.
But all those things have a
motion I would personally like
to express my thanks to the many
county clerk from the folks at
the secretary of state's office
that are going to be doing all
the hard work and that trying to
get this stuff done in
fairly short order it sounds
like because of the delays at
are going to be experience with
respect to the release of the
census data so
at please extend my thanks to
through the clerks that you come
in contact with as of the.
Just to see how all this goes it
it could be a very busy fall
thank you
R. madam chair and senator thank
you.
Thank you and we will go back to
Representative Chasey.
Thank you madam chair I forgot
one of my points
madam chair and senator I think
Olivia should present her
drawing to the judiciary.
I'm my sympathies I can't do
anything I'm not my son in
Denver has to consider the ball
with technology it is you know
my son's you know the older one
anyway.
I'm very much dependent on my
offspring for any kind of
technical.
Absolutely thank you we are I
think we all are.
Thanks committee members yes all
of the past thank you I do
passed by Representative Ely
will seconded and a second by
Representative Chasey.
Do we have any opposition.
Seeing none we have had to do
pass showing all members present
voting in the affirmative
Senator Ivey Soto you having to
pass on Senate bill four as
amended thank you very much
madam chair mac proceed to
Senate bill twenty six yes
please do thank you very much
madam chair in of the first
actual session that we had in
twenty twenty we adopted Senate
bill four
which in the our portions of
that bill that were originally
introduced that dealt with
running an election during the
pandemic we are provided a
variety of different
contingencies for that election
we also increased election
security.
During that election
particularly for mail ballots.
And so what we've what we've
done them we we we just figured
well when we get to the to the
twenty twenty one session we
will
put that in a in a general to
have bill which by the way
Senator Pat Woods is carrying
the General to have bill this
year the and
and and and they will take place
in our course of business
because the next election will
be till November twenty twenty
one.
And then of course we've had a
member of Congress the elected
are be appointed to a
Go opposition have actually just
had a hearing I think it there
to go and we anticipate a vote
on on that position to be held
sometime in the next couple of
weeks and that will trigger the
need for an out of cycle
election for Congress and the
I'm lines on that election is
fairly high kids are and and so
but but we need to deal with the
issues.
you deal with the issues that
were dealt with them Senate bill
for that are appropriate to have
in there so let me explain the
differences between Senate bill
four.
And the set of bills paid for
the first profession.
And several twenty six today and
so the differences are first of
all when we were in the midst of
the pandemic in the summertime
we didn't know where things are
going to be in the fall we
created a provided health and
safety task force.
Are provided legislative
leadership to review
if there was a need for any
changes to the election rules
that is not in this bill because
we have pretty well figured out
how to manage our election a
pandemic in were on the
hopefully we're on the on the on
the tail end of of of a number
of things that are so that is
not included here the other
thing is is that has that bill
when it came to the house it had
a provision in there that county
clerks could send an automatic
request for absent out for mail
ballots to voters.
That is not in this bill however
what is in this bill is that
every single every single.
Our goal actually secretary of
state on behalf of all thirty
three categories will go out in
the name of the county clerk but
it'll be paid for up front
because across state will send a
notice of the election.
voters and that notice of the
election will inform voters of
how to get a mail ballot the U.
R. L. to get the mail ballots
that is actually more efficient
than the paper form if people
want the paper form a phone
number to call to get to perform
as well as all the different
places where they can vote in
person so that notice will be
what is neutral as to the manner
in which people vote whether
vote by mail but paying person
it provides all that information
if this bill also provides
separate that which is distinct
from previous one it disallows
and there's another shot up to
Representative Nibert it just
allows third party absentee
ballot requests.
All in one of the things
actually in the general election
that happened there are number
of third party groups sending
out absentee ballot requests and
medically it confuse the voters
and help and and ups that a lot
of voters and so we're so so use
the official for you to go
online or call to get the first
one from and how to.
And then the last thing that is
that is distinct we are
continuing to use up that
through this bill the
we are continuing to use the
last four digits of social
security number.
And our and so what we do have
in this bill is the ability
challengers to be are present
with the county clerk does
initial rejection or acceptance
of the
of the absentee of the mail
ballots and then the last thing
we have we instituted in the
general election of twenty
twenty at work out really well
I'm a hard stop for the election
board of eleven PM and what we
find here is that if there are
unaccounted ballots on election
night that there are there that
a deputy sheriff should show up
to watch those of a deputy
sheriff is not available that
the secretary of state will look
the state police and the state
police will be there and if
neither one of those shows up
them you the credit card or
check deputy county clerk is
required to remain on site and
that watchers and challengers
may remain on site to ensure
that the uncounted ballots are
secured until the election
process chair without have to
stamp.
Thank you senator and we will go
to our usual and pull and
conduct a poll and that have
individuals vote for or against.
Senate bill two eighty six as
amended.
Okay we have five people who
voted in favor of the bill we
will now go to the audience and
here.
The public if you would like to
make a comment in support of the
bill please raise your hand I
have Mary Mario humanness.
Yes hello madam chair and
members of the committee but if
you medicine we have come
because as a sponsor so
eloquently stated there is a
strong need for the changes
within this piece of legislation
for the upcoming special
election to fill the soon to be
congressional vacancy we feel it
is important to continue to
ensure we do all we can to
protect New Mexicans voting
rights and expand those rights
for appropriate and this bill
does just that I'd like to thank
the committee sponsor for
bringing forth this piece of
legislation and urged committee
members to support Senate bill
two eighty six by granting this
measure D. passed thank you.
Thank you Richard Mason.
Madam chair members the
committee many miss Mason I'm
care the action committee
ability to one governors of New
Mexico I'm the league support of
this before and was clearly
clear that eight.
Help the ability turned out and
that's what the league is all
about promoting voter turnout
will be deeply during concerns
with the you know the help the
help of New Mexicans so we thank
the sender Ivy Soto for bringing
this bill and we urge the
committee to give it to pass
thank you very much.
Thank you do we have any public
comments in opposition of the
bill please raise your hand.
Seeing that will go to committee
members representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair.
Senator.
What is it all in place close.
Madam chair and Representative
Nibert thankfully place
during early voting April in
places loans are based on the
time frame legislative I think
kind of clerk at least ten days
prior to the election that is
published that made available to
the public on election day
polling place is closed to for
people to show up to vote at
seven P. M. however if you are
already in line you may still
file to and them and them the
the work includes the eleven PM
deadline that we have for the
election board is a is related
to the absentee ballot the state
for the apps about pricing for
processes of those ballots those
mail outs that were received
either in the county clerk's
office or at a polling place by
seven PM on election night and
and does not process those that
were received after that.
Madam chair and senator are what
I'm glad you said that because
we've already had this
discussion in this committee and
the I I have the amendments and
contacts version in front of me
if you want to refer to that
page three.
The third line down a polling
place Dada shall not be closed.
I thank you being a laminate of
close in that context.
Madam madam chair and the
Representative night birds that
is that is correct in that
context that is that is
The closing in that context
means eliminated you are correct
that is the same language that
was used and Senate bill four
and also was sold the the
experience we have with that
language is in the context that
you've just identified.
There are I think you probably
need to change that word and and
then we have prior testimony.
Madam chair and senator
regarding this provision of the
testimony was basically that
the.
Tried would work with the
County clerk's office and
through that process.
Would allow guest houses for
county clerk officials and the
challengers of all our co
workers to actually go on to the
tribal lands for the election
day and conduct their
activities and so you know my
preference would be that we have
some words that that it will be
there will be
that the the tribal entity would
work with the county clerk in
accomplishing those goals but
those would be two comments with
respect to paragraph C. of.
And then the.
Madam chair of the the other
issue that I have.
Is.
Madam chair and senator.
Do we not already have a process
to fill these are.
Great and stays when they when
they arise they're not already a
process that allows our
candidates to appear on the
ballot when there is a vacancy
of right a congressperson.
Madam chair representative
Nibert so
Let me let me answer that
question in a couple different
ways very but I strongly briefly
so this bill does not deal with
the candidacy process this bill
deals only with the election
process the candidacy process it
was addressed it's it's already
addressed to the law and one
that fifteen dash eighteen point
one R. as an out of cycle
election for a member of
Congress in addition
Representative Ely and senator
Morris have a bill that passed
through the Senate rules
committee that would seek to
modify the candidacy process
which is distinct from the
election process
as as as to the
I will also point out.
That the
Yes Representative is is the
only office for which we have an
out of cycle election.
All other offices are appointed
either until the end of the
original term or until the next
general election.
Depending upon the office the
With regard to the access house
representatives one of the
interesting things about that
chamber is that no person has
ever served as a member of the
answer is yes Representative
without being elected by the
people to get there so that is
the reason why we have an office
I collection
at in the entire history of our
nation that has if everyone who
is Sir yes Sir as a result of an
election by the people on to the
nexus for present.
So I I guess I'm a little
confused is this only dealing
with the procedures for the
June.
Our primary election or is this
a procedures to.
Get the.
People who would be running in
the primary election on the
ballot.
Madam chair and representative
Nibert this deals with the
procedures for the actual R. for
the actual vote.
It does not have to do this this
bill has nothing to do with the
procedures for candidates who
who have their name appear on
the ballot.
Okay so madam chair and senator
I would look at paragraphs the
the state if you need to tweak
some of that language
are there and otherwise this is
basically the same bill with
Google modifications that you
went over to deal with the.
General election that we just
have in November is that
accurate I'm sure of that is
correct we we would travel to
the general action to see what
we can improve upon we've we've
found some places of the kind of
corporate those are and madam
chair representative member what
I would prefer if if if it's
acceptable to this committee is
forced to work together between
here and Judiciary to see if we
need to modify the language in
subsection C. R. I am a little
bit as attempts to be overly
directive with of the procedures
used by a sovereign with the
states.
Madam chair and senator
or the county clerk's.
In favor of this the this bill.
with that.
Madam chair
Representative Nibert.
The
this is just what I County
courts
and of those five credit cards
have have reviewed this bill and
and they're all of it but.
Bills were Torrance Bernalillo.
Madam chair representative
Nibert Torrance Bernalillo Santa
Fe Valencia Cibola.
And and I'll also point out that
the secretary of state's office
also supports this bill and I
believe care process is it
somewhere in the universe of
this committee if any questions
are often technical nature the.
Madam chair that's all the
questions that I have thank you
madam chair thank you Sir.
Thank you committee members.
What is the committee.
Two passed.
Thank you I have two passed by
Representative Chasey.
And I will second that motion.
Do we have any objections.
To to pass motion.
Showing all members present
voting in the affirmative.
Senator you have a do pass on
Senate bill two eight six as
amended thank you very much
Senator thank you members of the
committee I appreciate the
discussion very much and I also
appreciate your patience as I
struggled to log in without the
assistance of my talk.
Thank you senator and Committee
members we are now adjourned.
Have a great day.
