Here.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Hall here.
Represent Representative Mejia.
Representative Ortiz.
Representative Reed.
Representative Terazas.
Representative Torres Velasquez
here.
Vice chair Travis.
Here
Chairwoman Royal Caballero.
Thank you.
You may proceed.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
vice chair and ranking member
and members of the committee.
I'm Senator Michael Padilla. I'm
here with our Department of
Military Affairs. We're here
with, with you on Senate Bill
160 inflation purports to do is,
um,
Uh, mandates comprehensive state
and national background to
interact with or oversee or
supervise children in the job
challenge academies, the
Governor's Summer program and
other youth, uh, some of the key
provisions, and members of the
committee are that we provide.
We do have a conditional
employment, you know, you can be
offered the role, but it, and
then the use of the background,
the use of background check
information. These are things
crimes, crimes against children,
offense on these, they could
lead to denial or offer that's
been made, uh, the bill outlines
procedures for handling these.
these types of cases and what
would happen.
why again, you know, enhanced
safety for minors. If one also
there to be a standardized the
what I mentioned earlier, it's a
provisional hiring and the
hiring flex on how, uh, the use
of the sensitive candidates do
need to pay for their own
background, you know, reimburse
them for that.
But here again, um, we want to
ensure that there is the safety
for these, these children.
That's just say I want to go in.
I'm the adjutant general for the
state of Mexico. So this, this
legislation is very uh from the
FBI so that we can do the
background checks in um
the, the, the way the public law
is written is very.
To run that to ensure that all
of our employees are screened.
The other thing that, that the,
that be a higher under state
active duty, um, the, uh, to be
participate in this and, for
example, last year allowed us.
Um, you know, gave us some money
and at-risk funds in order to
fund this program.
program.
If that, if that money were
transferred over to the
Department of Milli.
And is there anyone?
In the Zoom audience that is in,
is there anyone on.
All right, we have a hand up by
the name of Tom. You may speak
to.
Hi, my name is Thomas Flores.
I'm the executive director for
the New Mexico National Guard
Association, and on behalf of
the officers of the association
and the members. We do support
this bill.
Thank you.
Is there anything no others, uh,
in the audience, those in
opposition and I can see.
That there are many in the
audience, uh, in favor, who
wishes to speak in favor.
You, Madam Chair, I, I do have a
couple of questions. One, are
these youth programs new or how
long have they been in
existence?
um, and there are other programs
that could be addedar general
can tell us how long they've
been around, but I'm aware of
them. Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Chavez, so the
youth Challenge program that's
in Roswell, the Job Challenge
program, um, that is gonna be in
Albuquerque at Expo New Mexico
will be strong.
And my next question is.
Yeah, Madam Chair,
Representative Chavez, uh,
because one, there, there wasn't
a stiff these background checks
done.
And then my other question is,
um, so you're gonna be that this
drug testing applies to.
Employees, current employees,
correct? Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Chavez says,
we're talking about drug
testing, we're talking about
background checks. And so this
would this would only apply to
those who uh have unsupervised.
To children. So we can't do
everybody, uh, the you
challenge, um, your supervised
children.
They would be OK, so maybe I
asked my question wrong. So
actually what I meant was, um.
An example of a Prober 24 years.
So, Madam Chair and Madam Vice
Chair.
And then all new ones
with a.
30 year olds and that there's a
but it's actually this came up
in the previous committee as
well. Uh, there would be a
review thing that they've
They've uh demonstrated, they've
had stellar demonstrations.
Yeah, and, and Madam Chair
Representative Chavez, so
there'll there'll be a decision
depending on uh what comes out
of that background.
On whether they still
about
then we may have to make a
decision, but it doesn't
necessarily mean that they lose
their job.
They could simply be transferred
to another part of the
department.
and Madam Chair, representative
senator, um, so I know I in the
bill basically it talks about.
In the department, what does
somebody, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Chavez, so we in
fact we were having a discussion
about it. Generally speaking,
um, even if you preschool, you
have to be background checked,
um.
We would like, uh actually, you
know, because these are
long-term employees that we've
So that's
Madam.
Um, before we move on with the
following the same.
Uh, Madam Chair, yes, so, uh, in
order for, um,
For the FBI gives us access to
the FBI data.
Um, we have to be in, in
accordance with.
Federal and essentially the
statute says, uh, the records
are specifically for those
purposes, and they're not to be
released. Uh, that's why it's
important that that information
cases, you'll have a file and
I'm sure they follow all state.
In the personnel file, then in
reference to uh if something
comes back, that's questionable
spaces, correct?
Yeah, Madam Chair, absolutely,
and I think that's the, that's
the component that uh
Representative Ny was talking,
the state statute requires us to
do that, so we cannot, uh, the
fact that there's a criminal
Members of the New Mexico
National Guard.
any of
Within particularly the New
Mexico National Guard members of
the.
Um, and so the only other
section that was added, is that
correct, Madam Chair, those,
those two amendments in, and we
may not necessarily go through a
criminal background check, uh,
depending on what, what, what
this attempts to do, one is, uh,
it allows me to hire, so the, so
the governor can claim an
emergency. There are some
exceptions, the, the one that we
most recent in higher state
active duty.
Uh, for preventive.
Um, this amendment is one is
sometimes there's so uh we are
currently with mitigation work
uh in response, um, well, that's
not I have access to to be able
The vice chair.
Thank you.
Do you, are you, does this bill
allow you to differentiate
between um misdemeanors and
felonies.
Um, Madam Chair of Chavez, so it
gives us
The actual
Right. We would get
Uh, all of those.
Uh, again, uh, it doesn't
necessarily mean if, if.
A background came back and it
said, hey, there's uh doesn't
necessarily mean you're not
really gives us the ability to
make that we know what their
background is or we hired them.
Or continue employment in the
case of catching up to the
others.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Just to further clarify, um,
those checks.
Do
Um, since the.
provisions and changes in
federal laws given.
And given the circumstances as
they do come back with a
distinction.
Um, so that's entirely up to HR
on the background check is being
late.
Um, that you want that are being
worked with, but at the same
time, so the next on the list
is.
It's a,
it's runs somewhere between 50
and 60. And if I'm understanding
this right, my understanding is
new employees explain really
quick new employees are
required, uh, Madam Chair
Representative Taras says no,
we, but we've had the
discussion. I think somebody's
got to pay the amount, so, uh,
Quick question.
Would there be a, a, a pro
because I would imagine you're
gonna, you're not gonna, these
are contingent that's correct.
So there are continue to get
down to the one.
The question that was my only
question.
You know, um, Madam Chair
Representative Tarasas, uh, I,
I, I don't want to be flippant
about it, but because that's
what someone has to do the uh
General and senator, uh, I think
this is a simple way. So you've
got, it may not be hired and so
they, the employees that you
hire who passs Velasquez, yes, I
mean, so, so those, um,
and it's hard to know without
seeing the spot, but like the
director of Youth Challenge also
would so there would come to a
point about, you know, General
Henry or I where, uh, we're,
we're not physically uh on site.
Uh, I go visit, uh, the cadets.
Where there wouldn't be, but.
Madam chair and, and, uh,
representative excellent
question. And he went up and
down the this chapter.
If they're Um, was that it?
Thank you. So what's the will of
the committee.
There was a uh past, all right.
Senator, you have a due pass and
before the committee leaves,
thank you, um, senator we're
gonna do housekeeping real
quick. I'm gonna sit here till
the bitter end, madam.
Real quick housekeeping, uh, we
have not had any as of today.
For this committee, but
Please stay vigilant on your
emails and text messages because
