No no.
It.
Representative Chasey.
For most of the state analysts.
We are getting a little
Townsend Here not currently.
There you.
So there's there's Gail she's on
excuse me representation.
I don't know she can onion
herself we should be able to see
here.
Mr chairman I also need you to
come in.
Joining
there's Judy.
Okay.
Show me are we gonna be able to
see the.
We're just here them.
Just hear them.
That's unfortunate on.
Can't promote them to panelists
so they can.
So we can see second I can go
ahead and try to promote them.
Yes this is really good the
people presenting should be
panelists so we can have that
your action and then the the
public comment to with audio
only.
Thank you Judy has been
promoted.
Okay.
What it that's good.
Thank you Representative Chasey
whenever you're ready.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and members of the committee
it's great to see you all this
morning.
Reshaped
Getting on first thing so we
have this morning the
environmental database bill that
I'm sponsoring was Senator
Stewart and Representative
Georgian Lewis Judy Madam of the
Audubon society is here is my
expert witness.
Judy presented this to the
interim water committee and I'm
going to really let her begin
the explanation that I would
like to let you all know that we
have an amendment that was in
your committee twenty four hours
in advance.
It's
We'll be happy to put that on
whenever the committee is ready
it's just kind of a tactical
request and it is designed to
make the data more secure or so
we'll take it from the
we'll take your cue on that and
I'd like to do to go ahead and
get you are overview okay so
maybe a little rusty at this
point I think we simply move the
amendment for discussion
purposes some like to make a
motion.
The native.
So move for made a motion.
Thanks.
A second.
Okay so
Well what about the amendment I
guess later so
do you go ahead.
Thank you Representative C. and
good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee thanks
for having me here today to help
present the bill and for those
of you who don't know me and you
to comment on the New Mexico
policy director for the Audubon
society and this is a very
simple bill it would just create
a single map based database that
would centralize the state's
basic environmental data at the
database but then be searchable
by agencies industries and the
public it would include
information like threatened and
endangered species locations of
oil and gas wells rare plant
data and locations of hazardous
waste sites among other things
we want to do this because it's
hard right now to figure out the
complete picture of what's
happening in the state if you
want to know everything that's
going on in a certain part of
New Mexico you.
So many agency websites to try
to figure that out so this
database would let users zoom in
on an area of interest in the
state and know right away what's
going on in that area.
This will help the public but we
believe it'll also help the
agencies to have a more
comprehensive view of what's
happening some agencies are
hiring landscape planners for
example and these employees
would benefit from being able to
use and easily searchable map
and that has other agency data
on it as they try to make plans
and decisions we believe it will
also be useful for industry
project proponents as they go
through their own complicated
state permitting process.
We model this idea on a similar
tool to the game and fish
department already has for
species data and natural
heritage program at UNM
currently manages the site for
game and fish and they're
willing to take on this
additional database to many
other states have more
comprehensive databases like
this and find it incredibly
useful to have all the
information in one place and
some of you were present at the
November interim committee
meeting were Joe Weber from
Virginia's department of
conservation give a presentation
about how his state uses their
more comprehensive database.
I'm because we want to
consolidate data that the
agencies already have on hand
the process is pretty easy and
inexpensive I am happy to help
explain the amendments if that's
helpful and otherwise I think
that's that's all I have and we
can take questions.
Okay I think the the.
The pre technical for straight
forward is there any objection
to the amendment.
a discussion on the amendment.
Mr chairman might it be helpful
to have it described or early
for folks who don't have in
front of them that's the that's
a good idea thank you
so Judy could you to go over the
amendment for us at chair Mr
chair and members of the
committee there's there's two
little pieces to the amendment
one it's just clarifying that
this only applies to data that
the agencies already have and so
we have a list of data that
would be required to be up
loaded on to the database and
it's just a little clause noting
that it's not new data that the
agencies have to collect it
stated that they're already
collecting for reporting
purposes and and collecting
purposes and then the other one
was in response to some meetings
with industry stakeholders we
learned that there are some
security issues with having
pipeline data on a website like
this you can still get pipeline
data through other means but
they were concerned about having
it super easily publicly
accessible and so we agreed to
take the pipeline data out so
that was it.
The two oh two number Mr
chairman and two one nine two
nine three point one on the
amendment.
Thank you for members of the
committee the amendment is in
the Citrix file.
Okay so now that we got over the
amendment are there any
questions a discussion on the
amendment.
Any objection to the amendment.
Okay so this right I have my
little gavel developments about
the.
and so we're back in the bill
Questions or comments from the
committee on the bill.
So I think if you use your
raised hands function
I think you will just line up in
order to you raise your hand I'm
hoping that's how that works
Representative Ferrary.
At thank you Mr chairman thank
you Representative Chasey or
chairman TCS bank I just was
concerned about some of the
financial
Issues that the different
departments were talking about
even though
It might be well if you could
just tell me how this the
funding would be absorbed by the
different departments
On the cost of getting this
started.
To turn left this common answer
that question she's been working
on this with
The university and with the
agencies.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative Ferrary I'm so
that FIR from UNM estimates that
it would be about a hundred
thousand dollars to set this up
and they have some of the
infrastructure in place because
they already run similar
databases out there should be a
line item in each B. two to
cover that and that's what we're
anticipating and expecting and I
think it should not be a ton of
administrative time for the
agencies because it stated that
they already have so I hope that
the amendment we just passed
clarifying that it's it's data
they have anyway would reduce
that time that they would need
to get you and then that data
but it should only be a matter
of them getting data years to
you and them and then you
amendment which would be the
pride people's spending the bulk
of their time doing in this.
Mr chairman.
She can.
Mr chair where we this
represents Korea.
Well we're supposed to go to
that back on that.
Yes and we got that point and
can do it.
Were we not supposed to go to
the public comment first.
Yeah I I told you I'd be rusty
of this yeah.
the Santo is exactly correct I I
miss public comment so can we
well that question.
President Ferrary and we'll come
back to you yes that's great.
Yeah so the first bill every
year I do the same thing so I
apologize
So I can see a list of attendees
in we have to currently raising
their hands I don't hello okay
now we have a dozen racing there
and so we're gonna go through
the list of attendees which are
the people the the public I'm
gonna ask everyone to be very
concise because we have we have
other bills.
So
the first step in Shelby can you
admit Britney Fallon.
Hello Mr chairman members of the
committee this is doctor Bernie
Fallon representing New Mexico
wild action fund we are here to
support this bill simply because
it is common sense to have data
consolidated into one database
and we're happy to stand in
support.
In our homes.
Thank you for that next up we
have but are you you're not
you're not.
Yes good morning Mr chair
members of the committee this is
our eternal your with New Mexico
State Land Office word of this
bill we are one of the state
agencies that work with the
Sanchez we're also one of the
state agencies are that the
expert mentioned who was
recently hired a landscape level
planner we will benefit directly
from this bill we also believe
that it will enhance
transparency generally and
specifically help New Mexicans
better understand the
environmental implications of
state government decision making
we are all.
Thank you very much next up with
Michael John.
Good morning Mr chairman
committee members my name is
Douglas Michael John I'm a
lawyer with the New Mexico
environmental law center we
support this bill and urge you
to support it it's a good start
on putting together data that
the public and industry need to
better protect New Mexico's
environment thank you.
Thank you for that
except you do parent.
Warning Mr chairman members of
the committee on chose to
pandemic executive director
would cause problems so your
organization that works
statewide to protect our
watersheds and we so we support
the bill for reasons previously
cited.
Thank you
can't Salazar.
Good morning Mr chairman of the
German clean and committee
members of Gen Salazar with echo
expansion joint camping hunting
and the outdoors and we stand
strong support for this we feel
that agencies and public be more
informed to make proper
decisions that will affect our
communities thank you very much.
Thank you Kerry **** Romero.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee members I'm Kerry
Karcher Meryl on behalf of the
New Mexico council about
critters and guides I want to
say that we are not necessarily
opposed to the idea of this bill
we do.
Proven to increase transparency
of environmental efforts among
state agencies.
However we do have a couple of
technical concerns with the bill
our first concern is that
there's no appropriation to fund
the effort this effort would be
extensive in terms of time and
technical expertise and not
might be costly so who's going
to pay for the construction of
the site and the upkeep
additionally the bill does not
provide any enforcement
mechanism for state agency who
fails to comply it seems
possible that over time the data
will become increasingly out of
date without a provision for
enforcement on the annual input
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you
Dr Esteban mold that and.
Well they even.
Thank you Mr chair in the
committees I'm doctors say more
days and you get the less than
good I'm director of national
heroes to Mexico at the
university of New Mexico at the
biology department we will be
the ones responsible for setting
up the the database in which we
think to be make a significant
contribution to the states that
natural resources and
conservation data infrastructure
accordingly we certainly support
the goals thank you.
Thank you for that European.
Good morning Mr chairman
committee members thank you for
the opportunity to comment.
Representative the coalition of
sustainable communities New
Mexico a coalition of the
elected leaders of the cities of
Los crucis Albuquerque Santa Fe
and Santa Fe County we strongly
support the barrel as it
provides for transparency
additional agency cooperation
information sharing and
efficiency.
We urge you to pass this bill
thank you.
Thank you for that Marco
Gonzales.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members the committee my name is
Marco Gonzalez and I'm the
registered this for pattern
energy pattern is developing
projects totaling about four
thousand megawatts of wind
energy transmission projects in
New Mexico and now for pattern
that represents about a seven
billion dollar investment in
wind and solar.
We have a I talked to the
sponsor about some of the issues
that we would like to discuss in
the bill and so we're hoping to
have that discussion we thank
you for being the measure
forward and are just seeking to
make the bill better but at this
point we you know I'll just need
to talk have the visit and and
we appreciate you know
everybody's input today thanks.
Thank you for that Gen one
Chester.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee just want to thank you
for the opportunity to talk here
today I represent the
independent petroleum
association of New Mexico we do
stand opposed to this bill we
are concerned on several fronts
first of all searchable faqs are
available for public inspection
already and there is a wide
range of of data that can be
accessed by the public easily
second ball we are concerned
with the fact that there will be
additional reporting
requirements that will come down
the road and that will create an
additional burden on operators
so for these reasons and others
we stand a post.
Thank you
Lesli Allison.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee this is Leslie
Allison with the western
landowners alliance we do not
yet have a position on this bill
but we do have a question about
whether there will be
protections for private excuse
me private land data thank you.
Okay
more in Paterson.
Thank you chairman members of
the committee my name is Laura
Patterson with New Mexico cattle
growers association we currently
oppose this bill although at as
previously stated by Kerry
Kaufer Mero we believe in open
government and the movement
towards that we do have concerns
with the private landowners data
we need more details in relation
to that we also think that the
timeline is unrealistic for
implementation of this as many
of the state agencies may
require public comment and rule
changes in order to provide that
data and thank you for your
time.
Thank you for that great Peters.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee and I
thank you for the opportunity to
comment here today my name is
Greg Peters on the public lands
and wildlife advocate for
conservation voters New Mexico I
am here on behalf of CD in them
to stand in strong support of
this bill as Judy Senator
presentations commonsense bill
addresses the simple need for
centralized repository that
everyone can access across the
state.
We believe this will lead to a
more comprehensive and smarter
land use planning in New Mexico
by state agencies and more
transparency for the public with
more equitable access to say
data on thank you.
This.
Thank you.
And dax who I'm gonna guess is
Michael that.
So we can see Michael but we
can't hear I'm not sure what we
can see I'm not sure why if
either of those things are
clear.
You know you're supposed to be
over here there is yes okay I
thank you turn green and members
of the committee my name is
Michael decks with defenders of
wildlife use in strong support
of the bill and believe it will
increase coordination and
collaboration among state
agencies a number of state
agencies already have their own
databases that don't currently
talk to each other and so
consolidating that data will be
very useful for both agencies
and the public thank you.
Thank you
John this with the calibers.
Good morning Mr chair and
members of the committee my name
is Jonas more and more yeah I'm
here representing the New Mexico
will Grover's this morning
actually and we stand in
opposition of this current bill
as it stands we're concerned
with several factors of it one
being under funded to private
landowners data and then as
always we are also in support of
more open government and I think
you all for your time and thank
you for allowing me to come in
this morning.
And last Carlos funds are.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee on
Carlos Sonntag with the New
Mexico business coalition.
We stand in support and
opposition to this bill I'm
while we appreciate the fact
that it would make it easier in
some regards to have that
information consolidated it
actually creates
An issue for safety well I'm
glad that you took out the
pipelines it still makes it a
little bit easier to get into
the database in a single source
and create some problems our
biggest concern with this bill
is that it's on funded and the
cost to taxpayers for
information that is currently
already available seems like a
place we don't need to go right
now especially in this pandemic
thank you.
The other speaker Adela Duran.
A delivery in.
So the deal is muted hi Mr chair
can you hear me now.
Yes okay thank you I really
didn't mean to raise my hand but
I'm going to go make a comment
thank you for recognizing me I
represent Laramide resources
energy fuels and Homestake
mining company and we're not my
clients are not necessarily
against the bill but they had
some of the same questions and
others do such as how it's going
to be paid for and who's going
to manage it.
This is that one of their
comments was this is the
duplication of efforts but I
also noticed on the FIR and I
trust that members of the
committee have looked at it
there several implications
provide a fiscal implications
provided by several agencies so
you may want to look at that
while you're debating the bill
and thank you again Mr chair.
Thank you
Surely there was a there was a
question earlier about someone
want to call in and speak and
the people on the phone don't
have the ability to raise their
hand a.
So as far as I know.
Yeah I'm trying to identify the
person's phone number I don't
have it currently
so real watch for that but
show the I I guess for it just
sort of fell through that and do
do the best we can you know
anything about that.
I know that there is a way on
your phone and there's I think
it's maybe of a look it up but I
think it's something like Star
line is the way that you can
raise your hand on the phone so
it'll show on the computer that
you're raising your hand but I
can go ahead and look into that
and the photo the person that we
have calling in is for house
bill fifty seven at this point
that I have spotted so okay.
Good so we'll try to make that
announcement
should be if you can get the
details on that I I might like
make that announcement at the
beginning of public comment for
each bill just so people
listening know that that's an
option okay so now that I it fix
my screw up I thank you
Representative thank you for
that we will go back to
Representative Ferrary
Representative Ferrary you have
for.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
again madam chair and this Madam
I I really do believe this is a
great idea and support it
I think getting started without
you know any special mandated
funding is going to be a little
tough but then it will also make
it so that in the next years
Budget that the committee the
different agencies and
departments can then incorporate
what they're finding their needs
are is that your plan.
Representative senior muted.
I'm trying to get this call to
answer about.
Mr chair and representative
Ferrary it yes that is the plan
I will note again that the cost
is pretty minimal because it
stated that the agencies already
have an arty collecting and it
shouldn't take a ton of time on
the agency's part to get this
information to you amendment and
I will also note that that the
cost and the timeline was
estimated by U. and M. itself
who's responsible for doing this
so both of those things should
be pretty accurate and lastly
again we are expecting that
there should be a line item in
each of you to to cover that the
initial implications of this
bill.
Right I I Mr chair and and panel
I believe that this will help
with the valuation of a lot of
different projects and tax
credits and things like that
that we we need to New Mexico to
help protect the environment so
thank you I appreciate the help.
That's all thank you
Representative Ferrary next up
we have Representative Ortez.
I thank you Mr chair madam chair
I am very supportive of this
bill in this database several
years ago my organization
invested hundreds of thousands
of dollars along with the trust
for public land to develop a an
internal private database using
all of this public data on it so
and it was very expensive and it
but it's really have it helps us
do our work to protect land and
water
I do have some concerns about
the the data the privacy data of
you know private individuals
that have state conservation
easements that went through the
energy minerals natural
resources department state
forestry through the state tax
credit program we we have a
given lots of that information
to the state I just I want to
know how that data will be
protected private land data and
also a secular data we made sure
that we did not have that data
on in our in our database really
there were there were fears of
you know folks being able to
look at that Water Rights and
what a second they were tied to
the just just for for purposes
of you know of folks trying to
buy that land by water right so
I just want to love to hear from
from you on how to protect some
of that private data that is in
our state databases.
Judy.
Mr chair representative or has
thanks for that question I'm
there's nothing listed in this
bill that would require
publication of private land data
and there's also a pretty
expansive confidentiality
exception at the end of the bill
so that allows for the date
agencies at their discretion to
not publish stuff if there's
like a safety reason not to or
as sensitive species reason not
to and a few other things so I
think all of that combined would
make it so that private land
data is protected it shouldn't
require publication of anything
like that and just applies to
HSD data that they're they're
already collecting.
Thank you Mr chairman and madam
chair.
Thank you for test except we
have Representative Dixon.
Good morning thank you Mr chair
Representative Chasey and as
common I was wondering to follow
up on with Representative Ortez
is question the data that's
available currently through the
agencies
That.
That data has already gone
through privacy filters and so
if there is confidential
information from them it will
not be included.
That correct.
And Mr chair and representative
and I believe that's correct
yes.
Thank you Mr chair and
Representative Chasey an agency
Madam another question that I
had is
With regard to some of the
concerns and I don't know the
specific concerns but mentioned
in the public comment
with regard to some of our large
renewable energy providers I was
wondering what efforts are gonna
be taken to make sure that those
concerns are resolved
this bill thank.
You speaking of the the wind and
solar.
you Mr Gonzalez contacted me
yesterday and I would I have
been in meetings all day and I
told him I wasn't available to
talk yesterday and so will
definitely have a conversation
with him
on the half of the page and
solar our group I I'm hopeful
that perhaps just listen to this
discussion today and clarifying
some of the exceptions of the
confidentiality might allay any
concerns they have that we're
happy to talk with them this
Madam and I will do that.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative Chasey and miss
common that that's all that I
had.
Thank you
Representative said so for the
public watching you might see a
couple different twenty to
themes Tony is the.
Analyst for the house Republican
side and a couple of our members
had difficulty getting on this
morning so I think one Tony
Dauphine is Representative
Strickler.
And the other is Representative
Montoya and I recognise
Representative what Toyota if
you have questions.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Yeah I just a question about the
fiscal impact and the discussion
of how this is in and of in
house bill two
I'm not sure but I I think it
would be appropriate to get a
referral that committee for
attendance and house bill two
I'm not sure how.
The members of of appropriations
would even know that that's
being put in there it's a we
have members who would be voting
on that apparently they're just
be it would just show up there
and I did hear.
That stated that
That there would be some money
for that in house bill two so I.
Just from a preparation
standpoint I'm looking at the
fiscal impact of it and it looks
like there's at least a
initially about a hundred eighty
five thousand dollars.
This first year
but look at the front page of
the fiscal impact report for FY
twenty one it says it doesn't
have anything however if you
look at the second page on
fiscal impacts.
It it clearly states that first
year
as any NMED has eighty five
thousand that that to coordinate
data collection and UNM also
estimates.
Thousand dollars initially and
then after that it looks like
two one five thousand dollars
recurring every year.
and then you see on the you know
on FY twenty two the fiscal
impacts there so it it appears
to me that that at the very
least if it's going to end up if
it's going to pop into House
Bill to the members
appropriation should have a
chance to to at least understand
why it's being put and they're
not just at all.
The dollar amount magically
appears in the house bill two
without the members
appropriations.
Every discussing.
I I don't know.
them anime this question for you
chairman going.
so.
I I think my understanding is
that the a budget line items
being added to cover the cost of
this bill is obviously not part
of this bill so not only do I
not refer bills to committees
this is this bill doesn't have
that attached so I think that
information is provided to us to
give us some reassurance that
the there was some funding for
the start up costs.
And I'm sure that the members of
the appropriations in their
process if they see this land
line item and have questions
about what for they can have
that discussion at that time.
Thank you Mr chairman and just a
doesn't seem like the process to
that we've had for adding items
to the appropriations bill so
that was just not the experience
that I've seen so it seems that
we're putting the cart before
the horse just a little bit just
to.
In the instance that this did
not get past it still has to go
through another committee that
has to go through the Senate and
if for some reason
That happens.
In the budgets can be.
For for money that's not there
or that's there that not to be
used thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Montoya.
We have Representative Scott.
Thank you Mr chairman can
everybody hear me.
Yes.
The question that I have for the
presenters is
What I would like to ask them to
describe.
With some specificity how.
This new database project would.
Would help with the.
Specific problems.
The trouble I'm having is.
Is.
Is this a solution.
In search of a problem because
it appears to me that there's
already significant body of data
that's out there and readily
accessible could you could to
presenters who describe for me.
Klay hello this new database
would be used to move something
forward whatever that something.
Mr chairman Representative Scott
and any yield to this column in
but I do want to say that I
heard over the years when we
were talking about permitting
and environmental standards I've
heard industry and business
complaining that they have to go
to this place in this place in
this place and this place in
order to get their permits but
I'm gonna let this come and try
to answer your question with
more specificity.
Mr chair and representative
Scott I I think I agree with
Representative Chasey and I I've
heard that from industry friends
too I'm just that the state
permitting process is so
complicated then they have to go
to different departments to get
different things and so.
You know consolidation is help
on their part I think on the
advocates side and on the agency
side it's the same thing I I
wouldn't say that that data is
easily accessible from different
agency websites I think I'm
getting all the data that is
required by the state of the
spill if you did it separately
would actually require many many
hours of sticking through many
different agency websites and
because the agency websites are
all formatted differently you
have to dig through them
differently in order to provide
that data and so we're really
we're really talking about is
just creating one map of New
Mexico that essentially has data
layers that you can turn on and
off depending on what you're
interested in seeing and so it's
really a way to just see and one
picture what's going on in any
particular area and so I would
you know I would echo also with
the Land Office said in their
comments you know they're hiring
landscape level planners where
they're trying to look at larger
areas of New Mexico at once to
figure out how to how to do
their own planning and without
being able to see kind of the
big picture of what's going on
in the state at all the agencies
it's a lot harder to make that
decision and so I just think you
know consolidation would help
everybody from from all aspects
of what they're doing whether
it's an agency or a member of
the public or industry member.
Mr chair and miss Kallman would
be easy.
There would be no modification
of the permitting process.
With a stab wish one of this
debate about this there's no
advantage with respect to having
to go quality to get a permit or
to the OCD to get a permit for
bill in to get a permit because
all of those activities still
have to occur separately is is
much more understanding.
Mr chair representative Scott
that's correct this doesn't
change anything about permitting
requirements or or anything like
that you would still have to go
through this process these
separately but I think being
able to see in one picture at a
glance kind of what you're
dealing with when you're trying
to get a permit would make that
process easier and faster to do
because you could see right away
okay this is an issue that's
happening in my project area I'm
gonna have to deal with that so
I think I think that's the point
and not that it changes the
permitting process it just makes
sense sort of easier and more
efficient.
Mr chairman Representative it's
got if I can add to
it allows if we have the
centralized database it allows
agencies industries and the
public to zoom in on an area of
interest and check the status of
that area and know what the
potential impact of the proposed
project would be.
It would make it.
So much simpler because they
wouldn't have to comb through
seven different agency websites.
Mr chair representative.
Explain to me how you would know
what.
Act your have an on the proposed
project.
Still don't care center stand.
The impact on for example a Hey.
Growing well.
Those impacts are.
Developed to be a land of the
OCD.
And to those projects.
Already have access to all of
the databases in one spot but
don't necessarily need to go to
any of these other agencies so
the folks that are developing
these projects are likely to
concentrate on the specific area
of concern with regard to the
permit.
Rather than going to this.
overarching database if you will
for what.
It would be a higher level look
present is accurate.
Mr chair and representative
Scott and I don't think that's
totally accurate I think this
would allow you to.
To kind of instantly see the
bigger picture so in your
example if you're going to get a
permit for drilling you could
glance at this and see oh gosh
there is that state sensitive
species right outside my
drilling area I should talk to
game and fish or.
You know I I just think it would
enable people to have better
ideas of what's coming down the
road when they go through
permitting I think it would
allow members of the public to
understand what's happening on
state land better and more
comprehensive way and so I I
think people would use this more
comprehensive database.
Even even an industry when
they're going through the
permitting process.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
very much miss Coleman for your
answer so that's all I have.
Okay thank you so we have we we
have to attendees with their
hands raised and normally I
would say appreciate that but
public comment we've already
done public comment I'm
sympathetic to the cause we
change the order of the bill so
if you were tuning in about now
expecting us to still be
discussing the private right of
action bill that within
reasonable and because of that I
would like to recognize the the
two attendees.
Show me if you could help me out
here the first is just pop us
with the the Cup Department
cultural affairs if we could
hear from him for just a minute.
Thank you representative of the
queen and members of the
committee and I was asked to to
sick couple of things we have a
secretary Garcia great Riego
about the database that we
maintain at the start
preservation division I also
service the status or
preservation officer.
And I oversee a database that
was actually identified in the
bill I would just like to bring
to the attention to the
committee because you've talked
quite a bit about funding.
And and and how that might play
out just so that you know
through various individual
agreements
documents
A user user fees and what have
you unmuted Chris which is the
name of the database generates
about six hundred thousand
dollars a year in funding for
the division which maintains the
staff at HPD or at least the the
database management staff HB do.
Our and so that would you know
that's a fairly significant
funding source for the division
that would need to be accounted
for the database to is also
password protected under state
statute and under the rule which
governs that the increased
database which is the database
that the division of manages so
there is some significant
financial issues that we need to
be considered of course access
to public data which has
confidential archaeological data
is already covered by state law
we also maintain quite a bit of
federal information as well to
on federal lands in federal
properties would be beyond the
for service and the National
Park Service and so I just
wanted to bring that to the
attention of the committee and
the thank you.
Thank you Jeff and the next
attendees with their hand that
is labeled Health Security staff
I'm not sure what that means.
Health Security Cephas currently
muted.
There you.
hello
actually I don't know why it's
full security except that thrill
securities on zoom I'm
representing the oil and gas
accountability project well
project earthworks and
essentially Mr chair you've had
a lot of testimony lot of good
points I do want to say that as
a researcher just spend hours
and hours going through
different databases and I know
that in Sandoval county when
there is an interest in drilling
for oil and gas it would have
been very helpful to know what
the cultural on and wildlife
impacts would be and that that
would have been helpful for the
industry as well and so I I will
delay further because you've
already had a huge discussion on
this so I hope you will support
this this legislation thank you
okay Mary Feldblum is that you
yes it's ME Mary Feldblum thank
you.
I'm sorry about that folks that
back to the committee
Representative Townsend actually
one more thing sorry so I got
reminded committee that if
you're in shared office space.
You have to keep a mascot and
that includes we and you're
talking unfortunately I think
many of us are not insured
office space I know I'm not
insured office space but under
our house rules if your
insurance space you have to
maintain.
Being masked.
And that unfortunately includes
when addressing the committee so
just a reminder Representative
Townsend.
Thank you Mr chairman
I.
We have been.
Listening to the.
Or comments
Hi missus.
Common and the representatives
on the benefits to industry.
On this this piece of proposed
legislation I would I would tell
you that
Even though Representative Scott
asked for more specificity that.
Having been.
Personally responsible for a
number of permits.
Whether they were.
Opportunity to be a lander state
agencies.
Any proponent we're trying to
get a permit.
Typically has a lead agency that
they go through or they have a
national program manager if it's
an interstate.
Ject.
And I I'm just trying to figure
out
If missed common or
Representative can give me any
specifics where.
Yes.
Actually would.
The benefit to a proponent of a
project.
Mr chair and representative
Thompson I mean.
I think there are a million
reasons why it would be helpful
to the public and agencies I
think that it would be helpful
to agent industry to you know
when I've talked to them which
has been off and I've I've heard
the same complaints as
Representative Chasey that it's
complicated to go through the
state permitting process for
things like oil and gas so you
know I'm speculating I don't
work in the industry I'm just.
you know it's my understanding
based on what they said that it
would be helpful to them to have
this info consolidated on to one
map table so that they could see
at a glance what their potential
impacts might be where they
might have to go to address
things in the permitting process
so I just I think it's that
consolidation and efficiency
thing that would be helpful to
everybody.
All right.
Mr chair and miss common I can I
I I I hear yeah I would tell you
that now
if you are.
If you're trying to permit eight
large linear project across.
Four five states for example.
You will be directed typically
to.
A national program manager I
think there's five of them the
United States.
And you will be you will have.
That person will be.
The gate keeper of all of the
information that is compiled
into your D. A. or your EIS.
And any project
like that then has
Many are you'll have a great
general contractor permitting
contractor.
That will will walk through that
whole process whether you're
dying.
You know an archaeology of phase
one environmental phase one
project does hello and there is
a process for doing that.
It will not and there are no
provisions in any of the
statutes that I'm aware of.
That would director proponent
did go to this this new
database.
so.
From my point of view and and I
I continue to look for.
Reasons to support this but.
From my point of view this just
makes the process more
difficult.
It and it will make it more
expensive.
for the proponent of a project
if you are.
An entity that's that is trying
to propose a project.
It might be beneficial to that.
environmental group that wants
to instead of going out and
doing their own homework.
To to figure out.
What positions they may take
they're going to use state tax
dollars in order to do that and
so I don't believe that this is
a bill.
That anyone in the industry
should support or will support
going forward because it's just
it's duplicity and that's
problems going forward so for
that reason right now
unfortunately I can't see a
reason.
to support this and or just
ordered to tell anyone else that
I think.
it's beneficial to in the
industry aspects so I
appreciate.
And the thank you Mr Kaufman.
Thank you Representative
Townsend just one point of
clarification Representative
Townsend you said duplicity I'm
hoping you met duplicate to.
You are absolutely correct.
I I appreciate that
Representative Townsend
we have Representative Strickler
who I believe is on the phone
but I don't really know.
Representative stricter there
you go.
Can you hear me.
Okay.
Well I you know I made my living
in the only gas industry and and
I I have have some experience in
permitting
on gas wells or work with the
permitting department what not
and they county records are
excellent specially in San Juan
County you can you can look
through the county records and
find out who owns what the
service ownership and when we
permit well we the lan
Department knows a four on state
federal.
Private or Indian lands and I
usually are our Dropbox or three
R. twenty acres and
usually the spacing available to
us is
for wells are on you know one
one for every eighty acres to
develop a formation whether it
be the New Mexico to formation
or the place of our formation.
And the the state land office
has an excellent land ownership
base
and they also have.
You know in our country in San
Juan County eight eighty.
The eighty percent of the lands
are owned by the bureau of land
management department of
interior.
only six percent of private
lands you've got four sections
per township of state lands and
then the west side of the county
is
Navajo lands and so forth so.
This information if I can if I
can search this is pretty good I
mean it's pretty pretty user
friendly I can't hello Sir.
this meeting very well but
might my court my guess my
question is
Addis's capture
data you've got
state lands where you capture
the wind and solar projects have
you capture data on federal
lands and and the reason I ask
this we've got to so we're.
Checks in the works in San Juan
County near the PNM power plant.
two different companies they're
put in and how to make a lot to
our facility and I with the with
the.
option to expand the solar
facility from a hundred other
mega wants to two hundred
megawatts so it's really a big
deal and they're using mostly
federal land so have how would
this this system work for that.
If you can help me a Mr Coleman.
Hi Mr chairman and
Representative Strickler thank
you for that question it's good
to clarify that so this bill
would only require reporting
from state agencies so it would
not require anything from
federal land agencies like you
said so if there are solar and
wind facilities on.
Not showing up on our database I
guess unless the state happen to
have that information
involuntarily put it on the
database which they could do
according to this bill if I'm
there discussion indicated that
they should but when require
anything from from federal land
or private land for that matter
so this is just about what's
going on state land from state
agencies I think there are some
data years that might show some
things on federal land I'd have
to check but things like
you know the game and fish
department does keep track of
federal critical habitat for
threatened and endangered
species so critical habitat is a
thing that doesn't follow land
jurisdiction lines so that would
be a data layer that you know
would encompass some federal
land and sea land because it's
just about what habitat is
appropriate for that species so
I think some years in the
database would contain
information like that but not
not solar and wind facilities on
federal and like you said.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you this Madam so in other
words okay State Land Office
they they manage thirteen
million acres of minerals and
nine million acres of surface so
this bill really focus on the on
on that.
On those properties.
And not on not on private which
we don't have much private San
Juan County and and not all
federal.
Mr chair and representative
player that's correct so when
you're talking about utility
scale renewable energy
facilities that are run by the
state or at least by the State
Land Office it would just be the
ones under the land offices
jurisdiction.
Okay.
One last question I know I know.
Resentment Toya talked about the
fiscal impact and and and I was
just reviewing some of the
different analysis and I and I
think it looks like
to departments amber will made
to Daschle FTEs and I think that
the environmental department
will need another one so if if I
understand chair the queen
correctly that's that's built in
and there the regular budget.
Maybe this
is common that ninety
Representative McQueen can help
me understand that little
better.
Representative.
I'll have a detailed knowledge
about energy budget I was just
told that there would be a line
item.
In house bill two to start.
The process and I'm not even
sure that line item is directed
at and
I don't know I don't have any
information about that issue.
We are one of the mother reports
in the case that there's going
to be the need for three FTEs to
to help manage this so it sounds
like it's going to be addressed
and in the budget.
From what I gather.
Mr chair and representative
Strickler if I could just add
one thing.
I'm the money we're trying to
get H. B. two would be directed
to you and them because they was
there creating the database I do
think that the amendment that
was passed at the beginning of
this committee would probably
affect the fiscal estimates of
the departments because we
clarified in the amendment that
it would just be data that they
already have so hopefully that
alleviate some of their fiscal
concerns.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you miss common that's
that that's all I have.
Thank you Representative
Strickler herbs of starting the
other.
Thank you Mr chairman I just
want to say like this bill and
all supported.
as a former computer programmer
in a database manager.
They debate.
The ator.
this will help modernize
environmental data anytime
you can centralized data can
understand me hope you can't.
A centralized data make it
searchable becomes a tool and
it'll help our public and anyone
make informed and responsible
decisions.
But the unit is.
All of the wall something makes
it usable thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Representative Mr
chairman I'd like to move
adoption of this bill.
is there a second to the motion
second.
I think that was Representative
Ferrary seconded yes I get my.
Video thank.
Any further discussion.
Shelby can you take a look for
the role of the vote Mr chair
the proper motion would have
been a to pass please.
the.
Representative got your correct
and in fact it's a two passed as
amended.
Is that your motion vice chair
Stansbury thank you yes Mr
chairman I would like to move
in to pass on this bill as
amended please.
Thank you sure we can you take a
look please.
Representative Chandler.
Yes.
Representative Dixon.
Representative Dixon.
Yes.
Representative Ferrary yes.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Montoya.
So I would like to know.
That was a no thank you
Representative Ortez.
Yes.
Representative Sariñana.
Yes.
Representative Scott no ma'am.
Representative Strickler.
Representative Strickler.
Ryan.
Year.
No.
Representative Townsend.
No ma'am.
Is Tristan.
Yes.
German McQueen yes.
And that is if you pass as
amended.
Read the telling please.
Yes and that is seven four.
Okay.
so.
You have in the past and present
to see I apologize you that's
that offer some closing comments
and I I miss that as well so but
you do have to pass so that's
good news let's take it Mr
chairman thank you for your time
we really appreciate it
thank you both.
Thank okay so we're going to say
goodbye to years of Chasey and
to comment
and next up we have house bill
fifty which is the private right
of action bill.
Shall we do we have the
presenters can we promote them
to panelists.
Yeah give me one second thanks.
You're good sorry.
What yeah.
Yeah.
This.
Okay so I just received word.
Excuse me.
A receiver for a Representative
Lewis she's unavailable at the
moment so we're going to switch
the internet again yeah we're
gonna do the prescribed burning
Act.
that's my bill so vice chair of
the stands for you could you
chair this portion of the
meeting yes Mister chairman
you're ready to go.
I have to experts that will need
to be provided to panelists
hopefully they're online it be
Lauren McCarthy insurance data.
Thank you Mr chairman and Shelby
it can you let our folks and
implement them to panelists
please.
K. it looks like we have state
forester McCarthy on do we have
the other expert on.
Can you repeat the name of that
other experts.
At Mr.
Sure I'll be that the eighty
eight.
Mr chair would you like to
proceed open area looks like we
have misstated on with us.
All right are we ready to go Mr
chair a ready to begin
presentation.
I am thank you madam chair.
Madam chair members of the
committee House Bill fifty
seven.
Is the prescribed burning at so
here in the west of over a
hundred years ago we started
suppressing fire and we have
suppressed it ever pretty much
ever since so we have densely
overgrown forests in a landscape
where the last keep that fire
adapted were fires natural part
of the cycle in because we've
suppressed fire and we have
densely overgrown forests we now
have a situation where when we
do have a fire we have an
intense the reading Force fire
crown fire that is much more
destructive than the the low
levels are natural fires at this
landscape is used to.
So we have a lot of work ahead
of us as a state to treat are
forced to make them healthy
again and to bring farger back
to the process.
But in this bill is a step in
that direction.
On our books we had in eighteen
eighty two statutes dealing with
the subject so eighteen eighty
two is a territorial statute
that predates statehood and it's
essentially a strict liability
double damages statutes so you
can see the statue though it's
in the back of bill because we
have met that it's actually
Hello curious it's a criminal
statute has a civil penalty in
the criminal.
criminal code of the strict
liability double damages what
this bill does is.
Changes that will start to
increase not only a new statue
to deal with prescribed burning
but also an incentive to get
train go through strict
certification process you do it
right so instead of strictly
ability and double damages what
we create is a negligence
standard.
Excuse me.
Which is the typical standard
standard of liability if you're
negligent in whatever you're
doing you're typically liable
for the consequences and that's
what this bill sets so it's not
immunity builds a negligence
bill in there's two tiers if you
go through the training and you
get certified.
The you can survive burn chair
then you would be subject to a
negligence standard in actual
damages.
If you are landowners who is
doing a prescribed burn but
hasn't been trained you still
have the benefit of the
negligence standard as opposed
to the strict liability but you
are still subject to the the
double damages.
and we were hopeful that this
will.
Make it easier to do prescribed
burns and also make it easier to
ensure that activity as it goes
for and that's the bill and with
that I'd like to turn it over to
our state Forster Lorman
currently.
Thank you Mr chairman and miss
McCarthy would you like to go
ahead and present.
Members of the committee.
In addition to the reasons that
Representative McQueen stated we
are the rationale for this bill
I want to also point out that we
one of the facts that we know
about wildfire is that
prescribed burning is the single
most effective way to reduce the
on wanted impacts the damaging
impacts of wildfire in the
places that are affected people
in communities that damage our
water supply and water
reliability and in the places
where wildlife habitat is
important.
We have prescribed fire
occurring to date on federal and
state lands but very little is
happening on the private lands
and as you all know fire does
not respect our jurisdictional
boundaries.
When we first became aware of
this problem we work with
Representative McQueen to have a
memorial to study this issue and
we spent over a year with more
than twenty five stakeholder
groups agencies and
organizations really looking
into the barriers and we believe
that this bill is a very finally
targeted to fix the problem.
I want to say is just to
reiterate our what's in the FIR
that EMNRD's all it does have
the resources we need to
implement this bill because it
is so fundamental to our mission
of providing healthy for us and
that NMAA you corporative
extension service has provided a
letter stating that they also
have the resources needed.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you the state forester
McCarthy Mr chairman is there
any other testimony before we
move on.
Chair I think you're right for
public comment.
Okay I'm Mr chairman I
understand there's a couple of
amendments to this bill would
you like to move those before we
take public comment.
If there is omitted amendment
and we might get some friendly
on the fly amendments is maybe a
member of the committee other
than me could move the amendment
thank you Mr chairman am I
understand Representative
Chandler will be moving in the
amendments.
Yes madam chair I am prepared to
move the amendment that's been
provided in writing and also
madam chair I have one almost
certain are a few friendly
amendments since the chair asked
me to make some is this the
appropriate time to do so.
Yes Representative Chandler I
believe so but let's take them
sequentially so M.
Representative Chandler would
you like to move the first
amendment yes madam chair I
would propose that House Energy
Environment and natural
resources adopt the following
amendments to house bill fifty
seven and they are ticket waited
on a document I don't know if I
need to read them dot two one
nine three zero four point one
and I'm assuming that all
committee members have recieve
that document I'm happy to read
the document if you if you would
prefer madam chair whatever your
preferences and ability to
explain the minute the first
amendment.
I am yes madam at some at and
check.
Thank you Representative
Chandler
why don't we go ahead and and go
to Mr chairman to explain the
amendment and then we'll take a
second on.
Thank you madam chair so that so
the first amendment which is
pretty similar to was it wasn't
a cut the request of some of the
sorrel water conservation
districts it makes it clear that
the definition of prescribed
burn that we're not talking
about agricultural burning so if
you're burning fuel they're
burning a ditch that is outside
the scope of this bill and then
the second
Second amendment on the
disbursement amendment clarify
some language dealing with the
department partnered smoke
management program we have
language in there about permits
but they don't actually issue
permits so that was just
clarifying language
there.
Thank you Mr chairman is there
any questions on the amendment
would someone like to offer a
second on the motion to move the
amendment.
A second.
Okay we have a second and we are
now on a motion to move the
amendment to house bill fifty
seven are there any objections.
Okay so it acted and
Representative Chandler you
still have the floor would you
like to move here other
amendment
yes madam chair thank you very
much I have a handful of the
additional amendments which I
believe are friendly and I'd
like to read them for you on
page three line to.
After the word land owner insert
the following phrase quote or a
private landowners agent
contractor or legally authorized
designees E..
So I make all there are four of
these madam chair so I make them
all at once or do you want to
talk about each one
individually.
I'm thank you Representative
Chandler I think I am just to
make sure that I didn't miss it
are you are you gonna describe
them first and make the motion
are you making a motion and
describing as you I'm this is a
motion.
Hi so move and I there will be
five pieces to this motion I
mean four pieces excuse me okay
why don't we go ahead and go
through all of the amendments on
the fly I'm just give a moment
for everyone to open up the
document we are on house bill
fifty seven Representative
Chandler is making a motion to
amend the bill in a friendly
manner on the flight so we'll go
through and then we will take
questions from the committee go
ahead great so I read one is
just did everyone get that one
I'm happy to re read it if
necessary madam chair let's go
ahead and just start over again
okay on page three line to after
the word land owner insert the
following phrase quote or a
private landowners agent
contractor or legally authorized
designees.
That's the first one.
Okay Representative.
On page three line sixteen
strike civil damages to property
or injury.
And and insert in lieu of that
any damages to property or for
personal injury.
Can.
On page three line twenty four
strike civil damages to property
or injury.
And then suit and cert in lieu
there of damages to property or
for personal injury it's
identical to the previous one
madam chair obviously
Chair for I'm sorry could you
repeat that one we're trying to
the pharmacist before hands or
trying to write this into our
documents and so if you just
take it just a little bit slower
since we have not received this
prior to this meeting.
Madam chair your pleasure
shelling yes please
Representative Chandler and
Representative Montoya I just
the last when do you need
repeated.
Madam chair six.
The last two the last year okay
thank you yeah okay well the
last two are identical so but
I'm not on page on on the second
one is on page three line
sixteen strike civil damages to
property or injury and insert in
lieu of that any damages to
property or for personal injury.
And
Michelle at proceed madam chair
to the third one yes okay
online on page three line twenty
four strike civil damages to
property or injury and insert in
lieu of that.
Damages to property or for
personal injury.
Okay I'm hold on just one moment
Representative Montoya you guys
ready to move on to the next
one.
Yes that's we've got okay and on
page the last one madam chair is
on page four line one strike the
word person.
And insert in place of that.
Quote private landowner or a
private landowners agent
contractor or legally authorized
designees.
Okay Representative Chandler can
you repeat that one more time
yes on page four line one strike
the word person and insert in
place of that private land owner
or a private land owners agent
contractor or legally authorized
designees.
Thank.
Before we move on to everyone
catch that on the committee.
Anyone need it repeated.
Okay let's move on this is the
final amendment Representative
Chandler madam chair that's the
sum total of the amendments
there are four or four
amendments proposed minor
amendments okay so we are on a
motion to move these amendments
on the fly is there any
questions or explanation that
anyone on the committee would
like to offer Mr chair would you
like to explain that amendments.
Thank you madam chair so these
amendments for suggested by the
trial lawyers association and I
do them as clarifying language
just Sir word smithing this the
terms we use in the bill and I
think there improvements so they
are from labels.
Excellent thank you is there any
questions about the amendments
on the committee.
The line is there a second on
the motion.
A second.
Okay we are on a motion to move
the aforementioned amendments on
the fly to house bill fifty
seven are there any objections.
So it acted.
Okay we have adopted two
amendments to this bill and I
believe we are back on the main
bill at this time are there any
other amendments and if not
we'll move to public comment.
All right scene then if you are
a member of the public and you
are on this soon and would like
to testify in this bill please
raise your hand and we will take
a public comment in the order
that it was
at the hands were raised so
we're gonna have shall be
recognized the folks that would
like to speak in order that you
raised your hand so let's go
ahead and Senator yes Mr chair
chair as like to remind the
public that if you're on the
phone if you press star nine
that raises your hand and we can
recognize you if your if your
call and member of the public
thank you madam chair thank you
Mr chairman okay Shelby can you
go ahead and and let our first
person testified.
Yeah sorry got.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name's Nina
Conco and I'm the director of
external affairs for the nature
Conservancy in New Mexico I'm
here today to speak in support
of house bill fifty seven the
prescribed burning Act NASA the
committee support this bill as
well the nature Conservancy is a
science based organization and
we support prescribed burning in
New Mexico through multiple
programs and networks which
focus on protecting and
restoring our forests and
watersheds there are numerous
benefits to the spell a couple
of them are the actual result in
more prescribed burning on
private lands that will in turn
reduce the threat of
catastrophic wildfire and risk
and the risks that it poses to
our communities drinking water
enforce the act will also
provide an incentive for
landowners and prescribed burn
managers to obtain training and
certification thereby reducing
risk by improving the skill set
of practitioners thank you for
your time today I hope you will
support the spot.
Thank you very much all right
we're ready for the second one.
Yes this is Lauren Patterson
with New Mexico cattle growers
association we have proudly
support HB fifty seven we
believe that the creation of the
training and certification
certification program through
the extension office is going to
be a great way to build skills
for our members and limit their
at look negligent liability
under the territorial law so we
proudly support this we think
the sponsor for bringing it for.
Thank you very much all right
we'll take our next person.
Sen.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is John is more and the
executive director for the New
Mexico will growers and we also
support this bill and we with
the amendments that are
clarifying the language within
it this is a great bill that
will definitely benefit many of
our members as they carry out a
prescribed burn safely thank you
very much.
A chair queen for bringing this
bill forward and thank you for
allowing us to.
The comment on this topic.
Thank you Mr Moran all right our
next person.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Valerie work I'm a registered
lobbyist for the New Mexico farm
and livestock bureau and for all
the reasons previously stated we
to support this piece of
legislation.
Great thank you next.
Good morning madam chair
committee members Camilleri with
the New Mexico State Land Office
Land Office strongly support HB
fifty seven which will help
reduce barriers to the expanded
use of prescribed fire on
private land clarify liability
and establish a certification
and training program.
Well managed private land within
the share landscape the
watersheds benefit not just
private land but also state
trust lands because of the
pandemic of fires threatening
surrounding ownership HB fifty
seven would expand opportunities
collaboratively plan and
implement prescribed fires
across boundaries with the
respond double expansion used to
prescribe.
Prescribed fires in the right
place at the right time matters
can reduce hazardous fuels Mr
fire dept ecosystems increase
the resiliency of our vital
forests grasslands watershed and
community Furthermore these
beneficial outcomes preserve our
ability to generate revenue and
Stewart state trust lands for
future generations of the trust
beneficiaries.
Thank you Mr Merrill all right
next.
Madam chair this is.
Madam chair this is Glenn banks
and I'm just a private citizen
who owns some property that's we
had issues with this we going to
do controlled burns and so we
would like to from our
homeowners association we would
all like to strongly support
this bill and recommended
passage thank you and Sir could
you please say your name for the
record the land banks great
thank you all right next please.
Yes I can't read I'm director of
the New Mexico forced to worship
restoration institute
and I strongly support this bill
we have excluded fire from.
As
a way to long and I think the
committee and percent are going
for bring this forward thank you
thank you Mr right next.
Members of the committee this is
Judy common New Mexico policy
director with the Audubon
society again just wanted to
know that we also support this
bill we know that prescribed
fire is an essential tool for
wildlife habitat management on
private and public lands a
variety of bird species benefit
including popular game birds
like Turkey and quail and also
species of conservation concern
like in your J. lesser prairie
chickens so on behalf of our
thirteen thousand New Mexico
members we support the bill
energy to do so to.
Thank you miss Calman next
please.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee I'm
curious to see Mr representing
the New Mexico Rio Grande
chapter Sierra Club and I was a
member of the house memorial
forty two working group
researched and developed some of
the recommendations in the house
bill fifty seven we strongly
support the prescribed burning
Act it will for the first time
the staff pollution negligence
standard for prescribed burning
on private land.
And lower liability and risk for
landowners it will create a
training and certification
program for contractors Cruz and
burn managers and it will create
a model burn permit for New
Mexico counties to use we need
this bill to properly handle
prescribed burning on private
land and private burning is done
correctly it's a natural low
impact low cost method of
removing dead or dying trees and
education and it releases
nutrients to restore healthy
soil please approve this needed
policy bill thank you.
Thank you Mr stern okay next
please.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Greg Peters public lands and
wildlife advocate for
conservation voters New Mexico
I'm here again on behalf of CVM
to speak in support of the
prescribed burning Act as
previously mentioned fire knows
no property boundaries well
prescribed burning is frequently
used on federal and state lands
extent of uses low on private
lands in the past for some lands
New Mexico experienced frequent
low severity fires with these
fires brushing trees become
dense thereby creating an
abundance of fuel this bill of
the feelings when fire does
return to the land can create
catastrophic wildfires
prescribed burning helps bring
fire back to landscape safely
which protects our forests Water
Connie and local communities
this bill seeks to make burning
by private sectors more
responsible and the public safer
from accidental damage from fire
smoke.
Thank you for your time me again
recommended passage thank you
thank you Mr Peters next.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Jason
Espinoza I'm the registered
lobbyists with the New Mexico
coalition of conservation
districts whose mission is to
work towards the betterment of
all conservation districts here
in New Mexico we stand in
support of house bill fifty
seven and the amendments that
were adopted a shift in the
liability standard to a
negligence standard will really
help make private insurance more
accessible and more affordable
we appreciate the Sanchez
bringing this bill forward and
urged the committee to move on
to the next committee thank you.
Thank you thank you Mr S. the
nonsense next please.
Yes my name is Dr diagram of
extension portion fire
specialist with the cooperative
extension service that New
Mexico State University.
I noticed on the
Pardon you Mr chairman and
members the committee pardon me
thank you.
I know some Division website
that it said MSU did not submit
a fiscal impact report I believe
we did so I'll look into that
getting that submitted so take
this opportunity right now to
read a letter I sent to
Representative McQueen and.
President Gail Armstrong on
behalf of Senator service you Dr
Graham's I'm because we have so
many people here to testify
today thank you for your
testimony to under two minutes
that would be great.
Indeed thank.
The cooperative bank to service
support this bill and is
prepared and capable to deliver
the mandated training new new or
additional state funding is
required the extension service
to fulfill the mandate the
mission of the extension service
is to provide the people of New
Mexico with practical research
based knowledge and programs to
improve the quality of life the
training quote called for in
this bill the squarely within
our mission statement thank you
wonderful thank you Dr Graham
next please.
Hi madam chair this is Britney
Fallon representing New Mexico
wild action fund we recognize
that wildfires are one of the
biggest threats to New Mexico's
landscape I was lucky enough to
work on the original memorial
with Representative McQueen in
my role as the Sierra Club and
I'm happy to now support the
outcome of that memorial this
bill in my role with New Mexico
wild.
Thank you doctor Allen next
please.
Hi this is Adrian though deputy
director of the New Mexico
wildlife federation expanding in
strong support of this bill we
have over eighty thousand New
Mexico members and we all
recognize that the science says
that prescribed burns are
effective management's
especially for landscape
management and to prevent
catastrophic wildfires so
definitely standing in support
of healthy ecosystems and
controlled burns prescribed
burns so thank you madam chair
for recognizing me thank you
Representative McQueen for
bringing this forward and just
to reiterate the New Mexico
wildlife federation stands in
full support of the prescribed
burning Act thank you so much
thank you Mr next please.
Thank you madam chair my name is
a time crystal of ski with the
forest stewards guild the
conservation group based in
Santa Fe we conduct research
outreach and education on
wildfire related issues as well
as we are also practitioners of
prescribed burns and I worked on
the HM forty two working group
and I want to thank
Representative McQueen for for
filing this and want to just
reiterate that we stand in
strong support of medical and.
You for your wonderful next
week.
It looks like we have M. the
Health Security staff zoom is
now available to talk.
So they dropped out okay next
please.
It looks like we have the Mr
Walter Bradley please go ahead
thank you madam chair members of
the committee and Representative
McQueen.
I'm a registered lobbyist
farmers of America but on this
particular topic.
I like to just reiterate that
there are or inform you that as
of when I was lieutenant
governor I had the unfortunate
situation of presiding over to
devastating forest fires in the
state of New Mexico one around
Los Alamos the other one up to
read the Rideau centre area and
this this is a long overdue
peace legislation that we've had
the studies for years I used to
take people up to three of those
and showing the difference
between the.
State Land and that is for us to
and the Indian forest where they
continued to thank.
Thank you the other Russian it
surgically almost prescribed
burn your your bill
Representative McQueen and thank
you for bring it forth thank you
Mr Bradley I'm if we can foster
just like in the state
Representative Townsend and it
looks like you have unmuted
several times.
Are you looking to be.
To say something.
On the bill but
at that the preparatory time
okay thank you read accounts and
all right we'll go to the next
person in line.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is joy
this person deputy executive
director with New Mexico
counties we do not yet have a
formal position on this work on
our board on this we will be
taken to our executive committee
on Thursday that being said we
have been well aware of the
memorial efforts in the task
force the state foresters done
amazing job of keeping not only
us but also our fire and
emergency managers affiliate
price of this bill yeah we do
anticipate a position of support
on Thursday thank you.
Thank you very much all right to
more and we're almost there.
Hi my name is Jamie park on
policy coordinator and staff
attorney for the New Mexico
state association and and I'm a
a would like to express its
support of the amendment
clarifying the prescribed burn
definition of providing an
exemption for uses of
Albuquerque agriculture thank
you.
Great thank you so much all
right and our last public
testimony looks like.
Madam chair members of the
committee Mr chairman thank you
my name is John Thompson
registered lobbyists for western
landowners alliance western
lenders one strongly supports
this legislation prescribed
fires a critical tool for
reducing the risk of
catastrophic wildfires and
restoring forest range lands and
watersheds we encourage you
supported this measure and
appreciate your time thank you.
Wonders what all right well
thank you so much to everyone
who offered their public
testimony considering the volume
I thought that went very well
and and now we'll turn it over
to the committee and I see that
later Townsend is at and that
patiently throughout and that
The presentation so please Mr
Townsend Representative.
Thank you madam chair
And chairman McQueen I'm gonna
break a longstanding tradition.
And I'm Milou but do passed on
a house bill fifty seven.
That
we are on a motion for a due
pass for house bill fifty seven
as twice amended with a second
Representative Dixon are there
any objections or should we do
level called the.
See no objections objections the
bill is passed with a do pass.
It is now moving on.
Sh
thank you madam chair thank you
members of the committee and
Representative Townsend I do
appreciate that and thank you to
the Loranger ought per sheet all
the work you've done this bill.
Thank you and Mister chairman
with that I will hand the gavel
back to thank you to the
committee.
Thank you for that so now we'll
see Shelly if we have
Representative Louis available.
She's currently returning.
Our next bill.
The is house bill fifty which
started out first on the agenda
and then moved to second on the
agenda and is now our final bill
today Representative Louis
whenever you're ready.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee members good morning
to everyone I also have a two
expert witnesses to while I'm
making a statement if we can get
that moved over to panelist Doug
Nichol John and Charles
Desalegn.
So I know Doug is available and
I think Charles might be and a
Senate hearing right now but we
can proceed.
Thank you again for having this.
Bill scheduled and for also
being very convenient with
moving it along House Bill fifty
would allow an individual or an
organization to bring an action
in state court against any
company or other entity that has
been in violation of our state
environmental laws in such an
action the plaintiff that seek a
court order requiring the
defendant to take the necessary
steps to come into compliance
the plaintiff could also seek
civil penalties for the
violations any penalties would
be paid to the state
additionally the court could
award the cost of the litigation
including reasonable attorney
and expertise to the
substantially prevailing party.
Under the bill a private right
of action can be brought only
sixty days after the rate of has
given written notice of the
alleged violations to the pro
proposed dependent.
To the Attorney General and to
the state regulatory agency
either at the department of
environment or the energy
minerals and natural resources
department.
A private right of action under
the bill would be barred if the
state or EPA has commenced and
as diligent prosecuting a legal
claim for the violations also
under the bill a private action
could be brought only by a
plaintiff who has some interest
in the outcome of the litigation
in other words the plaintiff
must have standing to sue for
example members of the local
community who are affected by
air pollution that is emitted
contrary to the terms of a
permit but have a standing to
sue to enforce the permit.
The bill amends the air quality
control lacked the water quality
act the hazardous waste act the
solid waste act and the oil and
gas gas act to allow private
rights of action.
Currently both the New Mexico
mining act and the New Mexico
coal mining reclamation acts or
any include private rights of
action provisions the other
state laws do not.
This model excuse me this bill
is modeled on similar private
right of action or US citizen
suit provisions in federal
environmental laws including the
clean air and clean water act.
Creating a legal mechanism for
private parties to bring an
action for violations of the
laws and for and for several
reasons.
First it help insurers that
Lawson are enforced even if the
regulatory agency lacks adequate
resources to devote to
enforcement it helps to preserve
the deterrent effect that a
civil penalty provision of the
laws were designed to create
second although the federal
pollution laws allow sentences
states any penalties assessed in
those states go to the federal
treasury under this bill
penalties assessed at a private
action would be paid to the
state.
Third creating a citizen excuse
me creating a private right of
action given some legal
recourses to individuals and
community organizing
organizations who are injured by
a **** that violate the law for
example people who live and
Albuquerque's south valley have
become victims of largely
unfettered industrial
developments resulting and
pollution of their land air and
water a private right of action
would empower them to sue
polluters that violate the lack
the law.
Similar similarly.
People who live in or near the
oil and gas fields of the San
Juan basin in the Permian basin
are continuously exposed
emissions of harmful pollutants
including benzene a known human
carcinogen and in some cases the
well operators are out of
compliance with their air
permits yeah there are tens of
thousands of individual
operators in the state far too
many for even a fully funded
agency to monitor adequately
this bill would allow affected
residents to enforce permit
requirements.
Also government agencies would
be authorized to bring a little
legal suits.
Under this bill where there have
been violations of the law or of
a permit in the past the
Attorney General local
governments and tribal
government governments have all
brought private actions under
the state mining or under
federal citizens suit provisions
this bill will not to require
and appropriation or
expenditures actually because of
the penalties the court assesses
and a private action would be
paid to the state this bill is
likely to have a positive update
affect on the state budget of
whether that Mr chairman and
committee members
if Mr Nico John and Mr.
The selling were able to join
I'd like to see if they want to
add anything.
It looks like Mr Nichols John is
on.
So I think we provided provided
Mister miracle John as panelists
I don't think Mr Salant has
arrived yet okay thank you Sir
John.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee members this bill
would provide an important tool
for individuals and communities
that are adversely affected by
violations of state
environmental laws in situations
in which the state regulatory
agency does not have the
resources to enforce those laws
I'll be glad to answer questions
but we urge you to support the
bill I apologize I didn't
introduce myself I'm Douglas
Mikel John I'm an attorney with
the New Mexico environmental law
center and as I say I'll be glad
to answer questions that you
have thank you.
Thank you Mr Michael John
The president lose anything that
should be good to the public.
We have Mr to sailing do we want
to
see have anything you'd like to
this one I know you're just
arriving
we've we've heard earn
introduction from Representative
Lewis in some comments from Mr
Michael John you have anything
like that before we go the
public comment.
The Representative McQueen
members of the committee thank
you very much I have not nothing
further to say I'm sure Mr meek
Mr because John is cover the
issue very well.
Okay thanks for that I'm sure
there will be questions but
we're going to go to public
comment
it looks like first we have
might be Antonio.
Who still needed.
Hello there you go we can hear
you now.
Okay good morning Mister
chairman Mike Antonio with Xcel
energy we oppose this bill
respectively
Representative Lewis.
And it may be for economic
development reasons we think
that it just opens up the door
to too much medication for the
state and it's going to be
viewed very negatively amongst
the potential folks are coming
to relocate in the state it's
just too broad we feel and
well I'll leave it at that let
others to comment on it thank
you it's.
Thank you the my for keeping
your comments short at all us
all the members of the public to
keep your comments short we
currently have twenty people on
the list.
And if you by chance you're
calling in as opposed to online
if you press star nine on your
phone that will raise your hand
and we'll recognize you when we
get down to the point of the
list next we have Allison Smith.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Allison
Smith I am representing the New
Mexico groundwater Association
and for the reason Mr Dantonio
mentioned regarding litigation
we also stand opposed to this
one other comment I would like
to add is that the New Mexico
groundwater Association he is
concerned that this measure
would allow a business to be
sued for actions of a previous
business owner so we feel that
that is very problematic thank
you very much for your time.
Thank you thanks for your Elson
civic.
Good morning chairman the queen
and members of the committee I'm
Allison civic executive director
of the human resources
information project based in
Silver City and I'm here to
speak in support of the private
right of action bill as it will
help communities such as ours
here in Grant County who were
impacted by a major polluter and
provide us with the legal tool
to stop pollution in our
communities the bill creates a
needed Avenue for holding
polluters accountable and we
recommend passage of HB fifty
thank you.
Thank you next.
You mean you're still muted.
There you go.
Good morning Mr chairman and
madam vice chair members of the
committee I am a very the
registered lobbyist for the New
Mexico oil and gas association
no mother stands in strong
opposition I'm House Bill fifty
for a number of reasons I'll
highlight just a couple of those
reasons this bill is the product
of a laws already administered
by the World concert vacation
Division in New Mexico
Environment Department arguably
the largest concern in this bill
are the no cost you both the
state and New Mexico businesses
the state questions are outlined
in your FIR the bill enables a
plaintiff to sue for both
current and past grievances
without setting a standard for
what constitutes agreements
which makes it challenging for
both government agencies and
businesses to assess the
financial and operational
impacts upon its implementation
the administrative costs to the
state as outlined in the FIR
will cost millions of dollars
and require hiring additional
staff members in addition in any
action brought under this
litigation the court has to
grant appropriate relief
including without limitation as
civil penalty the amount set
forth in statute already for
each violation issuing a
restraining order or temporary
permanent permanent injunction
or combination of the foregoing
the court may award reasonable
costs of that litigation
including expert costs in a
tourney fees again making the
unknowns in this bill
potentially untenable for
government and business planning
purposes the broad language in
the bill provides for the
claimant to file on behalf of
their own injuries or for
injuries of by standards people
who are not themselves injured
but observed and and injuries to
others housing concern for an
eye and manageable litigation
frenzy burdening government
agencies and businesses.
And specifically from an oil and
gas operational perspective
since restraining actions could
potentially be immediate
legislators should be aware that
the oil and gas operations
involve a complex alignment of
activity and high cost as assets
that would be subject to
potential schedule interruptions
and downtime me contributing to
increase development and cycle
times housing individuals making
business basically injuries
claims which could single
handedly operate helps
operations in the field for an
unknown period in closing the
legislature has previously and
very thoughtfully enacted laws
already that provide a pathway
for parties to file grievances
with state regulatory agencies
and the legislature has
empowered those agencies to
impose penalties and work with
businesses to correct the
actions making this legislation
and necessary and the potential
for next New Mexico's post
comment economic recovery
impossible thank you for your
consideration.
Thank you for those comments in
general if we can keep comments.
Refers on that I would
appreciate it
next.
Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you for the
chance to comment this morning
I'm Ashley Wagner director of
public policy with the New
Mexico chamber of commerce
formally known as a CI and we
represent businesses in every
industry and every county across
the state as we all were to come
out of the current economic
crisis as well as to where to
diversify our economy so that we
are not so reliant on oil and
gas revenue in this state The
New Mexico chamber of commerce
is very concerned that house
bill fifty and the creation of a
private right of action create
significant regulatory
uncertainty across a myriad of
industries if you touch it air
water or soil in this state you
may be impacted by this
legislation it has no statute of
limitations so the look back to
harm appears unlimited the
future in harm's language will
also create an environment that
litigants can use to threaten
businesses with lawsuits
extorting settlement in order to
avoid the cost of litigation
even with I'm more to claims no
business wants to invest capital
and resources into a state where
there is no regulatory certainty
regarding those investments H.
P. fifty will undermine our
efforts are efforts at economic
diversification and development
I urge you to oppose this bill
thank you.
Thank you next.
Good morning again Mr chair and
members of the committee my name
is Jonas more the executive
director of the New Mexico will
go first.
Here in New Mexico we oppose
this house bill fifty at the
time because of the previous
reason stated and also the
broadness of the bill
we also propose because it it it
opens up significant risks to
agriculture and you worry about
that for producers who are
already facing so many
challenges as they try to
continue to raise their flocks
to New Mexico so thank you very
much for the time commenting
have a great day.
Thank you next.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name's Brenda
boatman I'm a registered
lobbyist for Americans for
prosperity New Mexico and we
stand strongly in opposition to
hospital fifty well we have
numerous reasons to do so I will
highlight just a few of them out
of respect for the committee's
time well modeled after citizen
suit provisions in our federal
environmental laws house bill
fifty would actually create
unnecessary in unprecedented
private right of action and
remove accountability hospital
fifty would devastate small
businesses encourage in this
litigation exacerbate energy
poverty and sat back
environmental progress according
to one estimate even before the
pandemic many low income New
Mexico households were paying
over twenty percent of their
annual income simply for
electricity and heating COVID
nineteen has as a I'm sorry
exacerbated energy poverty in
the U. S. house bill fifty would
make this energy poverty much
worse our neighbors in Arizona
have demonstrated the bottom up
innovation rather than top down
mandates and litigation have led
to better environmental and
economic outcomes including
reducing energy related carbon
dioxide emissions and creating
population.
An increasing Ms are popular
population at a much faster pace
in New Mexico
decades of experience with more
modest citizens to enforcement
action provisions demonstrate
that this bill will usher in
secret behind closed door
rulemaking and enforcement
actions leaving New Mexicans to
foot the bill the US chamber of
commerce found in a series of
reports that citizen enforcement
actions under the federal clean
air act led to backroom sue and
settle agreements to develop
costly and burdensome
regulations imposing hundreds of
billions of dollars of costs on
the American people each year
rather than create the tools for
citizens to hold state
environmental agencies
accountable for carrying out our
environmental laws this bill
would instead deputized
unaccountable anti energy third
parties resulting in runaway
litigation privileged citizens
and forced actions and last
economic opportunity for low
income New Mexicans and the
committee members should have in
email in their inbox from me
with more details as to why we
oppose the bill and we urge you
all to do so as well thank you
for your time.
Thank you that's.
Yes this is Carlos's Sir okay
good morning chair the queen and
the members of the committee
Carlos is start with the public
school service company New
Mexico we appreciate the sponsor
holding certain companies
industrials accountable when a
person is injured are starting
with an injury as this bill
states PNM is subject to some of
them statutes and house bill
fifty such as air quality
control act which deals with the
missions the hazardous waste act
in the water quality act with
individual lawsuits that
potentially could be filed in
the future this could have
extremely high cost costs in
defending litigation against
multiple individuals for alleged
violations of these
environmental acts.
Currently these acts are
endorsed by the state and
violations result in fines not
in damages to individuals which
could be much higher than
finance as PNM most to a cleaner
sustainable and deeper for the
portfolio and one hundred
percent emissions free in the
next twenty years we expect to
see a very low low amount of
future violations of these acts
we support how violations are
currently handled through the
state again we understand the
Sanchez and tap for House Bill
fifty but we respectfully oppose
thank you very much.
Thank you next.
Morning Mr chairman and members
of the committee my name is the
nationality and I represent care
development which is a land
acquisition manager for western
Albuquerque land holdings which
which owns fifty four thousand
acres on Albuquerque's west side
we oppose this bill in two
thousand thirteen and we did it
and with regards to the
hypothetical aspect of it I can
tell you right now that this is
no longer hypothetical I'm this
type of legislation will stop
development specifically
economic development on the west
side we have major developments
underway right now we have
almost one point seven million
square feet under one roof that
is going to be the largest
facility in largest building of
this type in New Mexico and the
third largest in the country
this particular client.
Are you concerned about this
legislation is at fact expressed
interest in not filling its
third requirement which we have
a third contract underway and
leading to another state so
this.
This legislation in particular
will adversely impact jobs in
New Mexico and certain on this
website and we certainly need
that at this time.
I strongly oppose this bill
thank you very much.
Thank you next.
Yes my name is Bruce Garratt on
the.
Legislative and political
organizer with the Sierra Club
Rio Grande it's after and we
stand in support of HB fifty I
am not a lawyer but this bill to
me is good for the people and
communities in New Mexico this
is a very important right that
individual citizens should have
people have their own property
there health damage to the
company's producing built in
accidents this bill provides
individuals and communities are
right to be able to receive a
fair process and it also allows
companies sorry also holds
companies accountable for
environment The New Mexico
families as well which to me is
probably most important I am
asking that you support and you
go to favor of HB fifty today
thank you very much.
Thank you next.
Good morning this is Erin singer
general counsel with the New
Mexico Interstate Stream
Commission only providing a very
Madam chair comment on to
support the attorney general's
recommended recommended
amendment that the bill would
clarify that it does not provide
a cause for the cause of action
against a state agency
And my size and my issue is
concerned that it could be
construed to lead to litigation
against the nursing Stream
Commission put bill in pumping
were delivering water under its
settlements in contact
obligations thank you.
Thank you next.
Good morning chairman members of
the committee my name is could
still add you are I'm here
representing yucca youth United
for climate crisis action we are
you applaud climate justice
organization with members
throughout northern New Mexico
we stand in support of HB fifty
it is critical that our
communities have the power to
hold industry and our government
accountable when our public
health environment and futures
are threatened and our
government fails to protect us.
In New Mexico we know that.
Environmental racism has led to
our indigenous and low income
communities of color bearing
disproportionate burdens when it
comes to the pollution and
contamination caused by
extractive industries and dirty
Energy.
Some of our members have been
directly harmed by living in
areas where industry seems to
call the shots and regulators
seem blind to the real and
present danger posed by
polluters.
This law will empower community
members to sound the alarms and
demand government action as we
face daily quote unquote spills
infants flaring accidents and
public sorry in a public health
crisis that is it exacerbated
for frontline communities.
Breathing toxic air and drinking
contaminated water this is an
important step to right these
wrongs and increase
accountability and action we
just want to say thank you to
the sponsor representative
Georgene Louis for bringing this
bill.
And to the members of the
committee for listening to our
voices we ask that you support
H. B. fifty thank you.
Thank you that's.
Hi there this is JD Bullington
thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee this is JD
speaking on behalf of the
greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce in opposition to house
bill fifty the chamber believes
this legislation will undermine
the existing an effective
regulatory framework we have in
place to objectively enforce the
various acts to which this
legislation applies a stable and
predictable regulatory
environment is key to balancing
business development growth with
responsible environmental
protection.
The string of lawsuits the
chamber anticipates that will
come from this legislation will
create a financial challenge to
both state agencies and
businesses in our state
therefore the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
believes we should refocus our
efforts on making New Mexico
more competitive for jobs and
new investment while balancing
environmental protections that
are already in place thank you.
Thank you New Mexico print more.
Thank you Mr chairman.
My name is Brent more of a
registered lobbyist for the
American property and casualty
insurance association and APCA
respectfully stands in
opposition to house bill fifty
the reason why AP CIA stands in
opposition is that our
membership is about sixty
percent of the property and
casualty insurers in the US
market and they insure the
permit teas in the regulated
entities that will be the
subject of these lawsuits and
with those insurance out there
our members will be the ones
having to defend these lawsuits
of the bill creates a very
significant concern for us for
several reasons and I quickly
outlines first the the standard
for filing the suit is fairly
low it talks about imminently
threatened with injury and
that's while it may have some
standard at least in the minds
of the proponents can be very
broad it could lead to many
lawsuits and it could be very
problematic for our members and
defending these lawsuits the
second point that raises concern
is that this proposal duplicates
existing regulatory programs
both the energy and minerals
department and at the New Mexico
environment department I think
the legislature has heard many
times over the past years that
those agencies need more
resources to do their regulatory
programs this duplicates it and
takes resources away because if
you look at the FIR you'll see
that both agencies say that they
will need lawyers and paralegals
to track the lawsuits that will
be filed the a better course of
action is to support the experts
of the agencies and let them
conduct their regulatory
programs at the next point is
that the bill looks to
potentially past violations so
what that means.
Is is that a permit T. or
regulated entities compliance
history going all the way back I
assume into the initial
enactment of these various laws
that compliance issues subject
to review and disagreement by
the private citizen who believes
that they are imminently
threatened by some violation
that seems to us to be a very
broad sweep of potential
violations that are subject to
these these lawsuits and it
causes great concern to our
members about the potential for
these lawsuits the last thing
that I would mention.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee is this bill
presupposes that there are
violations which the agencies
are not addressing and at this
point I am not aware of those
violations which the agency
isn't aware of it is in trying
to track compliance of that is
the initial premise of the bill
for all of those reasons that
eight PCI and it's members stand
in opposition to the bill thank
you very much.
Thank you we have Florida.
Yes thank.
Thank you chairman McQueen and
members of the committee.
I'll keep it short and sweet.
New Mexico cattle growers
opposes this bill as written we
fear that the bill would
circumvent some of the
protections afforded agriculture
in the right to farm act.
And particularly the grandfather
clause thank you.
Thank you that was three that I
do appreciate that this bill
only.
Thank you Mr chairman bill Lee
Gallatin Lee County chamber of
commerce are chambers stands and
full opposition of this bill
house bill fifty for reasons
previously stated in that
respect for the committee in
their time we'll leave it at
that thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee.
Thank thank you Mr lane accepted
Remond.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Members of the committee it was
more register law Mexico will
electric cooperative association
we also stand in opposition to
this bill.
This bill will affect rural
development those affecting
economic development in those
areas and so once again stand in
opposition thank you.
Thank you except the you go
could tear us.
Hello can you hear me.
Yes great it would be no second
Mr chairman and members of the
committee of the chairs director
of government relations for
Marathon Oil.
Thank you for the opportunity
today we appreciate the Sanchez
dedication to New Mexico and to
this legislature but I
respectfully appear in
opposition to house bill fifty
simply put out given every
citizen the ability to commence
a private right of action is
created by the bill is bad for
business and would have a
terrible impact of the state its
economy and its industry
partners existing state statutes
and regulations already hold
companies accountable should
they fail to adhere to
environmental protections at a
time when the state's economy is
challenged by the on going
pandemic low commodity prices
high unemployment and ever
increasing costly regulations on
federal lands the last thing the
state needs a redundant law the
signals the industry but if you
invest here we'll make sure and
let me get you to pieces.
The bill does nothing to create
jobs generate new tax revenues
grow the economy or improve the
environment and lastly Marathon
Oil operates in multiple basins
in North Dakota Oklahoma
Louisiana and Texas and and we
do have optionality on where we
invest our capital every day
marathon oil's New Mexico
Permian business competes within
my own company against other
business units in other states
to attract limited capital
dollars to it reinvest in the
business.
Fifty pass New Mexico would be
put is a serious disadvantage in
attracting investment because
the mission risk would overwhelm
entertaining Energy business
opportunity in the state for
this reason Marathon all
respectfully urges the committee
not to pass house bill fifty
thank you very much for your
time.
Thank you Mr terrorist acts we
have James chair or.
Mr chairman members of the
committee apologize it's Jim
Winchester with the independent
petroleum association of New
Mexico
members from the independent
trump Association Mexico stand
opposed to this a private right
to allow citizens to file suits
or personal actions against any
pastor president environmental
violations really essentially
empowers anyone anywhere with
the ability to act as an
environmental vigilante
regulator over eighty present or
past indiscretion this is a
broad standard
in we are concerned that this
would the.
Allow of these vigilante is to
file anything for nefarious
reasons essentially clogging the
system clogging any authority in
any industry the ability to
conduct reasonable business in
with that obviously one example
I I did get a call this weekend
from a member who reported
activist Allen's wellsite trust
passing which endangers everyone
involved so for those reasons we
are concerned that this gives
too much power into the hands of
people who do not have
upstanding morals thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman had to
step away for a moment so I'll
be taking the gavel for a moment
so please our next speaker.
Mr weeks please go ahead.
Madam chair thank you members of
the committee I'm not going to
belabor the points previously
made but I represent Albuquerque
Hispanic chamber of commerce XTO
acts on inner resources all
three of those clients anymore
what registered lobbyists oppose
this legislation this really
does create basically an
unchecked ability for anybody
who's a private citizen to
initiate a lawsuit against.
I've been entities for just
about any thing that they want
and do it under the guise of
environmental protection on the
other concern that I think has
been touched on but not
significantly focused on is the
significant cost agencies this
is gonna we do a flooded with us
litigation and well it could
lead to some damages that get
placed in the agency's hands the
agencies are going to have to
that numerous suits to to
determine whether or not the
suits or something that they
want to join in on which is
going to stick costs significant
resources for those relevant
agencies and all we appreciate
what the record what
Representative Lewis is trying
to accomplish but with respect
to this piece of legislation we
feel that will cause significant
damage to economic development
opportunities for the state and
also damage existing businesses
thank you.
Thank you Mr weeks next please.
Go ahead Mister Z. pan.
Madam chair members of the
committee
Chose the pandemic executive
director of the Migos Prabhas we
stand in support of this bill we
think it gives so
levels the playing field a
little bit for people that
aren't able to hire some of the
dozen lobbyists of spoken
previously thank you.
Thank you Mr and that's where
the dollar during.
Thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee.
Representative Laramide
resources energy fuels and
Homestake mining company on this
issue and my clients concerns
have of all being captured in
the prior remarks I I will just
so.
You know with the conversation
during the legislature certainly
for the past year Mr chair up
being that.
It's important to diversify our
economy this bill would
definitely discourage any
businesses from coming to the
state with all due respect to
the sponsor of my clients join
the others that have spoken in
opposition and we hope that the
committee will consider all
comments made thank you.
Thank you we have Beverly I
didn't catch last.
Mr chair members of the
committee it's Beverly it's in
good executive director of dairy
producers of New Mexico we stand
in opposition of house bill
fifty it opens the door to and
Sarah litigation from out of
state attorneys the kind of look
for these kind of statutes
Like this to attack family farms
it's happened before New
Mexico's happen in several other
states and it's happened in
other agriculture industries
especially when you break and
things that you're talking about
like with regret and the clean
water act and the clean air act
and everything
the Derry regulations in New
Mexico where some of the most
stringent in the state around
the nation especially when it
comes to groundwater and result
of almost a decade of debate
between an agreement between the
dairy industry the environment
department and a bunch of
Environment mental organizations
including some on this phone
call right now we're on the same
meeting right now so this would
and do all of that work that we
had to put these regulations
into place for the dairy rules
so we encourage you to.
House and house bill fifty thank
you.
Thank you Melissa Sanchez.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Melissa
Sanchez executive director for
the Albuquerque westside
business association and I urge
you to oppose health bill fifty
in our business environments we
need certain team businesses
need to know the rules before
coming into our state so when we
have big name companies are
committing hundreds of millions
of dollars into development we
can't just pull the rug from
underneath them and also I do
speak with many neighborhood
associations who addressed
concern with our community and
our city that we have with the
jobs to housing this bill would
discourage any economic growth
to Albuquerque's westside and
again I urge you to oppose house
bill fifty thank you.
Thank you next up is great
Peters.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Greg Peters public lands and
wildlife advocate for
conservation voters New Mexico
appreciate again the opportunity
to come up I will be brief I'm
here on behalf of CVM to speak
in support of this bill this
bill would give individuals
communities and groups with
limited resources important tool
to ensure compliance with
environmental requirements this
will permit priest equity for
their communities and increased
accountability or industry we
recognize accident fifty fifty.
Thank you Carlos ontact.
Mr chairman members of the
committee on Carlos ontact
president of the New Mexico
business coalition I will not
repeat all the comments that
have made been made in
opposition but I will tell you
that we oppose house bill fifty.
And I specifically want to draw
your attention to the fact that
with the other certainty that
this would create for businesses
it's going to be a significant
deterrent to business expansion
and diversification in our state
and this is at a time when we
have been talking for years
about needing to diversify our
economy businesses will come
here our with that kind of
uncertainty about.
Being sued by anyone at any time
with no statute of limitations I
urge you to oppose this bill
thank you.
Thank you Marco Gonzales.
Yes hello.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee Marco
Gonzales and I'm here today on
behalf of pattern energy at
first I just want to apologize
to the sponsor because I wasn't
able to reach out to her to see
what we would be talking about
today at it's my practice to
reach out to members and
particularly if I'm going to
propose a bill and I really do
apologize for that you know
we're just getting started and I
just got my feedback this
morning but on behalf of pattern
energy and I won't belabor the
point I don't want to make a
little of it but also with
regard to renewable energy many
of the concerns have been
expressed would likewise apply
and in addition to that you know
renewable is a very very long
term kind of when you look at
development in terms of
financing and it also presents
problems for long term projects
that New Mexico is being looked
at so right now we oppose the
bill and and and I apologize
once again to sponsor and I
think the committee for its time
to the thank you.
Thank you next we have valor
working.
Mr chair members of the
committee thank you again for
having me Valerie worked the
registered lobbyists with the
New Mexico farm and livestock
bureau New Mexico farm livestock
bureau is New Mexico's oldest
and largest agricultural
organization in the state
representing over twenty
thousand member families
involved a involved in all
different aspects of agriculture
I'm house bill fifty creates a
huge regulatory risk for New
Mexico agriculture agriculture
processing in agriculture
manufacturing
further more HB fifty would make
it harder to recruit and retain
businesses especially as we
restart our economy so for those
reasons New Mexico formalized on
bureau opposes H. B. fifty.
Thank you for that we have
former lieutenant governor
Walter brother.
You Mr chairman members of the
committee I won't belabor the
point either a particularly
after a.
Presentation by merrily aging
which is right on point.
I will say that we have this
this particular bill is a
imitation for lawsuits and we
have already experienced one the
from out of state lawyers who
are looking for these we had one
here in New Mexico just a couple
years ago and the outcome was in
favor of the defendants the
insurance companies were
involved in the without that
does particular dairies were all
be completely broke but after
the the lawsuit was quote
settled.
we still lost one of their ease
and all of the various lost
their insurance which is been
report.
Eluded to by the previous
speaker.
This this just opens the door to
kill Business and and they will
we will we will be expanding
and.
And continuing under those
circumstances there's no way
that that businesses will will
be attracted to a so for those
reasons plus all that been
stated very farmers of America
stand in a position to this
bill.
Thank you sue Sherman.
Hello can you hear me.
Yes thank you so much my name is
sue Schurman I'm communications
manager at the New Mexico
environmental law center.
And I'll be very brief.
I stand in full support of this
bill HB fifty.
Which would help hold polluters
more accountable.
Transaminase basically good
stewardship for current and
future generations which is
imperative for advancing the
principles of environmental
justice.
I want to thank Representative
Louis for sponsoring this
important bill and thank you so
much.
Thank you we have Gail.
Hello everybody can you hear me
yes thank you my name is Gail
Evans on the staff attorney for
New Mexico environmental law
center.
Just want to start by saying
that it's a shame that so many
businesses and business related
organizations are speaking out
against this point saying that
it would cause uncertainty the
rules and the laws of our state
clearly set out in our statutes
and our rural books and those
are the rules and laws that need
to be followed there's no
uncertainty there are if you
follow those rules and laws and
you're not subject to a lawsuit
by individual that's been
impacted by violation of those.
Once
it's also important to point out
I think that of the state
agencies in New Mexico are are
very under resource in terms of
having investigators should be
able to monitor my industry in
our state and in terms of having
internet to implement and
enforce the rules and enforce
penalties this bill.
I'm sorry I'm hearing an echo of
this bill would actually assist
our state agencies in helping to
enforce the environmental laws
that are already on our books
and finally this is not a bill
that would permit individuals to
obtain damages monetary damages
if they have been impacted by
violations the environmental
laws it would just allow
individuals to seek injunctive
relief meaning are you getting a
stop to the environmental damage
is being because and having
penalties imposed on these
penalties are already on the
books in our state and they
often cannot be enforced again
because we have a lack of
resources in our state agencies
to enforce the law and I'll just
end by saying that there's
already a provision like this in
the mining act were individuals
can bring a private suit to
enforce the mining act we
certainly haven't seen this
decimate our mining industry in
the state and likewise we
wouldn't expect any destination
of any other industry in our
state it's just a way for
individuals who have been
impacted by environmental
violations to seek an end to
those environmental violations
what's all this bill would allow
and it's certainly necessary for
the Communities New Mexico thank
you.
Thank you we have just two more
it thank Leslie also.
Hello Mr chairman members of the
committee this is Leslie Allison
speaking for the western
landowners alliance based here
in Santa Fe.
Western landowners alliance
stands opposed to this
legislation.
This bill could subject
landowners ranchers farmers and
other land based enterprises to
endless litigation and related
costs.
Solution to better enforcement
is to invest resources in the
agencies that are properly task
and qualified with this
oversight this bill would
actually undermine agency
oversight by diverting focus and
resources into responding to
sedition generated litigation
rather than opening this can of
worms why can't the state
instead invest resources in the
agencies assigned to these tasks
I'm right now the agricultural
community is struggling to get
young ranchers and farmers back
on the land and can you imagine
what this bill would do to young
families trying to scratch out a
living on a family farm we have
a lot of agricultural producers
who live in remote areas with
limited broadband many of them
older having to respond to
lawsuits whether that lawsuits
have merit or not what's the
main issue it's a disadvantage
increase real economic hardship
for those reasons we urge you to
oppose Hospital fifty thank you.
Thank you Tracy Hughes.
Yes Mr chair thank you good
morning my name is Tracy Hughes
I'm representing myself today I
want to just mention that I have
spent over seventeen years
working for the New Mexico state
environment department eleven of
those years and all of those
years in the office of general
counsel I just want to briefly
very briefly explain what just
tell you a little bit about what
my experience was with citizen
suit says as the sponsor mention
there are it the hazardous waste
Act actually it's the federal
Recreo Act in the Air Corps air
a clean air act both under the
federal scheme have citizen suit
provisions in the state would
have to receive notice under any
of those provisions we very
seldom saw any US citizen suit
provisions I want to say we
didn't see any but I would say
over a ten year span we probably
saw I and we occasionally of
those five with the industry
representatives would come in
and of want us to take
enforcement action and then we
would enter Madam echo station's
almost immediately so in a way
it was another tool for the
department to be able to use at
that time under the federal law
and we were able to work then
work cooperatively with the
industry and this in the end
with the citizens and be able to
work something out thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you.
And that is our public comment
portion of the presentation
before we go to the committee.
Let's organize Representative
Lewis is there anything you
would like to.
To add in light of the the
public comments.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you committee members and thank
you to everyone that took the
time to participate in the
public comment today it is
exactly in these times that we
defined a new framework to and
the long history of
environmental degradation and
exploitation of lands and
leaving individuals devastated
with no recourse people come and
exploit and leave legacies of
environmental devastation I am
like everyone else in New Mexico
in strong favor of economic of
of a great economic environment
especially when it comes to jobs
for New Mexicans but I don't
feel that we should let outside
corporations dictate how we
protect our land our water and
our air so also there was
someone else that made a comment
about defendants that were found
in violation
excuse me so it Madam about
someone involved in a lawsuit
and that kinda wrecked them but
here in this bill defendants
that are found in not in
violation will be awarded their
costs and attorney.
Reasonable attorney fees so you
know I think a lot of that well
address the frivolous lawsuits
and
I've been talking to with vice
chair Stansbury and we have a
friendly amendment proposed but
if we could first go to die and
Charles to see if they want to
address any of the public
comment as well.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Okay.
Mr by the judge maybe Mr dot
Michael John and that Mr descent
happy to hear your comments
please keep them short we are
insurance.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee members.
with respect to the allegation
that this will lead to frivolous
lawsuits I would
echo what Representative Lewis
said and point out that the if
at any point of files a
frivolous lawsuit and it is
dismissed then that the
defendant can collect attorneys
fees and costs from the
plaintiffs so that is a big
disincentive to filing a
frivolous lawsuit the other
point I would make and Mr
disabling can address is much
better tonight M. vertically on
the federal level is that the
enactment of citizen suit
provisions in other states and
if at the federal level has not
led to a proliferation of
frivolous lawsuits it simply
hasn't happened.
Okay thank you for that Mr Salem
anything quickly so we move on
yes chair McQueen thank you
members of the committee I just
want to make a couple of points
real quick
first of all as mutant Mr
Michael John indicated there
have been.
citizen suits that have been
brought in New Mexico under
federal law and that Authority
has existed since the nineteen
seventies but there have been
very few of them as as
Tracy Hughes indicated earlier
and I work for the environment
department for approximately
fourteen years in the general
counsel's office and I saw maybe
a half a dozen
citizen suits were filed under
federal law so I don't I don't
see how this bill is going to
open up the floods floodgates of
litigation the other point I
would make is that in order for
a
a a a person to be subject to a
lawsuit under this law you have
to be in violation of one of the
statutes year quality control
lack water quality act hazardous
waste act if they're not
regulated by those laws if
they're not involved in those
laws if they're not permitted
and if they're not in violation
they're not subject to a to a
lawsuit the third point that I
want to make is that this bill
does not deal with damages at
all there's a big difference
between damages and penalties
damages is if an individual
person is injured brings a
lawsuit gets damages as
recompense for for that injury
penalties are a intended as a
deterrent they are a a penalty
is paid to the state
as a deterrent for from
violating the law
and this bill deals with
penalties does not deal with
damages us thank you Mr chair
that's that's on my comments but
I'd be happy to answer questions
that the committee members may
have.
Thank you Mr seven we're gonna
go to the committee of vice
chair stands for.
Thank you Mr chairman
procedurally I just wanna check
and so I'd like to move to adopt
an amendment to this bill and I
know I'm I'm can I make that
motion after I raised my hand.
Right okay to do that.
The if you for you can go ahead
and make a motion that I are you
can.
Yeah.
There's several of which I I'm
not a contest not super clear on
but now the gauging in the baby
and then making the motion so if
you want to go ahead and make
the motion on the amendment and
discuss your amendment let's do
that okay great thank you and
yes thank you Mr chairman M. I.
and thank you to everyone who
testified today I think one of
the critical issues in this bill
is some language which it seems
to me having talked to the
sponsor and those who assisted
in a technical way was not the
intent of the bill gave it the
appearance of being overly broad
and and a lot of comments I
think attest to that so in the
bill throughout the billion
refers to I am especially
I'm I'm I'm not trying to debate
I'm trying to identify that the
location for example on page one
line twenty four it says that
And.
Make commence a civil action on
a person's own behalf against
any other person and I think
this language is what is causing
a lot of issues we received some
feedback in the FIR from the
Attorney General and from New
Mexico Environment Department
and so the amendment that I
would like to move is the first
amendment which is suggested in
the fiscal impact report which
reads for each section where it
is stated may commence a civil
action on the person's own
behalf against any other person
insert after other persons the
phrase and it's in quotes here.
Who is subject to or regulated
by the in brackets Act or a
rural comma permit or order
issued pursuant to that act New
Mexico so that the purpose of
that clarification is to ensure
that this is not just a suits
against any person but persons
who are subject to some sort of
state policy regulation or law
so that it's a clarification
that its to enforce something
subject to state enforcement
already.
So with that and Mr chairman I'd
like to move that amendment.
Their second to that amendment.
The second.
Is there discussion on the
amendment.
well first let me go through the
sponsor Representative Lewis.
The tiles always switch around
which is weird so I I look for
Representative Louis where she
was and that she somewhere else
Representative is that a
friendly amendment thank you Mr
chairman and vice chair stands
very that is a friendly
amendment.
Discussion on the amendment so I
I have a couple of hands up for
discussion on the bill want to
wave at me if you want to
discuss the amendment.
This.
Real quick.
Mr chair could you could she
repeat that over again we were
trying to write that down.
Not provided for us so we're
trying to write that down and
specifically Stansbury could you
chairman of the.
The is so we're amending the
phrase any other person which
appears repeatedly in the bill
and so we with the men and each
instance that it appears.
And insert after and I'm Mr
chairman thank you Jim
Representative Montoya I if you
look at the fiscal impact report
this is the actual language that
was provided by the agencies as
a proposed amendments the first
amendment language there so all
re read it here so in Sir after
other person in every place
where it appears in the bill who
is subject to or regulated by
bracket subject act.
Or a rural comma permit for
order issued pursuant to that
act.
So as I understand it amended
you know we I think we're
dealing with with.
I different existing
environmental laws and so each
and we use it it's a parallel
structure with each each one
every amend that raised any
other person to include this
language about.
Person being subject to the act
not this so by definition so to
the act not the state agency the
the person regulated by the act.
Representative Montoya did you
have any other questions on
that.
Representative Montoya.
Yes so this just takes care of
the state.
Not being sued for negligence or
not doing their job or.
That that's really all I see
that's happening here nothing
changes for anyone.
Of being sued by anyone else in
changing standing and all that
it Mike in my getting that
correct this is just to limit
liability on the state.
Is that correct.
Senator would you care to answer
that and thank you Mr chairman
not being an environmental
litigation attorney I I can't
answer the complete legal
implications but my
understanding is that it
clarifies who what which persons
subject to the law
would be subject to the citizen
suits so they are regulated
persons under the law thank as a
rule then.
Representative.
You're not currently muted or.
So
Can generate.
So thank you Representative
Montoya.
Okay so
Do believe that's what it does
it only those who are subject.
To the regulation so that it I
think that's the clear reading
of that amendment is state
agencies are not subject.
To that so the state agency will
not be suited appear to me that
the initial.
Bill what it did was
specifically
and this is for some of the
state agencies were concerned it
because said any person or that
that could mean a state agency
or even an individual in the
state agency.
Could be have deemed to be
negligent.
And automatically would have
standing in the costs to the
state to the setting itself
would have gone through the roof
which is exactly what I
understand why private industry.
What is it is against this as
well because there.
The men lose their in insurance
potentially these companies pry
not be able to be insured for
against litigation so anyhow I
think I understand thank you.
For that.
Thank you so much we have
further discussion on the
amendment.
Is there any objection to the
amendment.
So hearing and seeing the.
The amendment is adopted.
And we're back in the bill
Stands for you still have the
four.
Thank you Mr chairman and and.
Thank you Representative
Stansbury going to the committee
September.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
chairwoman blue for bring the
bill and and also presenters and
comments from the audience I
very much appreciate on the
various inputs on this bill it
is an important bill and in
concepts I very much support the
notion that citizen suits do
advance the cause of
environmental protection and
Enforcement so please don't
interpret these questions to be
a negative on the premises more
kind of in the implementation
and some of those kinds of
things so my first question
madam chair our Mr chair sorry.
Mr chair a a and chair woman
blue is I'm I'm curious to
understand the consent decree
process so let me set it up for
you and then maybe we can get
some clarity here an individual
may bring a suit under this
proposed law.
They enter it they must notify
the state I get that the
Attorney General and perhaps
others I I don't have that
strong grasp all the details but
I understand the state will be
notified of the state may choose
not to insert itself in that
case.
Our then the individual
negotiates up some kind of
settlement or a consent decree
if they're allowed to do that.
Who enforces the consent decree
madam Mr chair and madam chair
blue.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative since I mean this
committee or committee you're
fine to calm your.
Thank you for your question and
I'm going to defer to Charles to
answer that thank you.
Thank you Representative Lewis
Representative Chandler members
of the committee of the
plaintiff typically would be the
party that would administer and
enforce the consent decree but
the first of all you have of the
the consent decree is a court
order and it is under the
jurisdiction of the court and
under the jurisdiction of the
judge so that would be the
judicial oversight of how the
the consent decree is
implemented in addition the
state has the opportunity in the
context of the citizens to to
intervene in the case and if
it's a case that the that the
state considers to be important
enough for significant enough it
has the ability to get involved
and inner as an intervenor and
then it would be involved the
state would be involved in the
implementation of any final
consent decree.
Okay
so thank you Mr chair and thank
you Mister to sail and so what I
hear you saying if the state to
state gets and get involved they
would have the ultimate
authority to and to enforce the
consent decree how would that
leave the plaintive Mr chair and
Mister to sail and if
of the plaintive wasn't
satisfied with how the state
chooses to implement this the
consent decree or even startling
enough choose to renegotiate the
consent decree as we know it's
happened in Los Alamos.
Madam.
Mr chair Representative Chandler
members to the committee
I've never seen this exact
situation happened before so it
would kind of these a new
situation but
typically the if if there are
two parties that are involved in
a lawsuit or settlement
agreement they try to work
together and reach a consensus
on how things need to be
implemented and I'm sure that's
how this would work and in this
scenario that you're you're
describing
ultimately I think that the the
environment to pull Department
in that situation would probably
all the upper hand
and and probably have more
authority than then the
plaintiff but it should be and
typically would be a
collaborative process and and
one based on consensus.
Thank you Mr chair and
Representative there is a
provision in the bill that talks
about the the plaintiff being
barred on that to bring up
private cause of action if the
department is already diligently
prosecuting civil action and
what what is diligently means
and are we gonna have all kinds
of Mr chair and presenters what
kinds litigation debating
whether the department now is
diligent enough to the
satisfaction of a plant in a
particular lawsuit.
I'm sorry I I but my question is
completed so sorry I wasn't
clear.
Mr chair
Representative Chandler so
should I go ahead and answer
I'm.
Thank you I'm so
Term diligently prosecuting
comes out of the federal laws
the the federal citizen suit
provisions and there has been
some litigation on that term and
as a consequence its meaning has
been fleshed out I I wouldn't
say there's been a tremendous
amount of litigation but there's
certainly enough so that that
you know you can look up the the
the case law and get an idea of
the situations in which the
courts have said yes this is
diligent prosecution or no it's
not.
Okay so Mr chair and Mr Salem
what I hear you saying is there
is potential for increased
litigation against the state I
hope the earlier amendment might
have alleviated that and I it
does of course but they're still
this this lingering issue out
there Mr chair and Mr Cassell
would you not agree.
Mr chairman Representative
Chandler
as the bill was originally
drafted there was a provision
that allowed as a citizen suit
against the state for failure to
carry out a non discretionary
duty
that was dropped because of
opposition from the from the
agencies and I think that the
amendment that was just made to
the bill of the minutes any
possibility of the state being a
defendant and less the state is
in a situation where it's
actually regulated and there's
not too many examples of that
that I can think of but if the
state had a water quality permit
or something for some operation
it was doing it might be subject
to a lawsuit then if it was out
of compliance with the permit.
Mr chair Mister president you
know thanks for that
clarification and I you know I
my apologies the plaintiff Mr
chair Mister to sail and would
suit the the the the original
Defense what's up would argue
against original defendant and
the defendant tried to raise as
a defence that the state was
pursuing a particular caught
cause of action against them in
a separate litigation that's
really what's going on Mr chair
Mister president is that not
correct I'm not sure that I
understand the question
Representative Chandler okay Mr
chair and Mister to sail and.
Plaintiff bring suit against ex
company.
X. company is the subject of an
enforcement action by the state
over here but some make it
plaintive will argue state is
not diligently Defense raised by
ex company I'm already being
sued over here by the state Mr
chair and Mr the sale and and
then it will be the company's
burden to say that it's a
diligent a prosecution against
it in the original state case
correct Mr chair and president
Mr Mr chair representative
Chandler yes that's correct and
I'm sorry I didn't quite
understand your question the
first time that I understand it
now great
one I hope this is my last
question Mr chair and Mr
to sail in this business about
penalties going to the the state
treasury raw raw that's great.
Why does the plaintiff gets to
pocket the damages Mr chair and
Mr the sale and what because
those damages be in terms of
order of magnitude.
Mr chair representative Chandler
this bill does not provide for
damages okay so it does not
create any cause of action for
damages one hobby out that I
would place there and that is
that if the plaintiff
provincials the the court can
award the cost of the plaintiffs
litigation meaning expert
witness costs and attorney's
fees yes discretionary with the
court the court does not have to
do that and does not always do
so correct thank you Mr chairman
Mr San Juan just clarifying
point about that it sounds
really good on paper that
there's a kind of a re diverse
attorney's fees thing Mr chair
Mister to sail but if it's an
individual
has that has almost no resources
no
a defendant Mr chair Mr Salas
likely to collect very much I
think we can all agree to that
but it's a nice thought anyway.
And maybe it is something of a
deterrent Mr chair and Mister to
sail in but I mean.
It's it's probably gonna be
somewhat futile at least in some
cases Mr chair and Mister sale
in in terms of collecting if
you're the defendant I I just
think we need to be fair about
how that might be a kind of a
toothless pool thank you I'm I'm
through Mr chair thank you.
Thank you Representative
Representative Montoya.
Thank you Mr chairman before I
the.
bring my questions I'd like to
address the the chair self.
We we've had to amendments that
have been presented today that
did not come in early enough for
either the public or the or the
members of the of this committee
to review them in advance.
I would assume that's.
That's not going to continue to
be practice going forward or if
it is that that all members
would have the ability to bring
amendments
on the day of the legislation.
As for me and go over this on
the first day and you were I
think you Mr first
organizational meeting where we
went over this as has been the
practice of this committee in
the past we will do the twenty
four hour rule for Committee
subs in for lengthy written
amendments we will also accept
on the fly amendments search
keeping because some of House
Judiciary and I'm sorry that's a
sort of my mindset so for your
reading the bill worse we're
seeing things I I am I will
entertain amendments to to fix
them at some point I think I
could best be described as
discretionary if it gets to be
too much we could we did a roll
over the bill
or ask for to be set to come
back at a later date.
On the during amendments on the
floor for the sponsor Mr chair
it.
It appears to me the purpose of
this.
Bill
is to to deputise as it were
activist groups.
For enforcement
That's what appears to me if I'm
wrong maybe that maybe a better
question is a Representative
Lewis is this is this bill from
a department or from or or that
the governor has requested.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Representative Montoya this is
not a government at a
governmental departments bill
and it is not a governor's bill
actually carry the bill in
twenty thirteen a past two
committees in the house and then
it L. to pass on the house floor
so it's been a bill of money
prior to be carrying this bill
of speaker of the Honda has now
passed away he carried the bill
so it's been in the works for a
long time.
Thank you for that the Mr chair
and representative Lewis
so it does appear to me that
this is kind of a.
A. deputizing of of activist
groups but it's not.
For for the purpose of
enforcement because they're not
looking to capture damages other
than
lawyers fees
I'm just wondering is there any
other portion of state law or
any other department where we
have passed legislation or we
essentially are are are
deputizing the public to
enforce.
laws or rules that are already
subject to government agencies.
So I think that.
Mr chairman thank you Mr
chairman the you may take that
I'm sorry is looking for my mute
button and it couldn't pull it
up go ahead Charles.
Okay thank you
Representative Louis Mr chairman
Representative Montoya yes there
are several examples of such
provisions in state law right
now for example the New Mexico
mining act includes a.
Private right of action
provision of the New Mexico
coal mining reclamation act
includes a private right of
action there's also a doctrine
under the law which is known as
qui tam which allows individuals
to bring a lawsuit on behalf of
the state.
As a on the so called private.
All I'm only vaguely familiar
with how those work I know that
the system New Mexico law and I
know that that such actions have
been brought Mr Michael John may
be able to elaborate on that.
Mr chairman and committee
members Representative fund
Toyota I'm not sure I can
elaborate on T. ten Mexicans but
I would point out that the New
Mexico unfair practices act also
provides for individuals who are
adversely affected by unfair
business practices to be able to
sue to enforce that statute.
Thank you for that answer in in
in within those specific
Examples that you've given.
Is there no statue of
limitations and is there also
retroactivity.
This seems to be unprecedented
language here
As to and also a it also appears
as far as the mining at or it
concerning mining.
There.
That
Or let me rephrase that
concerning the
Unfair trade practices act
that's person still has to be
someone who's directly affected
not a third party.
and that's that appears what
we're doing the what we're doing
here is we are going to be.
giving third party automatic
standing you don't have to you
don't have to look at.
The damages directly to the
person or the group as it were
presenting this course of
action.
And a it appears that because of
that.
Any business because this goes
way beyond just oil and gas
industry disclosed to anyone who
disturbs land anyone who is
building or doing something near
water way.
this goes way beyond that to
give automatic expanding to
someone who may or may not be
directly affected it is that
correct in my in my reading that
correct
Representative Lewis.
Representative Lewis Mr chair
Representative Montoya I
respectfully disagree with that
characterization of the bill the
bill provides that suits can be
filed by someone who is
imminently threatened with
injury economically or otherwise
the other words there has to be
a threat to the individual who
is bringing the lawsuit I also
think that the court is not
going to allow someone who does
not have standing as that is
been defined by the New Mexico
courts to file a lawsuit I think
if a person doesn't have
standing the lawsuit would be
dismissed.
So thank you for that but it
appears to me this gives
automatic standing and that the
whatever the company is or
whatever the business is.
would have to defend themselves
to to prove that there's no
standing at it the clear reading
this seems to be that it gives
automatic expanding third party
groups.
Again Mr chair representative on
Toyota I think we'll have to
agree to disagree
I don't believe that the bill
does that.
And I think that if the bill
purported to do that a court
would say no that's not up to
the bill less up to the courts.
So thank you for that Mr
chairman Mr Michael John that is
how insurance companies have
already stated that they're
looking at this these companies
are any of these businesses that
come into New Mexico have to be
insured.
And and our.
Malpractice insurance I would I
would assume would go
skyrocketing so.
That is the way that industry is
looking at this so you may
prefer to disagree with me but
you're not just disagreeing with
me you're disagreeing with
anybody who.
Potentially wants to start any
sort of business in New Mexico
so Sliq goes way beyond a
disagreement in this committee
between a few members and some
and an activist this
disagreement goes to anyone who
might be thinking of opening up
a shop here in New Mexico or
going somewhere else I I think
especially in a time Mr chair
during the COVID where we're
hearing.
On the low end estimates are
that at least twenty thousand
jobs that of the hundred
thousand that have been
temporarily done away with that
twenty thousand plus of those
will become permanent.
This and not only do I believe
is a bad idea in in regular
times but right now during the
COVID when we are potentially
going to be looking to.
Find a way to recover.
When those federal dollars that
we're relying on to prop up our
state.
The.
Budget.
When those dollars stop coming
into the state and we have to
stand up on our own
this is going to be another
reason why we won't be able to
recover because businesses will
be afraid to open here and as a
matter of fact as is happening
now businesses who have not been
able to stay open and many of
them have closed shop
permanently and and some that I
know I have just gone to another
state courts a little bit easier
to open a business so now the
very threat of a lawsuit and
means that.
Several companies are already
predisposed predispose the Mr
chairman Representative Lewis.
To sell.
And.
That.
The.
Or they don't have the lawyers
on staff retainer because this
this is not limited to big
companies assist any company any
business.
That.
The easiest thing for them to do
would just be to close up shop
and I and I think this is a.
Very very destructive to all
communities not just oil and gas
communities that's why we have
so many of the.
Local business organizations
that are standing up in
opposition to this and I and I
would hope that.
The the.
At the very least we can put
this off until we had a chance
to come out of COVID see where
we really stand with business
but I just I in in good
conscience there's absolutely no
way that I I can vote for this I
have to Representative.
Representative structure getting
the businesses people who need
jobs I you know at businesses a
lot of time just get a bad name
I don't want to talk about
businesses but just people who
need a job to provide for their
family and I I have to stand up
for them against this
legislation thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you want to
Representative Strickler.
Thank you Mr chairman.
And I have concerns about this
bill as well.
I appreciate
Mr chairman.
Representative Stansbury at
corporation the AG
Chanticleer fiction I think that
you know certainly helps with
the overall bill is to it's
pretty tough to swallow for
small businesses and industries
yeah I just want to just kind of
gave him.
example in San Juan County we we
lost a you know a restaurateur
you know shut down we lost so
many jobs in our area only gas
the coal mines and power plants
in a span it's been tough on on
our local community and when
that water nag and and the
chamber of commerce's and
another big businesses are are
concerned about the the
overreach of this bill and and
ideas have.
A lot of faith in in a
regulatory
agencies.
That have been governing only
gas for example for sixty
seventy years and and it we're
probably at work like the dairy
farmers we're one of most
stringently regulated industries
and in the state and country
which is a good thing that's
that's the industry that I that
I serve and and it worked and
for you know forty some odd
years so
I think we just need to be
sensitive to this pandemic.
we lost so many jobs.
This is this is worse than it
was the greatest the Great
Recession and two thousand nine
which we all lived through.
In the state to.
Revenues were greatly impacted
back in two thousand nine in two
thousand ten and the federal
government did help
with some stimulus money and
work on that same boat again
separates worse and stated
Mexico's is not growing like it
should.
We got great assets great people
we have
I think that the best to climb
it in in the in the country is
right here and and we're
tracking some we're just not
attracting to businesses and and
and we're not getting the people
to move and so I just think we
this this bill it would be.
Very very difficult for the risk
managers of these companies
they have to manage risk and
they'll take their business
elsewhere I mean we're not an
island and or population growth
is is under two percent our
surrounding states Texas
Colorado Utah Arizona they're
going at ten percent plus.
Oklahoma is growing at five
percent still not bad and we're
under two percent so.
We just we just need to count
up.
Be sensitive that and I think
this bill goes too far and
it sends a sense it's gonna be
very difficult for businesses
from the chamber of commerce and
all the people they represent
the larger businesses in our in
our state and appreciate
representative of I remember
this bill when you present it
back in twenty thirteen.
Been a been on this committee a
long time and appreciate the the
intent but.
in practice I I just have to
respectfully disagree with the
attorneys
that this is not going to be an
avalanche of litigation I think
I think we can't we can't say
that for certain so
did really didn't ask a question
I just wanted to express the
concern in my community and Anna
and and the folks at I had deep
concerns.
We're we're doing some exciting
projects in San Juan basin I
mentioned earlier today two big
solar projects
R. megawatts.
Per project and with the with
the
With the opportunity to double
those uh double the.
The service and it it's it's
pretty exciting stuff I don't
know if this bill will hurt them
or not but I don't want to take
a chance so thank you Mr
chairman and thank you
representative
ideal.
Thank you Representative
Strickler Representative Dixon.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Representative Lewis I am
several questions and I'll try.
To not repeat.
Questions that may have already
been answered.
I'm.
First
Mr chairman Representative Lewis
could you explain the statute of
limitations in this bill.
and representative I think I'll
just defer to a Charles for the
it is your question.
Thank you.
Thank you Representative.
Mr chair of Representative Dixon
the bill does not have an
express statute of limitations
in it and it really doesn't need
to have one because there is a
general statute of limitation in
New Mexico law that would apply
and I I can.
point to the example of federal
law the federal environmental
statutes likewise do not have a
statute of limitations in their
citizen suit provisions of the
course of applied the general
federal statute of limitations
so in this case the the law that
would apply would be the three
year set statute limitation and
I can't give you a citation to
that off the top of my head I'm
sorry but it is it is in our
laws and we actually looked it
up not too long ago.
Thank you.
Mr chair and presenters could
you.
Explain why this is why we need
this law when as I was reading
the room the analysis I did see
that there are mechanisms at the
federal level up for a citizens
to bring suit so could you can
you walk me through why you
believe it's necessary that we
have something at the statewide.
I'm.
Mr chair Representative Dixon
yeah I can give you to sort of
big reasons they're probably
some other ones as well but that
the two biggest reasons I would
say is first of all the federal
laws and the state laws are not
necessarily congruent so for
example the clean water act at
the federal level regulates
discharges of pollutants into
waters of the United States
surface waters it only covers
surface water there's there is
case law and regulations that
say it does not cover
groundwater.
In New Mexico we have a water
quality act and the water
quality act is it covers service
for a little bit but it's mostly
a groundwater protection statute
anybody who just charges a
pollutant or may discharge of
polluted the groundwater has to
get a groundwater discharge
permit
so.
That that groundwater discharge
permit could not be enforced
under the federal clean water
act citizen suit provision us so
there's a rather large gap there
on the second a very important
reason that I would point out is
that
under the federal environmental
citizen suit provisions the any
penalties that are assessed in
the citizens to go to the
federal treasury.
The way that that house bill
fifty is written any penalties
that would be assessed
initiatives it is private right
of actor private action under
that law would go to the state
so we would be keeping that the
penalties that are generated
here in New Mexico.
Thank you Mr chairman and
presenters
When you reference the the
penalty or that the money that
would go to the federal treasury
is there can you give me an
example of about how much we're
talking about and.
Would the money that we would
you don't New Mexico would be
expending on suits
Out way what we would
potentially be bringing it.
Mr chairman Representative
Chandler it's very hard to put
it a number on that
but the the maximum penalties
under our state laws generally
range around ten thousand
dollars per violation per day to
twenty five thousand per
violation per day they're
different under the different
statutes but those are the
maximum penalties so in in in in
action the court has to do at
the discretion and it's very
much within the court's
discretion to set the
appropriate penalty for the
violations taking into account
quite a number of different
things
yeah as far as what this is
going to cost the state I know
I've I've worked a lot with with
secretary Kenny we were just
this morning a sort of tag
teaming and in support of the
bill that was in Senate
conservation but I have to say I
respectfully disagree with the
analysis of the environment
department did on this bill this
bill is not going to cost the
environment department for FTE
that that this is just that's
just inconceivable and I and I
can say that based on fourteen
years that I worked at the
general counsel's office for the
environment department it's not
going to cost it's not going to
take that much time
and the other thing about the
this bill is it does not place
any actual requirements on the
environment department of the
environment department can
intervene as a matter of right
in any private action that is
brought but it does not have to
there's nothing that says that
the environment department has
to intervene and as a matter of
fact in in in the time that I
worked at the environment
department they were probably
half a dozen citizen suits
brought under federal law within
our jurisdiction.
That we could have intervened in
but we did not.
Thank you Mr chairman
and presenters
Could you tell me a little bit
about you mentioned that there
is a civil right of action in
New Mexico with regard to I
believe the mining act and maybe
one other could you let me know
how frequently that's been
utilized just to get us.
I'm sure Mr chairman.
Representative Dixon to my
knowledge there have been us in
the let me back up here The New
Mexico mining act was enacted in
I believe nineteen ninety three
and I always get this wrong I
see it was either nineteen
ninety two or nineteen ninety
three
and since that time to my
knowledge there have been a
total of two
private actions that have been
brought under the mining act and
I am not aware of any actions
that have been brought under the
the coal mining act Mr because
John may be able to fill in some
of that may have have more
information but
So so far as I'm aware on the
under those two laws are only
been three actions.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative Dixon I do not
know the history with respect to
the coal surface mining act so
I'm not a we're whether there
have been lawsuits filed under
the citizen suit provision of
bad act.
Thank you just one or two more
questions I believe Mr chairman
and presenters
some folks are in public comment
and in responses and feedback
that I've received from
constituents there is concern
about the cost the no costs to
businesses in New Mexico ranging
you know across the spectrum not
just oil and gas but also
renewable development energy
development companies and many
others could you talk about any
efforts that have been made to
sort of get a handle on how much
we're talking about and some of
those.
Real implications.
Mr chairman Representative Texan
I don't know if any efforts to
get a handle on those cost I I
think that as as some of the
some of that the the commenters
indicated there's probably not
going to be that many lawsuits
year you know in in the fourteen
years that I worked at the
Environment Department I saw
about six citizen suits that
were brought
you know maybe maybe that's
going to be twice as many maybe
three times as many I can't
imagine that there's going to be
a flood gate of litigation as a
result of this bill passage and
and I can say that to some
extent in in from my experience
working at the environmental law
center and seeing the kind of
requests that come in for our
assistance in in bringing
lawsuits and I and there's very
few that that I have seen that
would have been immutable to
this kind of of of lawsuit there
are a few though and and those
are the ones that are important
in those are the ones what that
that are sort of prompting this
bill there are you know people
out there who are affected.
Adversely of by
industry or other entities that
are violating the law and are
harming the environment and and
harming people's health harming
the air in the water as the
consequence so that's what we're
trying to get out we're not
trying to open up the floodgates
of of you know massive
litigation here and and I just
don't see that happening it is
as other people of have
indicated
there are a lot of obstacles to
bringing a lawsuit you have to
find a lawyer first of all and
lawyers usually costs a lot of
money you have to have expert
witnesses and those usually
costs a lot of money so it's not
that easy just to bring a
lawsuit
and and again I just I don't I
don't see
some of the fears that that
people are expressionist in them
but I don't see them coming to
bear.
Thank you very much I'm.
My last question Mr chairman and
presenters if you could so we've
talked about Enforcement and
sometimes agencies not having
sufficient funds are for
enforcement of regulations and
so one of my questions is why
why shouldn't we just fully fund
our agencies to make sure that
they're enforcing the
regulations that we have.
Pros Mr chairman excuse me sorry
and sorry Representative Dixon I
just have to excuse myself I
really really apologize and I I
asked Mr chairman it would be
okay if Representative or task
stepped in my place my work is
having an emergency right now
that I have to address they keep
lining up my phone and then I
have a meeting at one as well so
I sincerely apologize and and
thank you Representative
Representative Ortez and Mr
chair for accommodating me thank
you.
Thank you Representative Louis
etcetera etcetera or test will
take over clinical presenting
the bill with the aid of the
experts thank you.
Thank you for stated that
Representative from.
Sorry did you at Mr chair did
you need for me to repeat the
question.
If you could that would be
useful.
Thank you Mr chairman and to a
Representative Ortez and our
presenters my question was why
why are we choosing a different
route as opposed to fully
funding and making sure that our
our agencies are enforcing the
regular.
I defer to Mister detailing
Mister miracle done.
Thank you Representative Ortez
Representative Dixon I I
certainly think that we should
be fully funding the agencies
but I would also point out that
even under full funding and if
we we went back to where the
agencies were several years ago
they still would not have the
resources in order to be able to
do all of the inspections
inspect all of the facilities
that are permitted
and bring action against all of
the violators the the it's just
it's not physically possible and
you know and less and less we.
Quadrupled or or you know me the
expanded the size of the agency
many more times and then we
would be able to but we
certainly are in favor of of
fully funding the agencies.
Thank you Mr chairman and
presenters I have no further
questions at this time.
Thank you resent Dixon
Representative Stansbury did you
have additional questions for
the.
Presenters yes Mr chair just one
quick question and I know we're
we need to get get down by is
into this state of the state but
Mr chairman and and presenters
you know sometimes I think when
we get into these technical and
legal discussions we can you get
in the weeds and we kind of
forget the bigger picture and so
Mr chairman and Representative
Ortez and our our our subject
matter experts I just want to
kind of like ask a question to
make it as a comment which is to
say what this bill is really
about is if we have a situation
where dangerous pollution is
being dumped into a water source
or the ground water that people
drink is contaminated with
something that might make
children and families sick or
something is being included into
the air that might settle on a
community and actually made make
children sick and the state's
not able to enforce it this
would essentially allow that
community or citizens to bring
an action in front of the court
that would essentially stop that
to protect the public health and
the environment is that correct.
I'm Mr chair Representative
Stansbury yes that's absolutely
correct thank you okay thank you
Mr chairman that's all.
Thank you Representative
Townsend.
Yes thank you Mr chairman I just
wanted to ask the expert.
Or the representative.
Are you aware of the time that
one of the of the examples that
representative Stansbury.
Just use has that ever happened
as the state ever failed to
react to that type of action.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative for twos expects.
Mr secretary Salem.
There is.
Mr chair thank you
Representative Townsend
there certainly have been.
Perhaps not exactly the
situation that
Representative Stansbury was
referring to but there has
certainly been situations in New
Mexico where
The individuals people
communities use usually
disadvantaged communities
communities of color have been
exposed to pollutants as a
result of local industry and.
We have have had
health effects as a consequence
and added some of for example as
a rates have gone up
Menace les over the past few
decades and
that's usually a seems to occur
in
Lower income communities
communities of color
I'm and and places where there's
a lot of big industry so and and
unfortunately the agencies I
mean I I think they try to do
the best they can with what they
have but they're not always
there enforcing the law as well
as they should be so
hi yes I think I think those
kind of things have happened.
Representative Townsend Here
muted.
Not by my own doing and my dad
but to.
If.
This
Can you give me one.
Location and you might say that
that.
Has occurred in the the state
has not been actively involved.
And any mitigation efforts.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee Representative
Townsend
south valley of Albuquerque is
one place that comes to mind
the the the the San Juan basin
is another place that comes to
mind with with the the act and
then we'll go to pueblos close
by
There's certainly more examples
to Mr Michael John.
May be able to to give you some
more.
All Mr chairman.
Representative Thomson I would
just.
Wipe out with respect to the
south valley of Albuquerque
that.
The quality of the air in that
area is demonstrably worse than
it is elsewhere in Bernalillo
county and the U. life
expectancy in that area is
demonstrably shorter than it is
elsewhere in Bernalillo county
so that is no that's not
technically the state that's.
The local air quality board of
the Albuquerque Bernalillo
county air quality board but
it's acting sort of in the state
of the state it's a local board
under the air quality act.
Mr chairman and Mr Michael John
I am.
I have been and are in.
You know all and gas industry in
many locations across New
Mexico.
And I have and then in a number
of other states and I have yet
to.
Seen.
any of the state.
Regulatory bodies in any of
those.
State where.
I managed assets that were
operated.
The states did a good job.
And work we're a grant of.
And promoting
Not only the current
regulations.
But those authority from and
hearing to those regulations I
think this piece of legislation
will cause.
The M.
Harmon their ability to do that
and I don't believe it's in the
best interest of.
Of New Mexico to pursue this
proposal so I cannot support it
for those reasons I do support.
Individual rights.
What.
What this bill does.
In my opinion.
Is is a plaintiff's attorney
dream of for facilitating.
Sometimes
great and could very probably
be.
And actions that were reprisals
and not of directed at
appropriations ongoing so I am I
think it's so.
I don't believe it's a good
piece legislation so thank you
Mr chairman.
Thank you Representative
Townsend for someone to do
something brief.
Yes Mister chairman just a brief
Madam.
It is intended to deal with
anything in the San Juan basin
this is not a good bill for that
because only six percent of San
Juan County is privately held
and that's almost and you all
incorporated city areas San Juan
County where any oil and gas
production is taking place
almost all of it is taking place
on federal land see they're all
BLM or tribal lands even where
it goes and extends into the
other areas such as a in Rio
Arriba county or even in the
sand of all that is all tribal
land so this if this is this is
a intention is to try and have
some sort of effect in San Juan
County
this does is.
I'm not a good effort what I see
happening is if this is intended
to do something in the south
valley or some other places like
that that is why private
industry it is so nervous about
this in intend to
because I think the bill was
intended to look at the quote
unquote big polluters but this
doesn't to exclude.
And any of the small businesses
why we're seeing that the local
chambers of commerce oppose this
in the business organizations
thank you Mr chair.
If you want to I have a few
questions of my own and then
we'll we'll take a vote
Mr to sailing on the notice
provision there's a.
Sixty day notice provision
unless there's an immediate
threat and if there's an
immediate threats.
Then you can you can file an
action but it's still after no
this is that correct so you
still have to provide that is
you can't even your first no
this cannot be the lawsuit
itself they're still sort of a
two step know this process is
that correct.
Mr chairman members of the
committee yes that is correct.
Okay and.
Mr descend on the
there is some concern raised and
I I've never been in the
enforcement arena but is there
is a spill or something and
maybe OCD is negotiating and
clean up.
I am not really sure how that
works but if there's a mystery
of action pending.
Could someone go ahead and file
one these lawsuits.
Mr chairman and members the
committee yes they could and
administrative action under this
bill would not serve to bar a
a private action and the the
federal environmental citizen
suit provisions work much the
same way in order for a citizen
suit to be barred the agency has
to have brought an actual civil
action is supposed to administer
an administrative action and the
reason for that is that it is
very easy for
I a hostile agency which we
sometimes have to the bring a a
friendly Enforcement
administrative action against of
violator and settle for for
nominal amount and they're by
far a a
the private action and we we saw
it at Los Alamos National
Laboratory and the action that
was brought against the
department of energy a few years
ago in which the the environment
department announced that you
know fifty million dollar
assessment of the penalty
And and ultimately
settled for a zero dollar
penalty that would be a very
good example of a situation
where the in the agency could do
that if an administrative action
Bar a private a private it's
too.
Thank you for that and
Representative Ortez Mr to
statement.
Your I see the
The appropriate relief and you
know there's a standing issue
that you have to show an injury
but there is no compensation for
that injury in the appropriate
relief there's injection and
their spell these could could
this actually be paired with.
Another claim that the provides
compensation to the person who's
actually suffered an injury.
I'm Mr chairman members of the
committee yes.
It could be paired in under this
bill as you correctly point out
there would be no ability to
collect damages for the injury
but certainly a plaintiffs could
bring an action with several
counts so one of the counts
might be a private right of
action under this bill and a
separate count might be a tort
claim for injury seeking damages
but that's something that could
be brought separately even if
this bill is not an act.
Okay thank you and one of.
One final just comment the money
will look at the future under
the air quality section the
penalties so well actually
clarifying question.
Mr chairman all the penalties
actually go to the state or to
the public right there's no
private.
People can't seem to and and
capture those penalties
privately is that correct.
Mr chair yes that's correct okay
good yes I would Senator the the
the clean air act provision it
says
The penalties we get to the
agency for county general fund
yes the sources within the
jurisdiction of a local
authority or to the state
treasury but I would think every
source would be within one of
our thirty three counties is.
That just drafting lecturer
could you use because our be
outside the state of New Mexico.
I'm if it Mr chair if I
understand the question the.
The action could only be brought
against a source within the
state of New Mexico in and at
the in New Mexico we have one
County well Albuquerque
Bernalillo county that actually
has the authority to.
Implement administer enforce the
air quality control act so
within Bernalillo county the the
Bernalillo county air quality at
the already has jurisdiction as
opposed to the New Mexico
Environment Department and so
there are provisions in the
in the air quality control act
that apply to local local air
through Ortiz.
Okay but the.
This is the penalties receive in
no event with the be deposited
in the state treasury under that
act because every source would
be within one of the thirty
three counties of New Mexico.
Mr chairman I.
College you I think that the the
the intent of that provision is
if the the source is within the
jurisdiction of Bernalillo
county then it would go to the
the penalty would go to
Bernalillo county if the source
within the jurisdiction of the
environment department in other
words anywhere in New Mexico
outside of Bernalillo county
then the penalty would go to the
state treasury.
Okay I might I might discuss
that with you later
What is the pleasure of the
committee Representative Ferrary
Mr chair I'd like to move do
pass for house bill fifty as
amended.
We have to pass as amended is
there a second second.
The second for Representative
sorry now that the show do you
can you take the vote.
Representative Chandler yes.
Representative Dixon.
No and I'd like to explain my.
Representative Ferrary yes.
Representative Montoya.
No.
Representative Ortez.
Yes.
Representative Sariñana.
Yes.
Representative Scott.
Representative Strickler.
Representative Townsend no.
Vice chair stand very yes and
I'd like to explain my vote.
Chair the queen.
Yes.
And that is a do pass as amended
with a vote of seven to five.
We have a state we don't have
that many people on the
committee yes my apologies that
is a do pass with a vote of six
to five.
I think that is correct
Representative Dixon to explain
her but.
Thank you Mr chairman
I wanted to recognize that I
believe in our that there are
gaps in enforcement and
regulation and protection for
citizens in the state of New
Mexico with regard to
environmental safety and health
and I do understand that this
can be a useful tool are for
when administrations choose not
to enforce regulations.
But with regard to this bill I
do have some concerns
First I believe that we should
be fully funding our agencies
and ensuring that they are.
Enforcing the regulations second
and concerns that we have not
adequately addressed the
potential cost to the state and
businesses
And third I'm not yet convinced
of the need to do this at the
state level when we do have
venues at the federal and
finally I would be interested in
more data showing that this is
the most efficient and effective
tool that we can use to solve
the problem I'm so thank you
very much.
Thank you Senator Representative
Stansbury to explain about thank
you Mr chairman I wanted to say
thank you to the sponsors Center
special acts ours are special
subject matter experts and
everyone who showed up to
testify today I heard a lot of
testimony from the public in our
small businesses that they're
afraid of how this will impact
the economy I hear that I do
think this is one tool and an
entire toolbox of ensuring the
environmental health and safety
of our community is and I think
it is a potentially important
tool but we do want to make sure
that it is not misused abused or
cause an undue impact on the HSD
is so I look forward to this
bill being improved hopefully in
the next stop in Judiciary
before it comes back to the
floor to make sure that some of
the concerns that we heard today
are addressed thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you everyone that was a
long meeting but I thought we
had to discussion of we are
return I will see you Thursday.
Thanks everyone.
