Chair is years.
The.
Good afternoon committee good
afternoon Mister chair committee
Presenting house bill one sixty
six and may I have a expert
witness.
Mr.
Osama.
Thank you he's with the New
Mexico working safe of save vice
chair and he's with the also the
A. R. P. New Mexico at the
advocacy director.
And I'm just gonna jump right
into this Mr chairman I very
second.
Live committee that I.
September passionate house bill
one sixty six
New Mexico working safe act
retirement changes
what it does is it makes three
necessary changes to the payroll
deduction IRA which is the
independent retirement account
program in in New Mexico works
and say that as you may recall
the working say that his passed
into law in twenty twenty right
before because it so the
activated nine nine member board
the fire support to stand up to
to retirement programs
specifically for New Mexico's
private sector employers and
workers that do not have a
retirement savings plans New
Mexico has about four hundred
forty four.
Thousand workers do not have to
workplace retirement savings
option most of these are low to
moderate wage earners and
without retirement savings they
will be reliant on social
security and state assistance
when they retire.
The two retirement programs for
the setting up our retirement
plan place and the payroll
deduction IRA program H. B. one
sixty six funding makes changes
to the act specific to the I
read program and those changes
are simple and necessary before
the program can be launched the
bill will one require employers
that can't or don't offer a
retirement plan who have I for
more forties to auto enroll
their workers into the I have a
program.
There is no.
Charge two players are enrolled.
And the workers can opt out
anytime.
Once their employees are rolled
the only responsibility an
employer has going forward will
be to process payroll deductions
from workers next wages and to
remove those deductions to the
workings a program
administrator.
This is the exact same process
employs requires already do when
the process payroll this just
adds one more deductions.
The working save irate programs
facilitated by employers
processing deductions with
employers are not sponsors of
the program not liable to
workers accounts not responsible
for the investment performance
and employers cannot contribute
for providing match to workers
account.
The only other changes H. B. one
six sixty six makes to the Act
is to clarify to definition
require the board to ensure that
fees fees charges Irish program
remain reasonable.
The board will complement
accomplish those students are
reviewing the fees at least
annually and more often if
necessary to retain reasonable
fees.
It is critically important for
the committee to understand that
without reached truck requiring
employers with five or more
workers to participate in next
will be unable to launch the
iris program.
The board we try to find a
program administrators read the
program without requiring
employers to participate part
two part yeah my little dryer to
participate with no financial
services.
Roger was willing to build the
necessary infrastructure and
operate the program because
there would be no guarantee of a
sustainable number of accounts
in the program to offset the
upfront and continuing
operational costs.
So the state does not operate
the program initially go sheets
with professional finance
services provider separate the
program this is very much like
how the state offers the four
fifty seven deferred
compensation plan called smart
state and how the state operates
the five twenty nine college
savings programs.
And with that Sir Mr chair
committees will stand for
questions.
Community here echo in the
Senate we can do just.
Yes Mr chair members of the
committee thank you for the
opportunity to present today
this is a very critical programs
you just called a couple years
ago and it was it was
implemented and passes a
voluntary measure since then the
board and the program has as
Representative Lujan indicated
that it would not be feasible to
to continue to stand up on its
own as a voluntary measure
we get to the R. P. S. as
Representative Lujan indicated
we got zero response from admit
financial advisors ministries to
want to take on the program and
that's what we have a memo of
understanding and cooperation
with Colorado six combined
our respective programs and sort
of look into that as a measure
to hopefully offset you know
with the kind of scale combined
their membership and they're
they're participants in that
would make it more viable for
four or two programs to have a
large pool offset costs and fees
sixteen states already are you
there implementing this or have
are considering it none of them
have a voluntary programs are
all out on the rules require the
employers to our own role as
well New York was the only one
to have voluntary agency but
then since would turn are only
you might hear from from from
some businesses that you know
their concerns may be that it's
over burdensome costs it costs a
lot maybe are they might be
concerned that it might take
another a lot of time that's not
true in fact if you were to hear
from other businesses small
businesses I've taken this on in
other states the indicate that
it's it's very low to no cost in
fact I'm all they have to do is
to take our payroll deduction
line item for something that
they already do for their
employers delivery maybe some
information to the work and save
program and then outside third
party financial administrator
will come and.
And basically handle all the
administrative work for the
employer the employee does have
the option to opt out but in the
in fact on many cases employees
I think it's a really good thing
for them to UNICEF their futures
of four and and and preserve
their financial futures by
having some savings that they
can put away if anything the
pandemic is really shines how
how critical it is for people to
have savings and retirement for
you know the special in our
stable with so many of our
people depend on social security
alone and trying to pay for the
utilities and food and other
measures really critical for
them having savings that's what
we're trying to put together and
and set forth in this thank you
very much.
With the go to the this is
anyone here in support of this
legislation.
Is there anyone here in
opposition.
It does you into port is there
anybody who wishes to speak.
Go ahead Sir and vote.
Mr chairman members of the
committee part one asked me I'm
also on the working state board
I want to thank the
representatives the sponsor for
you.
You know we have time in the
public sector in order that we
have some of the worst
retirement in the private sector
in America.
We have seniors who really
struggle to get by.
Rather than pulling para in New
York the Dow.
We want to left the private
sector up.
Frankly this is a small step
it's important step not you know
we have a state level to five
minute plan for private sector I
think.
But in the absence of that which
is what.
This is something that allows
workers to take their own money
not their employers money.
And investing for themselves for
the future so we think this is
important for New Mexicans.
For.
So not have seniors looking into
our property it's gonna take
awhile to get there but the
sooner we start people say even
this year I am so thank you
support for the.
Yes.
Thank you.
Committee fighting this guy for
I by small business owners to.
registered lobbyist for the
judge of huge charitable
foundation and we sentences for
school today thank you thank
you.
Yes.
There we didn't have anybody in
opposition to my correct.
Okay we'll go to the.
Four years but it was speak in
support.
Bill.
Read the front page.
What is.
Yes I would like to speak in
support of this bill as you know
I I I did sit on the pera board
for sixteen years and this is
something that we need to do for
the private sector I will say
when I first started with the
City of Albuquerque I wanted all
my paycheck and I was very upset
that they were taking care
thirty five years later I am so
happy that because now I have a
pension am I still security so I
just want to say that I
definitely am in support of
this.
I think she's a grandma taking
care.
The last time we got a.
The committee that.
Not just to be sure I understand
this yes.
this is we only have this
program is that what we're doing
now is the thing that I if my my
understanding of everything that
the meeting so far yes Sir but
when it was implemented it COVID
hit so we it wasn't able to
launch fully so this would.
health launches to get to the
number so that we would be in
compliance with the and you that
we have with Colorado.
But the building out the first
last year or was it last year
the bill to pass it over to the
governor's desk with the filming
make sure Sir Mr chair it was a
passing twenty twenty eight
twenty two eighty the side of
the it is the law and what we're
doing now basically you
submitted this bill would do yes
okay thank you I just wanna make
sure that.
That going to the market
structure.
Mr chair.
Representative thank you for
bringing this this bill forward
to cope with things.
the big change is now business
will have to opt out.
Mr chair Representative Martinez
they what they'll have a to give
the option to the automatic
option for their employees
police to opt in or opt out.
Of.
Chair representative.
I just want to be I want that to
be very clear that.
Even the total the the word
mandate has been thrown around
for small business still has the
off state thanks but we're going
off.
So Mister chair Representative
Martinez any private
sector business as I am more
employees will be required to
ask their employees they want to
opt in opt out.
Of Mr chair representative on.
But that is an option for small
business to sister to opt out of
it.
Mr chair and senator no they
would be met with they would
have to allow their employees to
opt in or opt out we have five
one please note this.
Chair representative but that
that all options is there.
The most the rules mandated that
option there Mr Chairman up are
you asking if it's are added now
or did businesses can clarify
the question I'm sorry Mr chair
representative.
This bill mandates of Business
to participate what that
business has the option.
To opt out of this program Mr
chair known they would be
required to staff five more
employees to provide the
paperwork so to speak that would
essentially say here's a check
for your employee when you do
your your intake when you're
hired to say check yes I want to
participate and I want to add
certain more money to be go to
retirement plans subject.
For the Mr chair if they don't
want to be can opt out then for
you could.
Mr chair representative.
So just just one very clear on
this.
The options there.
To not participate in this
currently Mr chair yes the
option for the the business's is
an option with a delicious
pizza.
Sure thank you both the.
Representative.
The only get one run are we.
The.
I
this.
Sure.
First of all your requiring any
business I employees are more
has to follow through on
offering that program and the
size and siting themselves local
brokers firms basically to the.
in order for them to have this
this irate.
Mr chair Representative
confesses.
The working state program so
they're separate thing called
market places which are
operating in tandem with the IRA
were this is could.
Circle all one stop shopping for
going out of business programs
you say to implement that
program that's a whole separate
thing this is of strictly for
the auto higher rate the Roth
IRA right program which doesn't
have any matching or any sort of
fiduciary responsibility upon
the employer all they have to do
is just basically offered to
their employer no onus on the
employer to really do anything
except for office.
Mr chair and this one.
P. as I think it was aware of it
is composed okay so if the off
you offer to your employer Mr
chair representative and I know
that you don't have to continue
that that's not what this is
what it does is it.
In rules it gives them the
option.
Okay but the business themselves
has to also participate in.
And and deductions.
I.
The poor can you take some money
out of my paycheck right because
right so far because I want to
keep going too fast and but to
set up that program the ivory
program who does that Mr chair
representative.
Mr chair
that the onus is on the business
to.
Have the paperwork so to speak
to say to us please they want to
participate they do not it
doesn't come out of their pocket
for them to participate into
this program it doesn't it
doesn't that there is that's
what you're getting.
This is Mr chair representative
I know the money forget the
money where the this is not
gonna find one penny of it the
paperwork that is required to
establish this account who's
responsible for what I just
provided the papers but to
manage that paperwork and get it
to the property who's
responsible that Mr chair
representative so Mr chair
Representative access to the
paperwork that would be have to
be like H. R. function right to
HOV response for holding that
paperwork and making sure that
those deductions for that
employees are implemented the
table yes yes so Mr chair
representative I got that most
little I yes person employers
don't have a the charred
Department right so it's usually
the employer self employed man
or woman whatever and so my
point Mr chair representative my
questions who fills out that
people work and get to the
entity that will hold those
funds was responsible for that
Mr chairman Mr chair
Representative the the lawyers
response will get just like your
the employers response for any
paperwork we filling out of
social security information or
they're filling out anything
that anything that regarding the
information this is their
responsibility so this is
another action other checkboxes
speak another piece of paper
that Health enrolled in there
about the new mission instead
but that is already in the thick
of the port of five to the opt
out.
Mr chair what is already in the
fact is that businesses now have
the option if they want to
participate right exactly that
is already in the thank you
lawyers are now doing this if
the employees of already updated
that is already being done that
is not the that is not
pertaining to this bill that
particularly
what it feels.
That as to who just got
paperwork.
So Mister chair that is
absolutely comes just to make
sure that we understand it this
is on the.
All we're doing is making some
changes.
Mr Chairman representative I
think the the the
good news is the other thing is
currently you you can always set
up this program on your own as a
business.
You could always have done that
you don't have to have the state
Mr chair representative tell you
when I have a for all my
employees basis and it wasn't
because of state told us that we
need to do this for for
employees Mr chair
representative you that in our
next level to say Hey we want
established the last bill was to
say and so Mr chair
representative businesses you
guys can do this for your
employees but demanded that some
is that correct Mr chair
representative.
So Mr chair that so it's been
possible this this is what
you're saying that the path
option this is about the option
to opt in to everything's been
sexually so now yes we are
moving to the the change to
match.
So so strictly that the server
was confused I know what works
one of the something I refuse
understand really well so Mr
chair representative I think the
thing that I'm trying to.
Thank you a parent is that most
I.
Unemployed has listen I am or I
am please ten employees usually
I mean.
They're not used to doing this
paperwork and I know that
anybody can learn anything Mr
chair representative
it's just another mandate to
force us to do more work so well
it's just some paperwork.
Mr chair representative I don't
even to this day for myself we
have to have a CPA firms we have
our people work with partners
firm that's how it's done and
the the deductions are exactly
the same as Cherokee but it is
the paperwork do you have a a
sample of the folks we control
of the committee what you're
asking no more I will defer to.
If I may Mister chair and
representative Ross says so I
understand.
that any business can go for
care a particular financial
services to do this the problem
is is that they're not servicing
the needs of all the businesses
that require that one necessary
because if they are if they were
out there they would give
services now and so I think what
what what's difficult is that
particularly those services
those third party services some
of them can be very costly for
the for the business to
implement that's one thing and
that it does require a lot of
work for the employer to have to
implement those financial
services to make that available
what this does is in lieu of
that is it creates a process by
which the employer does not have
to take on the burden of having
to set that up it's another
option for them to set up and
provide savings for their
employees through the higher
higher rate program which
wouldn't cost them anything
which would take them very much
time I understand saying of the
lord and I this is more may not
have the infrastructure to to
take on something of setting up
a whole entirely on their cell
but this really just.
Basically has the employer offer
than the program through the
working state program then third
party entity would handle all
that all the paperwork and other
things that are necessary to to
enroll that employee it's a one
time kind of process and then
the auto deductions will go
naturally four months three
months
which would require much work
for the employer Mr chair
representative actually to to be
honest with you
ever does does it for free.
So this role that this doesn't
if anyone can go to a brokerage
firm there's no minimum
To figure out the have to start
the most brokers firms so.
Mr chair representative right
now there's nothing holding them
from not doing that other than
in other words.
As a business can turn around Mr
chair representative saying you
know what they were Jones I want
to offer this to my to my
employees okay
and I want you to come to my
office offered to all employees
the employees just come in and
the help in the office and they
don't want to they don't.
Contributed can contribute but
that's always been standing is
this isn't a new concept this
is.
Mandating Mr chair
representative is for I have a
problem with it and and the
number of employees for I have a
problem with it Mr chair
representative is is it's most
most small businesses are on our
are less than twenty employees
okay and so what we're not what
the elephant in the room that
we're not talking about I think
it's great to certain to to save
Mr chair representative I
encourage all my employees to do
and I'm actually
you know have absolutely but
that's not the point the point
is there are some businesses Mr
chair representative or that are
have a high turnover rate.
And what we say well it's just I
this is five employees right
your only I propose but there
are some places is constantly
the turning over and over and
over and they keep opting in but
then.
The amendment the obviously then
they have to go to another point
where maybe how I'm gonna ask
you I'm not gonna do I want to
order from you how does how is
that handled the sustainable use
and goes to another Millard
thank you Mr chair thank you for
that question that's actually
really wonderful question
because with this program the
this will this problem follow
the NMAA follow that initially
wherever they go where the work
so that that takes care of that
issue as we know that a lot of a
lot of people specially the in
these the second jobs you have
been studied thank you they do
move from career to prepare to
job to job to many will follow
them which gives it an
additional provision that that
we need for the for this
workforce so Mister chair
representative so what happens
of an employer want to call it
employs a.
Hey those template be pleasantly
be responsible for Mr
Representative again for for
fluency Mr chair what this does
is it provides a flu season now
that point goes to in you and
you employer and say that is and
why we have the low threshold to
the I please now that is a
better chance that that next
employer has the same provision
and so there's no cohesiveness
to the program but Mr chair
representative there's talk to
to pay for these fifteen
following I don't fault because
that is anybody as an irate can
two thousand right now anyway.
And so this is a this website is
not new
Mr chair representative and the.
I like the idea we already have
a mandated program social
security.
Mr chair representative employer
contributes six point two
percent of their of their.
Match two employees replace
percent six point two percent or
percent extra twenty percent and
that's the mandated social
security that we actually today
I think my but where I get a
little bit nervous is a
preemptive Bill Representative
the game Mr chair representative
of something more where we
began.
New Mexico school security
requirement for we're starting
to we went last time it sure
option this time Mr chair
representative it's mandated
next semester chair
representative it's you know not
to contribute mandatorily that's
what I think I get a little bit
nervous especially Mr chair
representative with what we're
dealing with today.
And all of a.
Was getting over a cold with
some of these businesses already
struggling.
And I think it's important Mr
chair representative for them to
say absolutely and I and and
Representative you're my friend
and I think you're great
personalized level you're always
trying to do
but that is one of my biggest
concerns
And I and I I'll be honest with
you Mr chair representative as
one of the reasons that I don't
that I don't know myself because
we don't have time is business
guys too to to all our work and
with the Mr chair representative
when we have already a lack of
labor participation.
We're having to as business
owners put in more hours to
cover those hours.
And to to cover those bills both
of the.
You know the our inability to
fill in those hours and that and
for that reason
this is one more set of
paperwork so here you are
as of the some of the meeting.
Some of these things although
they're great are very
burdensome to small business
because it's mom and pops and so
they already have to fill in the
extra hours at the the can get
employees and I'm beyond that
now they have extra therefore
that they have to do and
although it's just a deduction
most of Mr chair representative
don't have a CPA that doesn't
work that's right I have to do
that or there's no way I would
sleep so those are my my big
issues with the
again you know especially do you
so my question is do you feel Mr
chair representative madam.
Very good question but.
This is a pre requisite to a
mandated contribution Mr
chairman I do not I think this
is very much an incentive to
those mom not because of.
Small businesses as your as
you're referencing we're having
a hard time the reports right
now so any kind of incentive
that we're looking to give two
employees right now I think
really gets them to get to this
place and get into the workforce
and I and I'm glad that you
mentioned that yes we have a
provision of federal provision
for social security retirement
but we all know it's a
discipline we have found that
that is not efficient or for
most of our retirees especially
more incurring costs of living
for medical costs and so forth
so I think that the what I'd
like to say is what would happen
if we DO something and make it
mandate students we are sending
this message of benefit to our
workforce that New Mexicans who
do not have access to workplace
retirement savings plan would
face an uncertain financial
retirement future according to
the state treasurer's office
here in New Mexico New Mexicans
can expect to pay an additional
Is a program of the state of New
Mexico has chair yes and do they
handle some of those
For this story responsibilities
at all Mr chair representative
Mr chair of the state I'm going
to.
I don't believe so but I'm going
to defer to my experts so Mister
chair representative offices the
program is not yet fully in
effect we have the bill
and this is the enabling
legislation to implement it and
so at this particular point
there is no mechanism to to
facilitate that right now but
once it started the the entity
whoever decides to take on the
financial administration of the
program will handle the pro
through the paperwork back and
forth between the employer and
and that industry.
Program facilitated and and so
the the work program will
actually walk the employer that
process to help them make sure
that they have everything they
need employees to make that work
for.
Thank you thank you to my
experts thank you Mr yes there
is there is a a request here if
you read the I. F. I. R. two
hundred fifty thousand dollars
we're asking for two FTEs for
right now where this program is
the house is that the state
treasurer's office so we open
that would work would continue
and that they would be able to
high higher to administrative
FTEs to do that work for staff.
I think my bills I Mr chair
representative I can't remember
the bill that yet that we into
this and that's that that's what
I was probably so I can
understand this a little bit
more I think that's where.
All of that can help you with.
This is Mr chair that bill with
HB forty four twenty twenty
Wirth state act established in
past in the house of
representatives with sixty two
to one in passing the Senate
forty two zero signed by the
governor in chapter twenty six.
So
I think I think with that I
just.
I'd probably have some follow up
questions on this.
But
at this point and that pretty
much pretty much I thank you
Representative.
Check ahead.
Thank you Mr chair
representative.
He got all of the mostly.
We have a whole lot of the G.
did.
Okay so I'm just trying to think
of some of the people on the
small business owner and I just
think in the burden on me
because I'm not in a very
popular business so in asphalt.
If you don't want to do asphalt
as a career so I rotate people
quite a bit and it seems like
the super cumbersome for me to
have to run you know all the
paperwork.
Secondly.
Budget on that bill that you
were talking about
hi how it was originally voted
on.
I was told that is said the boys
were all wins.
Have the ability to offer it was
voluntary.
It would be voluntary always.
And now we're going back and
making it or it's not following
Terry.
And you see in in my town after
the COVID.
And everybody you know they were
they were trying to get people
from native patios.
And they took away salad bars
and the you know there's just
they're they're struggling and I
just think that.
Excuse me if we if we place
another burden on.
Most of we're trying to they're
trying to rebuild now and
they're in that five year
threshold.
Of they might fail again.
And.
I just feel like.
Right now is it is not the best
time in and I was hoping that
maybe of.
Mr chair representative would
you give me an example of how
this would work in business is
struggling with less than five
people like the process of okay
Mr chair Senator.
Businesses with less than five
employees would not from the so
called I'm sorry that's okay.
I remorse so if the police come
in would you walk me through the
process okay Mister chair
Representative incense I see
you.
So I think I'm gonna go through
this process and just to clarify
something to I was HR director
for the state of New Mexico and
so when you when you hire
somebody you go through the
whole process of hiring
everything of the state of New
Mexico New Mexico it's it's it's
a very long process and it can't
be compared to a small business
so your small business network
our offices as well and you're
managing your own books or speak
you still are required to take
having.
For instance for the social
security information for I need
to clarification and education
that this is a your somebody it
is so eligible to work in our
state.
So do that same process this
would just add a simple step
that would I would assume a
check box it was a either your
opt in or opt out I've never
seen any kind of cumbersome
paperwork we're applying for is
it T. E. R. A. for the state of
New Mexico now that that is a
cumbersome it could be a
cumbersome process that is
actually spin
reduced to very simple a simple
process so we're not doing that
process this is giving the
burden off to a third party
therefore we check off that you
want to participate as an
employee or where you're giving
them a sense incentive to do
this and they may want to work
with you and ask what this is a
little bit longer or they may go
on to another another business
and that that money and that
investment for themselves and
not return this is going to.
Thank you Mr chair
representative so what I'm
hearing you say is if I'm coming
to.
I want to be your employee yes
and I turned in my application
and we go through all this
paperwork and I.
Good employee for you for five
years and I decide to leave and
what happens with the paperwork
whenever I get rid of the.
Chair of that paper work most
likely
You'll be able to have that
paperwork can take a copy of it
and take it with you so that
would follow you so that you can
but there would also be I I
believe that education but the
number that would follow you to
the next place of employment and
therefore much like our social
security number we are to its
identify identify out of all and
you were you can follow you and
then there for those balances so
to speak you as well.
So you as my employer what is
your what is your
responsibility.
On my face for.
The the future so the
responsibility would be to make
sure that that deduction if
you're participating to be it to
be show me transparent upon your
payroll
and you see that you see where
where those investments are
being checked.
Mr chair representative I.
Unlike my colleagues here I I I
really unless I get there
thankful for.
On a I love the concept is the
lead to mandate.
And you know I whisked
I was used for like maybe twenty
employees or more maybe were
somebody have an HR department
for the kids you know they have
a bookkeeper but I think that
That flies for more is a little
bit
just.
Chair thank you.
From the rural New.
Treasure the table madam vice
chair.
The.
Representative Johnson I'm sorry
thank you Mr chair and at call
eight thank you Representative
still clerk I think.
It's the principle of the matter
is.
This allows hard working workers
injuries to save.
There are.
An additional.
Every little bit maybe I think
it helps
for example I myself will not
save my own money.
But if I sign up often for
program like this and which I
always to take that opportunity
I will sign up and then it
helps.
So I thank you for bringing this
bill forward I think this is a
great way for businesses to take
care of their employees for that
opportunity take care of mom and
pops workers so I support this
bill thank you Mr chair.
Representative.
Mr chair I move to other pasal
house we have a six to six.
The
second.
The
second okay before we think that
motion by.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative for in this.
Bill and.
Just as Representative Johnson
mention of this is this is an
employee.
Senator bill is to give
employees.
Of the strength.
Of saving for the very much.
In a.
That is protective.
that expresses their desire to
say.
And I anticipate Mr chair that
once we get the system to set up
that quote unquote whatever
paperwork that was alluded to
will be entered into a system
that will follow the employee
forever that way feels because
and forties or so stated with.
Social security numbers and
other kinds of identifying waste
this typically the way Mr
Chairman IRA.
This is geared towards employees
that don't necessarily make.
The income threshold that
qualifies for a higher rate.
The whole.
That's the staff.
With two of.
Cover those that are in the
private sector that don't have
the earning capacity.
to invest large amounts of their
salaries they don't earn large
amounts of their salary into any
type of formal retirement yes by
law.
Everyone
loan passed to
enter into the social security
system.
So but as we all know Mr chair
of the social security system.
It has been
It is going to get.
We don't know where that status
is going to be so it's best to
protect the employee Frank
offering this and in the
investment pensions an oversight
committee where Representative
fatal one I
yes years.
Secretary then for a very very
presented the whole presentation
will not connect the state of
New York Act that in twenty
twenty.
And subsequently has been
very committed until he left
office and that office is very
committed to ensuring that.
The low wage worker so the
speaker lower wage workers the
workforce in general and private
sector and in the report Mr
chair in FIR report makes and
all the committee that we have
and all the analyses we have
indicates that this is designed
for the so the.
The small business as.
Here the sponsor.
As indicated
The burden is very light it's
like any employment.
So even if you have full.
The.
Business the five men from the
boys are more you still have to
account.
For those employees.
They still have to.
There has to be some sort of
record for those employees.
We all know that employment has
to follow the federal wage and
salary laws of the country so at
the very minimum Mr chair we
have to have some sort of record
of employment that's what this
referred to I've been spent a
great deal of my life being sent
to and resources just the
sponsor have and so everyone is
required to have an employment
record even if it's just the one
sheet record on that one sheep
record is where is this often
or opt out is going to be.
Appropriates in that one record
and then small businesses.
Either the owners of those
businesses themselves as
representatives of us's and
others and Representative into
another submission.
It falls on the owner of the
business to keep those records.
A lot of those records and
account for those records there
has to be some sort of
accounting process associated.
Most small businesses.
Employees five to ten more.
They will often more often than
not rely on the content.
Or a CPA firm the most of the
time it's just a note that the
bookkeeper that's what the that
level is late so thank you for
that follow this record.
That bookkeeper will help the
employer for the end of the year
finalize all his or her
paperwork.
And then account oftentimes CPA
will sign off on that.
All of us know that that's the
practice.
A small business.
And keeping employment record so
again three points on eight
there is an active place that's
not in question.
This bill is simply.
Giving the option.
Providing that option to the and
then there's so many reports
here that is to those
Fifty price fifteen thousand
private sector businesses that
don't offer savings plan and
then of those sixty five one six
thousand five hundred and
business employees complain more
than seventy percent of the
process workers giving them that
opportunity to opt in or opt out
for
we heard this and thank you
several times and
I think you did an excellent job
Mr chair and sponsor non and
answering all the questions and
I think that I hope that that
kind of sums it up and close the
deal and thank you very much
description.
Just the fact that I had with
your employer.
It will work.
Are you still at the rate if you
have to do all of that social
security income tax and
everything else.
To apply please.
All of.
I am more.
This and so the option not to
mandate is integrally of one's
that is if the employee wants to
the employee does not want to
put money in.
That's it.
But the thing is here.
It's not like this is going to
be the end of the world for an
employer to do that extra piece
of work C. we remember if you
work for government the state of
New Mexico and I can prove it
cause members get no and the
option.
Extra money above your
the right hold.
And today because somehow or
another us but in the state is
again Mexico through dollars
that I have checked the
nontaxable.
I would never say that myself
there's no way that I want to
put that one or two percent
better remote it was no way I
would I would put that at the
bank today if you look at my
take into account Services
students shock.
But with that in mind the Madam
chair of the of the members of
the group yes Representative I
do have a proper motion and that
was from the Senate.
The proposition Representative
the Chavis so if you will call
the roll and.
Chair of the secretary.
Representative jobs with.
Representative yes.
Representative Garcia yes.
Representative grown up yes.
Representative Johnson yes
Representative Martinez.
US.
Representative right now.
Representative that ISS noted
like to explain both.
Representative and respectfully
no.
Representative or vice chair Ron
go viral yes.
Representative of course.
Representative Martinez.
And chair of course yes.
There is a little bit thank you
Mr chair representative again
thank you for The the idea which
thank you bye bye reserve for
although I tell my kids and I
agree with Steve is a very very
important aspect to your future
Mr chair I believe that we keep
saying this this little bit is
I'm going to kill this little
bit is a new job but as a state
you know by the death of a
thousand cuts is a different
story I I also feel Mr chair
that for people have to take
self responsibility.
And not expect always someone
else to do it for you and so
Mister chair for that reason
this this is something that I
understood what we pass it last
time it was voluntarily done and
so those people have always had
the option you can walk into any
brokers to do that on your own
and and so for that reason that
I would thank you Mr.
Okay.
Okay you give your are on your
way through appropriations.
Was senator Clemente sorry what
the.
The committee at the last
minute.
Sanchez thank you.
Okay.
You go with the house bill one
eighty one.
Representative the leading
online.
You.
Every.
Percent.
Yes Mr
chair is here it thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee good afternoon
representative Debbie seven
hundred percent house bill of
lading.
Thank you expert witnesses
calendars from Albuquerque
federation of teachers and.
The president of New Mexico
National Board certified
teachers network.
This bill is about house bill
one eighty one is about national
board certification.
And certified teacher
mathematics and I just wanna
tell you a little bit about why
we do this national board
certified teacher.
There's a board certified
teachers is a voluntary system
that certifies teachers need
rigorous national standards for
classroom instruction initially
it's it's and then when I went
there about ten years ago it was
about a year process and it's a
long process and it's a rigorous
process in you you look at your
teaching practices you learn
best practices you videotape
yourself over and over to see
what you're doing right what
you're doing wrong
The process makes you a better
teacher and because of the depth
to go into really in in in your
practice and you also receive a
differential when you become
National Board certified and I
just I just wanna make sure you
understand this process in order
cations very rigorous and it's
now gone beyond teaching it's in
other areas and that's what this
bill is for house bill one
eighty women's the public school
code to remove the word teacher
replace it with license school
employee allowing license school
employees certified by the
national board of professional
teaching standards to generate
program units in the public
school funding formula beginning
in FY twenty four.
This changes to things it would
allow certified counselors to
also receive the differential
and extend the differential to
educators serving in an
administrative capacity already
been National Board certified
but they went into
administration
in the current her currently
hold a national any CTE
certification or or in in the P.
T. S. certification in many
educators good good teachers who
are not for certified are going
to ministration because they
would lose differential so this
would allow them to get the
differential as as administrator
and that in which department
expert witnesses.
The members of the committee.
I think that when Sanchez
I was a national board certified
teacher
I retired twenty five after
thirty two years of teaching.
And
I have been working on.
That ever since I was certified
team that I
So the benefits of national
board certified teachers to New
Mexicans
Senator points.
National board certified teacher
leadership skills has
administrators.
Also help to retain teachers.
Improve student learning and
develop effective to.
ministrations who are
for national was every teachers
who go into administration can
strengthen the ability to
identify support struggling
teachers improve ability to
organize professional
development opportunities
they're able to assess future
practices materials trainings
for districts.
Following assessment for student
growth helped teachers with best
practices guide staff.
Seven of.
I do I do have
So
testimonials from national board
certified teachers who are in
the administrative roles right
now.
And one of them who is ready
Griego from a magnet school I
believe in Roswell of the states
that
The difference between a
principal who's instructional
leader and one that's up from
here our kids.
Of the building rooted in the
depth of the pedagogy but.
That principle to this that he
said he's got credibility with
staff you can walk into a
classroom and secretary read out
the culture and rigorous class
and he's confident.
Point out what's going wealthy
he can help troubleshoot help to
improve.
because he believes he's a very
highly visible fence fully
process.
Fund and he talk about houses of
at home they also have the
knowledge of what happens in the
classes.
And currently in the state there
are three counselors that.
Nate is from Farmington
Municipal.
He's he's our own performance
coach for school leaders to New
Mexico pets.
Excellence rights law programs
and he's learning that these
competencies are foundational to
our ability to improve outcomes
for kids unfortunately under
current statute teaches national
appropriation I do sense.
Sen supplies from.
All to provide
He said that there are any CTE
select to remain in the
classroom because state funds
willing to fulfill their hard
earned salary differentials that
begins with national board
certification.
About has a recruitment and
retention tool
Clear statement of New Mexicos
values around workforce and
community they urge you to
consider expanding opportunities
for those who hold this act
certification in our to twelve
school setting national board
certification is one that that
currently to move from licensure
level two to licensure level
three in our current three tier
system and more recently the
twenty twenty one the state
established a scholarship fund
to support educators who are
pursuing this certification in
their own professional
development additionally and
predated the twenty twenty one
scholarship creation by the
state of New Mexico the Landel
foundation established their own
scholarship in twenty seventeen
in the Permian basin grant has
also followed suit in order to
encourage national board
certification in our southeast
New Mexico counties and I
believe that the Landel
foundation may have emailed you
in regards to spell earlier
today I wanted to point out a
couple statistics from the FIR
which I think are worth
mentioning I Mississippi State
University study showed the
kindergartners were thirty point
seven percent and third graders
were ten point seven percent
more likely to achieve a
proficient literacy assessment
score than their peers who were
not in classrooms with
nationally board certified
teachers similarly the national
board of professional teaching
standards teachers could produce
gains of one point five months
of additional learning is
mathematics and
an additional month of learning
in English language arts this
clearly has implications for the
ongoing Martinez Yazzie
While most areas of
certification are in teaching
certification can be achieved as
a counselor and that's something
that has progressed since the
institution of this differential
in two thousand four and as was
mentioned currently in New
Mexico this is three individuals
so it's incredibly small number
of folks who are National Board
certified who are left out of
the differential
another area certification our
library for a special those are
already holding a teacher a
license in New Mexico so they're
covered by existing state
statutes.
And I want to mention one of the
thing about what House Bill.
Inclusion of certificate holding
administrators really
incentivized good educators to
make the jump to principal ship
positions we know that there are
vacancies in our principal rigs
and we have had any
conversations with currently
nationally board certified
teachers is that I'm hesitant to
make that jump to administration
because it would represent a
rate cut based on survey data
and this is reflected as well in
the L. E. S. C. analysis there
are currently seven serving
administrators with act
certification national point
we're talking about ten
individuals what kind of an left
out of this differential process
versions of this legislation
have been introduced every year
since twenty seventeen and the
reason that they've not been
successful is that in twenty
seventeen this matter of
actually vetoed unfortunately by
a different governors and one
who served now and in other
years the bill start use lack of
time constraints this bill has.
On the house of representatives
multiple times with almost near
unanimous if not unanimous
support in prior years and in
twenty seventeen ability to pass
the Senate unanimously as well.
And that would be the thank you
Mr chair.
Can we send the questions okay
the other is the statement that
spoke in support of this
legislation.
In opposition those who support
would you like to add anything.
Go ahead.
Hi Mr chair members of the
committee and chair of I'm a
long time early childhood
educator Alamogordo New Mexico
and and deviced national
education association New Mexico
and I stand here representing
our thousands of numbers around
the state and strong support.
We know how important excellence
in education.
In our New Mexico students
deserve axle Education and
rigorous process of the national
board certification anyone who
completes that process is
showing their commitment and
excellence for our students in
New Mexico and.
Although we've always been
supporting your teachers
actually support for educating
the school.
Being the highest quality
possible is here to support you.
And so I may the representative
office support and thank all of
you strongly encourages for.
Sure.
What else that is Mr chair
members of the committee on CCN
yes government relations
director for a new Mexico and
only half of our members we rise
and support of this.
The bills already
as mentioned it's been the
process several times and the
main focus is to generate
funding.
for schools that half National
Board certified educators
also positively impacts the
program itself encourages others
Raul brought with it a lot.
The research is clear crystal.
Our students.
I quality professional we in the
class.
The national board
certification.
In addition the results of the
most recent solar roof.
Indicate that you unfortunately
suffer from patient care crisis
for prices.
And the vacancies there are six
hundred just for educators.
National board certification we
know how we.
For these reasons we support HB
one eight one thank the sponsor
and sponsor's and we ask that
this committee consider able
asks.
That would go to the board here
out of great artists.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Dwayne
Norris vice president
Albuquerque teachers federation
of speaking on behalf of over
forty one hundred union members
many of whom would benefit from
this bill we'd like to thank
representative Sarinana Ferrari
Trujillo and Senator cells
response in this bill in twenty
twelve I achieve national board
certification as a teacher
language arts and reading I can
tell you that is the most
rigorous professional
development that I've ever
completed including my master's
degree.
It calls for educators to
reflect on our practice and how
our work specifically budget
student learning and achievement
it made me a better teacher it's
save me from burnout which
happens to so many of our
veteran teachers and this bill
would incentivize support
related educators counselors and
others who are eligible for
national board certification to
complete this professional
development which would help to
keep our school staffs we would
it would help us to attract and
retain dedicated highly
qualified support related staff
and people who are not currently
covered under the national board
certification stipend on behalf
of the a TF I ask that you vote
to pass on this bill and thank
you for letting me speak.
Yeah.
Hey the committee.
Representative you rebuild that.
Mr chair of representative of
I'd really like to build a I
guess I just want to make sure
that these teachers are out and
get the certifications does do
they actually get paid more is
there so this week that may
actually get differential for
yes my question the only
question after the.
Mr chairman would you pass.
This second sorry Representative
is thank you Mr chair so just to
expand on what was
Representative Regis said.
They do get the model is a one
time.
they continue to get the money
as a work Mr Chairman I used to
get my paycheck every two weeks
a spread out of over a certain
time over the the it.
It is districts do half and half
well one one so it just depends
on the district.
Okay.
And Mr chair representative are
teachers who have in B. PTS
certification early paid more.
They are they to level three
which is a ten thousand and then
they get an additional salary
differentials it's hard for me
to get my mind right for this
because I I we had a similar
thing where I was from and this
is a little bit different so I
just have a few questions online
bill and go to Mr chairman it
this Representative it is a
national so it's all over the
country okay.
So
What are the what are the
beneficial outcome expected.
What.
Why do this.
Why why should I vote for it
well Mr Chairman representative
I did it just to to.
To make myself better as a
teacher you learn so many things
and you look at yourself as a
teacher what you do well which
don't it just you've just
learned so much and you become a
better teacher and and
Mr church said.
There's this is shown by it a
national certified teaching kids
to better.
It's a
Support
Thank you Representative thank.
Right these questions.
So what what I would do this.
What's the benefit so the
benefit is for the students.
The court.
Natural what certified teachers
when they go through the
certification process and a
committee one year course of
just three once they start
across the state have to
complete the.
They have to the show provide
evidence that their practice
does improve student learning.
And so if they can not meet the
standards.
Of accomplish teaching.
Will not achieve but those who
can find that.
We may complete each of the
proposed.
In the process they they have
shown that there practice this
affects the.
So to me.
All of the reason why.
As of the places done this and
one of the benefits in other
states have.
Mr Chairman is yes this is a
nationwide effort there are many
states to participate in
national board certification
many of them do offer some level
of control like Mexico does and
if I may I would like to add on
to why why vote for this why do
this aside from the budget to
students in the school
community.
Table benefit to educators this
is one way to advance their own
licensure level their career and
then we can educational rely on
level three to choose to do
things like mentorship for work
in other roles so as a teacher
or an educator mission level one
to level two to level three this
is an opportunity to move from
level to level three the other
pathways through a master's
degree program which is at a
cost potentially to that
individual so because our
scholarships from the Landel
foundation of the COVID basin
grant or through the state
scholarship this is one way that
a professional educator can can
not only advance their career
improve their their teaching but
also take on these other
leadership roles mentorship in
their school site.
Thank you madam chair Mr chair
representative.
Are their teachers that would
not want to do this.
Mr Chairman representative this
is voluntary you don't have to
do it and I want to get on with
one more thing counselors so a
lot of the people Ecker nurses
or counselors or therapists all
these people if they work
outside the get paid a lot more
so this is an incentive to keep
in their school schools okay.
So it benefits.
Teachers and administrators
students to do this.
Okay.
With the teacher retention of
a data point here that sixty
nine percent of national what
survey teaches remain teaching
after twenty years as compared
to only forty three percent or
not National Board certified
only remain in teaching for
eleven these so.
We are working on teacher
retention.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chair.
Else Representative.
Thank you thank you Mr chair.
Representative a.
Something in this initiative
for.
Mr chair would would you happen
to have a break down.
Enter the statewide.
Where are nationally board
certified teachers are teaching
in schools are teaching.
Mr Chairman said.
Whether all over but you
Yes
and.
And.
In the school for these
nationally certified teachers
are teaching.
What is the.
The the break down of the
school.
And the department you certified
teachers are may need focus
then.
Title one schools with.
At the of populations
percentages of state ninety
percent or more or the kind of
in the the
I.
schools
and also are certified teachers.
in schools that are in lower
income communities or higher
income communities.
Mr Chairman Representative
Garcia I don't have all the
information that I in my
district which is lowincome
which is
Every school is a title nine.
Chairman school telescope every
about so if you and there are a
lot of this who
Out there so I I don't know if
we can go specifics on that we
can tell you where they're at.
If the thank you very much and
if it's the
longest well this this I don't
think either first of all.
Chicago this from National Board
of New Mexico is one of the us
with the highest amount of the
people of color session one by
teachers
so that is something that
actually was always looking at
making sure that you know if
this process
It's for all teachers to to go
through is our state on our
state website we have a map and
it shows how many teachers
financial working each.
With the class that just
survive where our new ones we
had eighty eight new NBC TV's
this year
they hail from gaps in Los
crucis faster Tallis hall spent
coronas Roswell Gallup
Farmington Cimarron Santa Fe
Espanola Moriarty we Rancho APS
and of the one hundred and sixty
three M. D. C. T. to renew this
typical.
They came from gas in Los crucis
Alamogordo Clovis.
The staff was almost Gallup
field Santa Fe Cimarron APS
losses but in Rio Rancho and
Mario.
For the you Mr chair
That's a research
In terms of the strategy up to
the school district.
And
It's it's it's really important
that we have a highly certified
highly qualified.
It just.
Teachers gene in our lower
income communities because we
know that the.
That the Saudis certified highly
qualified highly educated
teachers.
A lot to the table in terms of
US of a you'll see that.
And
if this is not a personal.
Kind of a.
Negativity.
Our the national board certified
teachers but Mr chair what I
discovered in doing the research
on the on the outcome of the
school.
District is that if the school
chairs broken up into clusters.
And the cluster is a high
school.
The middle schools.
The one high school the middle
school and then on an average of
about thirteen elementary
schools and I think that yup the
school district has maybe about
seven.
Clusters.
Other than the rate on the
cluster.
And so what I'd this research
was that there's a skills
there's an EBT and inequity when
it comes to skills distribution.
What I mean by that is that I
pull that up with the help of
the school board member it's
been many years ago
about fifteen years ago.
And what we discovered was that
the let's say that the other
cluster which is in the part of
the northeast heights.
Mr chair if the above Leicester
has seventy five percent of
their teachers and plus.
There we go into the plaster
which are which is in the
Phelan cluster.
On the other hand had forty five
percent of their teachers with
an a plus degrees.
And the same thing goes with the
other clusters and kind of the
higher income communities of the
heights.
Versus the lower communities.
Balance so similar statistics
cared out with west messa.
Similar percentages on the
faster we have forty five
percent teaching staff with them
a class and where of our cluster
again coming in the seventies.
At two seventy eight percent now
with
message of Leicester's plus
degrees.
So.
There's a Senator.
Right issue.
Is that the US civil rights
violation going on with that
type of skill distribution.
The school district.
Of the yes.
And and it manifests so Mr chair
in terms of.
Putting the highest qualified.
I certified.
Of the highest educated teachers
not in these lower income
communities but he's higher
income.
You know where kids in the lower
income communities Mr chair I
have a hard time starting up
their educational.
And so you could see the
discrepancy.
just in that in that would that
research that I did and things
on different today we still see
that kind of discrepancy if if
we were to do a similar study
or similar research in in into
that and
Mr chair and and this is nothing
new.
you know in the nineteen eighty
five.
myself and a group of
She got a parents from that in
on the cluster which is mainly
south bound.
we were going to file a lawsuit
against APS school district Mr
chair.
Many because of a service going.
One.
Mr chair APS in nineteen eighty
five.
At the Bancroft capital as a
policy.
And they're bankrupt the capital
of the policy Mr chair was.
Egalitarian.
Equal equal.
So when is it right up the
capital outlay I.
Eight million will go to look
quite a high school.
Eight million will go to on the
high school.
Thank you we'll go to the doctor
plaster eight million will go to
less mess of cluster.
eight million will go to send
the cluster.
eight million because of a
protected hi question.
Yes.
Support Mr chair where only
really had about ten million
dollars worth of capital needs.
On the other hand to your
amendment the high schools.
What have about twenty four
million dollars in cash twenty
four million dollars in capital
needs so you could see.
So we get all of those losses
route in fact we had the
department of justice
internetting.
On the Civil Rights.
And working on that Mr chair was
what was known as the some run.
And APS was committed to that
what is this and from New.
It through other capital outlay
and and the trash can.
And then if you just have to
develop a capital outlay plan
based on the.
Nothing out there in the what we
call.
The other thing is that we have
hi Representative operates in
the in the cluster.
we had kids at the at the entry
level not being able to read at
grade level first grade second
grade.
So another another outcome was
the.
APS was forced to establish
preschools.
And all the elementary schools
and that is on the question into
this thing that they still exist
that was a step up.
In terms of really having these
kids.
Repaired and ready.
Kind regards with already a
skilled face.
In terms of alphabet into
riding just in terms of getting
a love for reading you know and
and and this and that the other
thing that APS is forced to do.
Less to hire qualified.
Hispanic teachers.
Of which state in.
We basically have in this
cluster that is eighty five
percent.
With eighty five percent and
with teachers.
You know and so they they they
put that in here Mister chair
and were able to kind of balance
out the fund to where now you
can see that moderation the
where the teachers basically
reflect population both of those
Fifteen or sixteen schools in
the cluster.
that it was a thirteen
elementary middle schools and
high school.
So again.
You know
The school board there's
nothing.
the unions that the vaccine Mr
chair because I see that some of
the initiatives that I've been
trying to push appear in terms
of deferential.
For for teachers with an a plus
degrees to teach in.
Schools with ninety percent or
more.
minority populations.
I've been doing differential pay
legislation that the calls for
the.
At the Hispanic minority
teachers of differential pay to
go into
minority communities and
teaching level.
The struggles that my proposal
here and the maybe fall into the
merit pay categories so there is
no really pushed forward.
But but my proposals perspective
they fall in line with Yazzie
versus much.
That got here in nineteen ninety
seven is pushing for these types
of initiatives that create
differential please the kind of
strength of the the the the the
wage.
You know in terms of delivering
good quality high caliber highly
certified teachers in these
lower income school communities
where they're needed the most.
And it's nothing negative in
terms of the national board
certified teacher program in
August and in that I have them
in my district Mr chairman I
adore.
You know I mean they're just
incredible in terms of the
skills in and and also the the
theory of teaching you know I
mean they master to do.
They're effective you can see on
these professional boxer I
teachers are the most effective
teachers in the store income
school committees that I have in
my district.
It's just that we need more.
You know
instead of them kind of going up
into those higher income school
districts you know
But which maybe someone before
the there.
And that's a problem Mr chair Mr
chair with.
You know this this whole of
placing teachers just like Mr
chair I done you know with with
GM.
You know as an engineer and they
tell you well so Martinez we
don't have an opening.
You know in our Richmond time
but we do have an opening in our
New Jersey but.
And I know that you.
That you wish to be placed at
the right time but.
There's New Jersey.
That's what we need to.
We don't have that mentality.
A budget to assigning teachers.
Also check that's usually where
you want to teach.
It is not where are you really
need.
Salary differential.
So this is what I'm trying to
figure out this National Board.
Are we guarantee and that all
the money like we keep earmarked
towards going to go to the
teachers.
Okay.
Mr members of the committee if
you'll differential for their
seasonal one time per year
locations.
One time per year.
And.
Representative
They.
I actually for.
Mr chair representative does
does this cost is cost the
teacher money to get the
certification.
Chairman Representative CS I was
lucky I had
said elapse as mathematics
science they would help us out
and they did keep certify the
first year but after that
because it is not a resurface of
first year.
Have taken as you have.
So but yes.
Thanks to address Representative
Garcia said about.
Being equitable
that's why.
We have so many stable I mean
is.
The New Mexico rate the you the
legislature's has give
scholarships that available to
all teachers in New Mexico to
have the opportunity.
go through the process and have
of the fees reimbursed to the
teacher.
Lateral the.
Representative excellent
question.
So so Representative are on Mr
chair representative.
We had two different.
Two different force that
certified us as first responders
and it was of course thing in it
and it went out the door that's
where they were two peas in the
against each other and then you
know certain places would go of
pro for the other places all of
the other side what what my
biggest thing is how much does
it cost of tier to get this
certification.
Mr Chairman in.
It's one in seventy five times
for.
Funds to
much.
Almost two thousand two thousand
every five years.
No.
The first time and then half of
that
could have less
than half to four feet.
Okay and it in that time frame.
There differential pay will that
more than offset that.
Mr Chairman representative yes
okay.
Mr.
Okay.
So again rural back to where I
was earlier we have a trough of
motion proper second.
I move
up to second by Representative
yes the amendment
Of the.
Posible.
Representative Chandler Smith.
Representative Figueroa.
Representative Garcia yes.
Representative grew up yes
Representative Johnson yes
Representative Martinez yes.
Representative group yes.
Representative Representative
that access Representative this
is.
Representative alright price to
a level coming here yes.
And chair gone yes.
Representative to
the in the bureau of yes.
Good luck medication.
Disco street.
One of the thank you thank.
The question.
The the the.
The.
Here.
Representative hill the
committee were thank you for.
In the.
What.
Hello.
I bring you a very simple very.
Productive of piece of
legislation is a memorial and
what it does is it creates a day
in September to honor labor if
his it's a labor history.
Obviously to Bonner
the.
They of later and they were
workers throughout the state
I have left my expert witness
Josh Anderson if you feel
compelled to pass the.
Questions but just to give you a
brief history
Senator born and raised and I
come from a really really poor
pap family and
we didn't have access to labour
so my for my family was our
neighbor you representation my
family were of potato and beef
up workers down in southern
Colorado.
but my dad knew about labor
labor unions we just didn't have
the majority you know to be able
to to try to structure some kind
of a program so that the workers
could unite nevertheless I grew
up and
I became the president of the
American federation of teachers
and the American federation of
labor AFL-CIO and I did that for
twelve years.
And I'm very strongly committed
and supporting supportive of
labor unions of their
contributions to the state and
to add to the country as well
and what I hear it simply yes
here simply asking you to do is
to work with me to create a one
day a year in September to
create the labor history
Memorial Day.
And the staff questions Mr
chair.
Of the body here is part of the
legislation.
But in opposition
Would like to speak on this
issue.
I will certainly work John this
year with the New Mexico
federation of labor AFL-CIO
we obviously are very excited
about this memorial we do
believe that you are
Basically part of the fabric of
our our society the whole a lot
too what you fought for it for a
few years
you know you.
we obviously not only care about
our Representative members I all
worked and we will continue to
fight for all
around the country we very much
think are past presidents
wonderful Representative through
the LFC and I will go so far the
team is a we want you thank the.
I believe that's what we just
heard I need to find.
I am thank you wonder.
So with all of that in mind we
urge this committee to support
the.
Credible Morial and I really.
Back to you want to help make
the state in this country so
great.
Thank you with that in mind
I just thought of that your ex
but would like to add.
Mr chairman members of the
committee Josh Anderson with us
council a team member
Representative about ten
thousand or so public workers in
New Mexico and I want to thank
the sponsor for bringing this
forward I think if she
wants to testify in support of
this bill that I got demoted to
expert witness so.
But in all seriousness and I
know many folks on this
committee have a long rich
history with labor and all you
can do a much better job than I
can't but this is simply to
recognize I I actually think you
might for the month of September
just all of the achievements
that organized labor and all
workers I frankly have given to
our country every member of the
members of our union are these
officers yes the antis.
Firefighters first responders
you know with the other popular
educators assistance in the
class nurses awful building our
roads and our bridges you know
keeping our community safe my
answers mineworkers I mean it
states all across the spectrum
but this is just one of the
reasons memorial to recognize
September for all of the their
cheapness everything from
workers rights human rights
civil rights
that the labor movement is
health of cost four and we
definitely for your support for
the questions but
will provide coverage for.
Will move forward.
Our study and.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative Trujillo thank
you for sponsoring this memorial
just put it into perspective
across our nation we see that a
new generations become active in
advocating for the rights in the
workplace whether it's in the
Amazon warehouses of Starbucks
coffee shops and elsewhere we
know these are positive steps
for our young people as I not
only work to improve their
working conditions with are also
pushing for democracy in the
workplace they're becoming
active participants in our
democracy and this new flowering
of workplace activism
underscores the importance of
this memorial as does the
misguided national campaign to
censor the teaching of real
history as a teacher of fifth
grade students for more than
twenty years it was my duty to
teach U. S. history as
accurately and engagingly as
possible The New Mexico social
studies standards for my guide
and that was my personal quest
to help them understand the
awesome duties and
responsibilities of citizenship
in our democracy but most of the
text books we used said little
about the struggle for economic
justice in this country unless
it was something gratuitous
they did not talk about the
foundation part that workers
played in advocating for their
own advances
that's why this memorial calling
for September to be declared as
labor history month in our state
is so important citizens in a
democracy our students need to
know that the future and well
being of their well being and
their freedoms is largely in
their own hands in a democracy
teaching the contributions and
sacrifices workers of maybe is
key in this understanding
whether it's the eight hour day
the five day work week the
abolition of child labour
equality for all genders races
ethnicities increase in our
workplaces employer paid health
care I can go on and on with
that blue unions in the
individuals that compose unions
are always on the forefront
California and Hawaii have
passed similar measures so this
and now include the teaching of
labor history.
in the criteria of any new
social studies curricula they
adopt and on the behalf of the
members of the a TF and those
people who haven't chosen to be
members but who we work for
every day I asked the committee
to vote do pass on this memorial
and I thank you very much.
The committee.
You have yet Representative cat
is okay thank you Mr chair
representative I have a quick
question
so and and
the question comes from the.
Part of the analysis that was
done so basically the intention
has the intention is to make
September labor issues.
That makes sense that it be
something that's recognized on
an annual basis thank you thank
you thank you.
They were in.
so roll question off of
curiosity.
only years I've never seen or
more to get assigned to a
committee.
The service of reason.
We.
Thanks committee so that they
were seen as of the only seven
of the more of this to get
decide if it's a memorial
recognizing somebody or in and
that the life we had to buy more
those recognizing the people
from.
that was before the school grant
okay that redistricting my
special people or something like
that if there was going to
committee.
If you.
That was one of the questions.
It Representative will.
Cool.
Decision I move up to five
phones House memorial for a
second.
Of the second Representative
tenants the.
You madam chair thank you can't
let this moment pass without
saying something.
so.
Mr chair representative Travis
I've gone through this process
of trying to establish a date
with a lot of them.
The governor.
Some sort of technicality of
that you have to go through and
I still don't understand that
Senator Lopez and I'm keen on
that right now to get that
annual day proclaimed but you're
right Representative.
Through some sort of
technicality that the
administration has to do with.
That is legal that has to do
with process for planning a
date.
So I had.
Hopefully with that for a.
So I had that same question.
That.
So Mr chairman and.
Representative thank you for for
sponsoring
if we can pull.
Doing here because it's so
significant I have I just
realized that.
Years of experience are now
spending fifty six years in
labor and organized labor and
many of you are for those of
them here before I have heard
the story I've been a I started
as a your W. youth worker just
like a nice.
Went on to be on an organizer
for the amalgamated clothing
workers of America which is the
father workers not so.
Member and organizer the United
steel workers.
Member and organizer thing that
can.
Member organizer of educate.
Member and organizer of United
grant workers.
And current and
Thank.
Committee on labor organizer so
this is.
Really significant for me
for someone who's been in the
trenches of sixteen.
So it did want to mention.
Mr chair and Representative said
I also teaching introduction to
come stay with.
And I think I'm the only one
that teaches.
Of and as the history of the
labor movement in New Mexico in
particular.
Because of on the deep roots
that New Mexico has been on the
forefront of the labor
struggles.
All and they were mentioned by
Representative to pay on others
already so it's just the fact
that we're asking that on public
education.
I mean school districts being
courage to commemorate but not
just to commemorate but I hope
one day to be able to add
specific curriculum.
That is designed to teach the
rich history of the
contributions of organized labor
and unions have had in the
United States of America in
addition to the fact that New
Mexico led the way in several
major national struggles labor
struggles
we cannot forget all sorts of
the earth and of the
significance of that particular
labor affect many people's lives
have been lost the guidelines.
I am lost.
Raising the banner of all rights
of workers so for me it's very
emotional because my husband
wraparound.
And Mr chair I just want to
thank you thank all of organized
labor that represented in New
Mexico thank you so much for
continuing the struggle.
And
We need to elevate our unions
and place them significantly in
the history books for the hits
historical contributions that
they've made
and have been reinforced
where we stand today and I think
Mr Morris was brought up.
Much of the district so Mr chair
and representative thank you for
giving me the time to make that
statement thank you.
Thank you.
We're ready to go to a vote.
All of public sector working
seven.
All.
Representative Jarvis here.
Representative Figueroa yes.
Representative Garcia yes.
Representative Donna yes
Representative Johnson yes.
Representative Martinez yes.
Representative right yes.
Representative dass.
Representative Vincent yes.
Representative vice chair rebel
coming into this and sure of
course yes.
And.
The.
Thank you very much all of you
for a for this wonderful result.
Thank you.
I think we for the day right.
