To order
Let's go ahead and call roll.
Representative A None.
Representative present.
Represented Borego,
Representative Lujan,
Representative Mejia, Madam
floor leader here.
Representative Zamora.
Madam Vice Chair.
Madam Chair,
we have a quorum.
Thank you. We have a quorum with
that representative. You may
begin. Um, thank you very much,
Madam Chair, and good morning
members, um, this bill is
something I might characterize
as a tune up on the municipal
code, um, it hasn't been updated
since 1978.
And over time, it'll gaps and
glitches have revealed
themselves to various
municipalities and so the
municipal code has been working
on providing some updates and
that's what this bill
represents, um, and I would
note, um, to begin with that.
Nothing in this bill will impact
um home rule municipalities, so
they will remain intact and
having the powers that they have
had and will continue to have.
So what the bill does, House
Bill 298, it allows um governing
municipal governing bodies to
cross-commission law enforcement
officers. This came up during
the horrible fires over the last
summer when
There were many law enforcement
agencies that wanted to support,
let's say, Ruidoso in that area,
and there were some
administrative issues that, that
got in the way. It requires um
that uh a a mayor or a councilor
vacancy be filled promptly.
It, um, it clarifies that the
person who's filling such a
vacancy will serve until the
next applicable election.
It clarifies that the governing
body voting procedures provide
um specificity about quorums and
voting and recusal and and
abstention, and it clarifies the
statutory responsibilities of
municipal elected offices,
officers, and it also makes some
um technical changes to align
with the election code. And with
that, I'll ask Rebecca Martinez
to offer a few words from the
missile municipal league, and we
also have Alison Nicholson.
here from the municipality.
Good morning, Madam Chairs
member of the committee, um, as
the representative mentioned HB
298 would make technical updates
to the municipal code. The New
Mexico municipal League serves
all municipalities in New
Mexico. And so we received
procedural questions day in and
day out from all of our members.
Each of the proposals within
this bill deal with issues that
are frequently experienced by
municipalities. Um, the bill
or excuse me, the chapter has
largely not been updated in over
40 years, and as you can
imagine, over time with
technological advances with
procedural changes and with
other changes in various
statutes that um work in
conjunction with the municipal
code, we need to align and
refresh the code. Um, chapter 3
has a total of 66 articles
within it were starting our long
term effort of updating this
chapter.
by dealing with two specific
articles. Articles 11 and 12,
that deal with mayor council
forms of government. Just as you
all have rules of procedures
that you use to govern yourself,
to understand what a quorum is
and how many votes are needed to
pass an item that is the same
thing that is true for each of
our municipalities and our
governing bodies. And so we're
simply adding clarification and
updates in these areas to be
able to better serve our
municipality.
and help them organize and
operate their governing bodies
accordingly.
And with that, Madam Chair will
stand for questions. Thank you.
Let's, um, did you wanna, OK.
Let's go ahead and go to the
audience for supporting
comments, please raise your
hands.
OK, let's take one minute.
Morning, Madam Chair and
committee members, thank you for
seeing us. My name is Lynn
Crawford. I'm the mayor of the
village of Ruidoso and also the
acting president of the
municipal League that represents
106 municipalities. We operate
off this municipal code daily
and it's high time that we were
able to update it so that we're
able to accurately do what we do
in training our municipal
officers. Also, if I could speak
to the cross commissioning, it
was never more evident during
the fire, uh, and especially in
some of our smaller communities.
that they don't have police
officers, so cross commissioning
helps just for example with
Rudoso and Ruidoso Downs, but
just protecting our homes when
we had the evacuation, being
able to have the police
officers, state police, whatnot
that were able to secure the
communities, give that that
clarity of thought that we were
able to put out to our
homeowners was a big big thing
for us, so we appreciate your
support and your consideration
on this. Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the commission. My
name's Jack Tores. I'm mayor of
the town of Bernalillo and vice
president of the municipal
league, uh, and for us, there's
a number of things that this
would do, and we ask for your
support. Most importantly, it
clarifies a lot of our
procedures, um, unfortunately,
this year we dealt with an
unexpected death of one of our
counselors, um, and the
procedures are very unclear, so
besides having a very emotional
time, it was difficult without
having a clear playbook in front
of us.
the other thing that's important
for us is um we're not a home
rule community, so this would
affect us, but it would not
affect the home rule communities
like the city of Albuquerque. So
again, a benefit for most all of
the communities across the
state. We urge your support.
Thank you.
Good morning, Chairwoman and
members. I am Leanne Mallonson
with the City of Clovis. I am
the city clerk and the finance
director and have the privilege
of serving as the chairperson
for the clerks and finance
officers election and
legislation Committee mouthful.
Um, we also do support all of
these changes and updates to HB
298 in this ever changing world
and ever changing elected
bodies, changing.
In clerks, we would and we would
be beneficial to have more
guidance, to have more clear-cut
rules, procedures. I also serve
as a mentor for the clerks, and
we're continually getting
questions as Ms. Martinez stated
as to how do we do this, how do
we do that?
By providing information on
quorums and recusals, I think it
also provides transparency to
our constituents and also would
make for a better run commission
meeting. Thank you.
Mm
OK, let's go back to the
audience. Do we have any
opposing comments go online for
supporting.
Anyone hoping to make comments
in support of the bill, please
raise your hand.
Anybody hoping to make public
comments in opposition to the
bill. Please raise your hand.
Hey, committee members,
representative Zamora.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, thank
you, Representative for bringing
this bill forward.
Uh
Madam Chair and Representative.
From what I understand this bill
started with the municipal
league, Am I right, Madam Chair?
Madam Chair and Representative,
that's right. I'm working with
them to try to help facilitate
some of their needs.
So, Madam Chair and
Representative, I went to a
municipal league, I believe
about a year ago for the first
time.
Very interesting and, and, and
then you get the feel of how
this stuff moves, right? And,
and their concerns and
I think every representative
ought to try to make every
municipal league. It's, it's
very, very interesting, very
educating.
And uh
Madam Chair and Representative,
were, were there any
Of the, of the municipalities.
Uh
Against this or, or what was the
vote on the bill when it, when
you all decided, you know, what,
what you had drafted at the end
and
Madam Chair
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative Zamora, that's a
great question. We in the
municipal League have a um
legislative procedure that we go
through every year to present,
um, items of importance to our
board of directors and
legislative members.
Is it within that process, they
are able to bring any concerns
forward to us. So basically, the
way this one's stacked up in
terms of legislative priorities.
This is at the top of their
list, each of our members' list
in um making sure that we get
the, this bill passed, and these
proposed amendments, um, enacted
into law.
Thank you. Thank you for that
answer
And if I may represents one of
the vote was unanimous, so we
had no one opposed to, um, to
this bill. Thank you. Thank you
for that answer. Thank you,
Madam Chair. So, Madam Chair,
and uh
Expert witness, uh.
The, the cross commissioning
seems to be a hot topic.
Uh, from what I hear, uh,
Talked about and, and it was
mentioned by the mayor Riodoso.
So
Does,
does this touch the sheriff in
any way, Madam Chair, and, and,
and Representative.
Madam Representative, no, it
does not. The cross
commissioning will be specific
to the governing body of the
municipality. OK. So, so we're
not, we're not crossing lines
there anywhere or anything, uh,
and, and I'm glad to see that
because
Because we don't need to be
Uh
How do
What, what was the conflict in
the cross commissioning, was
there, was there any with the
municipalities or everybody was
OK with it there.
Madam Chair Representative, um,
our members were uh unilaterally
in support of the cross
commissioning mechanism. Right
now, we lack the municipal code
lacks that ability for the
governing body to be able to
cross commission in times of
need. And that's something very
important that they need to have
the ability to do in times of
emergencies or other necessary
situations.
OK, and, and Madam Chair and
Representative, what or expert
witness.
Could they cross commission
before?
This or not.
So Madam Chair, Representative,
there was not a statutory
guideline in place that's
stipulated how municipalities
were able to do this. OK, and
this will clear it up and, and
give them the authority and
And
And I
I don't remember reading in the
bill anywhere about
Like an, like an, uh,
Emergency cross commission or
anything like that. Is that in
the bill or is it, does it take
a long time to cross commission
or is it just immediate?
Madam Chair Representative,
another great question. So
procedurally, if this is
enacted, it would play out, um,
so if a situation arose where
the governing body felt that
they needed to bring in
additional public safety
resources, they would convene a
governing body meeting. So that
would be properly noticed in
aligned with the Open Meetings
Act and at that time, an item
would be appear on their agenda
that would um have them
contemplate the ability to
cross.
Commission. In order for that to
pass, they would need a majority
vote of the governing body to do
so.
So Madam Cha.
And expert witness, so it can
happen overnight.
OK.
Thank, thank you for your
answers. That concludes my
questions, Madam Chair.
Next, we have Representative B
block.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Chandler and experts. So I'm,
I'm just gonna go probably
through the bill and just I have
a few questions here. So, Madam
Cha representative,
On page 2 at the bottom on page
2, line 25, we take out by a
majority vote.
On their
And then I believe Madam Chair.
Later in the bill.
We have on page.
10
There's a
Provision that says all members
of the governing body present at
the meeting are counted toward a
quorum. So Madam Chair
Representative, can you just
tell me what that's doing and
how that's changing it.
About the first one, we take out
majority vote on line 25, page
2, but it's added back in with
some more clarification on page
3,
Line 2.
So that's one point, and remind
me, Representative Madam Chair,
where you wrote your next
question I thought it could have
been maybe.
Coordinated with that change on
page 10, we're talking about a
quorum for the meeting, and I
believe it's line 7 to 8.
It says all members of the
governing body present at a
meeting are counted toward
decorum, so I'm just wondering,
would that mean just anybody
who's there is a quorum, or if
it's like a 7 member board and
there were only 3 people who
attended.
When two people of those three
count as a quorum, or would they
just not be able to transact
business? because I know that
Open Meetings Act is kind of
complicated in that way. So I'm
just wondering about that.
Madam Chair Representative
Block, um, so relating to the
question that you are asking in
section 9, this speaks to um the
governing body and what a quorum
is. So on page 10 in subsection
B, we're clarifying here that
for the governing body, a
majority of of the members of
the governing body currently
serving is a quorum. The reason
for this is you may have
1 or 2 vacancies, and many of
our governing bodies have 5
members, one of those being the
mayor. So if you have one or
more vacancies that could really
damper your ability to conduct a
public meeting and do the basic
um forms of, of business, so we
just wanna clarify an account
for if there are um vacancies in
this. So a majority of the
members of the current of the
governing body currently
serving. Next,
On line 7, all members of the
governing body present at a
meeting are counted towards the
quorum. This provides
clarification to say that the
mayor, who was a non-voting
member is also counted towards a
quorum.
For quorum purposes.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative. OK, that cleared
it up for me a little bit. So
when it comes to the mayor,
Uh, what, how many counties or
I'm sorry, municipalities have
governing structures like this
one.
Madam Chair, uh, representative,
many of our municipalities have
this form of government, the
mayor council form of
government, where you have a
mayor and you have, um, you
know, usually 4,
governing body or council
members, um, that could, um,
That could look a little bit
different in some
municipalities, some
municipalities have 8 governing
body members, 9 or even 10
governing body members.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
representative because I believe
in Alamogordo we have
7
And that includes the mayor and
the mayor is a voting member, so
it's a commission as well. So I
don't know if that changes how
that works. And so,
And so when it comes to this,
Madam Chair, would this also
apply because the mayor is
already currently a voting
member.
Madam Chair and Representative
just to clarify that I
understand the form of
government that Ellen McGordo
is. Um, are you a, is Ellen
MGordo a home rule municipality.
That I do not know, but I know
we're a commission city manager.
she's asking, Madam Chair and
Representative, if your home
rule these changes will not
affect your structure, your
charter will govern, so.
OK, and I did see that actually
and somewhere on on your bill,
which I had to dig to find, but
I found it. So, Madam Chair,
representative, next question
here regarding the quorums. So I
know that we had a provision
here about conflicts of
interest. And so when it comes
to those, I know that at least
in some some places that I've
seen, many of the members of the
commission.
Do have conflicts of interest.
So when it comes to voting on
that, if it's a 5 member board,
3 members have conflicts. How is
business transacted on that item
when that applies, Madam Chair
and representative experts.
Madam Chair, representative, so
just to make sure I understand
the hypothetical dynamic, you're
saying this would be a governing
body of 51 of those members
would be a mayor, so that means
the mayor is a non-voting member
and the other 4 are voting
members. So if all of those are
present,
Then they meet the number one,
the, the requirement to to be
seated and have a quorum to
conduct the meeting.
Next, if you come to an item
that um is being contemplated,
you need to determine whether
that is an ordinance resolution,
or other type of item. If it is
an ordinance, then you would
need to have at least 3 votes in
favor.
Because 3 is a majority of 5.
So, in your example,
If you can help me understand
your example, you're seeing how
many are recusing themselves.
Sure, madam, so it would be 3 of
the members. Let's just say it's
not the mayor in that case. So
then there we're left with 11
mayor who could maybe vote.
And then one other member who
Doesn't have a conflict. So in
that instance, with this change
anything to do with transacting
that item if a majority of the
members of that five-member
commission or council did indeed
have a conflict.
Madam Chair and Representatives,
so just again to make sure I
understand you're saying that
there are 3 members that are
still at the dais contemplating
the matter. So that can go a
number of different ways, um,
it, there could be one member
voting for one member voting
against, so you have a tie, and
in that case, the mayor would
break the tie vote, so there
would be 2. Thank you, Madam,
because when I read this, it
said that the person has to
literally leave the meeting.
If there are
So, but if it's a 5-member
board, 3 of them have conflicts,
they all leave, we lose a
quorum, don't we? And so I'm
just wondering how that even
works regarding that item, Madam
Chair Representative, so what
we're asking for in this bill in
terms of conflicts is very um
standard in um governing bodies
of, you know, many different
types. So if someone has a
perceived or actual conflict of
interest, they should speak that
into the record and then leave
the conversation.
So, for instance, if it's this
room, leave the room until that
matter that they have a conflict
with has been discussed in
deliberated.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative. That helps me
on, on that a little bit.
Because I know that with the the
small counties and small
municipalities if there's only 5
members and
Everyone knows everybody and
there's always so many
conflicts. So, I think that
could be a problem, but if it's
not really changing that in any
Large way, that does help me.
OK, Madam Chair Representative,
I'm going to go to page 9,
section 8, talking about
procedures for filling vacancies
with mayors. We have 15 days,
and I'm just wondering how that
works.
Depending on what's happening
now currently and is it more
restrictive or is it less
restrictive than what's
currently in statute.
Madam Chair Representative, so
currently the statute does not
have a specific time in which a
vacancy on a governing body must
be filled.
So in certain cases we've seen
governing bodies, um, continue
with vacant seats for quite some
time. Um, we feel that the
governing body
Of each municipality has
differing circumstances. So
therefore, they may not always
be able to fill those seeds in a
uniform amount of time. So we
did not want to stipulate a
specific time frame in which
those vacancies are filled, but
rather make sure that the item
remains on the agenda, so that
each governing body member is
aware that there is still a
vacancy and there is an
unresolved matter that needs to
be tended to as quickly as
possible. And also so that
Citizens of the community know
and get a status update each at
each governing body meeting as
to when that vacancy may be
filled.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative that helps me on
that. So I know a lot of these
commit commissions or
Is it councils or?
Boards, they have meetings that
kind of are spread out between
By biweekly and so when it comes
to that 15 days, does that
include weekends as well, or is
that just working days and how,
I don't know if that's
consistent in statute on what,
what that means, but if you
could just clarify that one.
Madam Chair Representative. So
for the time frame, um, we rely
back to the standard um
calculation of time. So more
than likely in this case, it
would be 15 calendar days, and
what the 15 means in this
proposal is, is that if the
vacancy has not been filled
within 15 days, then the
governing body at that point is
required to place that item on
the agenda and the agenda or the
item will remain on the agenda
for each.
subsequent meeting until that is
filled.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair, and
representative that helps. So it
would be calendar days more
likely than not, and then going
to the other page here on that
same section, or I'm sorry, on
section 6.
We have in here on line 9 to 11,
neither the mayor or the
governing bodies shall supervise
higher discipline or terminate
any employee.
Personnel or judge, the judicial
branch. And so, Madam Chair
Representative, I'm wondering
how, how common is that an
occurrence where we have such
meddling for lack of a better
word.
On page 8.
Um
I'm sorry, I was going by
section and that confuses me,
so.
Does that, does that happen
currently and is that a problem
that we're just trying to fix
with actual practice or just
something we're trying to
preemptively stop.
OK. Um,
Madam Chair and Representative,
um, that is reflecting a Supreme
Court ruling. There have been
occasion, at least in my
experience, um, having worked in
local government as well, where
the governing body starts
wanting to tinker with what's
going on in the municipal court,
for example, and this helps
clarify who actually is in
charge, Madam Chair and
Representative.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative that helps me on
that. And then when it comes to
actual employees that are not in
the judicial branch.
I know that some places like
mine, I guess, which is
technically home rule, but are
there any
City councils or city
commissions that
That higher the
City or the city manager, and
then the city manager hires all
the staff and oversees the
staff, because right now with
our commission, they have no
power whatsoever to do anything
regarding uh employment with any
of the different
Um
Places in government like, yeah,
like uh departments and things
like that. So could you tell me
a little bit about how that
could change in this bill when
it comes to those.
Madam Chair Representative, I
think you hit the nail on the
head. Alamogordo's form of
government is a commission
manager form of government. In
New Mexico, there's 3, there's
typically 3 forms of government
with municipalities, so
specifically for the mayor
council form of governments,
which this statute applies to.
In a municipality that does not
have a manager, the mayor is the
supervisor over the employees.
OK, so the mayor would be OK,
that makes sense. OK, Madam
Chair Representative, and then I
guess this question, I, I was
thinking about this last night
with you, representative,
because you're in Los Alamos and
it's a county.
It's a county council. So it's
kind of a hybrid. How does that
work regarding that, Madam Chair
Los Alamos is a combined city
county, so our county.
accounts, it's called a county
council, so it's both the city
council and the county
commission kind of combined
together.
Madam Chair Representative,
would it, is it a home rule, I
would assume or.
OK, so that, that clears that
one up for me because I knew
that you're kind of a an
outlier, but a cool outlier. I
think it's very interesting.
in my outliership.
And you, and I believe you're on
the commission too, Madam Chair,
Representative, and you were the
president of that council,
council rather. So thank you
Madam Chair Representative. I
think that's pretty much the the
main questions I had about the
bill, and I didn't really have
any questions about the
The other portions of the
legislation, but I think that
It does fill a hole that needs
to be.
build and hopefully gives a
little more clarity, especially
when it comes to getting quorums
and things like that. So I
appreciate all your hard work on
this and thank you, Madam Chair
and Representative Chandler.
Representative Mejia and then
Vice Chair Little.
Thank you, madam chair. Thank
you, Representative Chandler and
experts. Well, I have some
questions but uh John cover all
that.
But thank you for bringing this
bill forward. I fully support
it. Thanks. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
This chair a little.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'd like
to move a do pass, please.
to pass
and a second, do we have any
opposition?
Seeing then you have a you pass.
Hey, Senator Maestas.
Mm
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Honorable members, uh,
we're.
Apologies.
Alsopresentative De la Cruz.
we start, um, let's do some
housekeeping, uh.
House Memorial 20.
Has been rolled by the spons at
the request of the sponsor.
HJR 18 is rolled at the request
of the sponsor and
House Bill 477 is rolled at the
request of the sponsor, and we
will hear Senate Bill 16 on
Monday.
So with that, you may begin.
Good morning, Madam Chair
Johnson, members of the
committee. Today I'm joined by
co-sponsor and friend Mo
Maestas, who will also be
participating.
Today, a chair and and members
of the committee, I'm here to
present House Bill 444. Our
current New Mexico Athletic
Commission is outdated,
operating under a framework that
no longer meets the needs of
today's combat sports industry.
This bill modernizes the
commission by placing it under
the regulation and licensing
department.
Ensuring stronger oversight and
more effective regulation by
expanding membership and
establishing a medical advisory
committee, HB 444 will bring in
the expertise necessary to
protect our athletes. It will
also streamline outdated
licensing processes and create a
more transparent, accountable
system for both professional and
amateur competition, and with
these reforms we are not just
updating regulations, we are
ensuring that New Mexico remains
a leader in combat sports with
a.
system that is safer, fairer,
and built on the future. Uh, if
I could have a senator speak
now.
Thank you, Representative. Madam
Chair, honorable members, the,
uh, this, we, we extended the
sunset as you recall last year,
Madam Chair, and it gave us a
chance to look at the statute
which is, which is horribly
outdated, is out of the 1980s
when we were functioning on a
shoestring budget. Promoters
have to pay fees out of state
promoters have to pay fees. You
also have to pay under current
law, uh, a close circuit
television fees. These fees are
no longer necessary. Uh, we've
been meeting with RLD in the
offsea.
in uh folks from our finance
teams.
And so we want to eliminate all
the fees. We want to eliminate
all the fees and simply pay the
staff and the per diem uh
through House Bill 2, like a
modern functioning government.
We're also joined, Madam Chair,
by the chair of the Athletic
Commission, uh, Mr. Ed
Manzanares.
Madam Chair, if uh.
We're ready for questions. OK,
and do you have a committee
Thank you, Madam Chair. The
committee substitute is uh
124.1, and it's uh and from the
original uh bill that was
introduced, it's simply a
Making a lot of technical
errors, changing the word
commission to department, but
there's no substantive changes
from the original to the to the
sub.
Thank you, so I'll move, uh, the
committee substitute for
discussion.
Committee members, do we have
any discussion on the committee
substitutes represented a block.
Commander and Senator
Representative expert. So
question about the, the number.
Did we change that from the
bill?
The number of the commission.
It's 7
In the
The substitute was a 7 in the
original bill,
Madam Chair, representative,
yes, it's going from 5
commissioners to 7. Got it.
OK, I'll ask continued if you
had something, Madam Chair, uh,
correct, it was 7 in the
original bill, 7 to 7 uh from
the original to the sub, but
current law is 5, we want to go
5 to 7. Perfect. OK, that's the
only question I had on this.
Thank you both.
Resentative Zamora on the
committee substitute. Madam
Chair, I haven't even had a
chance to read the committee
substitute.
Are we supposed to have 24 hours
on this.
It was emailed.
On Friday, February 21st.
We must have missed it.
Like the presenters to.
Explain exactly what parts.
Sure, Ma'am sure, just if you
could give us a brief rundown.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, uh, Senator will
respond.
Madam Chair, thank you,
Representative Zamona. We, uh,
Because it's such an old
statute, every time we look at
it, there's, there's ways to
correct it. But on page
2
Under exhibition.
Uh, we, we add the word
department.
On page um.
On page 7.
It's somewhat of a clean up, uh,
The wording is not changed, but
it's just aesthetically looks
better.
Um, by starting the, the chapter
C of
Below the stricken language.
On page 8.
Uh, subparagraph C, or I'll go
by sections, section 3
subparagraph C.
We changed the word promulgate
to recommend the commission may
recommend rules.
be adopted by the department.
Oh, let me look at the line,
thank you.
The line on the uh
On the original bill was page 8,
line 18.
The line on the sub.
Is page 8.
Uh, line 18. All right.
And then
The original bill reads the
commission may promulgate rules.
To be adopted by the department,
the substitute reads the
commission may recommend rules,
so we changed the magic word
promulgate to recommend in the
substitute.
And then, uh, and then Madam
Chair Representative Zamora.
On page 13.
Line 15, we changed commission
to department.
The department may suspend or
revoke a license.
And then on page 16, that's
where the major changes are.
And just to be consistent with
the crux of the bill.
Uh
We change up.
Let's go uh line 6.
Actually, forgive me, Madam
chair. It's page 14 on page 14.
Uh
On line one.
commission to department line 4.
Permission to department.
Line 9 and 10.
A mission to department.
Line
1516 commission to department.
Line 20
Permission to department.
Line 25.
Permission to department.
Uh, we also kept on the bottom
of page 14, top of page 15.
Executive secretary, that's
actually a reference to the RLD
employee, not.
Not a member of the board.
And on a bottom of page 15 line
24, we.
kept the the words executive
secretary.
Once again, that's not a member
of the board. That's an RLD
employee.
And then uh the, the only kind
of
Policy changes on the top of
page 16, not really a policy
change, it's just better
language.
We're uh struggling with the
relationship between the, the,
the department and the
commission during a fight, we
want the fight to be smooth, and
we don't want a bunch of people
messing with the production of
the fight, so
So the executive secretary.
Uh, which is the RLD employee
will probably change that to
executive director down the
road, but the executive
secretary shall
See that the rules are followed.
That the
are strictly enforced in in
consultation with an assigned
commissioner.
So that that distinguishes the
power and authority during the
fight.
Thank you, Mr.
Uh, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative.
So on the top of page 16, lines
1 through 5.
The executive secretary shall
see that the provisions of the
professional athletic
Competition Act.
And the rules made pursuant to
that act are strictly enforced.
In consultation with an assigned
commissioner.
And then uh
And then on page 17,
Line 9, commissioner to
department.
And online
Page 18.
Line 25.
commission to department page
19.
Line one.
3
7 and 8 commission to
department. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you very much, uh,
Representative Zalora.
Thank you, uh, senator.
Concludes my questions, Madam
Chair. OK. Thank you. Any more
discussion?
Do we have a motion to adopt the
committee substitute.
Mm, OK.
Do we have any opposition?
Seeing now and you have and you
have a.
Adopted, OK, let's go to the
audience.
So those in support of the bill,
please raise your hands. OK,
let's take one minute comments.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
Jenna Vasquez. I'm the New
Mexico representative for the
World Association of Kickboxing
Organizations and Team USA
kickboxing. We are the largest
kickboxing organization in the
world, and we're recognized by
the International Olympic
Committee. We were established
on 6 continents over 136
countries and recognized by 21
states. We're here today to give
our full support to House Bill
444. The bill has been written
in such a way, it will allow New
Mexico to grow, thrive, and stay
current with the industry.
In the last 15 years, unarmed
combat sports has evolved far
beyond boxing and MMA. The
current act, as you know, it's
made us become outdated. It's
too restrictive, and I feel the
flexibility of House Bill 444
when we're not only modernized,
but while also boost the
economy, and retain of dollars
to revitalizing small businesses
throughout the state. These
businesses will develop young
athletes who represent New
Mexico on the world stage and
qualifying events leading up to
the biggest competitions,
competitions like the Olympics,
the World Games, Pan-A games,
and
much more
Morning, Madam Chair, members of
the committee. I'm Kevin Graham,
I'm the chief general counsel
for the regulation and licensing
department here to testify in
support of the bill on behalf of
the department and
Superintendent Clay Bailey, um,
as Senator Masta indicated
earlier, we have been working
with sponsors of this bill over
the last couple of months, I
guess, um, and working through
some of the details of it, the
substitute bill that's before
you as a product of that
collaboration. Uh, this was not
an agency bill that the, the RLD
brought forward. It was brought
forward by the sponsor.
but we worked with them to make
sure that the language uh
appropriately addresses the
issue of the distinction between
the licensing side of things,
which the RLD will now be
handling the full licensing side
of things, and then the
commission having more direction
and advice to uh both the agency
of the governor and the
legislature as to the policies
that need to be in effect for
proper combat sports in the
state of New Mexico and so we
believe that the bill as is
structured under the substitute
is a positive improvement in the
law.
we encourage your support.
Madam Chair and Representatives,
my name is Fred Slow.
As I choke, uh, I own Duke City
Championship Wrestling and I'm a
licensed promoter in the state
of New Mexico. Uh, I want to say
I'm in support, uh, there's kind
of twofold in my time here, we
haven't seen a ton of
progression in the state
Athletic commission, but the
last 6 months, that has not
stood true, uh, enator Maestas
has done a tremendous job of
moving forward a lot of ideas
and support to everything we're
doing, uh, with that said, I
hope it's step one of many, and
also I'm available for any
questions otherwise, but thank
you.
Do we have any further comments?
OK, let's go.
Online, do we have supporting
comments.
Amanda, can you hear us?
Yes. You have one minute.
Uh, my name is Amanda Monva, uh,
also here in support. I'm in Las
Cruces, New Mexico, um, House
Bill 444 is long overdue, um,
being in the industry, majority
of my life in combat sports,
karate, wrestling, kickboxing,
boxing, um, never.
Nevertheless, we, everybody has
mentioned um
The fact that it's being
recognized at the level where we
need
Ensure safety for the kids, um,
and any other ways everybody has
mentioned, um, I'm pretty sure,
uh, Senator Maestas is, has done
great as well as um everybody
involved in RLD um anxiously
awaiting the progress that uh we
will see within this future.
Thank you.
Thank you so much, Amanda.
Any anyone else hoping to make
public comment, please raise
your hand.
Anyone hoping to make public
comment in opposition to the
bill. Please raise your hand.
Do we have any opposition?
OK, Committee members,
representative Luhan.
He was Madam Chair, um,
representative, uh, Senator, I
just know, um, more of a
comment. I just want to say
thank you for your work on this.
I know this has been an endeavor
for you, and I think I've, I've,
um, this, this dates back to
when I was working on the Senate
side and, and, um, I'm really
trying to
Bring this up to date. And I
think that this is, this is good
work. Um.
How do you see why?
If this is enacted, Madam Chair,
how do you see this, this
changing every of what, you
know, currently we have to wear,
where this should be, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, before I let the
senator speak, one of the things
that I think has, has hurt us as
a state is that because of the
type of fees and regulation that
we have, it's really stifled a
lot of, of a lot of competition
that might have otherwise come
here goes to other states, and I
believe that with the work that
Senator Maestas has done and and
and everyone else that will have
a more robust activity that also
impacts economic development,
Senator.
Thank you, Madam Chair, I think
it sends a message nationally
that, that
But
New Mexico can be trusted to
regulate pursuant to the law
from time to time, there'll be
some strong personalities on the
commission and also these fees
are just kind of weird. So, uh,
the government should pay to
regulate the industry, not the
promoters out of state
promoters, uh.
You know, UFC has not been to
town in over.
Um, so I think this will send a
wonderful strong message
nationally as well as up local
promoters uh in their, in their
businesses.
Thank you man. Well done. I
think this is exactly where this
needs to be in the regulation,
um, arena, if you will. Um, good
luck with the rest of your, uh,
process to get this passed.
Thank you, man.
Representative Zamora.
I don't have any questions right
now.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I
was just checking, uh, noticed
that there's an appropriation of
$200,000 and I was wondering if
it was also has already been
included in the budget.
It has not
Madam
All right, thank you.
Mittee members.
Representative, uh
Onion or new.
Cherry move a path.
OK
Chair, I move a do not pass on
House Bill 444 and a due pass on
the government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee
substitute for 444.
Thank you. Do we have any
opposition to the DuP pass
motion, seeing none, you have a,
you pass.
Thank you Madam Chair, members.
OK, thank you.
House Memorial 31.
I memorial 31.
Good morning, committee. Thank
you for hearing House Bill 31
this morning, uh, uh, citizen
scientists Day. So what this
memorial does is it recognizes
the role of citizen scientists
in our state. And it's what, how
it helps our, the education of
our youth and encourages the
governor to create a citizen
scientist's day. Um, I have with
me some experts for that are
from the wild Friends group, uh,
there this, this year in
September, 200 students from
across New Mexico voted on a
topic that they wanted to
address. And these students
chose
To uh bring forward a memorial
encouraging more citizen
scientists. So today with me,
and if you guys can raise your
hand and I say your name. I have
Tristan Kim from Riodoso High
School. I have Rihanna Salcido
from uh Carlsbad Intermediate
School, Katie Barnhart from
Carlsbad Intermediate School and
Ariana Patel from uh Carlsbad as
well. So I'm gonna hand it to
them one at a time, so they can
give some brief um expert
opinion on why we should be
doing this, uh.
It's OK. We can just do this. I
appreciate that. And uh with
that, we'll, we'll go to
questions after.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you so much for
the opportunity to speak on
behalf of House Memorial 31. My
name is Tristan Kim, I'm a
junior from Rudosa High School
in Rudosa, New Mexico, and today
I represent wild friends who
helped draft this memorial.
House Memorial 31 calls for
asking the PED and the HED to
review how to use citizen
science and education. It
requests that the legislature
recognize the importance of
citizen science in your request
that the governor declare a
citizen science day to recognize
and promote its importance.
Citizen science is the
collection and analysis of data
about the natural world by
members of the general public,
often in collaboration with
professional scientists and or
organizations. This approach
makes large scale environmental
research possible, providing
scientists with extensive data
that they might not otherwise
have the resources to collect.
Personally, I contribute to
citizen science through the use
of the Ebert app as a
birdwatcher, I submit all of my
settings to Cornell University,
where scientists use this data
to study migration patterns,
population changes, and
conservation strategies. This
simple active data collection
integrates seamlessly into my
passion for birding both in and
out of the classroom.
Additionally, citizen science
engages young people such as
myself and my peers, exposing
them to STEM careers and
expanding science education
opportunities, encouraging
participation at an early age
fosters a new generation of
environmental stewards and
scientists.
In conclusion, this memorial is
not just about data, it's about
education, engagement, and
empowering people to be part of
something bigger. With your
support, we can strengthen the
connection between our
communities and our environment,
ensuring that everyone has a
role to play in preserving New
Mexico's natural beauty. Thank
you.
Hello, Madam Chair and members
of the committee, my name is
Reanna Salcido, and I go to PR
Leva in Carlsbad, New Mexico.
I'm 11 years old and I'm here to
ask you to support our citizen
science Memorial.
Citizen science is when the
public volunteers collect data
that help scientists better
understand nature, which then
allows them to protect and
manage resources such as plants,
water, and wildlife.
Citizen science data helps
scientists and resource managers
answer specific questions, help
with research and solve
important problems, lust anyone
of any age can participate in
citizen science.
Citizen science is important to
me because I would love to help
animals and nature. I love
nature and would like to make
the environment a little better.
Thank you.
Hello, Madam Chair and members
of the committee, my name is
Katie Barnhart. I'm in 6th grade
at Pier Leva in Carlsbad, New
Mexico. Our proposal is to
dedicate a day to citizen
science and to bring citizen
science into education.
This memorial is important to
state agencies because it would
involve citizens going out and
observing, discovering new ways
to help, and more, but they
observe can help scientists and
others gain different
perspectives to help animals in
surrounding areas. Citizen
science is important to New
Mexico because it would help
support the land and animals
that live here. It is important
to me because it would allow me
to take part in projects that
will help nature and help with
the study of animals, habitats,
and more. Thank you.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee. Hello, good morning.
My name is Ariana Patel. I'm a
7th grader at CIS PR Leva in
Carlsbad, New Mexico.
I'm here today to ask for house
Memorial 31 to be passed.
The memorial asks for the
legislature to recognize the
importance of citizen science
and for the educational state
agencies to consider
incorporating citizen science
into the school curriculum.
Citizen science benefits me and
my community because it reaps of
knowledge that can be used for
educational development.
It is also a way for adults to
get out in the community,
experience something new and
help make an impact in
scientific research. We would be
truly grateful for your support
in passing house Memorial 31.
Thank you for your time and
thank you, Representative
Serato, for sponsoring our
memorial.
And, and just briefly I want to
thank the committee for hearing
us on Friday, so these students
could join us today as you, you
hear they came from multiple
parts of the state, so it was
really important to them. With
that, we stand for questions.
Thank you. Let's go to the
audience, uh, those who wish to
make supporting comments, please
raise your hands.
OK
Morning, Madam Chair and members
of the committee. My name is
Michael Sanchez and I'm a junior
at Redoso High School, and I'm
here to voice my support for
this memorial. It is critically
important that the legislator
and state agencies encourage the
use of citizen science.
To better increase interest in
nature and get more people
outdoors to experience the
beauty of our state.
Madam Chair members of the
committee, I hope you will
support this memorial. Thank
you.
Let's go online, or do we have
any more comments? OK, online.
Anyone hoping to make public
comment on this bill, please
raise your hand.
You make any public comment in
opposition, please raise your
hand.
Hey, Representative on Ornu.
Thank you Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative, and thank
you experts for being here
today. I did have a question for
you, so this is kind of a big
deal. You guys are all the way
at your state capital on a
school day, you're in a
committee, you are defending a
piece of legislation. So my
question is, what?
prompted you to go to the
lengths of doing a memorial
about something you care about
when, as opposed to just writing
a letter. This is a, this is a
very big deal that you guys are
doing to this today.
Me personally, I've been taking
speech and debate. I'm sorry,
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, I apologize, uh, me,
I've been taking speech and
debate classes for over 2 years
now, and I've become really
passionate about, you know, sort
of this like public service area
and this is something that has
been really piqued my interest
in the fact that I'm able to
come here and support Memorial
that can help benefit our state
is been really important to me.
Thank you.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, this project is
important to me because science
is related to my passions for my
future.
Citizen science will help
benefit the scientists doing
their research all across
America. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Citizen Science is
important to me because.
As Ariana Patel said, um, it is
part of my future career and I
love science and I would love to
make the environment a little
bit better. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair. Thank you,
Representative. Thank you
experts for sharing that with
me. I just want to thank you for
educating us and I'm certainly
very proud of all of you. Thank
you.
Representative Lujan.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Again, I want to thank you all
for coming to the state Capitol
and taking on this endeavor as
representative um I know you
just said that this is an
important thing for you to do
and participate in, in your
democracy and that is exactly
what you're doing. Um, I started
off as this, I, I didn't call
myself a citizen scientist, but
as a youth, I, I was involved in
many science projects and many
science activities and advocacy.
So I wanted to ask you.
What, what specific
Um
Science or related field of
science brought you to uh to
this to us today and to this
piece of legislation. I hope we
heard from the young man that it
was a bird watching and he
contributes. What about our
other experts at the table.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee. I love um.
Making
Bird
Birdhouses, um, because
They bring birds to our
environment, and we do have this
one tree where we have a lot of
birds and we would love to make
more bird houses for them.
So they can have a very good.
Natural environment.
You don't have to answer, Madam
Chair, yeah.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, this is also
Um, and part of my endeavors
because through my Mesa group
last year, we participated in a
tree database where we were able
to study trees and how they grew
and.
what the impacts of the heat and
birds did to the trees.
Madam Chair, um, represent,
thank you so much for bringing
this and to bringing our youth
here and and participating in
their own democracy, the science
will lead you into
To um
rears into interests that will
will change you and this
experience will change you for
the rest of your life. So thank
you for being here and science
will carry you there. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
You, Madame Floor leader
Skipanski.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative, and experts, uh,
it's truly awesome to have you
here participating in the
process, um, and citizens, I'm
so glad you brought this
memorial because I really had
not.
Understood citizen science as a
concept, uh, you know, I
I know that, uh, I think my own,
uh, one of my own kids.
Participate somehow in, in, in
gathering data, um, or something
related to astronomy, but I
didn't know that that was called
Citizen science, so.
I love this. I'm just wondering
if any of you have any
suggestions for how we as
legislators in our spare time
might be able to do a little
citizen science ourselves.
Uh, you know, a little bird
watching or are there apps or
websites that we can use any,
I'm just curious if you have any
suggestions.
Adam, sorry.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee.
You could.
Create
Other habitats like as we said,
bird feeders or bird houses, you
could also go investigate the
trees and make them a little
better. You could go to parks
and try and clean up trash or
make it something better over
there. Thank you.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee.
If citizen Science Day does get
approved, there.
data will be submitted to the
INaturalist database, so you
would be able to add, so wild
friends will advertise the day
and ask state agencies to
celebrate, which is also a part
of, which is a thing that
legislators can also participate
in.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, like I said, uh, I
use the Ebert app personally and
this is an app you can all get
on your phone and you can use
this app to send information
directly to the Cornell database
where they use that for their
scientific research. Thank you.
Thank you so much, experts, and
uh I think we can all take that
to heart and when we go on our
little strolls around the
building, maybe snap a picture
or two of a bird that we see
that will probably also bring
our stress levels down, so
thank you all so much for being
here. That's all the questions I
have. Thank you.
We, uh, vice chair Little.
Madam Chair, I happily move a do
pass.
That motion, Representative
Zamora.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you Representative for
bringing these kids in.
You know, Madam Chair, uh,
representative, I think one of
the most important things that
we've left behind in our lives.
And
It has to do with regulations
and everything that we, we
passed through these chambers is
we've left our kids out of the
workplace.
And here we see 4 young kids.
Very vibrant. I think one of
them is a little nervous.
But
It's, it's a good thing that we,
we brought him here today.
And it's a good thing that they
get to participate and they get
to see the system and how it
works.
And, and Madam Chair, I have a
question for the expert
witnesses. Would, would somebody
get that young lady some tissue?
She's
It's, it's
He's OK.
OK, good.
It's, it's a
It's a big job.
A big challenge, a big
Responsibility for them to come
up here and I could
I could see
I could see why you would get
nervous. I, I, I was nervous at
the age of
But
658 when I came in.
And started doing this job. So
I, I have one question for, for
the expert witnesses, Madam
Chair.
Have you all gotten to visit
with the governor yet?
Uh, madam chair members of the
committee, uh, personally, I
have not yet. I can't speak for
my other witnesses they have on
a separate trips of the
committee. I have not.
Thank you.
So Madam Chair.
And, and representative, maybe
we can all take a vote and get
the governor to see these kids.
Madam Chair, that concludes my
questions. Thank you.
You represented a block.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative and
expert witnesses. Good to see
you here. I think we're
neighbors. I'm an Almogordo, so
I, I actually had a question for
you, sir. I, I'm trying to get
birds into my backyard cause I
only get those darn pigeons, and
you, you seem to be the expert,
Mr. Madam Chair and
Representative and expert. So
how do you do it?
Uh, manager, members of the
committee of me and my teacher
he was here, we rub peanut
butter on trees, and that seems
to work pretty well.
Uh, additionally, birdse having
bird feeders, having the right
environment for them to come and
stop there's also important if
you want them to be in your
backyard.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, and I learned a
new, a new thing, the e-Bird
app. I'm gonna have to get that.
And also the Merlin app I have
on my phone to find the birds
and see what they are, but
you're already the expert on
that. So I think I'm just gonna
have to call this gentleman when
I'm back home and say, let's go
birding.
Madam Chair, um, uh, Mr. Bluff,
uh, representative Block, what's
happening today? It's been a
day, um, Ms. Patel wanted to add
to that as well.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, there are also ways
that this connects to real world
science, so the students can
monitor bird populations by
daily observations of bird
feeders, and even if just
pigeons come, there are
different species of birds that
can come every day when you just
don't see it.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. Oh, please
continue. I'm learning so much
so so far.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, there are also
hummingbird feeders if you want
hummingbirds, you could, it's
like sugar water and you could
also plant flowers outside your
house and they would love to
come.
Thank you.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
Representative, and I love this
memorial. I think this is
probably my favorite piece of
legislation this session so far.
And so, Madam Chair, thank you
so much for bringing it forward.
And I look forward to seeing all
of your shining faces, maybe
someday in this legislature, I
know that that you said about
public speaking. You guys did a
great job, all of you, each one
of you did a really good job and
yeah, hopefully you'll, you're
in one of these seats someday,
and I hope to see you here. So,
I will take you up on that. I'll
go, I'll go birding with you
down where we are, but thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative Sarato and
Good job today. You all did
great.
Thank you, Representative Mejia.
And I'm sure, representative.
And its weakness. Thank you for
presenting this memorial. I'm
very proud of you and welcome to
the house.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. And before I call the
question just wanna say
congratulations. I'm so proud of
you, and I have both
experiences. I live in the city
where I'm able to walk the park
and I do pick up trash. It was
have a plastic bag in my pocket.
And uh I love taking care of our
parks in my community, and then
I live in the country where we
do have bird feeders, Grandma
and I, and uh we see all kinds
of birds and bobcats and fox
traveling through our home home
place there, so I just wanna say
that I am so proud of you and
congratulations.
So with that, we have emotion.
The
And do we have any opposition?
Being none, you have a due pass
your house memorial.
Thank you.
OK.
Oh yes, yes, yes.
to the house.
Mhm
missing?
OK, let's go ahead and begin
with House Memorial 37
representative and your expert
witness.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you committee members. Good
morning, Yat A Bena. My name is
Michelle Abeda and I'm here to
present House Memorial 37 along
with my expert witness, Ms.
Nadine Padilla.
House Memorial 37 is a memorial
affirming the state's commitment
to protecting and preserving
Mount Taylor as a traditional
cultural property and opposing
uranium mining projects that
threatened Mount Taylor's
cultural and environmental
integrity, and sure, I'd just
like to share brief briefly how
honored and happy I am to be
here on behalf of all New
Mexicans, especially my
district. Growing up as a child,
I traveled with my grandmother
who raised me and we'd go along
I-40 and she'd share wonderful
stories about Mount Taylor and
teach me about the importance.
and significance of it and in
our language we call it sosi and
I'm very happy today to be here
standing in support of this
memorial, and I'd like to hand
it over to my expert, Miss Padia
to also introduce herself. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Madam
Mhm. Oh, excuse me. Uh, good
morning, Madam Chair and
committee members. My name is
Nadine Padilla. I'm, and I'm
happy to be here today to speak
in support of House Memorial 37.
This memorial seeks to protect
the integrity of the Mount
Taylor traditional cultural
property designation and the
cultural significance of this
area. The TCP designation
ensures that cultural properties
throughout our state are
maintained and preserved. The
mount
TCP designation was upheld by
the New Mexico Supreme Court in
2014.
Um, Mount Taylor holds
considerable cultural
significance and importance for
many tribes throughout our state
as well as throughout the
Southwest. Um, it has long
standing and ongoing historical
cultural and religious
importance for tribes as it has
since time immemorial.
Mount Taylor is also eligible
for inclusion on the National
Register under the National
Historic Preservation Act that
identifies properties of
historical archaeological
engineering or cultural
significance.
As established through the TCP
process, other many communities
throughout New Mexico support,
um, preserving the integrity of
the Mount Taylor TCP
designation.
And with that, thank you very
much.
Thank you.
Let's go ahead and go to the
audience, those and supported
the bill, please raise your hand
in the support of the memorial.
OK.
Good morning, Madame Chair
members of the committee. My
name is Gina Morales with JD
Bullington government relations,
and we represent the Pueblo of
Laguna and they support this
house memorial. Thank you.
You
Good morning. Yeah, I'm Richard
Gay with the Navajo Nation
Historic Preservation
Department. Good morning, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee, Mount Taylor Erold is
a sacred place. We visit this
mount to learn about who we are
as a people to gather resources
and to celebrate our cultural
lifeways. We cannot allow
destructive mineral extraction
to chip away the sacredness and
environmental integrity of Salt.
The mine uranium ore from so
would be transported through
Naval Nation lands to the only
operating uranium mill in the
United States, located at White
Mesa, Utah. The nomination EPA
estimates that the plant mines
in the area would result in more
than 60 truckloads of uranium
ore passing through the Navajo
Nation per day. We oppose
uranium ore shipments through
our lands because of the long
history of uranium poisoning of
our people.
If the, if these mining
operations move forward, the
Navo people would not only
suffer desecration of one of our
most sacred sites, but the
prospect of additional harm due
to uranium mining and shipping.
I ask you to support Memorial
number 37. Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Conroy Chino, and I
represent uh the public of
Achema, and we stand in strong
support of the memorial.
Mount Taylor
Has a very significant role.
In the cultural identity.
And the spiritual worldview of
Akima.
It's rooted deeply in the
history, the songs.
And the prayers of the Yakama
people.
We are aware of the rich
deposits of ore, uranium ore,
the lie beneath Mount Taylor.
But we're also aware of the
decades of extraction activity
that has occurred in the
flatlands and the forested lands
and the mesas just west of Mount
Taylor.
And we're also aware of the
amount of drilling and
underground tunneling that's a
that has occurred in pursuit of
this oar.
Uh, I know because I worked in
one of those mines as a surveyor
helper while I was in college.
We're also aware of the ill
effects and the harm.
That it's caused on the
environment.
On natural resources like water.
And on human life.
And so we asked the committee.
To really honor the state's
commitment to protecting
cultural properties and lands
that are held sacred by the
pueblos and the tribes of New
Mexico for those reasons, um,
uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, we urge your strong
support. Thank you very much.
Further comments.
Support in support of the bill.
I'm Adela Duran and I represent
3 uranium mining companies. I
want to clarify I'm not uh
supporting or opposing the
memorial, just wanted to provide
some comments to the committee.
Um, my clients have never
operated in New Mexico, but they
understand to the extent that
they can be uh frustrations felt
primarily by our Native American
communities from the uranium
practices of the past and the
legacy sites that were left.
but the safety standards, uh,
uh, safety measures and
technology have changed
drastically, Madam Chair, in the
last 50 or 60 years, as you
might imagine, and I'd like to
just address uh briefly the
Supreme Court opinion, which
designated Mount Taylor as a
TCP. That opinion came down from
our highest court. It's not
going to change, so it's unclear
what value the memorial brings,
uh, but Madam Chair, with that
opinion did
strike a balance between the
desire for consultation between
all tribes and clubs in the
state, and I have just a couple
more, a couple more seconds.
Do we have any comments online
in support of the bill.
Anna.
Anna can.
Yeah, thank you very much. Um, I
appreciate the opportunity to
speak, uh, because I am sick.
Um, Madam Chair and committee
member, thank you very much. I
am the registered lobbyist for
Um, the Pueblo of Puake and we
stand in full support of this
bill, um, Mount Taylor is the
cultural property that needs to
be protected, and I want to
thank the sponsors for bringing
this forward. Um, thank you very
much.
Thank you so much, Anna.
Anyone else hoping to speak on
behalf or in support of the
memorial.
Um
Any opposition to the memorial.
OK, back to the audience. Did I
call for opposite OK committee
members, vice chair Little.
Madam Cherry move a do pass.
Before I call the question
Representative Lujan and then
Representative Block.
Thank you, ma'am. Thank you,
Madam Chair. This has been a,
um,
A topic of concern for me for he
goes back to like when we had
the citizen scientists here as a
youth.
Um
Uh
It's just devastating with this
community has experienced, um.
However, there is still mining
going on. Can you, can you make
a comment on what is current,
what is currently going on, um,
as far as, uh, um, processing
or, or transportation or mining
in the area, Madam chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative, uh, currently
there are no active uranium
projects in New Mexico, but, um,
as the committee is likely
aware, uh,
Uranium is being transported,
um, all around us. Um, and even
since the TCP designation was
passed and upheld by the New
Mexico Supreme Court, uranium
corporations have continued to
target uranium deposits um under
the Mount Taylor mine and there
are active applications before
the state, um, requesting to
mine uranium, um,
In and around Mount Taylor.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, so
this poses as a as a major
concern for the community. Um, I
don't need you to respond to
that because it does, and we
wouldn't have this memorial in
front of us if it did not and to
many concerns of our um
Just our communities, but, but,
but, um, our citizens and
Taxpayers of New Mexico, I think
that I just wanted to thank you
and affirm that I, I appreciate
you bringing this forward and,
and the attention that we have
brought to this, this issue in
the last few years, and that's
to your credit your credit as
well.
Madam Chair, um,
I support you. Your memorial.
Thank you.
a
so much, Madam Chair and
Representative. Good to see you.
So I, I love your memorial. I
do, but I do have one concern on
the memorial. It's on page 2,
Madam Chair.
And it's line 19 to 24.
Or 23, because
It, it talks in very general
sense about uranium mining in
general. It says uranium mining
operations create environmental
hazards through the transport
storage, uranium. And I know
that there have been many
problems in the past when it
comes to these kinds of minds,
but with current technology and
everything that's happened
currently, it uranium mining is
actually a huge portion of our
our green initiatives in the
state and the country to try to
get to net zero when it comes to
nuclear energy.
And so, Madam Chair
Representative, I would just
hate to, to in any way infringe
upon an industry that is helping
us meet those goals. And so,
Madam Chair Representative, I
was just wondering if you could
comment on that. That's the one
big concern I have on the on the
bill. I love every every other
word in the memorial other than
that one person and I'm
wondering if you could just
clarify that for me, Madam Chair
and representative.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative for that
question, um.
The current methods of mining
and proposed new technologies of
uranium mining still continued
to to have harmful effects on
the environment, on the land, on
soil, most importantly,
Um, significant impacts and
detriments to our groundwater
sources and surface water that
we have here in New Mexico, um,
so those issues remain, um, and
to just give an example of that,
the home steak uranium mill site
in Milan, which is just west of
Grant, um, they've been
attempting to clean up
groundwater contamination
beneath that tailings pile for
over 30 years, and they have not
been
successful in restoring
groundwater contamination and in
fact, no ISL mine in the country
has ever been able to restore
groundwater sources to a
pre-mining condition. So the ISL
methods of mining which um
is what is being referred to as
new methods of mining that still
causes significant impacts and
detriments to uh communities,
groundwater sources.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative and, and so to be
honest with you, I'm not an
expert when it comes to these
kinds of issues and, and I do
know Madam Chair representative,
if something was for 30 years
needing to be to be fixed. I
would, I would not necessarily
call 30 year old project a newer
technology, I would definitely
want to do a little more
research on that. So for that
reason, I still am a little,
little hesitant to support the
memorial, although I do like the
premise of the memorial because
I do, it's a beautiful site.
I've
driven past it, I need to
actually go and visit it,
actually, maybe, maybe the good
representative and I can go on a
hike or something, but that's
the one that's I I'm probably
gonna be a no on this, but it's
only because of that one
portion. I do support the
general concept of the memorial.
So, thank you both. I don't know
if you have any other comments,
but thank you both.
Hey, I have a.
To
Do you know if there are any
that you know of that are. Thank
you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, for that
question. This was brought to us
by the residents of District 69,
especially the San Mateo Asech
Association members who are
experiencing water contamination
in their area and who've already
been approached to have town
halls about potential uranium
mining happening again. So it
initiated there and the tribes
have also expressed interest. We
did present a letter, Madam
Chair, from the State of New
Mexico commissioner of Public
lands who did say that.
she would not be approving any
leases, um, and was very firm on
that. So we do not have a
number, a solid number to
present to you today, Madam
Chair, about how many permits
have been submitted for
consideration. However, we do
have the letter saying that
Of the ones that haven't
submitted, she's not considering
approval for those, and I'll let
my expert elaborate if there's
anything else to add. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Madame Chair and committee
members, I will just add that
there are several um mining
applications that are currently
going through the process, and
those are the Lahada Mesa mine
and the Rocahondda mine that are
on Mount Taylor.
OK
You
I just, um, I wanna thank you
for bringing forward this
memorial, it is a significant
concern.
About our water or land or
natural resources, our
livelihood and our generations
to come, and it is really beyond
um.
It's not just about a beautiful,
it's very important.
So, just wanna thank you for
this memorial and with that.
We will cover.
Representative on Nonu.
Yes. Representative Block. No,
sir.
Borego, Representative Lujan.
Representative Mejia.
Yes.
Madam Floor leader, yes.
Representative Zamora, Madam
Vice Chair.
Madam Chair,
61 pass on your house memorial.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, thank you committee
members. I look forward to
hiking with you all.
Yeah
