Mr chairman members
of.
And.
The reason.
I yes Sir.
Two two five four two one point
five to two number Mr Chairman.
The amendment or substitute for
discussion excellent.
I have a problem with that too
the the the office isn't that
correct.
And that.
We have this cool.
The real discussed with us and
those with your last the list we
have a point by point and today
Mr chair before going to
introduce my if my experience.
Seventeen a trio and Scott
scatter the spot will discuss
that last change.
Representative you just proved
that there is life after the.
Yes the gentleman.
And it thank you Mr chairman so
starting on page four of one
School of info thirteen that's
were he added.
Labour mine safety and health
administration to that
commission with our.
and H. four lines twenty two
twenty five.
Eight.
I
the giving the.
The department the authority to
do Raul and in our dispatch.
Eight seven.
lines thirteen to eighteen are
the specter
altercations.
a.
All eight is.
Hello existing elevators will be
inspected treated registers that
are.
And well section thirteen our
fees.
Section fourteen is Forsman.
Capability of the department
that weights to.
You're going to get stuck in an
elevator Representative we are
and.
Click on the.
And most of the office of.
Okay of course.
I have first in the second okay.
The more.
I would like to make a motion.
A motion to for a do not pass on
house bill two million nine.
They do pass on Committee
substitute for House Bill to.
The.
The.
We.
House legion veterans and
military affairs commission.
To
chairman I made a motion for a
do not pass on house bill two
ninety nine.
And they do passed for House
labor veterans and military
affairs committee substitute for
house bill two million.
Mr chairman.
Thank you.
In the offices of the.
The.
Representative.
Remove the and you're on your
way here.
Somebody dropped when I heard
that do not pass.
Thank you Mr chairman the.
Are ready for us is the the okay
I'm sorry it is it is also.
I.
If anybody is listening.
The forty five year old over.
After the Representative Thomson
is way over leave a picture.
Five seconds.
The level of the of the of the
seventy one there's no way.
All.
Chose Louisville for.
The.
I have discovered to the chair
that I can run up to the half
flights of stairs.
But the last little fees hello
is a committee looking like he
says what is the.
Two and a half already view
more.
Do for.
Working on working on.
I.
I just want to.
Do that.
Right right.
Thank you.
Because we're.
The twenty five year this are
these
used as promised.
Can we talk as
always.
For a lot of years I'll be fat
for.
Though the.
Okay she yeah.
Before this is actually for.
Yeah I need.
You
as long as you're working it out
I think we can recruit services
to.
On.
The.
Right.
Rules.
What are you all flexibility.
You can.
Questions chair.
Or seventy.
For some of these this is not
feedback your.
It's three seventeen that'll
happen that's okay thanks for
the.
Nice.
I was wondering.
Right with the choose your three
forty five.
For the governor.
Yeah she said for something and
I was like three.
Twenty four.
We've built this is what
happened to the into the.
Because our.
Some of.
Get this sergeant.
In the future.
And that's like your
Representative phone.
In that case a did give us
on information thank you.
What we.
And I.
You have that Capt.
I was elected and thank you and
the sort of thing
House Bill
rules for.
Perfect
the committee has to do this
today.
That one
it is nice to would make table.
I'm sorry to see that there is
to.
The
civil with both of those there's
no set hands with me.
Appreciate that maybe make some
of.
Representative thousand doctors
here the lady whenever you're
ready okay thank you Mr chair.
So this is I will introduce my
every those of you who don't
know Representative Rigby Idaho
was my godfather when I first
came into the Legisla- he was
our major for me during.
Here we we do with this bill I
said I wouldn't do it for
anybody else but I'll do it for
you so thank you.
So Mister chair and the members
of the committee basically this
is to increase the number our
increased the professions of
people who do get the school
personnel loan repayment
including instructional
providers found we all have
heard over and over we are.
Everywhere particular behavioral
health but with any kind of
medical providers and with that
I will let.
Representative we had a.
Thank you Representative Mr
Chairman survived madam chair
members of the committee of this
bill as a result of the
dedication of the legislature to
addressing mental health and
social services crisis facing
our students and twenty twenty
one last year the legislature
unanimously passed house bill
two eighty seven
which call for a statewide
assessment in order to map the
existing resources and social
services and their tax we're
going to talk about that more in
just a second of the Mr chairman
as a representative.
Thompson said this bill is
intended to take a look at what
is right now gaps that you heard
and read about within the system
schools with regards to you hear
a lot about social workers and
therapists this bill goes the
next step and talks about those
that you don't hear too much
about that are sorely needed in
the left in the school system so
with that
I will turn it over to let's see
Kelly into introduce yourself
from the public education
department.
Good afternoon Mister chair
person members of the committee
my name is Leslie Kelly and I am
the deputy director for school
health for the public education
department.
And how much other stuff but.
I am I was that task force chair
that looked at house bill two
eighty seven provided on the
recommendations and findings of
the
culturally appropriate social
services or the lack of
culturally appropriate social
services and providers
I can tell you from my
experience.
All rural health with the
seventy one right yes.
Thank you.
Right.
So excuse me so I had to have
had been the former director of
closing the health services for
the Albuquerque public schools
and and knew firsthand that we
had shortages of school
counselors and that was six or
seven years ago it's I think
it's it's become more difficult
taxable stop counselors school
social workers behavioral and
analysts are very hard to find
said school psychologists and
our ratios are still high right
now becomes really difficult to
provided services to students
their way higher there almost
twice as what a best practice
recommendations are
so I'm and and the other piece I
wanted to share with the
committee is that
At the public education
department two years ago we
received a U. S. department of
that grant for.
I think eight million nine
million dollars and it's a five
year grant and it's it's it's
designed specifically to recruit
and retain school based
behavioral health providers and
so the cell phone to tell you
how many how many participants
we had to date but it's it's
that we it's provided statements
to retain folks that are in
rural and hard to place areas
and the recruitment measures are
of lonely tuition reimbursement
loan repayment
and then just have a larger
state and for students that
decide or agreed to do
internship.
in hard to place areas and state
two years after that entrance at
so the other piece of that grant
is to provide reimbursement for
people that are seeking
licensure so if they get a
license and consult the receipts
will reimburse up to five
hundred dollars for any license
or study materials that's been
real successful program but it's
you know we will see the fruits
of our labor for these folks
actuating pointed schools
and I believe it's about we've
served about two hundred and
fifty students we have
four and four and that includes
the retention piece of people
that are already working in that
working in those places.
With that we stand for
questions.
The.
Okay.
That is fifty two over for the
loan.
Payment program on the fact that
about how things like this
number one is what we're going
to do with this bill.
What about the services that.
Nobody is talking about the
money I.
I did that thank you Mr chairman
R. as I when I initially started
I didn't need to use the
committee I talked about house
bill two eighty seven thousand
last year were the.
The you will pass the bill
despite not where there was some
gaps in the system two eighty
seven was done during the summer
and they find out where these
gaps or with regards to
providing services and the gaps
up to and including the fact
that we have a lot of social
workers out there you've heard
that before throughout the
session here but there is also a
variety of other workers that
are needed with besides the
social workers in schools and
what this bill does is it and
why this that this was
individuals are capable of
possibly receiving of the
scholarships that of with their
with the lonesome started the
logs that come into that and so
what we're doing here is we're
utilizing the monies that right
now the H. B. two right now.
He has five million dollars
distributed from the to to
teacher loan
Representative placement fund an
appropriation of and another
appropriation of two point five
million back to the fund so Mr
chairman that's where the
money's coming from and that's
what the money is for and I
think there's some individuals
in the items that are a little
bit more in depth about talking
about exactly where those funds
can be utilized within the
system.
Thank you that this conflict is.
Yeah.
Thank you of the human body is
part of the legislation.
Anybody in offices in.
Is the rules of course but want
to speak of our staff will be on
manta Maria.
Thank you thank you Mr chair.
I don't often get to refer to as
the.
But we do it I think you all
know we have a significant
shortage in person the public
school system special education.
Often.
Off of that.
Specialist teachers.
The
instructional support providers
support for two million years
education.
I see this as a state fines Gen
Jackson on behalf of the school
Mexico.
Of the and we clearly need to do
more to recruit train and retain
those support professionals.
I want to thank you by the way
for passing bills today to raise
the salaries for educational
system that one of the groups
that need coverage bill this
bill is another way to make
progress on addressing the
shortage areas particularly in
special education by making more
of those folks eligible.
And programs is currently
available to teachers but to the
physical therapists and
counselors and so on so we
encourage you to take favorable
action on the screen thank you.
One of the.
Yes ma'am well as.
good afternoon Mister chairman.
Nearly half
Mexico.
Transaction.
but I stand for you as a career
educator and one of the things
I'd like to offer is that the
where is your workforce is under
a lot of stress in addition to
the pandemic and for personal
reasons what this bill has the
potential to do is to support
teachers try a lot of the work
will look is tied to address the
needs that need to address so
specifically in my experience
students behavioral health
challenges.
I was a teacher this interest in
our classrooms but I have choose
to support their development
over time so I urge you to pass
legislation or this has a lot of
potential to.
I appreciate the time.
Rhythmic yes Sir.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee my name
is common Chico and I'm lobbyist
levels of tolerance Act money
and also the center for long
operate and support this
legislation and also first like
to thank others and Johnson
reading hospital to a seven and
carry this legislation is on the
basis for legislation before you
today but rosary service factor
there is a huge shortage of
these high priority professions
of what would become eligible
for this.
World water service and hi the
school districts where students
Who are identified and the the
Yazzie Martinez lawsuit
including the English language
flight orders
of
students.
certainly the
Endemic
really
clear the need for
behavior health services and
mental health services
especially the so with that Mr.
Stronger you.
Support legislation for the
district.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee made this policy
Candelaria I am turning echo
center online poverty and a
member of the legal team
representing the us the.
To we whole heartedly fully
support this bill is needed as
that house bill two eighty seven
the report that came out of it
provides all the argument that
the state needs to really
investing workforce be here
Hochman to help of the.
S. and others to find the
support services to our students
we often hear in addition to the
report we often hear from our
education partners with
districts just tremendously
important but services and we
really urge you to pass this
legislation and thank
Representative Thomson for
carrying it and I joined Mr
Chino and thank you
Representative Johnson for
carrying house bill two eighty
seven that was unanimously
passed by the Senate and the
house and twenty twenty one
because the legislature Solomon
to to a gap success meant to
determine core where they need
to us and provide findings and
recommendations of what the
legislative I could do to
address these critical areas
with that being.
Researchers tested state.
Enough of them but in offices
early Monday and officers not
through.
Okay seeing not.
Hey ordered up to four.
For all.
Thank you Mr chairman my name is
Harrison rival I have the
academic finance director of the
higher education department we
are not standing in support or
opposition of this bill when I
think that member Thompson and
the chair near bring it forward
I am here to answer any
technical questions as we enter
the future lower beta program
thank you.
Yeah.
Mr chair and committee members
thank you for giving me
opportunity to speak to you
today my name is Sonya curry.
R. and I'm speaking on behalf of
a you don't The New Mexico.
Our.
Organization.
Has eight branches across the
state and around four hundred
members considering the low
status of our educational
outcomes hired you to vote yes
on page B. three seventy one.
New Mexico has a dire shortage
of instructional support
providers also.
Recreated as I yes please.
Eight seventy one will help
recruit ISPs to public schools
and retain those already here
the bill will amended the
teacher loan pay repayment
packed to expand program
eligibility east to ISPs.
I ISPs with up to six thousand
dollars per year toward their
student loans such as this
similar to what the teachers are
currently receiving
require L. ISPs to receive the
loan repayments to work in a
public school for two years and
prioritize hello bill
eligibility to those I just
please working in high need
areas.
One.
So we what's inside our students
with a quality education that
prepares them for success in
their future work environments
thank you.
Okay thank you the.
Mr chair I I think work stand
for questions but I do want to
point out that Representative
Johnson and I are from from the
program.
Of members of the committee.
Martinez.
Mr Chairman representative
Thompson.
This this I like this kind this.
Type of creative solutions to
the problem.
I I do have a question or couple
questions on page three.
Starting in line
Whether it's talking about the
I. S. P..
Line.
Eleven twelve.
Thirteen.
Or.
For these alcohol drug and
substance abuse counselors.
Ordered from a regular counselor
that would be.
Employed by the school.
gonna get Mr chairman of course
chairman of the committee are we
going to get two part answer
this one in the first part is
because I am a licensed drug and
alcohol council form second
person Mexico what I did before
I retired so of I say that
because these are licensed
individuals that are
The gentleman making reference
to a drug and alcohol counselors
and then I'm gonna turn it over
to miss Kelly for the rest.
Thank you
Mr chair representative Martinez
as far as those positions so for
example the public education
department has licenses for all
these folks so if Representative
are important representative
here with the Ezzell household
the independent alcohol and drug
licensed health for license he
can apply for PED license and
there for them to the school
employee I will say from my
experience because it's very
difficult to just find school
counselors and the bait and
social workers necessary these
positions are often not found in
school.
Hello the public schools did
have some of these folks in this
budget budgets were reduced
those were the first positions
health like family like marriage
and family counselors in fact.
Mr chair representative Tom
Thompson.
Well my question is.
If we have the budget.
With these be separate.
From a regular comes for you
would have regular school
counselor.
And then the possibility of Troy
so alcohol substance abuse
counselor.
Mr chair representative Martinez
yes school counselors and
there's a big mess misconception
about what they can do and their
president in that practice under
their license even though school
counselor may have a mental
health license they're not
practicing under that license in
the schools the scope of work is
therapeutic in nature but not
therapy not not direct.
Ical services these folks can
find but services and then also
probably Medicaid but probably
bill Medicaid and school.
Interested.
Mr chair representative Thompson
is this.
I mean it was I know it seems
like it was always back when we
took notes with rocks.
What it.
Is this a fairly new concept in
the schools the drug in the
substance abuse counselor.
Mr chair representative Martinez
now it's not fairly new at all
it's just about an issue but and
into a budgeting being able to
budget I know that like I said
not a lot of places in New
Mexico can staff those but I
know other states use those
positions regularly.
Mr chair representative Thompson
I appreciate that and I would I
would like to.
Fund away.
Mr chair representative Thompson
to.
Figure out a way to supply more
mental health support in schools
especially now coming under
pandemic.
I think you know which from what
I see.
And of.
Talking to people teachers that
I've talked to that seems to be
a huge need.
The the two years of loss of
social interaction I mean really
impacted students in a way that
we never expected.
Mr chair representative so I I
really.
I'd really like to see maybe
more funding goal to.
Mental health treatment in the
schools of switching gears Mr
chair representative Thompson.
Where is this funded locate.
Of Mr Chairman.
Question of the committee
Representative
Right now House Bill to credit
contains five million dollars
distributed from the teacher
loan repayment fund and others
and in additional appropriation
to point them I am back to the
fund so it's it's in house bill
to this goes to PED to
distribute to the of.
The districts that qualify for
that and for those individuals
that they bring in by expanding
the concept will be able to get
those kind of funds for the
awards.
Mr chair representative
Thompson.
store.
How is is it all general fund
dollars are going to respond.
Yes Mr chair.
Mr chair representative thank
you for that information on
again.
I think he's a very creative way
to.
Tracked more people.
All.
It's especially the support of
teachers because the become.
Everything for those kids of the
more support I feel the more
support we offer those teachers
more support students.
Thank you very much.
The the thank you Mr chair the
only question I have is I saw
that you have state Mr chair
representative of.
Some to retain and in difficult
areas echo hard places to live.
For two
It's so.
Are those stipends that we're
sending out
Just to retain these these
graduates in New Mexico
throughout the state.
Mr chair could you please point
to the line and you know what I
didn't have the line minimal
language it was.
Okay okay so that in this for
something different Mr chair
members of the committee
Representative I was referring
to a program that you have grant
funding from that does provide
and it's to stay in New Mexico
in the state and Representative
place Roland and native American
communities so yes the the what
can find
it yeah because it's just as
it's we've already started to do
some of this work and sees a
great need for this to continue
to be funded.
So Mr chair representative the
system.
This does they would have to be
full time in order
to qualify for this program.
Representative.
Mr chair Madam westerners
Committee up I'm.
Not hasn't asked a question just
it's the program what we're
doing is we're allowing them to
go and get
the.
The services they need so they
can get licensed and and so
forth so it's that's what's work
that's what we're trying to do
here helping them get license so
they can come in to get a little
bit Mr chair of your first vote
and he threw me off of I got on
board.
Mr chair representative.
Still closed.
The motion and then go back to
okay with.
Representative and thank you Mr
chair.
Representative the only question
I have is on the recruitment
side.
Are these teachers already
trained or will you pay to have
people turning because I work Mr
chair they're not teachers there
the teachers are recovered so
just to make sure that we don't
do any more confusion and all
that Representative one of the
other.
I think of thank you
representative government Mr
chairman my vice chair again
we're we're not working with the
teachers were working with those
individuals who are going to be
the support of that's going to
call the.
As a call in the I. S. P.'s
the instructional support
providers for the teachers but
they're also all the individuals
were hopefully we're going to be
getting the money getting to
those individuals so they can
get licensed to practice their
practice in the school system
which right now you were
familiar with social workers but
there's so much more you getting
into working with individuals
with special ed kids and so
forth they have a whole lot
other needs that the roof of
social workers just can't find
and these individuals because of
their license and they're
specifically of a delineated in
the bill those individuals we're
gonna try to get more of a given
them the opportunity to get
those last thank you that's all
of the.
Yeah.
Representative Rowe thank you Mr
chair thank you Representative
broadens the pool of folks who
can apply for these loans which
is really important and my
concern I think
and it retains the must have
worked for three years and must
four years more requirement
which was really good my concern
Mr chair in the.
We've put more money into the
fund.
We have five million it there
and that is we have a six
thousand dollar cast in statute
in existence right now they can
be provided for the loan
repayment for teachers.
We have nine hundred sixty six
people I that means they're not
getting the six thousand getting
about five thousand and we did
not put more money in so we're
broadening the pool every is
going to get less and I'm not Mr
chair suggesting that that maybe
that will help keep more people
in.
But I am suggesting that we need
to put more money into this if
we wanted to work
Mr chair Representative my
question is is that the intent
to broaden the pool even if
everybody gets a little less or
is the intent to just find as
many people as we can as close
to the Max as we can and then
just hope someday the
legislature putting more money.
Mr chair Representative Figueroa
the latter part is definitely
true I think we all need T.
shirts to where we need more
money for this program when we
present our bills it's a first
step we know it's not perfect we
we would love to have fifty
million but.
I would love to have fifty
million for a lot of things
which is not going to happen so
we're taking a small staff and
how it's being.
The whether it be fewer people
or two dollars per person it's
going to be up to them but I I'm
with you a hundred percent in my
magic wand is on the Fritz.
Thank you Mr chair that PED is
going to have to figure out
which way to go this.
Is the answer to my question
thank you for that the increase
that's all.
Thank you for the.
Mr chair hello this would say
this is already a for profit
among.
And with that we use to pay to
help our future.
And the and we're going to they
are saying.
But get a money money to pay for
these counselor.
So how come nobody the to
appropriations for money there
are much.
Lecher.
US one or one question about
that important.
That.
Chair representative Thompson
were all Chairman yeah.
Could you tell me again there
was a five thousand dollar fund
and then two point five dollars.
One five million dollar.
Hey
correct currently Mr chairman of
that question of the committee.
Currently in house bill to the
contains a five million
distributed from teacher loan
repayment and appropriation of
two point five million back to
the fund.
The problem.
Helped section that would be up
is that most.
Do seconded on.
Thank you that that
Representative that we offices
during the film.
Affirmative.
In the next thank
you for entertaining.
Because.
Because
it is.
Well.
I.
The board.
Three forty.
The.
No.
It was.
This is.
just you know what what I was
trying.
Thank you for.
Members.
Whenever you're ready thank you
madam chair I in here
Representative these for are you
see.
for you basically the bill and
the.
Go on this bill because I think
it is needed what it is just
simply ask you.
To allow the issuance of an
additional disabled American
veteran plate.
To those who want.
Okay right now
know that.
Right now of.
The members of the Civil
American veterans get to sleep
like.
You too that's it for now the
Lakers will set up if you wanted
third or fourth you can pay for.
A case was not on this is us the
but with the PMR to sell you
another.
As disabled veterans plate if
you are by.
People were the first and the
second one.
you'll get what I.
With inputs.
Thank you Mr chair.
I'm
going.
This led to see everyone that's
here to oppose.
House bill fifty three fifty
six.
Online are there any person.
Then.
Then anyone here in the audience
that which is in support.
Thank you and the audience
anyone online wishing to speak
in support of health if we.
There's one.
Can you whenever you're ready.
Thank you so much the
opportunity to take a look
provided today my name is Anne
Bryant in ninety communicate air
that are in the military family.
One hundred percent disabled
veteran that currently has to
agree to table better life on my
own the.
I would personally like to thank
the committee interstate of New
Mexico for this disabled veteran
benefits.
Living in New Mexico for that
many days of you to find a time
and a lot of our veterans have
motorcycles and they love to hit
the road during the day many of
our merry better and has two
be at both animals that often
times have to choose which to
put the second plate on the
motorcycle or their their
vehicle as you all know better
take a lot of pride in our
service to this country energy
table better like the plague
allow us to share that by the
other motorist on the rise
your employee asking for the
opportunity to purchase
additional disabled veteran
license plate at regular cost
how are other vehicles or
motorcycles we have to pass
legislation so that we may share
our disabled veterans right
across all of our thank you
again for this opportunity and I
hope you have a great.
Thank you.
There are no lower online for in
the audience of the committee.
Representative you madam chair.
Reserve chair I of there's no
fiscal impact all of.
For a minute there there's no
cost to the the fact is if you
want to play you pay for.
No I to the state of the.
Yes.
One surgical equipment or no
Representative insanity yes.
I think I I.
Representative Johnson and then
representative of us I have to
pass a second but I just want to
ask questions that's fine some.
Share
Representative Avengers
Representative so.
The three please I for an
additional cards for in other
words it would be like when I
support veterans and I by the
way he just by simply
Representative car or and all us
all once we can answer one.
When you get to place to go for
two different vehicles okay so
let's start with Justin's so
that's the question I don't.
That.
This over the lady said on the
screen okay see that to place
her husband wants to get all of
our motorcycle K. okay he can
get one because he's of there
were only allowed to get.
So get out the I love this I
hate to get that there's
probably a factor of course are
B. U. R. please stay for lunch
that's all good.
Thank you any other questions
before we go.
The motion and do passed motion
by Representative counsel to the
second by the New.
Is there any opposition.
For
the two thousand.
For.
For the lotus and.
Representative.
K..
The.
When we were in.
Well as rivals rivers.
The actual.
As
The night is.
Yeah.
Representative.
There were you already the hot
seat is years.
Thank you very much Mr chair and
madam vice chair and the
committee I inure to present
House Bill three ninety five as
many of you may already know I
have spent a big part of my
career of running a nonprofit
organization serving individuals
with disabilities are this it
currently the the DDS di does
right studies to determine the
cost of these but they don't get
detailed information about the
direct care providers to
participate in budget in
specific mounts we we as an all
most employment categories
across the state been having
issues with retention and
recruitment of many different
types of unemployed he's played
this
Particularly in industries we've
had the struggle for.
Many years
so this bill is to be able to
find a data study on a regular
basis across the state on what
is the pay in the event budget
and the tension and education
that does being paid to the
direct care providers we believe
this will help inform us on how
to be able to recruit and retain
I just see you know many of the
individuals who are directors
support taking care of our most
vulnerable
society
R. have you they go through the
normal amounts of DO H. training
I say you know definitely as a
CNA levels and some meat and an
LPN levels yes there are issues
about their of we want to raise
them into a profession and and
that includes their budget and.
I have to date two of my expert
witnesses I have Adrienne Smith
from care givers coalition and I
half Stafford from that care
givers in action and I'd like
them to if they could make a
brief statement each thank you.
You Mr chairman and.
Yes and the president and CEO
The New Mexico caregivers
coalition we train an advocate
for paid professional caregivers
as well as unpaid caregivers
people who do this at no pay
their sixty two thousand more
than two thousand in our state
of New Mexico working as paid
professional caregivers.
This bill of House Bill three
ninety five we've been working
with the developmental
disabilities waiver provider
agencies so those are the we're
talking there about the support
professionals which they are so
called those computers are so
called direct support
professionals in the waiver side
you might also know these
professionals as home health
aides personal care assistance
sometimes their occupational
therapy assistants but it would
be that person most of his or
her time directly with the
client or consumer and then the
developmental disabilities
waiver program that would be of
the they're spending their time
with the consumer the person
with the developmental
disability.
And of home health setting that
they're spending their time with
the person elderly.
Right so this bill does just of
two things it requires as
Representative Kate said the
developmental disability
supports division to collect
workforce data every single year
and they do providers have met
with the department of health to
understand how that system would
work they said it's not onerous
and I'm hoping one of my
colleagues who represents the
way for providers will say that
in some public comment.
secondly this bill does a second
thing it says that the value of
this worker of the direct
support professional.
Should be a hundred and fifty
percent of minimum wage.
Thereby elevating the the
recognition of the status of
that direct support professional
because they are so well trained
because they are professionals
because they do do the work with
the most vulnerable in our in
our societies.
It does not require the
developmental disabilities
waiver providers Hey those
direct support professionals a
hundred fifty percent of minimum
wage.
It does not do that and it does
not do anything to change the
appropriations process at all
the department of health
developmental disabilities would
still come before you to ask for
what they need what we think
this bill does just to terrific
things it gives you is
legislators better information
on that workforce.
In terms of you know retaining
recruiting and retaining of a
well trained workforce and then
it also says that these
professional workers for what
they do should be valued for who
they are and the work that.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Pamela
Stafford I'm with New Mexico
caregivers and action but in a
previous life time spent about
thirty years in the state of New
Mexico working with people with
developmental disabilities I
started in nineteen ninety five
as a direct support professional
at that time my salary was three
dollars above minimum wage I got
full affects retirement medical
education and the workforce that
I was part of at the agency that
I was part of everyone had at
least a bachelor's degree and I
came into the field as a direct
support professional with a
master's degree ten years later
when applying managed an agency
I paid people exactly what I
have been paid two years
previously because we haven't
had any provider rate
adjustments and everything else
had gone up and it was hard to
attract people we had to be
creative trying to get get
people who
were either college students who
needed some experience or
retired individuals who just one
of the additional income and
wanted to do something
meaningful.
Two years later I was part of of
the of the U. N. M. CDT and we
did a rate study
and found out that individuals
were getting the seventy five
cents more than what I've got to
fifteen years earlier.
And guess what it was hard to
contain professionals for three
months six months or nine
months.
It has gotten so much worse now
with since the pandemic and I
just want to remind people that
in in group supported living.
During the lockdown the only
people allowed in the homes of
word direct support
professionals not supervisors
not nurses not guardians not
family there's not anything yes
only direct support
professionals making about
eleven dollars an hour and
taking their lives in their
hands and their family lives
every time they did the work.
What we collect the data to see
where we're at with the
workforce we do that then other
industries we do that and in
other fields let's do it in this
bill there is an organization
called national core indicators
which has met with the providers
and met with PTSD about twenty
nine other states collect data
send them their data every year
and they do a report that's the
type of thing we're asking New
Mexicans New Mexico to do and
then to value.
In the right studies all at a
hundred and fifty percent above
minimum wage
if in fact the legislature fully
funds.
It will be up to the providers
to determine how to spend that
money but then we have the data
that we can come back and say
did the data we did the.
The higher rates result in
higher wages and it if they did
that they can see rates are
still high then we have that
information.
Thank you.
Thank you very much Mr chair and
and and madam vice chair of this
is a very honorable profession
one of which I've seen for
decades now have people dedicate
also becomes a
A generational it the occupation
as well I know daughter's that
has learned from their mothers
and and as a legislature I want
the information to make
decisions about where the money
is going and this is a tool that
is going to help us do that I
thank you very much and I stand
for questions.
This this this time of anybody
here in support of this
legislation.
Is there anybody here in
opposition the.
Yes young lady in front.
Mr chairman and madam.
More than fourteen
Representative mining included
create of.
I am in.
I am a native can and I do
believe twenty eight year life
to being of service to others
and I'd like for you to know
today thank you for giving it's
not.
Labor and then gave.
said of getting nine nine eight
just a split second piece of the
Indian River thanking feeding
emulation activities outside of
the.
And.
I know they have their own
health that level I do my yes it
is client's mental health
practices to de escalate Act
money help de escalate
impression I am there to be of
service to support to the LFC
quality of life for the care
this to others in my career I
think when I started in the
field for seventy five and.
And in twenty nineteen in my
last patient care giving
position I need eleven dollars.
That's twenty eight years of
service I love what I do.
I support this bill because I
believe it will lay a foundation
that will give us the
information we need after the
state to support our existing
care person now.
And I believe that it will
Senator.
The trans in
Failure to.
Well years to find them we a.
And failure to so for what I
consider of there we
reputable.
The area and needed service.
Thank you.
This is.
Mr chairman of the committee Jim
Jackson for a disability rights
New Mexico the other provider
agencies in our disability
system they need to be very
adequate right so that they can
the current rate of staff of
adequate range in there for the
this bill before you calls for
these three point of process
these.
What it costs to provide the
services directs the department
said senator enough money so
that they can support those
rates and see super is also
calls for data and so we know
how many folks throughout the
field what kind of payment so
they getting what kind of
benefits that they was they can
see rates that we have so that
you all as policy makers connect
better decisions about of future
funding for the agencies and so
on the most most importantly as
you've heard of the direct care
providers are really the
backbone of our system.
Disability services and we need
to move for a
wages that it takes two to track
and retain the quality
professional people feel so we
want to encourage you to take.
In the past in this bill is a
step forward not the total
solution is really moving us
forward so.
People that are so important to
our system thanks.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the.
Yes Representative disability
coalition and we stand in
support of this bill the direct
care workforce whether they're
providing personal support
personal care to seniors and
people with disabilities and
their homes or whether they
want.
With developmental disabilities
are essential part of our health
care workforce but they're part
of that workforce that doesn't
get enough recognition and by
that I mean they don't get
enough attention in discussions
about workforce they don't get
the appreciation they deserve
and they don't get the
compensation they deserve this
bills this is on a subset of
that workforce that works with
people with developmental
disabilities we have the
disability coalition we're
thrilled to have the plan using
the federal American rescue plan
funds to a little weightless for
the do you waiver which has been
such a problem Senator years and
I know that all of you in the
legislature shared our
excitement about that but in
order to make that a reality we
have to have the work force and
this is part of the workforce is
essential that wait list
elimination our reality this
bill is just a first step in
that direction it's not the
whole answer but it's important
first step and we urge your
support thank you.
Mr chair
Senator online you can do and I.
Well educated about in support
J..
Afternoon Mister chair and
members of the committee my name
is Jim Copeland I'm the
executive director of the
association of developmental
disabilities community providers
for the state of New Mexico we
represent twenty seven provider
agencies all across the state of
New Mexico and we stand in
support of this legislation that
did notice that the fiscal
impact report referred to a
burden on providers to to
complete this data and and
submit the information but Mr
chair regardless of this bill or
not that's already existing and
the provider agreement and the
statement of assurances that all
providers of developmental
disability services in New
Mexico have signed that find
their agreement and statement of
assurances saying that they will
participate in any cost study
type information that the
department requests so we just
and when we agree with the
previous commenters and the
statements that they've been
made we we need this data to
know exactly where our system is
we hear you know anecdotally
that providers in their local
communities are having to
compete with Wendy's and
McDonald's and the other
businesses in those communities
to hire staff and we've
certainly got to raise the wages
that are available to these
folks to be able to recruit
retain and recruit and hire of
those support significant
numbers of people to continue to
serve the folks that are coming
up with this so we would stand
in support of this legislation
and request the committee's
approval thank you very much.
Good afternoon Mister chair my
name is Stephanie Welch and I'm
an attorney for the New Mexico
Center on Law and Poverty.
Senator online poverty is the
point this bill because the
people doing this important care
giving work deserve to be paid a
fair wage the funding for this
work right now actually works to
suppress wages by setting the
amounts paid to providers.
Those low wages are consistent
with the systemic historical
undervaluing of care and
undervaluing of care workers.
The bill addresses this
budgeting data about wages and
working conditions and
supporting future reimbursement
rates sufficient to pay these
care givers wages that are more
fair more competitive.
The reporting requirements in
this bill would help the state
develop sound policy to ensure
the work force is adequately
supported to provide these
important services thank you we
urge the committee to pass this
bill.
Curse.
Yes thank you Mr chair and
ladies and gentlemen of the
committee my name is crystal
right I'm the public policy
officer for the art of New
Mexico at the arc of New Mexico
we represent people with
intellectual and developmental
despite disabilities and I would
say that the care givers that
are contemplated in this bill
are the life blood of the people
who would they are taking care
of
they we just heard on the house
floor the increase in funding
for educational assistance
because their lifeblood of
individuals who were school age
children with developmental
disabilities and upping their
rate to the be the equivalent of
eighteen to twenty dollars an
hour
summer related care givers are
seeing an attrition rate of over
fifty percent per year it's very
difficult to keep people in the
profession is very difficult to
cover for someone when they are
gone
and we stand in strong support
of this bill as this prior
speakers of already sat this is
just a stepping stone to
hopefully getting caregivers
paid a higher wage and
professional wage for all the
services that they perform thank
you.
Those are.
thanks to.
Thank you Mr chair and and thank
and committee I just is a
closing statement once again
this is just a bill to be able
to gather data but just and I
want to thank all of the
individuals for public comment
this is been a real community
effort that we want to make sure
that we are protecting and
professionalizing seen this very
hard work just to we just passed
a bill on the floor to raise P.
A.'s to approximately eighteen
to nineteen dollars an hour in
this bill we're just asking for
a hundred and fifty percent of
the state minimum wage that's
like sixteen S. less and these
individuals are spending the
night they are they are at
communicating and documenting
their nurses and medical
providers they're putting
themselves in danger and knowing
the escalation issues I mean
these are professionals and we
need to be able to let them
thank you.
Members of the committee
representative market.
Mr chairman Representative K.
thank you for bringing this.
I have a few questions.
the first question is
In your closing you talked about
this being professionals.
one of your
people stood up.
but we.
So they're not on skilled
workers and I.
We we agree with that it takes a
certain.
Hi folks get.
but in light of the COVID the or
or professional.
Is there a special training or
schooling.
Or the.
Social workers.
Can you like me on but thank you
so much Mr chair and committee
and that was excellent question
Representative Martinez they are
we we will I believe they're
professionals they go through
intensive training through the
department of health care
required a series of apple is
still thirty six hours thirty
six hours of training and then
they have to do continuing
education training what we do
not provide a professional
certification program for them
so many they they are being paid
and
as as entry level non skilled
workers yeah we're requiring
them to have not just the the
the talents of their position
but actual education and skill
they go through the
certification program programs
which required we are just not
certifying them in in in in
professionalizing and then.
Mr chair representative.
So there the required growth
with thirty six hour training.
And deal which is not provide
some type of certification that
they've completed the training
thank you Mr chair that they
believe I'm so sorry
representatives of they get a
certificate for each of the
trains that they are the date
sheet and then they are required
to do continuing education those
are put in their HR file but
just I'll be if an LPN has to go
through a certain amount of
education what we did them a
certified.
Of.
Since licensed title thank you
Representative I will also I I
believe on my experiences would
like to make commented it thank
you very much.
Thank you Mr chair I'm here
Representative just to help with
this notion of this workforce
the direct support professional
has been so called or so names
in this particular field in this
industry of developmental
disabilities for many years.
Yes the US department of labor
has no occupational
classification the thing the the
classification at the department
of labor that they look most
like and our and it's included
in the rate studies that we
conduct year after year after
year is a personal care
assistant or home health aide
or homemaker and homemaker is a
kind of term that we use here in
New Mexico.
So in that regard you know a
direct support professional
sounds like this you know great
title.
It's a personal care assistant.
And yet in the field of
developmental disabilities that
is what they are called is that
help Mr chair representative.
Beautiful explanation I
appreciate that.
Just a couple more questions Mr
Chairman representative.
Is there more house bill two
going to the Department of
Health for the study.
So Mr chair representative.
there is deeply could be
confusion there are several
different appropriations bills
that are presented this does not
require
an additional
Additional funding in house bill
two because as stated so
eloquently by Jim Copeland is
that of providers are already
have this information they're
providing it with
What you will see appropriation
for is to increase the rate to
fully funds at the rate study
which is desperately needed for
the providers what this study is
is not a rate study it is a
workforce study so that we can
see what that cost will be and
what is the retention rate the
turnover rate such that
thank you very much I I would
like to also defer to my.
Expert witness thank you.
There's not an appropriation in
this bill at this time
this bill does to to fix one is
data collection and in in
creating this this bill we
talked to people from the
department of health we talked
to Jason Carmel who's the
director of the division we
talked with fighters.
Everyone tended to agree that it
would not be costly to do the
data collection the range that
the there is a cost to do the
right study we are currently in
the midst of a great study it's
already funded for this year so
we would not need an
appropriation to do another
study for another two years and
the and the bill does clearly
state that it's contingent on
fund so the legislators decided
not to put in the funding to do
another study.
Then that that does does not
occur
but we hope that that will occur
if it's about five hundred
thousand so would be about five
hundred thousand every two.
As we have indicated that it's
already funded this year there's
already a rate study that is
expected to be completed by
September this year.
Mr chair and vice chair of the
committee please I just wanted
to clarify because that sounded
confusing to me the right study
is different than the study the
right study is what causes costs
a great deal of money we need to
be funded and it only occurs
every five years we're looking
for work for study in that range
study they do not collect data
on specific wages they do group
being you know it's costs this
amount of money for the for all
of the hours so we're looking
for our lead weight wage we're
looking for retention and
turnover that is not done in the
right study.
Thank you.
Chair representative I'm looking
at page seven.
Getting funding for contingent
on.
For you planning on.
Coming back next session and
asking for this program to be
funded.
Are you
what what you're trying to do
here are you trying to.
Can you give us a heads up that
you're going to come back and
ask for money.
Thank you Mr chair and and madam
vice chair and committee.
We are trying to get data so
that when we do come to you and
ask for money it is not just an
emotional ask it'll be a data
driven ask as well.
The.
Mr chair representative so.
Skip down the line the Levin
works as the cost study showing
from the whole reason costs for
providing services Dobbs the
study that's already ongoing and
funded.
Mr chair and madam vice chair
committee all defer to my
experts.
Thank you Mr Chairman
representative that cost thirty
that's done by the department of
health developmental disability
supports division is currently
done every five years one thing
this bill does and we talked the
department of health and they
would like to do this and
they're already on schedule to
do it is to change that schedule
and conduct these cost of these
every two years.
That's at their request so Mr
chair representative so that
that's the purpose of this
language is to change it from
five to two years precisely.
Thank you thank you for that
explanation now it makes a lot
more sense to me
One last question on page seven
one twenty five.
To A. J. it's departments
request for each fiscal year.
Shall fall.
The shall include the.
In addition funding to in the
rules on the list.
Mr chair representative.
I'm.
Kind of uncomfortable that.
If this passes as written.
Your amendment demanding that
that state agencies whether
there's a change in
administration changing
priorities your mandating that
that.
HSD.
Make sure that.
they are they are including
sufficient funding for this
program.
So thank you very much Mr
chairman of vice chair and and
committee you are correct so
this program is a program that
is funded with Medicaid dollars
it is a mandate from the federal
government to provide disability
services now how our state
decides to provide them is up to
us so we're saying that the
state can not
they can the set the right in
the mouth and which they pay for
the services these set what kind
of services they are
expectations are requirements
we're saying they can't do that
without data they have to do
they have to gather the data.
To determine what the services
cost.
and so that would be a require
that is a shell.
Mr chair representative are you
reading.
AJ's.
I have a different for me.
You're not asking for funding
for data.
Your mandating that the corpus
this department.
Includes funding to continue to
provide support services for
persons with this developmental
disabilities and it goes on to
do actual.
Service not or not data.
Some wondering I don't I don't
understand why this including.
So of chair and and and madam
vice chair a committee
What I'm reading is the line
will you choose to go back to
page seven twenty five.
To a line at page eight line
three talks about the services
you're right and this is based
on the service provider
reimbursement rates recommended
by the most recent cost study.
So the services are already in
place this bill is saying that
the right will need to be based
on the cost study.
I'm so sorry Mr chair and madam
vice chair out I'll defer to my
experts witness.
Thank you.
Members of the committee for
instance in two thousand and
nineteen there was a rate study
done there were recommended
rates.
When when the the governor
requests occasion to raise rates
they did not include the full
amount.
and so the legislative body.
Would not have known how much
the full amount that was
requested for the right study
that right study from two
thousand and nineteen was fully
funded in last year's budget so
that that's how long it it took.
What we're saying in this bill
is that you all need to know and
that the department should be
pressed from the governor that
that they include the full
amount of whatever the
recommendation is.
The legislators of course will
still determine whether or not
they provide.
And the governor retains the
right to be utilised but rather
than than just simply
considering.
Whatever the the recommended
budget is we want to be sure
that the legislators known
recommended studies requests.
Sure Representative hi.
Love that I.
Are you sure that I am making.
Decisions with.
Information as possible.
I I just I I don't understand.
Why this.
Language is included with this.
If if the if the study is
already been pre funded I love
the idea of.
Shrinking that timeline from
five years to two years.
I think that could be done on a
one page bill instead of.
Eight pages.
I don't understand why we're
adding new language to existing
statutes.
And it seems like the majority
of the first eighteen lines
Beijing is a new language.
Which just kind of muddies the
waters for.
I support the idea I love the
idea I think we should
appropriate sufficient funding
for this study every two years
so we can make those decisions
important decisions I love that
idea I just don't understand.
All the language.
It just doesn't it's it's.
It's not making any sense to me
it's.
Using the issue for.
Mr chair by.
I will defer to my experts
witness I I will just say that
There is been not just to twenty
nineteen there is been fifteen
years of not funding to the
third party cost study the cost
of the is paid by the agency it
is not that there's no
Ability to influence it is it is
done by an agency that does the
cost studies of third party has
nothing to do with it and and
there has been vast history of
not just not funding the cost of
the but not for fighting and
from it we want to make sure
that information is provided and
I'll defer to my experts it's
just.
Mr chair representative.
In drafting this bill which we
did in partnership with the
department of health and the
device disability providers the
employers of these workers.
We had to make a decision which
attorneys who work with us did
do.
We spelled out the developmental
disabilities waiver act in order
to write the language and so
what you see in those first few
pages with the under lines and
all that actually the act itself
and what we're trying to do
there is add this definition of
direct support professional so
that we have we're all talking
about the same kind of person.
The the the the on your earlier
point when in that later section
when you said about the coming
you know needing to come to.
Every year with you know given
sufficient funding it does
nothing this bill does nothing
to change the current process.
Of how.
Department of Health comes to
ask for its budget.
Nor does it change anything
about how the legislature funds
that department.
Mr chair.
Representative if I think the
first part of your explanation.
Sure it's a little bit more
light on the need for.
I was tying everything together.
So that makes that makes a
little bit more since
thank you Mr chair
representatives
witnesses I I truly appreciate
the conversation.
The the time you took to explain
it to me.
Sometimes I have to go a couple
of laps around to understand
appreciate your patience and
your answers Mr chair thank you
very much with the.
Mr chair I also will confuse
self.
I'm on a one off it is an awful
days with a struggling to
understand how this works but.
Can I ask so I just want to
clarify from my mind so that
deal which has to do the study
right.
Chair of the they have to do the
study.
Mr chair representative this at
it is so this study no they
don't the this specific study in
this bill they have not done and
they don't have to do they do a
rate study
every five years and so the new
one every five years but it
doesn't include the whole scope
of people you're trying to get
into this study.
Right you're trying to include
additional people into the state
right Mr chair representative
Mr chair of representatives no
it is being they do not include
the specific information about
hourly rates retention turnover
vacancy the right study includes
of three pools of like labor
costs but it's not this specific
we're asking for the specific so
that we can make this more
detailed the other and to the
question of subject.
I thank you Mr chair I'm I'm.
So Mister speaker you want a
more detailed studies which
you're trying to say for the
study what you're saying to give
you more broad numbers and
you're trying to Merioles down
right Mr chair and committee it
it's we're looking for more
detailed numbers specific to
direct care providers not all
the other not durable medical
goods Dr Ruth not here and
Administration but Joss the work
force okay Mr chair
representative and then the next
question is.
So do you wanna you wanna make a
server I you want me to read to.
Okay and so can I ask you Mr
chair representative how much
does that cost eighty how much
is a study said after million
Here Representative so thank you
Mr chair and and madam vice
chair and committee that this
the the individuals that are
sitting on my sites and some
other in the back they all got
into the same room with DDS D.
D. O. H. and add cap which is
the actual providers to hammer
this out that that was all
something they would be
comfortable with that and is and
what the test what the public
comment from act cap which is
Jim Copeland he's the president
he's the legislative group
saying they do not believe that
it will cost the city money the
cost study is done by a third
party of cost analysis proved
that the state hires and they
provide the cost of the what
we're looking for is data from
actual providers to be given to
D. O. H. do you H. Traxxas so we
know what is the average hourly
rate what is turnover what's the
vacancy.
Mr chair representative I don't
want to go on and on about
because I think it refers.
Just try to get myself on board
here so you're just trying to
make it every two years try to
include extra information have
a.
Scope to where you want to get
this new information and all
your request is.
Additional information I guess
where I'm going with Mr chair
representative I I like what
you're trying to accomplish in
the way it's a little money for
me I would be honest with you
I I just think Mr chair
representative.
The study itself cost a certain
amount of money to do maybe not
the data if.
This feature but the that the
study itself was takes some sort
of dollars to to
create.
I I think I I I appreciate what
you're trying to do I would like
to see those half million
dollars a school it because it's
for me as a businessman Mr chair
representative system operator
to pay or pay our people better
I would I would much rather see
other than the the study start.
Money on directly on on the on
to use individuals that need
better pay and I was just trying
to wrap it around my I was
trying to figure out what you're
exactly us and those seem like
we're dancing around so my fault
probably it in understand it
right but I I'm just saying
online for myself Mr chair that
of.
Like to see the the money rather
than more studies of much rather
see studies is saying maybe
scope to the what you're saying
you don't get the information I
much rather the additional money
on additional studies both
payroll rather than to studies I
just want to thank you Mr so I
just want to make sure.
And the at the.
Are you using your and.
So are you Representative new
business and I I just have a
question you'll actually be we
can get this all over us for is
that these people that are doing
this for.
Their status and there may be
but they're doing it reported
the department that house that's
all we're asking for right we're
not asking for a new study with
this asking for a report.
Thank you Mr chair and we are
asking for a detailed cost
analysis of only the work force
not the whole costs to provide
the service that's a cost
analysis we're asking specific
to this workforce so that we
when we asked when we come back
as as Representative Martinez up
at eight to come back and ask
for.
Another bill to be able to help
professionalizing support this
workforce we want to have
appropriate data to work for
that have for this prophetic
short you're basically at.
For the information contained in
that file your taxes for
physical all of that detail
because you already got the
money and yes the study's bully
I do need is to find out the
details and that the data is
going to be provided by the
people that do this of these the
legislative.
Point one.
Thank you Mr chair I'll defer to
my expert witness Mr chair there
two things collecting workforce
data annually from the providers
precisely one used money for the
hearing impaired number two
thing that this bill does it
moves the rate studies that the
state does every five years to
every two years.
Thank you that two things yes
definitely remind me not hearing
this is here in this community
the the the the blue devil.
The thank you Representative
thank you Mr chair I'm glad you
asked that question and I'm glad
you fix that the only thing I
don't what is I think you get
more bang for your Buck instead
of I like it five years we have
right studies with me last
municipality those that we can
barely give them every five
years and white water rates
every five years and now we're
going to two years and I know
what those those
right studies costs they're
expensive the only thing I
wanted to ask was on the right
study instead of doing it every
two years I could you do it
every five years and have a
scope of work and put all the
details in there that you want
so that you're getting the
information that you want.
Mr chair representative.
Thank you Mr chair madam vice
chair I'll defer to my witness.
It's
a great study that was done in
two thousand and nineteen.
And you think about five years
later which is next year of this
year is when they're doing the
right study.
There's been quite a bit of
changes and so what is not
included in the two thousand and
nine great studies with the
increases in minimum wage was
the the cost of inflation over
the last couple of years is the
the back to the things slide
Like the lead actor between
absolutely supported
all of that seventeen and so I
years is really a long time to
wait to to consider how the
economy has changed and for
providers to the struggle
especially if it's not fully
funded and won't CMS's is
requires that every five years
the the reality is that before
two thousand nineteen the last
one was two thousand seventeen
so that was seven years so what
we're trying to do is is that is
to really be a little more aware
of of how changes in the economy
changes in the long thank you
all right minimum wage goes up
again this year for instance
How that affects a and so the
right studies being done more
often.
We're taking that into.
Thank you Mr chair
representative of.
I love what you're doing here
and I know it takes a special
person to do the work that you
do.
The the only reason that I would
oppose this is because I don't
believe it should be done every
two years I think it needs to be
stuck with the I and they need
to put the work in to get the
five year study done.
And on a positive note how do we
get.
People like that license.
That'll be that'll be a
licensure eight plus added
twelve would have another thirty
hours to.
Or forty hours to letter have a
license because there's.
One of my life Representative
said it takes a special person.
To do that kind of work and not
everybody is cut out for it so
if you have a group of people
that want to do it.
I would be more than willing to
help you carry bills get to us
thank you thank you Mr chair I
will remember that
Representative.
Representative Romero thank you
Mr chair and thank you
Representative I'm glad we care
clarify the workforce that
every.
Only versus the cost of the now
every two years but there's a
third thing in here and is a
little bit but.
And that is a tough of page
eight and that is the word
shall.
As it stands right now Mr chair
in our classes the cost of.
And it is after studying all of
the stuff this is recommended by
right.
And then the executive rooms the
department decides whether to go
that way or not and they make
their request.
And it's been my experience I
could be wrong Mr chairman
generally Department goes under
that providers.
Usually then that.
Department requests goes to HSC
goes to the legislature Mr chair
and the legislature decides
whether to fund the department.
And most of the time the
legislature should under.
So what we've done is gone from
the recommended.
Two steps them please and that's
what we in the funding in our
budget.
Mr chair the shell on top of
page eight changes step to the
process radically.
You still have that because
study they come up with the
recommended provider rate and
now we're saying that the
department must.
Turn a budget that that familiar
right that does not give the
department the discretion to set
their own budgets.
If I'm reading page five
correctly they must include
sufficient funding in the
budget.
Based on the service providers
reimbursement rates recommended
by the most recent cost study.
And I'm afraid that removal of
department discretion is going
to get this bill.
So the goal is to put the
information in front of the
legislature so the legislature
can decide Hey your department
is other what the what the costs
that you recommend virus are.
Then maybe it just needs to be.
A report to the legislature.
So the legislature has those two
things side by side and.
A we want to go with her to
raise not your department
budget.
I'm not sure that.
I'm not sure that sufficient to
get us to the appropriate
provider rate that we need to
be.
But I'm afraid using that
language there is going to make
this bill untenable and the rest
of it is so good we have to get
to that provider reimbursement
rate.
Some.
Madam chair.
Mr chair what.
Given the response to that do
you have any concerns about
that.
Thank you very much Mr chair and
representative Representative
I'm looking at it now and in I
read it differently if if the
chair could indulge me may I
asked Jim Jackson to to provide
comment as in he's a lifelong
attorney for disability and
would be able to communicate
this better than high that.
Thank you Mr chairman.
You can purchase the my.
Mr chair members of the
committee and Jim Jackson long
time person with a disability
rights group not an attorney
With the in the in the
preparation and drafting of this
bill we did work pretty closely
with the department of health
and so
and you they're not here today I
and as one who has had some
experience with the legislature
they were concerned about this
bill you'd be hearing from them
but we did work closely with
them and drafting this bill and
the and I don't I don't think
I'm speaking out of turn to say
that chasing coral who's the
director of the division that
deals.
Disabilities this has
essentially signed off as
comfortable with the language of
the bill you are right that this
this this bill does.
Director department in its
initial request which is what
goes to the legislature's noted
to ask for rate included their
budget another money to fund the
rates that are recommended it's
of course is you know to the
governor to decide what's going
to be in the official request
for the department when she
makes her presentation and of
course it's up to the LFC to
decide what their recommendation
is it's up to you to decide how
much money if any to get to the
Department but this that you're
right that this bill does.
And again this is partly it's
not going to their suggestion
but do there okay with this idea
that they're they're beneficial
budget request should show what
the results of this study are
and ask you all for the money
it's then up to of course the
administration and the
legislature and so on to deal
with that is you see fit but
you're you're right you're right
that that that is what the bill
says and that's kind of how we
came to this because as as you
as you heard is often the case
that a rate study is done it
says this is what you need to
pay people to cover the cost of
their incurring and that's not
always ask for but the
department so this bill does ask
them to ask for that money but
then of course it's go through
the usual process to determine.
What what level of appropriation
you'll get.
Thank you Mr chair thank you.
Representative.
Yes yes.
You what is.
reassuring and it doesn't get
the information in front of us
so thank you Mr chair that that.
And the.
The money made the looking at
everything.
The OAG has responded to.
Hello response.
A little bit of a.
It's like.
The fact that other analysts.
Sen added.
To be a.
I.
The lower the fee with the
average.
The settlement by anybody else
because in the last year.
Thank you
Thank you for forward I
understand that.
And I understand to questions.
In.
I stand with this is that this
type of.
I'll have to call it remitting.
for lack of another word there
are a lot of systemic things
that have gone on in the past
very long time creating
effectiveness with despair.
This is a perfect example of the
history of this.
That have we've just let.
For whatever reason got worse Mr
chair and worse worse
consequently we have these
workers.
As we have had other workers if
they are low wage workers at the
bottom of the.
So it didn't matter how many
wage increases wicked or how
many other kinds of things we
put in place we don't address
the real reasons why these are
what have occurred in the
history of our of our the way we
do business ministration please
and how we've responded
legislatively that we're going
to discontinue the cycles of
disparities so this bill is like
all the other bills that we're
getting their fixer uppers and
it's hoping for us to be able to
finally begin as a legislature
and as an administration that
you've got to change the system.
And this is I can help those
because we've been saying this
for as long as I've been in.
As a legislator and then as long
as I've been advocating since
the early two thousands when I
came back to the state.
And
you know business as usual
comfortable and we just
replicate what other people have
been doing for a long time and
we just don't care the ministry
right but it's not until we have
communities of caregivers such
as this or lower wage earners
that come to us over and over
and over again Intel's we just
make it.
How we've been operating and
it's got to stop at some point
so Mister chairman and and
Representative thank you for
doing this because I think the
opposite Representative I think
the opposite that is why we push
out of here because if we don't
start telling our
administrations that they shall
be doing these changes
systemically and institutionally
we're gonna we're gonna have
this revolving door of missed
opportunities and twenty years
from where will go on.
Fund
the new generation it may seem
the same issues
more people and we're still
going to have for working
professionals.
Because we're never going to so
much
that the show was directed.
to the Department I needed
administrative and public
administrator my entire life
hi what idea was make sure that
the systems that we instead.
Have future.
And so
I think to have a future meant
that we're not really looking at
things to close the gaps for
right now or fill in fill in the
holes or whatever that we have
right now but is in our planning
which includes budget right that
we're addressing the real
issues.
That we're servicing so we're
servicing this community.
Right who are servicing is also
being serviced by.
Our professionals professionals
and they're dictating to the
Department what has worked and
what hasn't worked and this is
one of those perfect examples of
what has not worked and so we
have to tell our department you
know what you better start
budgeting for ten years fifteen
years and twenty years in better
be putting into the budget cost
of of
living wages
up allow for inflation do
whatever it is growth do growth
patterns how many people do you
anticipate elderly and disabled
persons being.
Needing this kind of service for
the next in the next twenty
thirty years.
Budget for so that legislators
we don't have to keep coming in
and fixing up what should have
been funded twenty years ago so
we wouldn't be face right now so
it's budgeting for the future
and making sure people get their
wages living wages and working
conditions is not political it's
an administrative duty of every
one of these departments and we
don't have to be in the position
of being fixing that but because
we're so used to doing it in the
state of New Mexico I go to
council meetings around the
state of the nation in other
legislators are looking at me
when we're answering questions
around round tables about what
we're doing the fix is we're
doing because some of the most
advanced states in the nation
are dealing with different
issues as they arise with our
social and economic conditions
within the space administrative
had had the right.
And on the right path.
And so I absolutely see it Mr
chair and representative thank
you as a mandate or as a
director not a mandate that is a
direct because.
it doesn't bother me that if we
put it out there and the
governor veto said however that
governor maybe.
Well let them be aware and let
them have to face.
Their constituents.
Because that puts that terrible
veto.
On the back of the person making
the the the decision and not on
the what we've done is
legislators support
administrative in order to be
able to
address our our workforce I I
feel ashamed again that we're
addressing a fix that should
never have occurred had we been
following.
What we should have been instead
of having administrators and
physicians anxious to collect
the retirement so late just keep
rolling how the other ten years
of the for the move in doing
that and then the lead role ten
years into the retirement and
they roll the next ten years
roll that into retirement and
what they're they're twenty
something years and the putting
in for the retirement and
nothing's changed.
So this this I just felt a real
need it is good fences good
workforce
Study I understand that but
please take back once we move
this forward I hope the
administrators are listening as
they should be to all of our
committee hearings so that they
put this in.
In their budgets and plan for it
and we don't have to worry every
year about whether we can have a
surplus and also person thank if
they've been vetted into their
cost analysis for the next five
to ten years I would say even
ten years and they put it in a
projected cost analysis which is
part of doing this kind of
fiscal
preparation and budget
preparation than the system
itself Luna County system will
already put out.
How much is cost in the year
twenty thirty in the year twenty
forty and so then we deal anyway
I just I didn't have any real
questions because I get it I
just feel that we we really need
to not worry about.
The directors I think we should
be giving really strong direct
us to our ministry there's and
for that matter for all right
let's get we need to be provided
different.
And asking the hard questions
and really preparing for.
Grandchildren.
shoes thank you Mr chair.
The committee.
Give
them a motion but that that was.
Representative is.
Offices earlier go ahead will.
Representative Jarvis yes.
Representative zero yes
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Harper is.
Representative Johnson.
Yes.
Representative Martinez.
US.
Representative SS known I'd like
to explain.
The Representative Mentzer.
Representative provides to
recovery I don't yes.
And Cheryl yes.
Okay and Representative
Martinez.
Thanks we've sent.
Three.
The government Mr chair
representative I'm gonna I'm
want to thank my representative
a.
Calling here Representative
Colorado for her work and saying
that on administration is to do
the right thing in my opinion I
I I'm not a person that thinks
we need to study this over and
over and over I what I've been
reading here on the FIR this
group cost half a million
dollars I would much rather give
half a million dollars in
payroll to all employers and
that can compound over time
every two years over and over
and over I much rather see that
going raises of perpetually to
to to the in place although it
is a great idea and I love that
I'd like to see the money for
school for.
Thank you Mr.
Okay you have we do have the New
Mexico.
Thank you very much and thank
you for your wise words in your
madam thank you Representative
here.
July's would you rate them.
Love.
That is.
Thank you for I'm sorry this.
I would
prisons.
What makes this is
reasonable.
See is
these.
Yes.
That's the way I.
Mr Chairman is.
Online.
And he said.
Our.
that would okay.
Mr chair.
Members of the committee I'm
here today to present public
service loan forgiveness
multiplier
it's.
A basic bill in two thousand and
seven the federal government
through the bipartisan
establishment of the public
service loan forgiveness at
maintenance.
Situation where public's public
servants could if they work for
ten consecutive years and paid
back their federal loans the
rest would be for.
And that's been in place it's
been a bit rocky but it is in
place
however actually faculty of
higher education institutions
were denied access to this
public service loan forgiveness
due to a technicality at all
actually
Described that the bill works to
rectify the technicality about
working full time so somebody is
an example of state U. N. M.
they might teach you know for
classes are three classes and
that would be counted as twelve
hours so that institutions
certified that they were full
time would say well no they're
not full time when actually they
could be doing for hours of work
for each of those credits
because they have to do ours
with their students they have to
do preparation things like that
so this
Finds the bill for three to
provide full time for an agent
faculties working thirty hours
per week.
For eight months a year and that
it requires the higher education
institute to calculate and
instructors full time status by
multiplying the number of credit
hours per student contact hours
by what this loss starts at just
four point three five so that
the instructor teaching one
three credit hour class with
twelve thirteen point five hours
a week and for us if they're
teaching at least thirty hours a
week by that multiplier they can
qualify as a full time worker
and then qualify for this ten
year period of public service
loan forgiveness so that's what
this bill does and I would like
to introduce my experts at a few
remarks but his name is Winston
for Committee bring he is the
policy council and deputy
director for advocacy advocacy
at the student borrower
protection centers a longtime
consumer rights of working and
student loan borrower protection
as well so if could invite him
to say a few words.
Thank you.
Thank you bye I don't seem to
have the ability to my camera on
but can you hear me.
Okay greats all proceeds so
thank you chair thank you
Representative again my name is
Andrew Stenberg things remain
the policy council to students
are protection center for
nonprofit focused on student
debt crisis prior to this role I
was a student on this person and
financial regulator for the
state of New York and I
regularly dealt with the public
service loan forgiveness
this bill would essentially
unlocked and the thousands of
dollars in financial relief for
New Mexico after faculty by
leveraging that existing federal
public service loan forgiveness
program or the PSLF program
we can speak more to that you
know why that relief is needed
but all all of this very briefly
addressed the mechanics of the
battle and contextualizes in
national and state level
programs around the PSLF program
for public service workers and
I'd be happy to answer any
questions so as a representative
mentioned the federal program
provides public service workers
who work full time which is
defined in federal regulation as
thirty hours a week
they can qualify to have their
federal student loans canceled
after ten years of that full
time work are the regulations
however are intentionally
flexible in order to let
employers and employees tabulate
those hours between themselves
with the end goal of having a
piece of paper that is signed by
the employer documents in those
hours that is and submitted to
the federal government employers
play no role in determining
actual eligibility for the
program there we we just signing
off on the fact that the
employee bar or worked for them
and for how many hours what time
period as long as both parties
are on the same page and operate
good faith the federal
government has no problem with
how they arrive at those hours
that are submitted via paper so
as as a representative stated
the problem for adjuncts is that
their formal employment
relationship with their schools
typically doesn't include
account for that out of
classroom time lecture prepped
right in office hours except
around which is very much a
necessary part of their job even
if they hit that thirty our
threshold a week and practice
their employment documentation
doesn't reflect that so this is
where the state in a state law.
Madam facilitate that accounting
processing credit each of those
in classroom hours with a
multiplying factor if the bill
uses four point three five as a
representative mentioned so
overall the bill is drafted to
work with in the federal
regulations which define the
number of the relevant terms for
the program in order to leverage
that program for New Mexico
borrowers and the federal
government is well aware of
states are taking these
additional measures just last
fall it revise the federal
select regulations to include a
multiplier for adjunct faculty
similar to the ones that other
states have already passed in
use and that this bill presents
so the regulations part the
federal regulations permit that
multiplier but don't require it
which is why this bill is
necessary to make sure that
actions get that benefit
in closing in other states have
adopted similar laws the main
sticking point for employers in
those states has not been about
the merits of the bill or
administrative costs or anything
like that it's mostly just about
clarity and making sure they
know what they have to do the
bill today for you reflects many
of the conversations that have
taken place in those other
jurisdictions and I think it's
one of the clearest pieces of
legislation on this topic as a
result of that you know they're
making it very clear what
employers and employees have to
do so with that I want to say
thank you for considering the
ballot to be happy to answer any
questions and thank you Mr chair
we now stand for questions.
To the.
This is the the.
The leisure.
Thank you Mr chairman Dr.
Here gender confederation Jr for
yours for this bill and this is
something that I think is a
natural outcome of the
discussions that the legislative
finance committee has had a
working session start knowledge
in that Mexico is trending in
the direction relying more more.
Higher education institutions
and with visa provided like
helpful for three people not
only knowledge of the work that
I just.
Instruction professional we're
doing at our colleges and
universities but it also solves
another problem we know all too
well that the student prices
just every community in the
state and so by helping project
instructors to receive the loan
for the through the federal
government's allowing states to
make these kind of laws that is
a benefit to our local
communities benefit chooses we
will support this bill thank you
Maria.
Graham anybody on the screen as
far.
Sen Clemente in opposition.
Casey's.
Thank you yeah I would just said
that our own higher education
department stated in this is on
the
analysis that well actually
instructors are frequently
considered part time employees
some object Federal T. accept
numerous courses Simonsson a
semester and perform the work
load with less of a full time
professors so this honors that
reality and without a simple
questions thank you the
committee.
The.
Camillus Jr.
That we wrote on on on on thank
you have on them at this point.
Because.
To I know I don't have to but
this is a this is redid
redefining part time to full
time.
Mr chair no it's it's
recognizing that somebody who's
teaching three courses at nine
units is working full time.
Because they are required to
have office hours they have
preparation time so is honoring
the work that they're actually
performing.
Frankly at our community
colleges and universities
throughout the state.
Yes.
The.
So Mister chair representative
so there there.
So do they not Mr chair
representative get any
compensation for tutoring.
This is just for the.
Because I mean you mentioned
were off there's like the I just
want to find.
For me it's just one understand
how does this affect Mr chair
representative other things by
redefining part of because
technically most of them are
actually professors far part
time the defined as what we
least earlier had issues Mr
chair representative with some
of the compensation issues that
was brought before us to all of
those same concerns why the
qualify because they're not
qualified as full time
contract position
and so what it's a contract
position it falls under
different category than a
regular full time and that's
that's what have my hesitation
and so Mr chair representative
This to me is kind of like say
well all these other of
positions all throughout the
state part time even though.
They made because many teachers
propped in my opinion Mr chair
representative may teachers
probably work at home a lot.
After after school okay it over
to us.
But they they do some start ways
things but then they get the
summer off and so people see
that as a while you're doing one
thing to take another and that
to me is similar to this where
they don't necessarily.
Work as many hours throughout
the year yes I think it create
could create and share presenter
issues of what I'm working full
time.
And why is apartheid were
getting the same
coverage maybe I want to be part
time to get some of those same
privileges and I just I think
what scares me a little bit Mr
chair representative is
redefining one type of.
Now what is normally seen as
part time signal very full time
for this so the.
All of the loan repayment you'll
deal and I saw all the senator
is a lot of exemptions and of
what loan repayment could they
couldn't
There was a list here they
couldn't get.
Hello.
Impact for.
The result from.
And representative this only
refers to the government public
service loan forgiveness program
and somebody somebody who let's
say top three credit hours and
multiplied it wouldn't qualify
they would qualify for thirty
hours it is only specifically
related to the public service
loan forgiveness program the
federal government recognizes
what we're doing so Madam chair
representative so this is happen
other states yes and that.
There's they they've been able
to successfully do this for the
federal government they
recognize Mr Chairman yes I just
was afraid of the that we can we
the physician that is only red
flags that I have with Mr
chairman this only.
Refers to a narrow category as
it relates to the public service
loan forgiveness act in the
federal government okay thank
you madam chair thank you Mr
Representative.
Have the best of that.
The majority of it is still.
And thank you and to.
It's kind of like in the center
I want to let them know that
the.
And also you and everybody else
that we're making a great six.
For them because it does relate
public service however.
As state legislators were also.
Made aware that have one half of
the chair and teaching.
There's no qualification or
classification for us in the
whole entire nation.
So the twelve years and maybe
thirty years ago somebody else
again.
We can't get our.
Because cloning help the other
provision in the public service
public loan arena is that we're
the only nation to this page
eleven.
Qualifying for
the meeting forgiveness is not
showing history of salary.
So there's several points is you
would stand if you're listening
there's several points that
So in a way to encouraging.
As we have seen for Richmond
right to get to the other to the
current faculty and I'm glad
we're moving in this direction
to settle this point but on the
other hand for those in our
community.
In a line that are going to be
and I think there are few
legislators of the approach
request time of we need to be
cognizant of the fact that
whatever levels we have are
going to be forgiven I have to
listen also
for Senate office federal Senate
offices to see if I get.
For an exemption because we're
the only nation I mean the only
thing.
No one else has this experience
so if you just that question
whether states.
Be able to answer that but I'm
concerned about the people that
are going to school right now
that are graduating law students
that are now serving in the
legislature how it what's going
to happen.
So I raise that up because it's
an I'm.
It's not a popular.
That could change that was an
act in nineteen seventy six
before but it's certainly one
that's needed and so maybe we
can be down but anyway this is
this is been something that at
Duncan faculty and everyone else
on you and then asking for a
number of the state so I'm glad
it's being done thank you hello
Representative problem is up
percent in them.
Representative John yes.
Representative Figueroa yes.
Representative Garcia yes.
Representative no yes.
Representative Johnson.
Representative Martinez
Representative three
Representative asset so.
Representative Vincent
respectfully no.
Representative a vice chair
Roybal Caballero yes.
And representative
of one yes which.
What.
What to do with many New Mexico.
It's just.
Somebody.
So.
I.
School.
Stay in the fight.
Yeah.
