Representative.
Representative Powdrell Culbert
here.
Representative.
He's presenting committee I
forgot to mention article
printed excuse them
vice chair Garcia.
We have here.
We have a quorum with eight
members present when after
years.
Great.
Well thank you good morning
everyone we have I'm really very
interesting agenda I think this
morning as many of you all know
during the COVID broadband and
access to connectivity has just
been a big issue for a lot of
folks across the state I'm not
necessarily just for students
but I know it's been an issue
for all communities and
businesses across the state
especially being an isolated and
rule so being an isolated rural
state and then of course our
tribal communities that have
also faced issues related to
connectivity and so on this
morning we're gonna be spending
time listening to legislation
related to broadband and first
up is a representative Allison
and Representative Chandler who
are presenting on house joint
resolution nine which is the
public assistance for
infrastructure so
Representative taken away.
Good morning thank you madam
chair thank you to the
committee.
We're so glad to be presenting
to you this morning I'm joined
by a Michael Sanchez Christine
Chandler and also our expert
witness and answers and to
answer any of technical
questions we have miss Olga
serve from Google I hope I said
that right.
Anyway our house resolution the
description on that is
proposing to amend article nine
section fourteen of the
constitution of New Mexico to
allow public assistance in the
development of infrastructure
that allows essential household
electric internet natural gas
water and waste water connection
to domiciles upon the enactment
of a majority vote of the
members elected to each house of
the legislature of implementing
legislation that's a.
The title in the.
I don't know if my co sponsor
wants to add any more to it but
will be opening for questions.
If I may just briefly madam
chair.
good to see you all members of
the committee and madam chair
some of you haven't met before
so I look forward to speaking
with you about this bill.
Just a step back a little bit
the anti donation clause many of
you I'm sure I've heard of it it
is the product of the eighteen
fifties or so in response to
abuses that the rail come way
companies frankly had engaged in
across the west when they were
involved in trying to get
easements and so on so that's
kind of the genesis of it
it is an important part of our
constitution and that it it
helps moderate
investment in private entities
and that's not what we're
talking about here we're talking
about an amendment that will
advance the cause of providing
in it in the interest of you
know public benefits so our goal
with this amendment is to
facilitate access for
individuals to running water
wastewater services in internet
and me when you speak with our
experts who are here to talk
primarily about internet I think
you'll have a better
understanding how the strict the
state has been hamstrung in its
ability to really move
aggressively on and trying to
help
under utilized areas in
have access to a internet as
well as other.
Looking to ladies so with that
I'm happy to try to answer any
questions that you may have.
Right thank you both so much
will go to the audience we if
you can raise your hand if you
are in support of house to a
remote house joint resolution
nine.
And then go ahead and keep them
up if you would like to speak.
Okay we have a couple people I'm
first what will one person we
have a contact.
Thank you hear me yes we can
hear you.
Madam chair and members of the
committee I'm a contact a
software engineer from white
rock speaking on behalf of the
league of women voters of New
Mexico we supported share line
as a matter of basic equity
we're all thinking about
broadband now the pandemic has
made is also aware of our for
broadband situation.
But as I'm sure you know a lot
of New Mexicans don't have
internet at all and some areas
don't even have power or water.
The problem is getting that last
mile infrastructure to homes
we've been waiting decades for
private companies to do that and
it's not going to help on state
and local governments are going
to need to spend money on
infrastructure if we want to
bring our state up to speed it's
J. R. nine would help lead to
fund that infrastructure so New
Mexicans can start getting the
power water internet services
they need I'd like to thank reps
Ellison and channeler for
sponsoring and I hope you give a
J. R. nine ado passed thank you.
Thank you ma'am next we have
Andy Frazier.
me one second.
I also support this bill
Thank you all very much.
Thank you.
Next we have Dorothy Seton.
Good morning madam chair thank
you for allowing me to speak I'm
a twenty one year veteran of
military service and I volunteer
with the.
veterans caucus Democratic Party
New Mexico.
And I'm we are in greatly in
favor of it in behalf of
veterans because we know that
that earns depend on internet
for telemedicine services
Education and many other of
their essential needs in life
we also know that the native
American people have a higher
proportion of veterans per
capita than other demographics
and we believe that this would
be a great help to that
secretary of veteran population
so madam chair we are in favor
of this.
Thank you ma'am I'm.
Next we have the
Christadelphians will that
allow.
Yes thank you my name's that the
increased to do little to a
close.
Share committee members I just
like to mention that I'm from
the Adelante progressive caucus
little and we are supporting
several rural bills and we
consider this a a great move
forward for our state so we're
in support.
Thank you.
Do we have any more folks would
like to speak in support of this
of this bill.
We had David Kohl.
I'm sorry can you go there you
go yes I'm trying to chairs much
yes I'm David Hagel on the a
recent past chair of the New
Mexico foundation and we have
been working on broadband issues
during the pandemic and have
included an initiative which is
a product private nonprofit
partnership in rural parts of
the state particularly at this
point of Luna County where
access to infrastructure is
very difficult as it is in many
parts of the state and we found
that working at the local level
is helpful in filling in some of
the blanks but we think that the
infrastructure.
Analysis and action proposed by
this Joint Memorial would be
very helpful in strengthening
connection between our I or for
far flung communities and.
Schools and public health
information and number of other
vital concerns for our
communities that we stand and
support this bill thank you very
much for your time madam chair
committee members.
Thank you so much stated.
next we have Gilbert what the
under.
I appreciate the efforts are
going on I thank the committee
for putting forward this
legislation
I'm at a school board member for
COVID consolidated school
district in southwest New Mexico
We have students we're about
twelve hundred students.
Many of which live in very
remote areas including if you
love National Forest by the in
the members area and down four
droppers lake include in
addition we have very small
communities that have very poor
axis if at all to internet and
that is around the Santa Clara
area and in Hervey and white
signal and they would.
these areas do affect our kids
not only in the.
Pandemic mode of X.
Learning remotely but also for
our high school students that
are trying to do dual enrollment
with western New Mexico
university
this
Keeps them from getting to the
level that they can before
graduation and
Puts them on the lower paying
fields for employment
opportunities and beginning
getting to get college credits
while under a dual enrollment in
COVID high school we would
appreciate very much that
That the brought broadband and
of cell towers being a a
extended to areas we have a
difficult time getting
information and
We support this bill and which
you it would we're willing to
participate in whatever studies
or future meetings to.
It sure that this goes forward.
and we have about a hundred and
fifty students already using the
the mobile wifi
and that is hidden miss as that
goes along but that's about the
only band the that we could put
on getting students access to
participate in the classrooms.
All right thank you so much Mr
Wendy and I we appreciate your
your comments very much thank
you thank you.
Is there anyone else in the
audience that would like to
speak on on on this bill in
support of.
Okay is there any opposition to
this legislation please raise
your hand.
Going once.
Okay it doesn't look like
there's any opposition will will
go to the committee are there
any questions from the
committee.
You can raise your hand
Representative partly.
Thank you madam chair and the.
The vice chair of generous you
this morning and our
Representative Allison Regis you
as well.
So I guess I have a couple
questions.
The first being
just going a little bit to the
history of the anti donation
clause
I I I've done a little bit of
research myself and I I.
I do understand that a lot of it
was based off of the.
real real real bearing days
Yeah I have also building and it
looks like a lot of states
around the time New Mexico for
in this constitution for an anti
madam clause in.
it also had to do was a.
A little bit of anti Catholic
Church sentiment at times.
With with which I found very
interesting.
so.
Always a multi faceted story
right.
So so looking at the United
Nations flies why we have it in
New.
yes rulings over the years I
guess folks.
Taken before the courts.
this
you know either Boy Scouts or
girl scouts receiving.
taxpayer funding the American
Legion salvation army.
really any are nonprofit group
or corporation.
has been barred from receiving
that you know public taxpayer
funding over the many years.
Yeah I guess I just ask.
Madam chair representative so
do you what no do you believe
that there is
What is the definition caused
you to leave us is important or
should we repeal it like I think
there's a Senator that has a
joint resolution actually repeal
the anti donation clause in its
entirety.
More sure to my co sponsor Mr
Chandler.
I'm thank you thank you
Representative Allison and thank
you madam chairwoman and
Representative Harper for that
question it's a very good
question and I think you know
Representative I am a product of
local government having worked
as a county councillor for two
terms I see the value of course
in the anti donation clause
absolutely I do and I would not
advocate for its absolute repeal
it has its benefits and I would
note though that the exception
that we are proposing is
intended to be narrow and we
made a very strong effort to
keep it narrow and to focus on
issues of you know that public
need recognizing that we are in
a different world than we were a
hundred years ago more than a
hundred years ago where
government often partners with
the private sector and there
needs to be on a little bit more
flexibility to ensure that
services can be provided to our
citizens thank you for that
question madam chair and
representative.
Thank you madam chair and and
and question there for that I.
I appreciate your perspective
having served in that
interesting role in Los Alamos
kind of if you and you account
at the same time
I I would agree with you that
there is wisdom to the anti
defamation Clause not only does
it help government.
prevent government from taking
sides you know picking
businesses to support and others
not to support our nonprofit
partners not to support.
It also helps the government
performance actual important
duties right the more money we
elected a.
To
non government entities the less
we have to actually do the
government work.
And we all know there's plenty
of government work to do.
So.
So I'm happy to hear your answer
just.
The next question you kind of
already touched on this.
Is I'm here in this bill were
we're nearly addressing we're
we're opening up the arbitration
clause to narrowly address well
we're defining as essential
services.
Which is essentially utilities.
And
Additionally
the state of New Mexico has not
been involved in utilities.
So the municipalities have been
like Rio Rancho has their own
water utility.
but in general.
the state has not
involved in utilities.
Especially to this extent.
And I worry
what the unforeseen
Side effects of that might be no
are we settling how can be
responsible for all broadband
through out the state M. and
including
Non state governments like at
tribes.
Are we could then be.
Considering having to take care
of natural gas and water and
wastewater.
and start falling on the state
government we have to pick up
that cost I'd love to hear
thoughts on that madam chair.
Madam chair.
I would like to respond to that
by saying that the amendment
would not be self executing it
would require implementing
legislation to ensure that tax
dollars and other public
resources are properly
safeguarded and that the
legislation has appropriate
oversight authority so we would
control who gets what.
And I'd like to go back to
Representative Chandler's
response to your first question.
she made a comment about of
being one hundred years behind
the times.
I would like to remind everybody
that I think if you visit the
Navajo Nation for example you'll
find that we are still one
hundred years behind the times
in some areas that is the reason
for my support of this
legislation.
At the onset of the pandemic.
It reveals a lot of unknowns and
a lot of answers that people
have probably and back of their
minds for example when the
pandemic pandemic concept one of
the first requirements from the
department of health to
constantly wash your hands.
That is easier easier said than
done because that's good in the
urban areas but in the rural
areas it reveals that the Navajo
Nation for example or other
indigenous nations probably did
not have running water.
So we could not constantly wash
our hands and then the second
was social distancing and again
that's easier said than done
because of the no electrical
lines on to rural areas.
we have families in the four
corners area that we're
constantly going to the grocery
stores weekly because they did
not have electricity or
refrigerators to store their
food so they had to.
by other foods in short supply
so it would not go bad on them
so that is another needs that we
need on our nation.
The third was so.
The legislation or the rules
that came out saying that all
students will no longer be in
schools they will do remote
learning again easier said than
done specially for the urban
children.
Prior to the pandemic we had
students in my area that we're
traveling forty miles one way to
get to the local Burger King or
McDonalds and their parking lot
or in the blue state do their
homework because they did not
have adequate internet in their
area so the pandemic reveals a
lot of of.
Shortcomings that we had as a
nation just as a state so we are
hoping that this legislation
will assist in getting us up to
the twenty first century
although some of the Navajo
homes have running water they do
not have the the waste water
system
a still uses the old fashion
skinny building with the moon
crescent on the door a lot of
interest a lot of I still use
that on the combination so I
would like to be part of the
solution to bring all that up to
speed.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you the committee.
Madam chair may I supplement on
that fantastic answer from my
colleague
if I could just read a text I
received of couple weeks ago
from one of my constituents and
thank you.
Christine he said he recognizes
I'm very busy I'm again asking
you that you contact the Verizon
agent
just to the tower in Cuba on to
the mesa we are almost three
weeks now experiencing no
service or three G. at best of
my granddaughter could not be
online enough long enough to
take for distance learning class
nor could Christine Christine is
this gentleman's wife because of
this we pay a hundred three
hundred and nine dollars a month
our our bill that we do not have
broadband or high speed internet
service and so we have to use a
hot spot and this is a situation
that is across the state and it
needs to be reckoned
Representative rectified and I
think we as a state have a
responsibility to be part of the
solution not to throw our hands
up every time this issue comes
up and say well there's not
enough density to support the
private service providers who
are interested in moving into
that area we need flexibility to
be able to work with service
providers we're not talking
about the state becoming the
service provider or the utility
but it it we are talking about
giving us the ability to work.
More flexibly with with those
private sector businesses to
expand the services that are
absolutely necessary in the
state I would point out also
madam chair that we do have
secretary John Salazar and on
one of his members of the staff
that can talk in some detail
about how they might implement
such you know how they might
work within the parameters of
such as a constitution of course
recognizing we're gonna be
having implementing legislation
that the legislature sure we'll
have a lot of input on in terms
of checks and balances thank you
madam chair and thank you
representative.
Thank you madam chair and
representatives for that a great
answer.
So one of the first a
Representative Allison and to.
my wife and I understand and
intimately the circumstances
that you described when we were
both living in Sapporo.
we became very good friends with
us the Baca family that lived on
the on the reservation.
We go out there almost weekly
and and just love that family
and it was wonderful
relationship that still lingers
today.
Mister Spock it was a teacher
and Mr Baako workforce services
a firefighter.
And they were one of the more
well off families on the.
Reservation but I got to meet
and a lot of their extended
family
Running water that had floors in
their home.
and
you know my.
One of our fondest memories of
that time was my wife was called
very early in the morning to go
up and that should the cal for
their daughter's high school
graduation party and that's a
very funny story
she.
I will go to a here but.
Let's just say it made everyone
laugh heard the story and and
she actually got a Navajo name
after that that.
so we so we love our our friends
and and our
Americans.
and I I'm not trying to say that
there is not a need here I agree
there is a need.
my my question is is this the
right mechanism to address that
need.
we have other mechanisms in
place all already
for example the capital outlay
process.
there is an earmark
for tribal infrastructure
funding.
And there's I believe around
twenty million dollars a year
it's kind of the average last
several years that goes into
that
we've talked about other
mechanisms like.
Tax.
Elections are credits for those
installing broadband
infrastructure.
And then I I was gonna say this
for the next presentation but I
I really personally believe that
in the next year to.
broadband will only be needed
between cell phone towers.
If you look at the great work
that's being done
ideal on musk's SpaceX.
sterling system.
Then also Amazon's.
you for a satellite program in
the next year to.
I believe most of the folks in
US will be getting their
internet and cellphone coverage
from satellite.
This legislation doesn't specify
fiber it says internet so it
could also apply to folks trying
to get access to this the
satellite internet service.
I'm just I'm a little concerned
that.
By opening up.
The anti donation clause here in
this way maybe opening a box to
Pandora's to coin a phrase.
and.
And what are the unforeseen.
consequences I appreciate what
you said the Legislature you
know have enabling legislation
I've been in the Legislature
long enough to know that we are
often not a group to be trusted.
And will provide an opportunity
to do something that was not
intended.
that strikes us so I'm just.
I'm just a little concerned and
I'll be happy to hear.
Your your thoughts on that.
I'm sure.
Madam chair thanks for that
answer Representative Harper
You know one of the things that
we've been really really Pushin
is a New Mexico to have a
thriving economy.
And.
If we want thriving economy we
should be bring it up.
The other people our neighbors
with us to help in that thriving
economy we cannot have a
thriving economy if we allow
some parts of the state to be
lacking the basic
infrastructure.
You mentioned that.
we need other resources yes we
do whether the federal
government has many programs yes
but when they give us a grant
they often say that of the
entity that's asking for the
grant or the state should make a
small contribution so and that
way the state is still going to
be an all and then the.
Twenty eight.
Voters have previously approved
limited exceptions to the anti
donation clause for affordable
housing and other economic
development so what we're asking
for is not a first time we've
we've done it before for we've
amend that the anti donation
clause so that is what we are
hoping for and I thank you for
your answer I thank you for the
love of the Navajo people Mr
Harper I appreciate that and I
appreciate you for that answer
thank you madam chair.
Thank you.
I I'm gonna I'm gonna keep an
open mind to listen to the rest
of the discussion here madam
madam chair thank you very much
for.
Your kindness in this great
discussion back in force and and
I wish you much success thank
you.
Thank you Representative Harper
next we have Representative
Madrid.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Sanchez for bringing this
bill I think in relation to the
everything you've discussed and
we've discussed here today is in
is in lightning to me because I
am too of the rural south in
which I have people that are
without the services
particularly brought Matt and
and that's an issue but for us
in the south along with being
connected to the waste which
treatment.
And still some people Miner do
not have natural gas and and and
to say this doesn't have value
the presence of chief said
already the western housing this
is our asking for the
opportunity to assist our people
to being able to making
something possible I think in
relation of everything on for in
layman terms I would say this
helps the house will be able to
financially make payments
perhaps with something that's
minimal and allows it to get to
that New Mexico and you know for
us in the south.
It just goes without saying you
know from my role as a position
of state representative madam
chair woman I I I feel a great
obligation along with the the
two Sanchez you're in their
endeavors that we have to
understand as a state we have to
step up and give me quality
trans and that a quality is
giving the people the fare of
basic amenities that we all
expected gotten accustomed to
where we live in the urban areas
we have that advantage and it's
running is successful when
you're out in the outlining
parts were State Farm used to
west north to south it's
essential to see how people of
our of our cultures have come to
survive and made a way of living
still so this is a this is a
breakthrough for us in rural
parts of the state project stop
just as discussed in the north
of the four corners I think it's
the responsibility of us as
legislators to take on good
pieces of legislation like this
and and allow us to make these
endeavors and and whatever might
be seen as a risk to be put with
a certain sense of if you will
just to see the body and in the
process working and a chance to
reevaluate this so madam chair
again I didn't really have
questions as much as a clear
support to what I think is a
central piece of legislation
that will help me but in the
area of the district that I
represent that I know madam
chair woman you're familiar with
so I think this is essential and
I ask all members of the
committee to please put lied to
this and give us the the whole
in the north and south of being
able to bring some true services
I think we all have basically
that we all are expected and we
all appreciate thank you madam
chair over thank you Sanchez
again for great piece of
legislation that I greatly
support.
Representative Madrid our next
we have vice chair Garcia.
Thank you madam chair all.
Representative I'm.
And Palestinian Jennifer brings
bill forward.
I Representative the six
colonies the state of New Mexico
with our San Juan McKinley from
the suburb noted support
counties.
You know I have Representative
a lot of money Representative
hardly and I got ten chapter in
the Navajo Nation and
madam chair and members of this
committee like the
representative Allison said if
you really want to look at
what's happening to us come out
to the reservation look at it
you know it is it is.
Not disgusting it's just hard to
look at it's heart wrenching to
see these kids out there.
With nothing basically nothing
to us running waters we think
about every day madam chair you
just take it for granted zero of
the people out here don't have
that luxury no like of
Representative Allison said
madam chair to use the restroom
we have to go outside at
midnight through whatever hours
of the day they don't have a you
know we don't they don't have a
receipt out here and and all
these chapters are
Representative of madam chair
not all of that she but a lot
more.
We hired recently to see our
kids having to walk.
One of the McDonald's to all use
the internet and a lot of chair.
Representative Allison and and
and all janitor the we're not
asking for handouts we're asking
for this you know madam chair
the these people are people just
like we are in all rural parts
of New Mexico and we have been
real data it really short handed
we really really need to step up
as a state to support these kids
you know the people out there.
I see no more so madam chair in
pick ups going thirty forty
miles to get water usually put
in the back of the big gonna but
in and of hundred gallon
container to get hold and you
know how long that last number
wrong and you know.
People are not aware of what's
going on in the Navajo Nation or
rural New Mexico we really need
to come out and look at it.
You don't have a roll of their
own advocacy and and we're gonna
like to Representative Harper
sitting all the state might be
in the to have interim supply
only seeing what the state
should do it anyway.
We are they are part of the
state rural New Mexico as part
of the state of New Mexico the
concerns me that we have these
issues of not having simple
things is running water
electricity here how broadband
internet you know I know it's
expensive and every time I talk
about in DC well.
It's lateral how many thousands
of bill the dollar for mild.
So what if it is you know madam
chair.
Do need these essentials you
know like I said log you madam
chair when you don't have
running water your poll and and
the neighbors down here Dalberg
a schools and have everything it
was pretty hard to swallow full
full for this bill thank you
madam chair.
Thank you vice chair next we
have Representative Powdrell
Culbert.
Thank you madam chair
I have a couple of concerts
turns one you know kind of
following up with Representative
Harper I'm concerned about
opening up.
All may not just clause in it
becoming a contribution but I'm
also and and probably some of
you don't know I spent eight
years.
On
the Indian Affairs Committee and
I think I've been on every.
Well in the state in this
beautiful beautiful land.
And and work very closely with
them in fact I got in trouble in
this committee because I want to
yes my caucus.
On the gas tax you're a few
years back and I have paid
dearly and getting back in good
grace.
Because of the fact of some of
the information that I had
received by us sitting on the
Indian Affairs Committee.
But I'm really.
Concern the.
With this anti donation thing.
And and US open this clause up
and and as as Representative
Harper said opening up a
Pandora's box but I'd also like
to as representative Allison.
As to what the.
Navajo Nation as committed to
help address this and these
issues because I know that
they've received hundreds of
millions of dollars just part to
help address some of these
issues you know I've been in the
legislature now this is my
nineteenth year.
From the very beginning.
in fact I put fifty thousand
dollars into a fund to try to
help so that it would provide up
we have program money and so
that it could be used to
Federal dollars.
And so can you give me any
insight on that because I know
there's been a hundreds of
millions of dollars that have.
Appropriated.
To address these particular this
particular.
Issue.
So can you can you give me some
some information on that
Representative thousand.
Madam chair thank you for that
question Representative Culver
I want to try to answer your
your question the way I
understand.
yes it is true that the Navajo
Nation receives requests in the
hundreds of thousands of dollars
but we need to.
Members the area of our
reservation is the size of West
Virginia or one of the states
that they often use and a lot of
it is remote.
A lot of it is going to cost
millions and millions of dollars
just to get water lines for
example to the rural areas
because of the demographics and
the.
the unemployment on the Navajo
Nation is at fifty percent
because
We don't have entities that want
to relocate to the nation to
start businesses so what
economic development or what
employees we had like for
example the
The four corners generating
station and PNM stations those
are closing and the one in
Arizona which was a big
employer so of.
I forget the name of it right
now but that closed and it just
puts us into economic
depression.
Just just a water line for
example is going to cost
millions and millions of dollars
to get to each of Navajo home
there's some places that the
water line will never reach
because rain and even the
electrical lines are not going
to reach some of those phones
so.
It's kind of late.
Of the phrase throwing money at
something to solve the problem
that is kind of like a case of
what what we have we're throwing
money at it but we cannot fully
solve the problems we just need
to continuously work at it to
bring us up into the twenty
first century
I hope that partially answers
your your question miss Colbert.
Representative now it didn't
really because I I I know that
the state because there were so
much money.
That was sitting and
The Navajo Kaufer the state
clawed back millions of dollars.
Here maybe about seven eight
years ago and I'm not I'm
talking about somewhere close to
a hundred million dollars that
was clawed back because it had
stopped there so long and not
been use and that has always
concerned me because like I said
I'm probably one of the few on
this committee that spent that
much time.
And and Navajo land so I got to
see the name.
First and so that that is my
concern as to the Navajo Nation.
Instead of seven hundred dollars
using those dollars.
To meet some of the concerns
that your voice in year to date
I'm not a burst of the state
capital outlay dollars going to
help address these issues.
But it concerns me that once the
money goes to the nation that
it's set on and never used and
then we end up climb back those
dollars the cost is set there
and then never never use I'm not
in favor of all the
This you know it's gonna have to
go to a vote anyway but
I am.
Concern about the same way I
would be without the American
kids not having access.
But as so many of of their
communities they don't have the
dollars that are coming to help
address the problems and from
Senate on that committee for
eight years.
And I know it's a big nation.
But.
The money was never used for
what it was supposed to be used
for and that is still what
concerns me today
appropriations going to these
areas and not being and and the
state into an alkaline it back
and it not being utilized like
it should be so the big name
that you all
have to so thank you madam chair
that was my main question as to
the millions of dollars that
have gone to the nation and and
up.
Have been clawed back by the
state because agents set there
and we're not used to get.
Additional dollars to address
some of these problems that you
guys at thank you madam chair.
Secretary is would you like to
say something.
Madam chair committee members
thank you and good morning I I
do want to clarify a couple of
things that we are working
through from the broadband
perspective and I wanna let you
know that I totally support this
bill because it allows us to do
our job add to it I and in
regards to broadband let me just
give you some background
information.
in the twenty nineteen session
do it was awarded ten million
dollars for broadband to be
expand broadband in the state of
New Mexico.
We sat on that money for quite
some time because we did not
have the ability to grant that
money on based upon the anti
donation clause.
In reality.
The vendors the ISP vendors are
the ones are going to be
installing infrastructure to
address the broadband issues
right we're gonna have the
CenturyLink to the world of
Comcast's of the world they are
the ones that will lay the cable
and provide services to the
constituents.
They have looked at the state
and I hate to say this but they
cherry picked that parts of the
state or they can know where
they can make a profit right
take a look at clustered errors
and they install Services of
those clustered areas.
that's the situation that we're
in when we look at best
practices in other states other
states are working with the
federal government and they are
the states are also providing
funding directly to the ISP
providers.
and they're matching the federal
grant for example CenturyLink
can apply to the federal
government because there's a lot
of federal grant money available
now CenturyLink can apply to the
federal government for expanding
broadband services in the areas
that needed.
But they're only going to get a
certain portion of that funding.
CenturyLink is still not gonna
be able to do that expanded
because they don't have the
funding what we need is a state
grant program well we have
funding and are.
Our budget so we can contribute.
To providing CenturyLink money
to match the state grant.
Due to the anti donation clause
in New Mexico I can't take funds
from my budget and give it to
Comcast the way it works in New
Mexico rule right now I have to
get a product or service that I
own.
I'm never going own
infrastructure at the committee
level right that cable that
fiber that wireless technology
belongs to the vendor so right
now that that that anti donation
that's not allow me to grieve
give Comcast.
Broadband money for more funds
so that's the premise of what
we're trying to do is I'll allow
us to give that money to the to
the vendors because they're the
ones are going to be installing
the services.
We're gonna be giving it to the
some of the communities right
now because it can do some of
this on their own but that means
the communities are now the ISP
providers I don't know that we
want to get to that environment
I think that the Comcast center
links they have the
infrastructure to support it
because it's not just laying
fiber you've got half
cybersecurity got to replace
equipment you have to do studies
to get have to get right of ways
there's a lot that's involved in
pushing broadband out to the
committee but to us it's
critical that we have the
ability to grant that money to
the ISP providers we haven't
been able to do that and I would
agree with Representative Harper
talking about starting because
we are trying to get starting to
work in the community and I
think they're gonna have a
solution but it's a couple years
away to get that solution in
place but the New Mexico and
just as in other states there
are two issues with with
internet connectivity to the
answer there's an issue with
accessibility and that's
actually providing.
Our wires to someone's home to
get them the internet the second
problem which is a huge problem
in New Mexico is not everyone
can afford those services right
we have satellite companies now
that provide services to
constituents what is two hundred
dollars a month and it's very
slow speed it doesn't give the
citizens what they need so are
broadband program the with our
vision for the broadband program
is give us to grant money we
will work with the communities
in the end the ISP providers to
provide the funding where it
needs.
And then we if yes starting
becomes available and you know
it's also problem we're still
going to have that that they
need to provide funding to the
constituents to pay for the
services so our vision is that
grant funding is not only for
infrastructure now and that's
what we're going to start but in
the future it may be as this
problem is solved the ability to
give money back to the
constituents that are indigent
and the need the services going
forward and as far as quality
and making sure that we do this
correctly part of what we're in
envisioning and part of what
we're going to be doing in the
broadband offices and that's
House Bill tend this committee
coming up later is going to have
a process off were people submit
ISPs for providers will submit
an application we will work with
them to get the federal funding
if they're funded will match the
the grant funding from the state
side and we'll have a projects
certification process for them
to come in front of us.
And we will give them pockets of
money as they proved that the
rolling out of services to the
constituents we will have them
come through a phased process
where they will come in for
planning will give them a little
bit of money they'll go into the
implementation phase will give
the money and will assure that
the services are being performed
according to the expectations so
that's our vision and and and
that's the problem that we have
had yet that do it is we we've
gotten the money but we've had a
problem because the state when
we buy something it belongs to
us right it comes into our
assets we depreciated and again
giving the funding to the ISP
providers it's their
infrastructure so we need this
in order for us to be able to
operate and be proficient and
efficient in the delivery of the
services to the constituent and
I'll stand here for any
questions you guys may have
thank you madam chair Madam
chair.
Representative go ahead
I'm on a point of Secretary.
Could you not I have a contract
with century link that will
provide the same.
Access or the building of the
infrastructure.
So we we have contracts with our
with CenturyLink right now but
it's for state owned facilities
the problem that we all facing
right now right is the gap at
the residence we do not and we
can not provide services to our
residents right now so
CenturyLink has to do that
investment on their own the you
know and again they're in it for
a profit I can't blame them for
that we have to make money but
we're using best practices are
proven in other states we're
gonna go after the federal
funding we need to have our
portion of it to match with the
federal government requires as
well as the I. S. P. staff to
have a portion to contribute as
well that's the formula we
believe it's going to make a
successful going forward.
Okay and and and madam chair and
and the secretary.
Then.
If this were to pass.
And I guess this would also go
to Representative a Allison then
one of the Navajo Nation also
contribute.
Or
find monies.
So.
Meet these needs I don't know
the needs are out there that's
not my issues and knowledge.
No there my issue is the dollars
making sure they're being paid
for from both both sides.
So this we're just.
David do we have a commitment
from the Navajo Nation also to
spend their dollars to help make
this available.
In throughout Navajo country
and representative of Madrid I'm
not discounting what you all
the.
Well.
But I I was very involved in
this whole issue around
the Navajo dollars that were
clawed back that sat there and
sat there in this still some
that are that are sending their
that could be used to help the
state of New Mexico address this
concern because I don't want to
say in New Mexico or the
taxpayer up to save the taxpayer
the end up in a situation where
our.
Taxpayer dollars end up paying
for all the House whole
utilities.
I think that is our obligation
the local municipalities
obligation to get those services
to the property.
But not.
To pay for the services from the
property line.
The house and and and those are
my concerns but can you just
couldn't you know you all out to
those.
Thank you madam chair again
thank you for the question
Representative called.
yes the Navajo Nation of has
money on its own to start these
major projects
I think it's kind of like
The nation spends a dollar the
help that they get from the
state could probably just in the
in the pennies we do not fully
rely totally on the Navajo
Nation or the federal government
to do what what projects that we
have outstanding so this is
probably just a drop in the
bucket for what the Navajo
Nation needs and I would like to
give some time to our.
expert witness agency Senator
for Google to see if she can
elaborate more on that thank you
madam chair.
Thank you representative go
ahead ma'am.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee and
thank you representative Allison
I just wanted to start with just
a small clarification yes
donation closed already does not
apply when the funds go directly
to another governmental entity
or another sovereign credit only
applies when funds go to a
private person or entity so I'm
you're not opening up the entity
or rather house to in resolution
line is not opening up the
arbitration clause in that
respect anymore than it's
already it's already wide open
he doesn't apply so these are
all of your concerns yeah I
believe could be addressed by
legislation as long as the
legislature does you know
putting conditions on how many
we can already go under the
constitution to the Navajo
Nation to any any other
government government entities
are suffering and then it's up
to the legislature to put the
conditions and you can
absolutely you know writing
whatever
political power tools for the
political will rather will
support but what we're asking
for entities with respect to
broadband specifically.
The Salazar explained we the
problem that we have is
You know we have this huge
broadband gap that applies not
only to the Navajo Nation not
only to the pueblos to rural New
Mexico in rural New Mexico is a
huge territory and you know.
Private companies have not gone
into those markets twenty twenty
one everyone needs internet they
haven't gone so far they're
never going to go without
assistance because clearly the
money's just not there for them
to make with that you know any
return on their investment and a
minor no silver lining to
prevent abuse of there's a lot
of federal funds right now
available for project is
unlikely mentioned yes there are
emerging technologies but if you
look at our strategic plan
broadband is future proof fibre
optic cables future proof and it
will probably forever be the
gold standard because just like
your satellite TV you can
connect the device of your
weather.
The same way satellite internet
we we should assume we can
probably it's an educated guess
of course if we don't know yet
but it's a safe assumption that
those services will be
interrupted by you know severe
weather New Mexico knows how
severe the weather has to be for
there to be Representative
Brandon technology were
absolutely exploring it and it
is on our on our radar and more
so
but right now you know the
federal funds are available for
cable and what we have been able
to do it you know New Mexico
receive ten million dollars and
twenty nineteen for rural
broadband expansion and we have
spent setting aside money was
sent to we spent a we've
provided to pueblos and other
entities.
We have.
Three point four million of
those ten million and what we've
gotten in exchange for the state
in nineteen million dollars
worth of cable basically and
we've done this we have three
projects one for Sierra County
one for Travis in the counties
and one from Carlsbad too so
Madam genau
and you know the percentages go
from five percent of state funds
for the total cost of the
projects to the highest with
twenty five percent of it was
paid by us and in exchange we've
gotten you know over four
hundred miles of cable and again
this is future proofed.
Connectivity.
Problem that we have is that
again in order to save we cannot
make donations to ISP providers
like secretary calibex plane we
don't own any of funding for
infrastructure but we're not
actually allowed to provide
services to private entities
private homes we don't want to
be responsible for billing
maintaining updating our
infrastructure all of those
very.
Very specific areas of the ISPs
are experts in
now we have moved forward with
these projects because we
believe we have a good faith
arguments meaning you forever
you would be violating if any
ethical rules to say that we
believe that the state is
actually receiving consideration
in exchange for that two point
three point four million that
was given directly to ISPs and
that's an exception to the and
information order given the
consideration being that during
the pandemic we're moving
forward because we don't know
how long this will continue
still remained.
Vaccines are wonderful records
we don't know if we'll be in the
same position a year from now so
we're moving forward to
supporting telehealth distance
learning social distancing
access to online orders even if
you will for communities that
otherwise would have remained
I'm cert and and.
Thank you very if we were to be
soon you know the the the threat
of litigation significant
because of course if a court
were to disagree with our
analyses that the state receives
consideration then we will have
to call back at three point four
million and those projects with
hope and those communities would
remain unanswered and so we need
this amendment to be able to
optimize our state dollars again
from three point four million
we're getting in return nineteen
plus million in in fiber optic
cable and we have other we have
other alternatives they're not
really attentive there are
strategies your little
strategies one of which is to
allow private ISPs service
providers and so forth it was
provided to put equipment on our
radio hours we have okay hundred
five powers yet and and.
The number of hours will
probably grow we're working on
we have you know projects to
build more towers but that you
know those hours are already in
existence they cost millions of
dollars and so if we're able to
allow service providers free
access to our power to actually
expand their coverage area we
want to be able to do that but I
have the answer to the nation
for students to date.
We may or may not be able the
there's no there's no
controlling authority that says
we can do it with us attorney
general's office madam if you
could give us hopefully they'll
agree with us that we can do it
but again that's only persuasive
it's not controlling authority
again just a quick moment we'll
go on our towers cost hundreds
of thousands of dollars so we
were to add rent on top of that
it would just likely not be a
useful solution for any AI SB
and then our third Carollo
solution you have the secretary
mentioned we would like to be
able to find.
Wireless mesh Services in areas
that are so remote that it
wouldn't make sense even with
federal dollars and a state
match to going to private
service providers and we that's
where the emerging technologies
can you really hopefully give us
a viable solution.
But again.
Currently the in the nation for
the allow you know there is an
exception for the second
injection and if we have a whole
community that is so remote.
By and large by the way you know
rural New Mexico is probably
and probably need to definition
indigent as a whole because we
know from census data and from
school lunch data we school
lunches we know that we have the
highest rates of poverty in
rural New Mexico than anywhere
in the nation but again that's a
normal you know that's a legal
theory that would come up with
and of course there will
disagree with us we would like
to remove the threat of
litigation gives certainty that
you know if we're wrong we would
have to go back millions of
dollars from providers and
communities that don't.
In order to Lucien will begin to
do in a sense a service provider
to create recalls I cannot
really be targeted just for
students are just for the for me
there's you know family this
relatively well off and
community but they don't they
can provide the service from
private service provider because
there aren't any and they'll
never be any we want to be able
to give them you know log in
password and and and username so
that they can use our free
service but again congestive the
indignation costs prevent okay
that clarifies some of my
concerns because you know like I
said I keep going back and
looking at the dollars and how
they are or are not.
Being used and having access
because I know when I put in
money you know for particular
group they said we're going to
take it to.
The Navajo Nation.
To the Navajo Nation verses
into.
The Navajo Nation is two
different things and so
thank you that answers some of
my concerns and some of my
questions thank you madam chair
thank you representative and I'm
just a quick good time check we
do have to go on the floor Eddie
Levin and we still have another
bill to here so if just wanted
to let you all know next we have
Representative Garrett.
Thank you madam chair actually
my I wanted to ask
Representative secretary Salazar
and council
all good to speak exactly on why
this was so needed and they have
done that very articulate I no
more questions thank you okay
thank you so much representative
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair.
I guess going through my notes
here.
I think I personally still like
there are other states that this
could have been.
And so I first want to talk
about.
We already have processes in the
state for assessment districts.
So being able to turn over so
what actually define it is what
you what infrastructure utility.
Is is.
Location it could be extended
thank with the cat in the state
products.
Changing state.
With respect to.
What can happen with an
assessment district.
This we're solution and
removing.
Anti defamation.
Stocks that this.
Process.
That is just to be.
Taxed to the land over a seven
year period to no interest.
So that's one option that says
there are at with minor changes
to the legislation for.
With that to get to get the
Saudis not only fair but.
The homeowner.
Thanks.
We also.
Lowgar Lida that.
You know the conversation came
up.
On state grant.
We we need to be able to I say
grants to be able to.
To do the facts with respect to
the federal money out there and
I can.
The.
The state is is okay when the
return on investment with that.
The.
I believe that the should be
right.
As a state
What's the potential.
Just like we would do well
garnered eight slots I mean I I
personally had no clue the state
invested three point million
dollars portions of that with
in to inspire with respect to
just for for charities from
across but.
that the concern.
Thanks to a private company
development.
Fourteen.
Myself and another part.
This.
West Texas.
We will.
We funded it.
Serviced.
It is.
In two thousand nineteen I chose
to sell my assets yes to my
partner because.
It is very clear in the as a in
the I. T. world that that the
farmers critical to connect
points it will not be the wave
of the future.
I need will get rid of this
doesn't mean that we ought to
connect from our town doesn't
mean that we have to do.
Certain thanks.
Being able we we got rid of this
strictly because of what I need
is going to do.
To.
Internet connectivity.
Over the next several years.
All right.
I think there are some ways that
we could have done with respect
to the money that was invested.
Where we don't have the
potential of the pop Act
The anti defamation case I I'm
I'm I'm.
I'm.
Waiver of removing the anti
defamation case I I I we very
strongly that we create great.
Just like we we do and so many
other avenues and economic
development in the state of New
Mexico we create those
contracts.
And based on the criteria that's
determined.
We can change the.
A loan to a grant and that could
be forgiven.
We.
When we.
Yes yes.
What did you did you have a
question that you wanted to ask.
I'm trying to make some points
right.
Sure.
At the end of the day
I
that were made
I think we're opening Pandora's
box thank you madam chair.
Thank you representative next we
have Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chairman of the
video clips of my computers now
well but it's it's a little bit
wavy sometimes it and I think
the sponsors for bringing this
forward.
I am very much learn from the
discussion and debate this
morning but I still have some
very deeply held concerns I view
this resolution is kind of a two
part resolution part of it is
the broadband wins ties to House
Bill Janet we're gonna hear a
little bit.
They would then added
the lecture natural gas water
and waste water so we've added
underground utilities into what
what I thought was gonna be a
broader resolution.
It's been about fifty years of
my life as a builder and
developer putting in utilities
and and when I hear comments is
cost millions and millions I I
disagree with that it's going to
cost billions and billions
billions to provide that kind of
service.
It changes the whole dynamic
we're opening up as there's that
whole area outside the broadband
area.
Opportunity to build many ranch
houses and and ranch
headquarters all over the state
of New Mexico in those ranchers
have to decide where they want
to build a quarter or their home
and they pay for electricity to
get from where it is processed
to that home to that facility.
And so I began to wonder if we
if we passed this resolution if
we open I'm not do we have to
start select trustee and gas and
wastewater and water to all the
researchers that your entrances
in headquarters all over the
state are we opening that up
when I was a young man we used
to have communes workgroups what
we call these other together if
they decide we're gonna be there
all in the state we have to
find.
With all of these amenities if.
Now we've got throughout the
American Express in New Mexico
groups of preppers that are
building communities of of
people that are are prepared for
the future of bunkers in arms
kinds.
Are we going to be required to
provide.
The same services to those
groups I have a lot of
unanswered questions I I think
I'm okay with the broadband idea
the internet idea we're not
we're not specifying fibre optic
or anything but we knew that is
another segment.
With a price tag there is in the
to me it's going to get into the
trillions in the state of New
Mexico.
Is that fair to my constituents
just say we're going to provide
all these services and you guys
are going to pay for we
appreciate it I just really am
struggling with that issue so
just a COVID thank you for this
job.
Thank you Representative Crowder
Representative Garrett.
I move it do passive house joint
resolution nine.
Second.
Representative.
Table.
The.
Thank you representative we have
a second from Representative
role metal and a table by
Representative Pettigrew the
motion to do pass it perceives
the table
Madam chair we'll still do the
will still do the vote but I'm.
The manager of the rules are
that tabling motion takes
precedent over any other options
we'll do we'll do the vote I'm
before we get the votes it I did
want to make some comments
I I think overall what the
representatives are attempting
to do is one that is
important as Representative
Madrid mentioned there are a lot
of issues that rural communities
face across the state
when it comes to the anti
donation clause and a lot of
times it's applied arbitrarily
and unjustly we've had a number
of issues here in unincorporated
areas in Dona ana county
residents wanting to do a number
of things to improve their
communities especially when it
comes to issues related to
quality of life and it has been
almost impossible because of
this anti donation clause just
making it
we're not able to to get a lot
of any of that done and so
And families who live in places
like organ Butterfield off of
highway seventy for example have
been struggling on a number of
issues related to roads people
who have incredible medical
issues emergency services can't
pass through some of these roads
because of issues with public
private and privately owned
roads that the county can't do
much about because of these
issues I think this is really a
piece of legislation that is one
that we need to really take into
consideration because there are
countless communities around the
state particularly in isolated
and rural areas that don't have
the the kind of benefits that
many of us in urban areas do and
again I I feel that
anti donation clause is is has
historically been applied
arbitrarily and unjustly and
this legislation would help to
address that and so we'll we'll
moved with the table did
somebody second the table wasn't
Representative Harper.
Motion to table does not require
a second okay thank you
Representative Crowder so Mario
if you can do the roll for that
please.
Representative.
Yes the table.
Representative okay.
No cable.
Representative Harper.
Yes.
Representative Lundstrom.
It's.
Representative.
No.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Culver.
No to table.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Why are we voting.
We're going on billing.
I know to table.
You know the table.
Chair Rubio noted table.
Just going through
Representative Lundstrom.
Six now and re ****.
The thank you representative
your motion to table has failed
next we have the motion to or do
pass
Set by Representative Gary and
seconded by Representative role
metal can you do the role market
place yes Representative
Crowder.
Hello.
This is.
Yes.
Representative.
You know like twenty seconds to
explain my boat.
What's wrong.
Yes.
Representative Pettigrew.
Like to explain.
Representative it's.
Yes.
Representative Romero.
Yes.
Yes.
Representative Lundstrom.
Yes.
Yes right now all of.
Representatives you have in the
past and we have Representative
Harper and Representative grew
with wanting to explain the
real.
Thank you madam chair onto the
super brief I just want to say
that
I very much appreciate the
Sanchez and their work and.
Do some research between now on
the floor.
And I'm hoping to get a place
where I can support it.
On the floor just need to make
sure lance I don't ation Clause
issues are are resolved thank
you.
Thank you representative
Representative group.
She.
Thank you refers.
So this.
I to.
Representative Harper I need to
do some more research on this.
This
is.
Without us.
The cost.
That would be.
That we're able to help we're we
can't.
Price this product turns.
Thank you.
Thank you representative
Representative Crowder did you
want to say something.
Yes madam chair thank you I
would just request of the
sponsors of this bill is is in
transportation and then it goes
from there to House Judiciary
according to house rules it does
have a financial impact of the
Sanchez and myself both mention
that and I do think it should be
ask the speaker to send it to
House Appropriations so that we
can examine it and how it fits
into the budget.
Thank you for contraceptive
Representative Chandler
representative Allison thank you
so much for participating
interior experts we we
appreciate the time thank you
congratulations thank you for
your time and consideration
thank you thank you so much.
Great so next we have House Bill
ten uh representative vehicle I
I'm transferring you over.
And then Representative your we
be presenting Representative.
Will be presenting with
Representative Figueroa okay.
She's on madam chairman and
Mario.
Okay.
Do you what do you have experts.
Madam chair we have we syringes
Hughes in the antennae room if
you would raise to stand to help
you find him and Representative
it is she's not already here
sorry.
A Salazar.
I believe he's already in yeah
and I accidentally just remove
them so I'm.
right
Whenever you're ready.
We would like to begin.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee thank
you for the opportunity to
present this bill before the
committee I'd I'd like to give
you a little background on how
this this whole bill came about
because I think it's an
important New Mexico story and
and with the onset of the COVID
and the shut down and
in all students going on line
for their education it became
very apparent to all of us that
they were huge inequities and
internet access in the state and
and as a group of legislators we
were talking and then we decided
well why don't we try when we
try and see what we can do to
make the affordable universal
high speed internet a place in
in New Mexico.
We gather together and we we got
on soon then and we started
talking about this maybe like to
say this was kind of a a full
state you know of full court
press we had four
representatives from Albuquerque
the representatives Natalie
Figueroa Representative steep
starring era Representative
Marian Matthews to and
Representative joined here at in
the south we had Representative
and HELOC everybody on and we
had Candie Sweetser in from the
north we had Representative
Chris Chandler and myself so we
all got together with that with
the idea that we would do this
and we started meeting on Friday
afternoons at four o'clock in
there is a suggestion that we
meet once a month and we decided
we could never we can never.
Accomplish anything with the
once a month meeting so we
started meeting every Friday and
this started last March when
everybody is so is so this is
been going on on going effort
for about eleven months with
dolphin and soon we we talk
about issues and the and we make
appointments with different
people and and the state
different experts in the state
line I just like to go over the
people we met with we met with
the secretary of do it John
Salazar and his team we met but
the secretaries of
transportation economic
development the public education
department we met with the USDA
in New Mexico leaders and
private ISP providers we met
with rural electric co ops
including blue reciprocate car
selector up with John dollars
sacred wins with sid Aplin lico
we met with the PRC we met with
Rita equipment chambers of
Congress we met with
congressional staff met with
representative Dick Harlan we
met with the governor Michelle
hung Bisham and her staff we met
with house appropriations
chairman had A. Lundstrom with
the idea of of building a piece
of legislation that would
accomplish this goal.
Yes the goal is affordable
affordable accessible high speed
internet and why in education it
we knew that this was elected to
meet the immediate needs of
remote learning and future
educational opportunities we
knew from a health perspective
it was essential medical
services to every corner of the
state and we knew from the
economic standpoint it was a
driver growth and expansion of
markets and then we went into
the we did a deep dive into all
these different issues and we
look at the biggest once policy
or the right of way easements or
the digital equity in digital
inclusion and every time it was
like going down a dark hole it
which that the that the issues
are complex and far reaching and
there is a lot to put together
so so what we.
Ultimately had to do was have
three companion bills to support
this this legislation that
involve the public school
capital outlay act of the that
is made by Debbie Sarinana we
did their real it universal
service fund that is led by
Natalie Figueroa an up obviously
we did the anti donation clause
that was led by Chris Chandler
with the with the accompanying
legislation to accomplish the
goal of building a vision and a
mission or broadband in the
state of New Mexico if you wanna
know what doesn't work there is
that you know there's really
only two people at the office to
do and we're in charge of
broadband that's all we have and
we knew we had to build the
infrastructure build
infrastructure that would pave
the way for policies and
procedures for this state that
would carry us on
for the next five years for
actually revert to to really
enhance of these internet in our
state so I just wanted to give
that background to the day to to
recognize the membership that
participated in this effort and
to tell you that this I don't
think anybody knew what we were
getting into when we started but
it has been it has been a
a deep journey and that we are
proud to present this
legislation to do today thank
you madam chair.
Representative at all.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you committee given bills and
that joint resolution that you
all have already spent a lot of
time on this morning I'm not
going to bill labor the needs
everyone on your committee has
clearly articulated how you
understand the need for
education for health for civic
engagement for economic growth
so we don't we don't need to
talk about the need we need to
talk about the house how are we
going to do this and madam chair
and committee Representative
added has already talked about
the vision and the mission.
We have two people in the state
agencies who are working on
broadband some of them are
identified in your analyses I'm
being somewhere forgotten but we
currently have people working in
broadband and IAD in those we
are C. in the department of
transportation cultural affairs
because they were on libraries
in New.
Economic development is working
on broadband the department of
health is working on the and of
course the public education
department and the public
schools capital outlay
All of these groups and do it
have been working on broadband
and have made some incredible
progress.
What we don't in New Mexico is
the over arching vision.
And the accountability whole all
these forces in line and make
sure we are achieving the goals
of getting broadband to every
corner of the state that's why
this bill is called the connect
New Mexico act that is the goal.
And because I know you are short
on time I know we are supposed
to be on the floor at eleven
o'clock I'm broadly over the
bill and then we're just going
to stand for questions and I
hope you have thorough and deep
questions for us because every
time it makes the bill better.
So in the first session are
definitions and I would just
point you to a couple that are
important on page four.
Session.
I am in.
On line fourteen and item level.
You Mr.
Reaching the goals and we have
to define the uninsured and the
underserved I'm sure which don't
have internet at all according
to the SEC minimum standards
don't have.
And we know where that is and
then there's the under served.
With
we have a minimum.
Thank you all know.
Representative Crowder who's
trying to be in on this
committee and has to turn off
the video so is audio comes
through there's internet.
And there's internet.
So we need a high speed.
For rural internet if that's our
rule then we have.
Well then a standard that we're
reaching for as well right this
office then is going to track
where the uninsured and the
under served our and make sure
we reduce the percentage of
households and businesses in New
Mexico that are unserved and
underserved that's why the
definitions are in here and
that's why they're important
they are guiding pieces in this
document.
The next session session three
lays out the responsibilities
this bill creates a division in
the department of do it to
accomplish the goals of building
out broadband.
So in this division session
three lists their
responsibilities and that is
what I said coordinating the
broadband work in all the
different agencies did not put
obstacles to work is already
being done but to pull it
together and align with the
strategic statewide plan and
keep that data in one place so
we can know we're moving
forward.
The on page five is about
leveraging the assets we don't
have a lot of money in New
Mexico we need to be strategic
about how we apply it and we
need to multi purpose every
asset that we have.
So when we are talking
infrastructure projects in New
Mexico not just roads.
We talked to read New Mexico is
building out our electricity
grid across the state to meet
our renewable energy goals.
Well everywhere that greed is
building out.
Is there an opportunity to multi
purpose those lines and build
out of broadband to unserved and
underserved places.
We've got to purpose everywhere
we need him.
Session he deals with ways and
uniformity of transit has
permitting and licensing across
state departments.
Local governments county
governments tribal lands.
Even in our laboratory lands
everybody has different systems
for right away and it's slows
down the broadband process so
this office is charged with
looking at those.
Working toward uniformity where
we can to reset unserved and
underserved working with
memorandum of understanding
coming back to us as a
legislator and say these are
statutory changes that you can
manage to align these where
possible.
That's part of the the offices
job.
Session is goal of planning
assistance.
In our most rural and
underserved places.
There's technical expertise to
write for a very complex federal
grant so do we continue doing
that.
They are already in the
broadband office there have
already done some amazing work
in in your analyses you can see
some requests that have already
been changed from federal
dollars we want to continue
doing that.
And increasing.
For.
Refers to the rules and
standards what's minimal
definition of unserved.
We aligned with federal
standards we don't put a number
on it because as Representative
Pettigrew pointed out.
The need in this field changes
faster than you can write it
down and put it in statute.
So the entire bill is technology
neutral in the bill itself does
not specify a minimum speed for
example now the office is going
to have to come up with these
definitions because that's how
we're going to measure our
products are.
We just and I'm searching for.
For the purposes of measuring
our progress defined unserved
underserved.
Responding and updated
regularly.
Fine.
Coordination again.
And local planning.
Session six.
Strategic plan for the state.
What we're shooting for we do
not in this bill the state we
need to make a plan.
We already have a plan we have
an in depth analysis by LFC and
we have a New Mexico over the
education plan.
Created by doing June twenty
twenty so we need to move
forward with that but then this
bill and this office will be
responsible for updating and
plans every three years.
Just six also spent some time as
a statewide by three council.
For this office to pull together
expertise from tribal nations
from.
And private enterprise from
public enterprise our rural
electric co ops have done some
amazing work in this area.
All of these different layers of
expertise together in their
creation and revision in the
revision I should say of this
plan people from the department
of health from PED from cultural
affairs are part of this
committee to say this is what
we're doing this is part of the
plan moving forward into pull it
all together.
At the local level it is a local
community a local government
agency that will work with an I.
S. P..
To develop the local.
Increase the fund then.
In requests system.
and I believe secretary Salazar
mentioned it earlier when you
were speaking about another
bills.
If you look.
And page nine in talks about
the New Mexico funds and the
competitive grant process.
What the criteria are who can
apply.
Right now this bill is so that
local governments.
State agencies public education
institutions and tribal
governments can apply.
Prices do not.
Under this bill they need to
work in collaboration with local
governments to create the local
plan and the local government a
plus.
No one.
Is to provide.
The matching funds to leverage
the dollars for federal monies.
Your ties Asian for this
competitive grant aligns with
the same plan.
Does it reached unserved or
underserved does it leverage
existing infrastructure.
Towers lines.
Rules that we have.
Does it faster digital
inclusion.
Does it align with the plan does
it stimulate economic
development.
And.
In kind of financial support for
local agencies that local Brian
Representative Powdrell Culbert
talked about earlier.
This
is a communication session that
this plan is distributed to
state agencies legislative
agencies aligned with this plan.
Session nine.
Sorry section eight section
nine.
Is the accountability.
What we reported back to us
about how these money source.
That is clearly laid out in
section nine.
Recently unserved and
underserved is a key part of
that component.
Well.
I'm simply creates a division.
And.
Sessional.
Is an amendment to the rural
telecommunications act.
So this is currently overseen by
the PRC the session.
And the PRC
overseas a surcharge for the
rural universal service fund.
Thirty million cap is about a
dollar twenty four now I think
for every telephone user in the
state you'll see it on your bill
is a surcharge and right now
five million of that is
dedicated to broadband projects.
In our regional house built and
we increased that to ten
million.
madam chair we have a committee
substitute up to this point the
committee substitute is exactly
the same.
House.
Bill but I don't know if you
want to move the committee
substituting our continue.
To move the committee self so
she's already reached out to let
me know.
World universal services fund
then we're increasing that two
eight million in the committee
so.
dedicated to broadband and in
the telecom act.
The R. C. here's money out in
requests to telecommunication
companies that is directly to a
telecommunications companies
that is not something we are
changing or creating we are just
increasing the amounts that is
dedicated to broadband and we
are directing the PRC to send to
those grant applications over to
the broadband initiatives for
the broadband division to
prioritize them in line with the
state plans.
Sen here Steve the PRC to fund.
Okay madam chair this points.
Is the esper Louise right yes or
secretary Salazar have comments
wouldn't let them do that and I
appreciate committee and share
your patience let me take you
through this work.
Yes thank you.
Representative want to move the
solvent.
Madam I move the committee.
It that how.
House transportation committee
so.
The number is I'm sorry somebody
has their money gone it.
The number is two one nine five
two zero point one.
Great thank you representative
If there is no objection do any
of the experts want to say
anything.
madam chair.
stress welcome madam chair right
they speak yes go ahead okay
thank you chair members the
committee my name is Louise
France on the sea okay Carson
electric.
Up in towns New Mexico.
First I want to offer support
for house bill ten.
I think the legislature has been
working on broadband issues for
several years and I think it's
it's time to really.
But the plan that the.
Tenants anchored as cabinet
secretary sows are in do have
put together and and really make
a statewide initiative would
like to comment is the plan is
is the legislation is doable.
In nineteen ninety eight up here
we serve inTaos Colfax group
County it was a little the lack
of broadband services here.
The members of the board work
together and in nineteen ninety
ninety Carson electric form to
Carson internet broadband
company.
At a fast forward today we own
and operates about three
thousand miles of fiber optic
that passes every home and
business.
In in the three counties that we
serve.
we've gone and we struggle to
get federal funds.
And state funds to do this but
we've been being able to do this
if in fact the legislation was
in place we could brought
matching dollars and actually
brought services quicker toria
and one also mentioned madam
chair members the committee we
offer gigabit service we're not
talking about.
Twenty five megabits that we can
offer up to gigabit services
during this pandemic.
We've been able to support
schools hospital all those of
functions that really need a
high speed reliable internet.
And we've been able to fund it
with the matching of a coop
dollars and the federal funds.
I do think the elements put out
by Representative Figueroa are
right on and to.
Can be achieved
and we also believe needs to be
technology agnostic to make sure
that we don't to we we also make
it affordable to every part of
the system.
we have people that basically
have phone service and today.
They have you know they have
speeds up to a.
Again most of our members take
about a hundred megabits up and
down.
Of but that's much much faster
than in more urban areas so I
just want to offer that that
what the sponsors are put out is
realistic but I do think you
need to be formalized
legislation so that every New
Mexican has opportunities to
high speed internet thank you.
Thank you Mr yes secretary
Seneal said did you want to say
anything.
All yes good morning madam chair
committee members we are a do it
I think this bill gives as to
the direction on how to do it
broadband offices to operate you
know we had the everything that
we do is based based upon the do
it act and we have
responsibility for broadband.
But it was broadband to public
facilities right to schools
public buildings etcetera.
Right now we're the need is and
as in the community at the
residence this allows us to bill
provides guidance on how we
operate to the office and it.
Widespread direction on our
roles and responsibilities and I
think it'll allow us to manage
the process much better I want
to thank Mr Davis for his
comments I I that I think he's
done an excellent job in
northern New Mexico and he's
establish best practices out
there we want to take those best
practices and try to use them in
other areas and you know having
a group of individuals that have
that knowledge and expertise
which we do have and do it but
our role hasn't been to the
residents and I think this will
make it more efficient for us
and give us the tools to operate
and be successful so thank you
thank all the representatives
for the hard work I know we met
with them multiple times and I
really admire their passion for
what they're doing so again
thank you.
Thank you Secretary so we'll
open it up for the public so for
those that are listening in if
you could raise your hand if you
are in support of the committee
substitute for House Bill ten
raise your hand.
Great and and if you can keep
your hands raised
for
to speak and and we'll we'll go
ahead and let you speak.
Okay first we have a secretaries
on the left go ahead.
Thank you madam I thank you
madam chair secretary Mike Santa
Fe New Mexico department of
transportation we do think this
is a good bill we appreciate all
the communication we've had with
the Sanchez and with our sister
agency do it we're generally
support of the bill madam chair
I think the only thing that I
think we have some concerns
about we're just the right away
aspects of this bill and and
having that coordinated or go
through the office of broadband
we have a tremendous amount of
right away as you can imagine
out in the state especially
along our interstate and US
highways which are governed by
federal regulation we also also
have a a lot of the spending
agreements in right away
agreements with our tribal
partners and landowners and so
we're a little concerned about
that's a huge endeavor to try
and take that on the something
we kind of do on a regular basis
into every day so I just but
hopefully like an opportunity to
work with the Sanchez on
something that that may address
that because we really need to
be coordinated through our
office and managed to our office
that in in to coincide with all
of the utility work that we do
and so that other than that we
we support the bill we think
it can do a lot of good for New
Mexico but we do have that one
concern madam chair so just want
to bring that to the attention
thank you.
Thank you Mr secretary next we
have service Gerald.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee thanks for the
opportunity to speak to you all
today my name is service
chairman senior vice president
of the greater Albuquerque
chamber of commerce without
having seen the substitute the
chambers in full support of the
spirit of this measure well
we've known about our broadband
weakness as a state for years
this year in particular has
shown us the importance of
reliable and fast internet and
how difficult life is without it
when it's our only means of
staying connected for work
school and as a community.
We believe this bill will they
critical groundwork for getting
our state's connectivity where
it needs to be especially
appreciate the kind of birds eye
view of our state's broadband
that the bill will facilitate
the creation of the broadband
development division a plus the
leadership guidance and
negotiating assistance it offers
for localities we are support
for the bill thank you.
Thank you thank you Sir up next
we have Capricorn coast yadda.
Thank you madam chair can you
hear me yes we can hear you.
Thank you so much I have to say
those of you who know me this
this conversation this morning
is that is pretty much a
legislative dream come true and
I'm my name is Katherine Posada
I am a registered lobbyist for
eighteen T. and we are grateful
to the sponsors of this
legislation for bringing this
you know this critical effort
forward in New Mexico
The.
As we know and as you discussed
sort of act link this morning
broadband is a critical
infrastructure needs and until
we address it that way we're
never going to fully address the
needs of New Mexicans so it's
got so great to hear this
conversation around broadband
and and how important it is to
all aspects of our lives not
just home use but education and
telemedicine and government
needs for years we certainly
that and working on this issue
at the legislature and as Mr
just pointed out on you know
it's something that we focused
on lots of providers have been
involved in the conversation we
passed legislation for dig wants
that resides and Lida which is a
great piece of legislation we
modernize the telecom act and
created the fund at the PRC but
you know like Mr just said we
need to go further and and
really have a consolidated
statewide effort on and
certainly this bill goes a long
way to do so this summer I know
on madam chair Rubio and Dunn
Representative Sweetser and I
believe Representative Figueroa
were involved on and that
telephone call that I had on to
provide some feedback around
this legislation and we greatly
appreciate you being able to be
part of the conversation and so
glad to see that they'll come to
correct fruition beyond what
eighteen anti as nationally to
support education efforts around
connectivity here in New Mexico.
Mexico on that the working
throughout the pandemic two on
with remote school districts
create hot spots for students
and certainly as it was
highlighted earlier on the
pandemic has shined a light on
the needs and on and brought you
know brought in especially the
remote needs to light secretary
Salazar also had some great
comments and we work closely
with hand throughout the the
pandemic as far as digital
divide issues facing our schools
in New Mexico on as well as
government government employees
hotspots and devices for and the
light for everyone so we know
that we have a date meat here we
stand in support of this
legislation for all of the
reasons that are clarified by
secretary Salazar and we just
have some concerns around it
clarity and the legislation and
I have spoken with
Representative Figueroa at
length about this I do
appreciate your time
Representative and we're so
grateful to have the opportunity
to be at the table with you on
this legislation specifically
and as a representative pointed
out and describing the
legislation service quality
standards are are referenced as
SEC baseline throughout
broadband legislation that's
just sort of standard practice
and certainly the representative
is correct and that putting a
number in there doesn't work but
Representative referencing the
FCC directly is something that
works and so if if some clarity
around service quality on could
go a step further and mentioning
the FCC baseline I know that
that would be helpful to a lot
of providers concerns as well as
a PNG
And then you know we've
mentioned the permitting and
there and the rights of way
issues are certainly that I'm
cert in our you wrap it up
because we have several people
who are I'm list behind you to
speak yeah so sorry madam chair
I'll just wrap it up I'll say we
support the bill we just would
like to see some clarity around
the mapping issue those those
are propriet that's proprietary
information and I think you know
with some co clarity in that
section we can get there as well
as service quality standards
thank you so much for bringing
this critical legislation
forward we stand and support
thank you so much.
Next we have Diane Lindstrom.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Diane Lindstrom and I'm a
volunteer at the cat with a a RP
New Mexico you might ask why a
R. P. cares about broadband
access and the reason is because
people our our membership are
raising their grandchildren.
Hello who are part of our
membership are in nursing homes
people who are part of our
membership have died and been
critically ill in greater
numbers than other.
Parts of the population.
We stand in strong support of
house bill chan we thank the
sponsors for bringing this
important legislation and thank
you for allowing me to speak.
Thank you so much ma'am next we
have the together for brother
account.
Good morning sorry chair
reviewed Christopher to
maintenance and executive
director of together for brother
site for not clarifying
my name on the account thank you
for the opportunity to speak to
the committee today about
broadband even.
Can you hear me now sorry about
that okay as it is so sorry for
the confusion it's Christopher
it is and the executive director
of together for brothers I
apologize for not clarifying my
name on the on the account
madam chair and committee thank
you for the opportunity to
address you about broadband even
before COVID we knew that
brought that access to internet
was the issue for young men of
color in Albuquerque's most
lowest income neighborhoods of
the international district in
Westgate but the last year has
really shown us that not only in
in all aspects of of young
people's lives how much the
internet is the bottle a
connector for them we hear for
you Mike young people who have
the free account or the lowest
income the the the lowest rate
internet account that they're
not able to actually submit
online assignments because the
internet is not stable enough
you can imagine the also in the
past year employment including
job applications but also
applications to be able to get
unemployment or stimulus funds
are all online which makes it
really difficult for families
who either don't have internet
or don't have reliable internet
and so broadband is an issue
even Albuquerque because for
some neighborhoods and for some
households it continues to there
you continue to be a big gap and
so we definitely support any
effort to make sure not only in
rural communities but also in
urban communities where there's
a big gap of of reliable access
to internet that we can see more
families have universal high
speed internet in their home
thank you thanks Christopher
next we have rob black.
A good afternoon madam
secretary.
Pardon me good afternoon madam
chairman Joe and members of the
committee my name is rob black
and I'm president and CEO The
New Mexico chamber of commerce
and so plaque SO happy to be
speaking here today in support
of HB ten we applaud the bill
Sanchez on this effort
in in a variety of the issues in
this bill are have been so
important for this conversation
to move broadband forward in the
state the R. DOT secretary
touched on it right away he
mentioned all of the various
entities that play a role in the
rights of way discussions in New
Mexico if you if you gave us a
billion dollars today to try to
deploy broadband we couldn't do
it right now because of those
right of way issues so he's
absolutely right we have to have
alignment and coordination and
how that gets done is obviously
one of the trickier parts and we
would love to work with the
state and others as we work with
the our federal delegation on
the trip infrastructure bill
that will be coming out of the
the new administration this year
to help again with those rights
of way issues at the federal
level as well as alignment at
the local in addition while we
support of a great deal of what
is in this bill we do want to
ensure make sure that the things
that are and are supporting
additional private investment in
in New Mexico and one of the
areas where we do have concerns
is around the issue of of which
we it was mentioned that we the
efforts of tracking progress and
I think that's something we
strongly support but we in that
process we don't to dis
incentivize private broadband
investment in particular the
service quality requirements
area is a concern.
the new broadband division and
do it agency would establish
quality service standards for
broadband services with no
limitations it simply appears to
give due at the forty to
regulate broadband in New Mexico
generally under rulemaking
authority we would we're
concerned that would create a
significant disincentive for
private investment in more
capital New Mexico again we
support the efforts in H. B. ten
and we urge the Billsponsored to
continue to work with the state
stakeholders especially our
private broadband suppliers so
that we can ensure that we get
more private investment in New
Mexico and broadband thank you
for your time thank you.
I'm next we have any Frasier.
Hello.
Hi Mandy Fraser I've been
advocating for broadband and Los
Alamos County for a number of
years of a ended up being chair
of our local board of public
utilities I found it very
difficult I still find it
difficult to do this advocacy
because we need help
understanding and technical
issues organizational issues and
having a the.
place in the state where this
was focus would be a real help
so I support legislation thank
you so much.
Richard.
next we have so we think.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is that we think and I'm a
registered lobbyist with the
national young farmers coalition
I'm also a farmer myself here in
Bernalillo and Sikora counties
nationally and farmers strongly
supports house bill ten as we
all know broadband is a critical
infrastructure need and if we
want to maintain healthy role
Connie's particularly with the
younger generation entering the
farm and ranch secretary we need
to make sure that there's stable
reliable connectivity
to to help them do so so thank
you for your time and we think
that'll Sanchez for bringing
this important piece of
legislation forward.
Thank you.
Next we have a listen listen
diem.
You madam chairman and members
of the committee my name is Lisa
deal and I'm an attorney with
the New Mexico Center on Law and
poverty and a member of the
legal team for the Yazzie
plaintiffs in the Yazzie
Martinez lawsuit and then C. O.
P. stands in support of this
bill I won't belabor this point
but it can't be stated strongly
enough access to technology was
essential before the pandemic
and it will be with the pandemic
is over right now it is urgent
in a remote learning world kids
who don't have access to
adequate reliable internet can't
have a sufficient or edges are
equitable education.
The state must invest
significant and sustainable
funding to address this critical
issue and by building a
necessary foundation this bill
begins to address the issue of
broadband internet access to
students at home and it surely a
step in the right direction
thank you.
Thank you thank you Alyssa next
we have John
Thank you chair woman and
members of the committee my name
is John direction with American
federation of teachers New
Mexico and I wanted to also add
our you support to House Bill
ten and the and the committee
substitute many of the previous
speakers have touched on a lot
of the issues so I'm not going
to repeat those but I did want
to underscore one particular
this would be a huge advance
forward for technological equity
in terms of educating students
especially in rural areas and as
educational advocates for
students and both are in the
classroom the professionals in
the field we know that rural
broadband and urban broadband is
not where it needs to be in the
state currently and and pandemic
remote learning has really
expose that inequity and so this
bill will go a long way to help
address that so thanks for the
time we urge your support.
Thank you John next we have
shared Berman.
Good morning madam chair and
committee members my name is
Sharon Berman I am a civic
engagement and policy manager at
New Mexico First and I'm a
registered lobbyist for New
Mexico first we would like to
exchange extend our thanks to
Representative Figueroa and to
the working group of state
legislators to join forces over
the past year to study the issue
and make this bill possible
amazing work and deep thanks to
all the members of the committee
you for your dedication and
commitment to New Mexico.
Institutionalizing broadband
development is very much aligned
with recommendations from our
recent health body mind and
spirit town hall as well as
recommendations from the last
six town halls New Mexico first
is hosted in the past decade and
more our in recent town hall
Committee conversations with
people from all over the state
we've heard time and again that
often broadband infrastructure
development goes to communities
who are the most ready so what
happens is those who have
broadband get better broadband.
We heard stories from people who
had to travel as much as six
hours for a fifteen minute
appointment sometimes out of
state to get care with because
telehealth wasn't possible.
and you've all heard the stories
about children sitting outside
in the parking lot of their
library or school to have access
to the internet for their school
work and that's during tolerable
weather conditions
people have addressed that so
many of the points I don't need
to go in any more detail we just
wanted his voice our support the
connect messed Mexico act
provides for so much the people
of our state needs we hope you
support House Bill ten thank you
very much thank you Sharon next
we have Gilbert what the
amendment.
Hi thank you very much for
promoting this legislation and
allowing that the comments
I'm gonna with the and I'm with
the COVID consolidated school
districts in southwestern New
Mexico we have a large rural
population that is affected by
not having internet access we
have over a hundred and fifty
Why I Google wifi units out
through many of our students and
it provides
A very slow connection plus we
have multiple students at some
of the houses that make it even
more difficult but more
importantly our responsibility
as government is to provide an
education for students and now
it seems like the internet
service is part of the brick and
mortar requirement it's equal to
the brick and mortar requirement
to establishing
contact with the students to
find what we're legally
responsible to provide to them
I favor this I think it's
essential and its need is going
to grow with or without the
COVID and so I strongly support
this and I thank you for the
opportunity to speak.
Thanks so much we're next we
have Bill Jordan.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee on Bill
Jordan representing New Mexico
voices for children I want to
thank all the sponsors of this
legislation and all of those
amazing women legislators who
work on developing this
initiative leading up to the
session I think we all a rude
awakening to just how bad our
connectivity is around the state
when this pandemic this isn't
just about the pandemic though
it's about the need to get
businesses connected rural
residents teachers and school
kids everywhere were especially
pleased to see that the sponsors
are going big this is no time to
go slow please do comment don't
back down don't water down and
we really appreciate your
support for this timely
legislation thank you.
Thanks so much bill I'm just
real quick you all for the folks
on the committee we have to let
the speaker's office know that
we're still in committee and
that we will be excused so just
a heads up on that next we have
a Dorothy C. in.
Thank you madam chair of this is
Dorothy C. normal volunteer with
the veterans caucus Democratic
Party of New Mexico my twenty
one year military veteran.
I want to add my voice to the
chorus in support I'll be brief
I also want to think that
magnificent committee of
representatives who worked on
this particularly a fellow
veteran Syriana we're in
support.
Thank you so much for the next
we have a contact.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee I'm
speaking on behalf of the league
of women voters of New Mexico
the league has a position of
high speed broadband should be
equally available to all New
Mexicans and as Representative
as Representative Figueroa said
the trick is figuring out how to
get there there are several
different broadband bills and
this year's session we look at
all of them and we believe HB
tennis the best it would do the
most to help digital library and
make New Mexico more competitive
with other states it's the ten
doesn't just study and quantify
the problem like some of the
bills although that part is very
important to but it also
includes good ideas for how to
work with local governments to
design and fund the
infrastructure that the monopoly
companies clearly aren't
interested in providing us.
Thank you thank the sponsors for
all their hard work in writing
the bill and we ask the
committee to please supported
for you can thank you.
Thank you so much of Madam next
we have Francis Gonzalez.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee yeah
stand
my name is Frances Gonzales some
compared to Mexico from the
mining district in a rural area
in the southwest part of New
Mexico chair and that and that
red paint of course spring's
archer call Apache I'm also the
congressional district to
travel a long to progressive
caucus the rural area to which I
reside and Representative is
affected by underserved unserved
and tribal governments which are
all in my Geographic Area this
bill is diverse avenues
inclusive of all New Mexicans
and connect New Mexico and the
need for the committee to
support and create a uniform
system regulations
infrastructure across all our
governmental Jim jurisdictions
and especially funding.
More need for high speed
internet for hospitals Telemeds
police agencies are small
businesses our educators and our
students are not get progressive
caucus supports and to pass the
house bill ten of greetings to
my relatives on the committee
and thank you to all the bill
Sanchez thank you.
Thank you so much Francis next
we have and Rougemont.
Good morning.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee and
Rougemont registered lobbyist
for the New Mexico rural
electric cooperative
association.
I would like to thank the
sponsors to bring in this
broadband bill forward also like
to thank Representative Figueroa
for the discussion we had in
house bill ten.
Rural areas are in dire need of
broadband infrastructure
specially the most remote areas
in rural New Mexico the need for
broadband expansion has never
been greater than it is today.
This bill would be a stepping
stone you're trying to close the
digital divide gap that exists
in rural New Mexico.
I want to thank the sponsor for
expressing high interest in
working with rural electric
cooperatives in an effort to
plan and execute broadband
projects throughout rural New
Mexico and with local
governments.
We stand in support of house
bill ten and we look forward to
working with the sponsors in the
chair in rural communities are
part of the broadband expansion
plan since rural electric
cooperative survey eighty
percent of the land mass in New
Mexico thank you.
Thank you Sir next we have David
Hinkle.
Yes good morning.
Madam chair members the
committee thank you very much
for this opportunity to comment
I'm the need past chair and
current board member of the
nasco foundation which is
focused on supporting the
frontier communities an outline
course of our state the pandemic
curry we set up some pilot
programs in response one of
which was a two part
communications broadband
communications effort one of
which reached into the outlying
areas along the border in
southern New York County and
others working with tribes and
pueblos across the state.
we are particularly interested
in supporting this what is very
good bill because it coordinates
to broadband planning and
development across the agencies
which is been a problem for many
of us in the state for in a
number of years despite the very
good work done by do it and our
numbers state agencies and
secondly because of the connect
New Mexico fund which provides
mechanisms to collect and
distribute grants and
strengthens the role of local
governor so there's greater
communication about local need
and the ability to coordinate a
response the only other thing
I'd like to add is that since
this allows ample opportunity to
broaden the relationship between
the private public and nonprofit
sectors and respond so we
support each feature thank you
very much for the opportunity to
come.
Thank you so much Sir next we
have Scott Scanlon.
Thank you madam thank you madam
chair my name is Scott Scanlon
registered lobbyists for the
southwest cable communications
association we represent the
four major.
Able providers in the state of
New Mexico plus the number of
small and medium size.
companies throughout the the the
rural part of the state we we
understand the goals of this
bill
I specially appreciative to
Representative Chandler for
reaching out and and discussing
it with us
we support the goals of this
bill we understand it's a work
in progress but you know we we
provide seventy five percent of
all the broadband that's
currently out there and
available in New Mexico and so
we look forward to being at the
table and being a working
partner to get this bill passed
thank you madam chair.
Thank you next we have
from the honest.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee to take a
on the honest executive director
for the New Mexico exchange
carrier group.
The New Mexico exchange carrier
group is comprised of eleven
telephone companies providing
voice and internet service to
customers General areas in New
Mexico.
Our association members include
Baca valley telephone company
bell telephone company in a more
plateau.
Conozco belly telephone
cooperative you're gonna tell
column Tularosa basin telephone
company valley telephone group
western New Mexico telephone the
co cooperative when stream
telecommunications and level
communications as frontier
communications.
madam chair members of the
committee we just recently
received the committee
substitute are eleven company
members are reviewing the
substitute we wanna fall
Representative Figueroa and the
fantastic group of women
supporting and sponsoring and
bringing this important piece of
legislation forward.
We look forward to working with
the sponsors on being are
working partner at the table and
madam chair members of the
committee thank you for your
opportunity to speak with you
today.
Thank you so much I'm that is it
for folks who are in support of
this legislation is there anyone
in the audience was in
opposition of the committee
substitute for House Bill ten.
If you can raise your hand if if
you are in opposition.
It doesn't look like there's any
opposition in the attendees so
we'll move to the committee on
first we have Representative
Crowder.
Thank you madam chair I just
want technical question I would
ask the Sanchez to consider when
they begin to consider the
transportation request is find
ways and easements.
On page twenty five of the bill
my twenty one of twenty two this
is the commission shall evaluate
the amount of the cap
inappropriate receiving to be
completed by June thirtieth
twenty nineteen.
In line I line for I'm sorry
they have amended the amount of
money each to be put out they
amended that to eight million
dollars in the house committee
substitute bill so my request
would be to go back and examine
online twenty the cap of thirty
million dollars is that cannot
no money if we have adjusted the
amount that is shall be put out
each year I would just ask you
to look at that it'll come to
appropriations will visit about
it they're just want to ask you
to look at it for us please
thank you.
Thank you Representative Crowder
next we have Representative
Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you representatives for bringing
this bill I think you guys have
done a significant amount of
work
And in just listening to the
comments you know there's
several people that spoke in
favor of this today also asked
for an opportunity to be at the
table as as state as you
continue to move for and I for
one am one of those people that
would like to be at the table I
do have some concerns with
respect to right of way.
I think this bill could could
use an amendment to the The
Washington ran way that
clarifies the but clarifies that
and then we could also use
amendment to clarify and service
quality.
Standards this is also
discussed.
So.
And I believe there were some
comments that were coming from
the.
The.
Well yes sure for A. T. and T.
as well and so I again I I
appreciate the efforts I I
appreciate the antenna and
Got ready.
You guys worked hard on this and
so I appreciate all that
And that I hope to see those
amendments and if there's
anything that I can do to help I
would be happy to be part of
that thank you very much.
Thank you representative our
next we have Representative
Harper.
Thank you for your
it's great to see you this
morning representatives thank
you for bringing this bill
forward.
So.
I am.
Those to this legislation.
But I also understand that I'm
in the minority and this is you
get through so I wanna make sure
that you're successful and that
this is the best legislation
that it can be for your purpose.
First I I mentioned earlier
I'm I'm a big space geek nerd I
I know it's a complete shock to
everyone in the room
but.
I've just been completely
fascinated with the commercial
space program renaissance are
going through right now and the
incredible.
Re use of rockets that you on
mosque in SpaceX have been able
to accomplish in Iraq is not
even up six times.
And landed successfully
Level is gonna make it so much
more inexpensive.
To this work and one of his big
project programs that his votes
to raise money so we can go to
Mars.
Is a satellite system for
satellite internet and satellite
cell phones.
And when I first started here
just a few satellites up there
but every launch was sixty
satellites up.
And he now has one thousand one
hundred forty five satellites
up.
And they're averaging a launch
essentially a week.
And he wants the up to about
three thousand satellites for US
coverage and then the plan is to
eventually drive about twelve
thousand satellites to cover the
entire world.
There was a really cool article
about the US Air Force using his
system has a beta test and they
loved it and right now there are
ten thousand people in the U. S.
beta testing it and they're
getting speeds that are
comparable maybe even a little
better to the cable internet.
So you can see how.
This could be a complete game
changer were not only are we
getting our internet.
And I have to do is get a little
dish what kind what UFO just
like you would get for direct TV
additional missile dishes past
your house you've got internet
you don't need a broadband fiber
going up you'll need a cable
anything I got your house.
so I could revolutionise
internet in there also talking
about doing so full coverage.
So so I I really think in the
next couple years we're gonna
see issues were running a
revolution and where we get our
data and so I personally believe
that this is maybe a little bit
late will still need broadband
XXL towers.
But I don't think.
It's going to be.
Representative use of are very
limited tax dollars to to put in
that into broadband especially
since in a couple years.
More than half of us are going
to be getting our internet
through satellite.
So that's why I'm opposed.
But.
I just want to
increase you all I think of
madam chair and representative
your next office appropriations
is that right.
Six.
Yeah.
Representative it is going to
appropriations next.
Thank you madam chair and I and
I appreciate all the hard work
that was done in this I know it
wasn't just dreamed up in a few
weeks ago.
but there are few things that I
think need to be looked at
between now appropriations not
really again just wanted to make
sure your bill is as good as it
can be.
We have to be careful about I'm
doing state regulation of things
that are already federally
regulated.
I know that there are federal
maps already officer and I seem
to be duplicative of us to
develop our own maps.
And.
And I know there are some other
things that were were mentioned
During the hearing but I would
just.
Again increase your reach out to
the industry I'm glad you've
reached out to some of them
already but if you could reach
out to the others because
they're the ones that there are
gonna have to implement this
thirty after your partners and
you want to make sure that they
feel like they were involved and
that's our concerns are
addressed so I would just the
very strongly encourage you to
do that so that
this program can be as
successful as you hope.
So thank you madam chair.
Madam chair representative thank
you and thank you to the
representatives you spoke prior
year bringing up good points I'd
like to address three of them
that you have brought up and one
is around technology this bill
is technology neutral for
exactly that reason it changes
too fast and whether whether the
broadband access is going to be
provided by and your double by
satellite
to cable by in tower.
That is where the local
community in partnership with
their industry whatever I just
do they want to work with we're
electric coop CenturyLink
I'm saying they're going to make
a plan to service their
community best and applied for
the grant that works that way we
specifically did not want to put
limitations on the technology
because for one space again to
another it changes to yes so
there's one regarding regulation
you're absolutely correct Madam
chair representative when you
say we we can't regulate
something that the federal
government says weekends or
already regulates on their own
on page six of the bill is has a
division shall establish by
rural standards for quality of
service.
The service is defined
definition section.
And then we cycle right back to
the idea that we can't put a
number in this bill we can't say
the target is a hundred megabits
per second download and fifty
maintenance as well because you
just you fast.
The languages of the bill is so
we are competitive with
neighboring states it's kind of
thank the minimum is the FCC
baseline anymore.
because that has to be aligned
with applications for federal
grants that defines the
unserved underserved this
office.
Should do the research on the
exploration and say okay this is
the target.
Because our measurement metric
as a state holding this office
accountable for the money they
spend are we hitting that target
so somebody has to put a number
down is not a regulation that is
given to the industry instead
you have to do this.
It can't be we're not allowed to
do that but it is a measurement
metric that we must have for
count ability purposes.
All.
And regarding maps I will say
the SEC discussed sixty five
million dollars to do national
maps of unserved and underserved
so we will be able to access
those we are not in this bill
stipulating New Mexico has to
make their own maps we just have
to have an office where the maps
are capped in state and and we.
The measurements of success and
progress we have to know where
the underserved and unserved
are.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you representative.
Thank you Representative great
answers I appreciate you taking
the time to explain those to
thank you and and from one space
to another.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Harper next we
have a vice chair Garcia about
of judges want to see if you're
ready to entertain a motion for
a new bass this piece of
legislation thank you I share
yes I'm happy to entertain is
their second Representative
Madrid.
And Mario if you can just.
Okay great so we have a motion
for.
With Rep I Strickler Sienna
second from Representative
Madrid.
Go ahead and do Raul camara.
Yes.
Representative Gerets yes.
Representative Harper will.
Which is no.
Representative.
Representative Madrid.
You.
Representative.
Yes with the explanation.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Representative Romero.
Yes.
But.
A yes.
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
I'm sure Rubio yes.
Eight votes in the affirmative
one and then they get.
Thank you Mario that's so thank
you Representative and I
Representative for you know why
you do have a due pass for
Committee substitute house bill
ten
Is did you all have any closing
remarks before we're done with
your bill.
Representative Pettigrew real
quick you wanted to explain your
vote.
Thank you madam chair and again
thank you all representatives
for bringing this forward
I do want to be clear
voted yes because I think there
are some things that
that we can do with this I I am
very serious that I there are
several amendments that need to
be added to this and and and and
I don't want to have to debate
amendment on the floor thank
you.
You representative
Representative feet off thank
you madam chair and thank you
committee look forward to
working with Representative
Pettigrew and sing one thing
which you would suggest and and
going through the details again
and House Appropriations so
thank you committee thank you
for I'm and committee members
before we adjourn I I did want
to just brief folks that after
our briefing last week on house
bill three which is the
transportation appropriation act
there were a lot of questions
from many of you
which I think are important to
address especially in the
development of the
recommendations and so yesterday
I called on a small bipartisan
group which included myself vice
chair Garcia on chairwoman
Lundstrom Representative Crowder
and Representative Pettigrew
with staff analyst from the
committee as well as legislative
finance committee there are
several
issues that folks wanted to
discuss including that David
Abbey
first the first issue we
discussed was regarding the
fifty to fifty four point nine
million of new revenue and fund
balances to be added into the
budget the preference was that
the majority of this money
should be used directly on the
improvement of the highways and
we apply much of this to highway
maintenance for our twenty fifth
twenty five million program
divided between the six high we
districts also included in the
recommendation is an additional
five million for heavy equipment
three million for rest area
improvement and twelve million
for a hundred percent state
program because of timing issues
I would like to bring House Bill
three and the operating budget
before the committee Thursday
morning at eight thirty to keep
it on schedule for House
Appropriations on the other
issue discussed was the special
appropriation of a hundred and
fifty.
In and we can bring that to
committee the following week so
I wanted to just share that with
you all so that when we do meet
on Thursday the that's the the
conversation that we had
yesterday with with some of the
folks that I mentioned and so I
wanted to to let you all just
snow Representative Pettigrew
and then Representative Aug
Karen.
I am concerned it is my
understanding is that no
committee for you on Thursday
after request.
Yes Representative I know that
all committees will have
will not be meeting on Thursday
and Friday
because of because we already
heard a lot of things around
this bill I figured we could
meet for update on Thursday if
folks were if if that was what
folks wanted to entertain we can
still hear the bill next Tuesday
it is cutting it short before
appropriations so I'm happy to
to talk to you all about that
at at the end and Representative
pedigree were calling me so no
if if that was by accident
Representative Gary and then
Representative Madrid.
In question that Representative
Pettigrew asked covered.
Okay.
Representative Madrid.
Madam chairman chairwoman act I
would.
Like to say that even discussing
it this coming Thursday I think
the the feeling among us would
be still this constraint to the
timeline when we know we still
got to be on the floor I just
think that we were discussing
this bill we need to have the
ample time I don't know what
should times will I was thinking
are you talking about our half
hour.
on Thursday because I really
think it's a discussion open up
considerably given that you've
guys of already gotten together
and now we need to first year
which is what you will discuss
and then we need to make some.
Pondering thoughts and dialogue
discussion on this foster one.
Yeah so Representative as I
mentioned in what I just noted
is those are the recommendations
that were made by the folks who
got together yesterday so I was
offering up the opportunity to
have that discussion that did it
the discussion on Thursday if
that is something that folks are
are interested in participating
in we can and then would Tuesday
having a vote on Tuesday I'm
just letting you all know that
it's it's it's cutting it close
so I'm just giving you that
information I share Garcia.
Thank you madam chair just to
reiterate what the
Representative Madrid said you
know we do have to.
They don't know what's going on
because you know that would
nobody gets blindsided of we're
going to do and you know a
little time will be good and I
know we'll cut a real short but.
I want everybody this committee
to be aware of was what was
discussed like I said not but I
wouldn't want to give the blind
sided we're getting a rush do
what we need to do so if there
is fine if you want to meet
would with it but make sure the
rest of the committees pilot to
madam chair thank you.
Thank you thank you
representative vice chair.
is there any opposition to
meeting on Thursday.
Madam chair I'm sorry I I don't
know what happened I think I got
kicked out did we agree on a
time.
Well the floor is scheduled to
start at nine and so we can meet
at eight and have a full hour of
of conversation around house
bill three if that's what folks
are willing to do
as I mentioned we can pull we
can move it to next Tuesday it's
cutting it close I know that
there's a lot of communities
committees meeting over the
weekend so
to discuss the budget over the
weekend in in the midst of all
of the committees being already
meeting I think it's it's
something that I just want to
offer to folks in terms of
having that discussion on
Thursday we have in our if we're
still not ready to bow on it
then we Tuesday is sort of like
the last opportunity before it
has to go to appropriations.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair.
Mr Garcia I just suggestion
madam chair if you think of it
up you know how dollars not a
long time you know as far as I'm
concerned most people are
working from the house we can
for the I do seven thirty that's
a reasonable for everybody else
madam chair or eight o'clock but
everything is fair.
A lot of the committee agrees
on.
Thank you representative I think
that if folks are okay with
eight A. M. on Thursday we'll do
a full hour and then we'll see
where we're at then and then and
then make a decision that.
Thank.
All right sounds good thank you
all so much for today's
Committee and for all of this is
discussion I appreciate you all
and we will see you soon.
Your suggestions into
consideration thank you House
Bill can't thank you thank you
madam chair thank you everyone.
