Representative Chairman Lnte.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Thank you, Madam Vice Chairwoman
and committee members, happy
Valentine's Day to everybody in
the committee, all the audience,
and those that are online, uh
appreciate the opportunity to
present our bill this morning,
uh, with me this morning, we
have our, our co-sponsor, Gay
Representative Gail Armstrong,
who is the minority leader, uh,
she's here in the back and uh
she's gonna reserve her comments
for when things get testy, as
well as uh my expert witness who
is Jason Kasuga, who is the CEO
for the Middle Rio Grande
Conser.
District. As I begin, Madam
Chairwoman and committee
members.
In 1923, this this New Mexico
legislature passed the
Conservancy Act, which primary
services are to provide
irrigation, flood control, and
drainage to the Middle Rio
Grande Valley of New Mexico,
which is essentially on the
north border at Cochiti Dam
flowing all the way south
following the Rio Grande down to
the Bosca della Pace, uh, uh,
wildlife preserve. Uh, in that,
uh, within that boundary area,
there's a number of numerous
number of, of agricultural.
properties, uh, as well as small
towns, large cities, uh, city of
Albuquerque, as well as 6
pueblos within their their
boundary. Historically, uh, the
Middle Rio Grande Conservancy
District has managed their own
elections without fault,
question, and at their own costs
since their inception back in
1923. Uh, the local, however,
In 2018, via House Bill 98, the
local Election Act passed that
included the middle randa
Conservancy District.
That House Bill 98, again in
2018 included a three-year delay
implementation for the Middle
Rio Grande Conservancy District,
as it was recognized then that
there would be challenges to its
implementation for the MRGCD.
Shortly after the passage of the
local Election Act, the Middle
Rio Grande Conservancy District
and the Secretary of State began
a lengthy uh number of meetings
collaborating, uh, in regards to
a process to bring the MRGCD
into the local election.
A
Through that collaborative
process, significant
implementation obstacles were
encountered. Those difficulties
led to the passage of last
year's Senate Bill 335, which
further delayed the middle
regran consumery district's
inclusion into the local
election Act. Uh.
Later years of continued efforts
find implementation solutions
failed.
It failed to materialize as the
year-long process unfolded, we
encountered, they encountered
serious valid concerns from
either county clerks from their
constituents, and especially the
6 Middle Rio Grande Pueblos that
vote in these elections. Uh,
that led us to the conclusion
that the best path forward for
all involved was to remove the
middle Rio Grande Conservancy
District from the local Election
Act and returned their
administration of those
elections back to the MRGCD.
But this bill seeks to remove
the MRGCD and turn those
elections back to their
administration, again, at their
own cost.
This bill does not make any
changes to the local Election
Act other than the removal of
the middle rebranded Conservancy
District from the Act and
returned those elections.
To the administration again at
their cost. And with that, Madam
Chair and let's, uh, our, our
co-sponsor has anything else to
add to it, which she does not,
she indicated, or does, uh, Mr.
Kosugas have anything else to
add to this? Uh, he does, if you
would allow him to time.
Madam Chair, um, Madam co-chair,
uh committee, appreciate the
opportunity on behalf of the
Little Rio Grande Conservancy
District Board of Directors, we
appreciate the opportunity, um,
to be here today and uh we
appreciate the sponsors um for
supporting this bill. Uh, one of
the things that I want to add is
that um at our February board
meeting, the uh board of
directors of the Middle Rio
Grande Conservancy District
passed a resolution. I have a
copy of that resolution here,
um, that I can pass around and I
believe that you may have access
to that in your packets. If not,
Um, I can see that you get one,
but that resolution was meant to
show ERGCD's commitment to
ensuring that our elections as
we go forward and with the
rulemaking that would be
required to come after this, uh,
that, uh, we implement measures
to encourage voter turnout, um,
items including but not limited
to early voting, absentee
ballot, mail-in voting, those
kinds of things. So, um, as
said, MRGCD has a long history
of administering our elections,
uh, we, we echo the sentiment
provided by
Um, Representative Linte and
appreciate the opportunity to be
here today. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chairman. We
stand for questions.
Mr. Kazuka and before I call or
comments, Representative Lite,
you forgot.
And flowers. I'm just kidding.
Madam Chair, you think I forgot
your chocolates. There's a
surprise after this, depending
on the outcome.
to comments in the audience,
those in support of the bill,
please raise your hands. OK,
those in opposition, raise your
hands, seeing none, let's go
ahead and take 5 supporting
comments from the audience at
one minute.
Adam Chair Dan Najar on behalf
of the pueblo of Santa Ana and
on behalf of Governor Armijo and
our tribal council, we urge you
to pass this this measure, and
we thank the sponsors.
Oh
Good morning, madam chair,
co-chair.
Um, my name is Michael T.
Sandoval. I'm a former governor
and a tribal council member for
the Pablo San Felipe.
It's Pablo San Felipe on behalf
of the administration strongly
supports this bill.
Thank you, Madam Chairman,
members of the committee, good
morning. John Thompson, I'm a
registered lobbyist for the
Middle Rio Grande Conservancy
District. I want to thank
Representative Wuente. I want to
thank Representative Armstrong.
I also want to thank the
Secretary of State's office for
their years of efforts and
trying to help us find a
solution here. Um, Madam
Chairman, while, while Noble
House Bill 98.
was not an implementable
solution for us, the one size
fit all did not work uh for us
despite, uh again, years of
efforts even passing a piece of
legislation to add extended time
for us to find a solution. We
really are here as a matter of
last resort and, and would
encourage you to pass this
legislation so we can resolve
this situation and get back to
running our elections as we have
for 100 years. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chairman of
Committee, Larry Heran
registered lobbyist for the
Pueblo of Sandia. We'd like to
thank the conservancy District
andresentative Lite, the, the
tribal council and the
administration of Pueblo of
Sandia identified this bill as a
top priority for us during this
session and so we appreciate the
sponsors bringing it forward. It
puts it puts these elections
back where they should be and
gives our tribal members, the
the best voice in their
elections on a matter that's
very important to them, so.
Thank you for your support,
Madam Chair.
Good morning, care. My name is
Kathy Elliott and I am the
registered lobbyist for Arch
Hurley Conservancy District,
Arch Hurley is another
conservancy district that has
exactly the same issues. So we
100% support this bill. The
local quay County clerk cannot
run these elections. And so her
hands are tied and there needs
to be a legislative solution to
this. We appreciate your
support. Thank you.
5
What very briefly, uh, uh, good
morning, uh, Madam Chairwoman,
members of the committee. My
name is Pablo Per Junior, and
I'm water counsel and legal
counsel to Santo Domingo Pueblo.
Um, this bill needs to be
passed. If it's not passed, it
will lead to the
disenfranchisement of voting for
thousands of Pueblo individuals
who have beforehand voted in
these elections. We are you to
pass it. Thank you so much.
Let's go to online. Do we have
any?
Let's go ahead.
Hi Jure Abeda, can you hear us?
Yes, I can. Can you hear me?
Hello?
Below
Hello
Can you hear me, we're working
on technical issues. Just give
me one sec.
Everyone's looking puzzled. I
don't think they can hear me.
But I think it is.
They're working on it, I guess
that's true. OK. Are you on it
too?
Governor, this is Derek, um, we
can't hear you, but we can see
what you're saying. So we're
reading it, so don't say nothing
bad.
OK.
Yeah, short and sweet is
perfect.
Oh,
OK
OK, we will afford him a time.
To make his comments in the
meantime.
Do we have any opposing comments
online.
You can see your comments
and I didn't see any opposing
comments in the audience, so
committee members.
Represented a block.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
Representative. So these
Uh, or Mr. Chairman, rather, uh,
would you give me some
information about how these
elections are administered or
have been since.
The twenties, the other, the
previous twenties. And so could
you just tell me a little bit
about that because I know at
least local elections, at least
in town, for example, they have
to contract it with the clerk to
do them. So how does that work
when it comes to these
conservation districts, Madam
Chair, uh, Mr. Chair.
Uh, Madam Chair and, and
Representative Block, um, I, I
was remiss in regards to
recognizing Lindsay Bachmann
from the Mexico City, uh,
Secretary of State's office that
helped us out with this bill,
uh, and also in regards to a
quick message from the Archurley
Conservancy District is that we
wanted to include them, but the
amendment came too late to be
able to present it in this bill
in this committee. So we have
every intent to want to see them
included in this bill, but in
regards to, to your question,
Representative Block, uh.
A little bit of disclosures that
I was once a, a board member on
the Middle Rio Grand Conservancy
District and in doing so, I was
a board member there for 10
years prior to being a member
here. And, and those local
elections as I found them were
always done on a localized
level, always brought in, they
always brought in um a third
party, uh, organization to
conduct their their local
elections, but I want to allow
for our CEO to expand on exactly
uh the history of that.
Is that working now? Great.
Uh, Madam Chair, Madam Vice
Chair, members of the committee,
um Representative Block, um,
thank you for your question. So
the answer is yes, MRGCD has
hired out a a contractor to
administer our elections. Um,
they oversee the process of
ensuring that um they work with
the district and create the
polling locations, um, and help
bring the administrative work of
that together, um, uh, the
assistant hiring the poll
workers to make sure that those
poll workers are trained. Um,
one of the things that they also
do is, as the database for
qualified.
electors is put together, um,
they worked to make sure that
that database is properly
entered into the voting machines
um for the day of election and
the, and again, our, our
qualified electors are different
in that, um, we're conservancy
district who benefits um a
certain land area and so it's
the qualified electors are the
landowners who draw benefits
and, and that's what you're
seeing today with landowners
being both non-tribal and tribal
landowners, um, and which has
created the conflict of how you
integrate, um.
the Middle Rio Grande
Conservancy District's elections
into the local Elections Act.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
Representative that, that did
help me.
I was just wondering it, it was
curious to me, but there's a
third party, and it sounds like
they've been working well
before. I mean, I guess if you
run it for 100 years, nothing
wrong. I, I don't see why not
keep it the way it is. So, Madam
Chair Representative, uh, next
question real quick. This is
probably gonna be my last
question.
Uh, page 3, we're talking about
election director and election
officer.
Did we previously have these
roles before the the law changed
and are we just adding it back
into the statute. Can you just
give me some more info on that,
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
um, Representative Block, again,
thank you for the question. So
the in terms of, I think what we
were trying to accomplish is to
um as close as we can roll back
the procedures to prior to the
Elections Act being passed, um,
I think when you look into the
bill, there is some um
Opportunity for the MRGCD to uh
go through a rulemaking process,
um, that would allow us to, um,
I think create better access to
voting. Um, we know that that
was the intention of the local
Elections Act is to um try to uh
make it easier for folks to be
able to vote, um, make it more
available, uh, make it to all of
our constituents, be it tribal
and non-tribal. And so we think
that the language in the current
bill would give MRGCD the
ability to go through that
process and there is a
Check and balance in there in
that um those rules would be
submitted to the Secretary of
State's office to review to
ensure compliance within with
Allstate um and federal laws. So
the, we appreciate that
flexibility, um, that is the
nature of the resolution and the
commitment by the MRGCD board to
create that access in this
process, um, again, to encourage
uh as much voter turnout, water
is precious, um, and we know
that people want their voices
heard when it comes to water
issues and we want to make sure
that they, they have that
opportunity.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
Representative. I'll, I'll leave
it to the rest of the panel
before I make a decision on this
bill, but really appreciate you
guys and uh thanks so much.
Appreciate it, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Zamora.
Thank you, Madam Chan. Thank you
for bringing this bill forward,
Representative, and
So what business does the board
take care of this MRGCD board.
What, what is it that they, that
you look at and take care of and
regards to the election or just
the board itself?
But, but, but the board creates
some kind of rules or, or to, to
run the disc to run this.
This irrigation district, right?
So, so is it splitting the water
or?
Taking care of the water laws
that, that, that you have to
abide by or what, what does the
board actually do? Yeah, uh,
Madam Chair and representatives
of MOA. So the board consists
of, of 6 members.
7 members. Sorry, it's been a
while. 7 members and, and
perhaps I'll let the CEO talk
about it because it's been 10
years.
and post COVID that.
So Madam Chair, Madam Vice
Chair, um, Representative, thank
you for the question. So the
Middle Rio Grande Conservancy
District was again created um
through the Conservancy Act of
1923, which allowed for um quite
a few missions, but by the time
the official plan of the MRGCD
was created, those missions were
confined to river flood control
to groundwater drainage and to
delivering irrigation water to
constituents of the Middle
valley. So that's what the MRGCD
Board oversees. Um, we have.
Uh, that that board has
developed policies and rules um
through resolutions to, to guide
how the MRGCD um does the does
those duties. Uh, the MRGCD and
the board of directors is guided
by an official plan that was
approved by the conservancy
court, uh, which the approval of
that plan was delegated to a
conservancy court by the
Conservancy Act, and that's what
the Middle Rio Grande
Conservancy District has been
doing since our inception, um,
in 1923.
Thank you for that answer and
thank you,
Madam Chair
of the
no
they didn't do
it it doesn't.
It doesn't have anything to do
with that, right? Madam Chair.
Hello, Madam Madam Chair, Madam
vice chair, um, representative,
thank you for the question.
The, the answer to that question
is
that's une
nothing that is in this bill
changes the requirements of the
state of New Mexico to the
principle I think is what you're
I think is what you're getting
out of
New Mexico to the principle I
think is what you're I think is
what you're getting out
the, the accounting point at
least for the middle alley would
be Elephant Butte that would
stay the same.
This bill has no effect on that.
That and, and one last question,
Madam Chair is.
I, I'd like to hear from the
Secretary of State's office.
As to how
We don't have to go through the
county clerk on this. Why, why
is that so and
And, but it, but it still goes
to the, the Secretary of State.
Am I correct, Madam Chair?
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, um, Lindsay Bachmann,
director of legislative and
executive affairs for the
Secretary of State's office. Um,
um.
Madam Tes representative, the
answer to your question is that
um the way that the bill reads
is that the conservancy district
itself will go through a
woolmaking process. They
actually already have um some
structure in role um and in
their governance documents that
they have been utilizing as part
of their elections. Um, but when
they go and do rulemaking, the
Secretary of State's office will
play a role in that, but that's
it in terms of the election, so
there won't be county clerk
involvement.
and there won't be Secretary of
State involvement in the
election.
So, Madam Cur and, and uh
Lindsay, how
Will this affect other
Government
Maybe government entities is the
word I'm looking for in the
state. Will they be able to pull
away from the county clerks and
and.
do their own thing or?
Madam Chair Representative,
that's a really great question,
and it's an important one. And
what I think, um, the CEO has
done a great job of, of
explaining and, and
representative Linda, um, is
that this is a very unique
district that encompasses these
very unique pueblos, um, and,
and, and that requires a unique
election for them based on the
definition of qualified elector
for them.
And, and Madam Chair, and uh
Lindsay, and that's my concern
is now we have Arch Hurley and
who else is gonna call
themselves unique, and then how
much is this gonna change
throughout the state. But I look
forward to, to supporting this
bill, and I look forward to see
how this all works out and, and
how we all get educated with it.
Thank you, Madam Chair. That
concludes my questions.
Thank you, Representative. I
would like to take a pause now
and hear from 2nd Lieutenant
Governor Abeda online.
In support of the bill.
Rao Beta, can you hear us?
OK, my apologies, we still have
technical difficulties. I have
on the list representative.
Madam Vice Chair Little and
Representative Luhan, Madam
Chair, I would like to move a
due pass on this bill. Can you
wait?
OK, we have a motion for due
pass a second.
Do we have any opposition?
Seeing none, Representative
Chairman Lite,
how would you pass?
You Madam Chair, thank you
committee members.
Thank you. OK, let's go. We are
rolling, uh, at the request of
the sponsor House Bill 221. So
let's go ahead and move along to
House Bill 252.
Representative Herrera.
Yeah
Herrera. Uh, thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, members of the
committee. Good to be here
today. Happy Valentine's Day.
Uh, this is my favorite bill.
Uh, I've worked a long time
trying to figure out how we can
help grandparents that are kind
of in transition, you know, they
haven't decided to have custody.
They, they don't know if they
should get kinship care or
kinship custody or become a a
formal foster care, um,
grandparents, and it's
It's when CYFD calls him, calls
their
The, the parents subs, we're
gonna come and get your kids
tomorrow if you don't have a
place to put it.
And of course, who did they call
their mom and dad and, and
they're, and most of these kids
are not little kids. Most of
them are school age between, you
know, 5 and 20.
And, and the next thing you
know, uh, a grandparent has 3
mad teenagers at their door,
right?
And, and these grandparents,
many of them are on Social
Security at very limited
incomes, and, and trying to
figure out how to, how to manage
this and how to do all these
things and, and, um, uh, I
really worked hard with uh
Emily, uh, Kallenbach, uh, the,
uh, secretary of the Department
of Aging and to, to figure out
how we could do this and then I
reached out to our foundations
all over.
this state
Uh, the Lanel Foundation will be
the lead on this, uh, but we
worked with different
foundations to see if they would
put in a match, a private match
to get around to the
anti-donation clause because
really what are these parents
need grandparents need, they
need money. I mean, it's pretty
obvious to me, but I couldn't
figure out how to get around
that anti-donation clause, but I
then approached these
foundations and I said, with 5
of you give me a million dollars
over a, you know, 3 year period
so that we could give these
grandparents in transition so
that we could give them um a
$500 a month for 3 years.
And they said, yeah, we'd like
to help. So that's kind of how
this bill came together, um, oh,
it's kind of a public private
partnership, if you want to call
it that, uh, and, and, and it
would go under the Department of
Aging. Why? Because grandparents
are scared of CYFD. We all know
that. So we put it to the
Department of Aging because they
trust that department and what
the Department of Aging would do
is they would put a staff
together at the local level in
these 5 places, 5 communities.
and that staff, you know, one
would be kind of the
I don't know where we get these
things, but they call it the
indexer where somebody would
come in and meet that
grandparent and say, OK, tell
them what you know what federal,
state and local.
Uh, benefits are available to
them, and they would do that,
and then we, they would also
have access to legal counsel,
which they need, that would be
provided to them. All these
services would be provided with
this appropriation to these
families and, and then that
legal service could help them
decide, well, do they want to go
for full custody. Do they want
kinship care? You know, if the
governor is calling for $900 a
month for for foster care, kids
in foster care now, so that
would
Be an important decision for
those grandparents to make. A
lot of them don't want full
custody, and what we're trying
to do also a lot of this stems
from our drug problems, you know
that, and a lot of these
families are trying to keep that
path open, hoping that parent
will get into.
You know, rehab and and get
their life back together so that
they can be a parent, so you
don't want to shut off these
relationships with families. You
try to want to try and keep
those paths open so that
families can reunite so that
parents can heal themselves and
and get their kids back again.
That's a very important part of
what we're trying to do with our
behavioral health, uh, uh,
initiative this year. So in a
nutshell, uh, that's kind of
what this bill is about. It
It has an appropriation of 4.5
over a um 3-year period, I
actually think between this
committee and the next, uh,
we're working those numbers more
diligently. I think I can get
that down to 3 million, um, uh,
which always helps in
appropriations. I'm trying to do
that. It would be grow funded,
uh, so it would come with an
evaluation. It, this is a pilot
promising practice that we're
trying to do through Grow money
so that we can look at this over
a 3 year period, see how it
works.
If it works and, and if it makes
a significant difference in the
lives of families, so that's
really what this bill is about
and um with that uh Madam Chair
and committee members, I stand
for questions. Thank you,
Representative. Let's go to the
audience. Please raise your hand
in support of the bill.
OK. Please raise your hand in
opposition to the bill.
Let's go ahead and take
7 comments at 1 minute each in
the audience. Thank you.
And supported the bill.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, the Lano Foundation
has been working with
organizations supporting
grandparents and kin raising
grandchildren over the past 5
years.
This bill has been a long time
for advocacy requests, and we
just want to thank the sponsors
and the committee for finally
hearing the voices of
grandparents and the needs of
grandparents.
We ask you to support and pass
this bill HB 252.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, I'm a grandparent and
kin raising grandchildren
program coordinator for La
Cumbres Community Services in
Rio Riva County.
We support this bill because it
will alleviate burdens.
Her grandkids who have lost
their parents to death or
disappearance due to the
fentanyl crisis, a monthly
stipend could help reduce their
insecurity.
Her grandparents who make an
eighteen-year commitment through
kinship guardianship, it will
provide a consistent monthly
payment.
To cover the cost of raising
grandchildren.
This could reduce their anxiety
and their stress and increase
the likelihood of good health.
The average age of the
grandparents in our program is
72 years old, and the average
age of the child is 9 years old.
Our grandparents are um time.
Good. Thank you.
Saitamu, good morning, members
of the committee. My name is
Jessica.
Um, this is her, uh, response,
uh, Tama, good morning members
of the committee. My name is
Jessica Naranjo and I reside in
Santa Clara Pueblo, which is
located in Ririba County. I had
my grandparent raising 4
grandchildren ages 1412, 10, and
3 years old.
I am here today to give support
to House Bill 252 as a full-time
employed grandparent and family
does not qualify for assistance
from many state programs because
we are considered overcome. We
are not under case management by
any social services program, nor
CYFD. So we do not qualify to
receive benefits that are
offered to families under their
care. House Bill 252 will allow
those families like mine an
opportunity to receive
assistance advocating and
seeking assistance on our own is
a
full-time job in itself, and we
spend countless hours trying to
justify why our children need uh
these benefits sometime to no
avail. I encourage you today to
pass House Bill 252 so that
grandparents can
and seek assistance even if we
are not under case management.
now, thank you.
Madam Chair, steamed committee
members. I work with Casa first
as a volunteer supervisor. And
the only thing I want to do is
appeal to your empathy. Imagine
for a moment reaching the age of
70, suffering the trauma of
losing your child.
And then having to raise your 10
year old grandchild and wonder
how you're going to pay the
bills every month.
And raise this child and see
them through their trauma, and
this is something that we see
far too often. Therefore, I am
speaking on behalf of House Bill
252, and I please ask you to
support it and pass it.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, advocacy director
for AARP in New Mexico, Uamba
Umi. um, I think it's great to
just hear directly from the
individuals who actually are
impacted by this. We've been
long uh participating in
guardianship, um, kinship, um,
you know, for grand grandparents
raising grandchildren for many
years, and it's just great to
still see supports for this
particular system, and, and this
pilot program, so we highly
encourage you to uh support this
and pass this bill. Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair, and
representatives.
Thank you for having me. My name
is Jeremy Martinez and I'm a
resident of Los Alamos County,
born and raised in northern New
Mexico, and Espanol, and I'm
here to express my strong
support for Bill 252. I'm a
guardianship. I am a kinship
guardian of a six year old who
was placed in my care at 2 weeks
old, due to being exposed as
substance in utero and during
and was dealing with side
effects of
Um, of exposure. He was so
strong, innocent, and tiny and
beautiful. Um, my son.
During the first couple of weeks
of his life, um, struggled
extremely hard with withdrawals,
many tests, doctor visits,
safety plans, no follow-up and
abandonment. His parents faced
many of their own challenges,
struggling with substance abuse,
no guidance, support, and
resources offered by the agency
that protects our most
vulnerable children.
Um, I had guardian had no
experience navigating the
system, no education or caring
for a baby who is substance
exposed.
Um, we
Guiding through the legal
system, I, sorry, but I'm in
strong support.
Mhm. OK. Thank you. Good
morning, chair and members of
the committee. My name is
Mikeabizini, policy manager with
Bold Futures, and we are in full
support of House Bill 252 by
offering monthly economic
support and access to essential
services. This initiative seeks
to enhance the well-being of
children by maintaining family
unity and stability, research
indicates that children in
kinship care experience better
behavioral health and mental
health outcomes compared to
those in traditional foster
care, and moreover, kinship care
preserves familial and cultural
connections crucial for a
child's
identity and emotional
development. Currently in New
Mexico faces challenges with a
high number of children in
foster care and limited support
for kinship caregivers,
implementing this pilot program
with proactively address these
issues, strengthening family
units and promoting positive
long-term outcomes for children
and communities. We would like
to thank all the sponsors for
bringing this legislation
forward and please support HB
1252.
Thank you. Now we'll go online.
Do we have any supporting
comments online.
Melanie Montoya, can you hear
us?
Good morning. Can you hear me?
Uh, fortunately, we can only see
your text. We're not able to
hear you.
And we still are having
technical difficulty with our
online.
Oh, we apologize. So with that,
we'll go to committee members. I
have representatives Zamora.
Representative Ona Nonu and
Representative block so far.
Representative Zamora.
Thank you, Madam Chen. Thank
you, Representative for bringing
this bill forward.
Like everything about your bill,
I like what it does. I like.
To support this, I wouldn't mind
the monetary part of it being
higher.
But I don't like that it's not
across the state.
that it's not across the state.
Why?
Everybody across the state needs
help with this issue.
Why should we vote on this bill?
If we're not helping the whole
state of New Mexico.
Representative Zamora, Madam
Chair, uh, I would have loved to
do that. I, I
Uh, it, the real reason I really
couldn't do it, I couldn't get
around the anti-donation clause.
That, that was the reason and I
could only get 5 foundations at
this point. I have had.
Republican members come up to me
on the floor of the house and
say, I would like Sandoval
County to be in here. Susan,
why, why can't we do that? And I
said, well, I don't have a
funder, and he said, I'm gonna
go see Intel, so you know, if
you can bring more funders
forward, I think we can do more,
but at this point, there is
legislation to do away with the
anti-donation clause. I mean,
that could happen, but that
probably won't go into effect
for a while because that's a
constitutional amendment. So in
between, I'm trying to do what I
can and it's important.
that it's a growth funded
initiative because that is for
promising practices and it will
come with an evaluation. We
haven't done this before. Do I
think we need it? Yeah, um, but
I could never figure out how to
get around that anti-donation
clause, uh, representative
Zamora, I think it should be
statewide too. And um I, I, you
know, it could double in a year,
uh, you know, the more that we
have time to get out to
foundations and talk to them
about it. Well, we'll see what
happens. So that's my answer.
And Madam Chair.
And representative.
I know I'm leaning on you pretty
hard, but it seems like you just
worked that one area. It's not
sporadic like you got, you got
money here and not there and
But it looks like you just
And, and I'm gonna support the
bill.
I want to see it go forward.
But it just
It just doesn't feel good. It
just, what, what are, what the
people in my part of the state
that need the help, they're
gonna say, well you helped them
over there, but you didn't help
Curry County any.
But, but it's, it's just, it's
just hard to do. It's, and it's
not.
It's, it's one of those bills
that everything's good about it,
but you have that one little
corp with it that's a really
strong corp that
And, and I see where you're
coming from. Your explanation is
good.
I just would like to see these
programs like this carried out
throughout the state, Madam
Chair.
And chair representativear. I
couldn't agree with you more. If
you, if you know a foundation in
your district, talk to them.
We can talk. It's real easy.
It's 1 million, it's 1 million
over a 3 year period so it's
only 300,000 a year, so it's a
pretty easy lift for
foundations.
Uh, depends, so if you know of
somebody, you know, you're
you're United Ways might be able
to pull this off. So, so I, I
totally welcome your support and
if you know anybody let me know.
So, Madam Chair and
Representative, so even, even if
this bill passes, we can add a
foundation later and do it, or
it has to be before the bill
passes and signed by the
governor of Metam chair.
I think.
You know what, I might, I might
put add language between here
and now to, I mean, here and
then to say uh if more possi if
more foundations come up, maybe
we can increase the uh uh the um
uh services. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and,
and, and, and I love
The way you work representative.
If you have the biggest heart,
anybody in
In, in, in Santa Fe, you just,
you're always
You know, open to to.
Work with people and, and, and
you do things for a good cause
and thank you for what you do.
Thank you, Ben.
Thank you, Representatives.
Representative Anan Arnu.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representative for
bringing this bill, um.
It's this pilot program proved
successful, and I, I absolutely
know it will. It's going to fill
some really significant gaps in
service that are just so
important to the state, um,
representatives are more
essentially already asked my
question about why we're not
able to service more counties,
um, and with that said, like I,
I fully understand that and I'm
going to do what I can to help
you to find more funders because
I wanna see this program get as
big across the state as it
possibly can, and I applaud you
for recognizing that so many
Mexico families um look
different and are so often
multi-generational like this,
especially in my district. I
would.
Probably have to venture that at
least 50%, if not the majority
of families in my district are
multi-generational like this,
so, um, I very much look forward
to supporting this bill and
seeing its expansion. So, thank
you.
You
Representative block.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative for
the bill and, you know, I I
really love the idea.
Right, I, I think we need to
empower our grandparents and
other kin to be making
Just stepping up, and I think
that they already are and I
think that they need help. And
so this, I'm very conflicted in
this bill. I need to tell you,
Madam Chair Representative,
because
First, the, the, the question
about where in the state are we
looking? There's nothing in the
southeastern part of the state.
And uh
That's one problem that I that I
do have, especially in Otero
County. I think there actually
is a foundation in Otero County
that might actually be willing
to help.
With something like this. And
then secondarily,
This
Being run through the state.
I have a little heartburn on
that because Madam Chair
Representative, I just see how
CYFD is running right now and I
see current programs.
In the state
And for me, it's usually, oh,
I'm, I'm the government, I'm
here to help, and I usually run
away at that point and a lot of,
a lot of people in government,
they kind of pushed grandparents
and people away because it's
just so much paperwork, so much
bureaucracy, and so I guess
maybe if you could just address
that portion of it when it comes
to these funds getting to the
families, how much of that
paperwork will they be having to
do to get these funds, Madam
Chair and representative.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative
Block, thank you for that
question, um, because what we're
trying to do is make this as
simple as possible. The
foundations don't have, they're
not governments, so they don't
have the rules, so they'll
probably give these stipends out
and it'll probably like.
Be a gift card from Walmart,
because you could cash that in
to pay the rent or pay the
electric bill or you know
whatever you need help with,
that's what we're kind of
looking at, um, um, that would
be kind of the easiest thing and
then you know we all shop at
Walmart. What can I say,
especially in rural America, I
mean rural New Mexico, um, so
that's kind of how that will
work, that aging, the aging um
staff, they're just there to to
help them navigate to, to, you
know, you don't.
know what you don't know, right?
A grandparent doesn't know that
maybe there's a local, uh, uh,
nonprofit that gives out beds to
to families who need beds. So
what you, so what these local
communities would do, uh, these
local communities would do is
that they would kind of do a
list of they know what the
federal, the state and the local
benefits are what foundations,
what nonprofits are doing in
that area, and they could go to
that family and say, do you have
this? Do you have this? Do you
have this, do you have this and
go kind of go.
on the list. And, and that's how
they would do that and then the
plan is for, you know, when you,
they would do like a home visit
once a month just to see how
everybody's doing, kind of check
in with the grandparents, see,
uh, you know.
Just see if they need something
that they don't have, uh,
sometimes you, you get that or
you, you have a deeper
conversation when you're in that
home with people. So it's, it's
building relationships, then we
would create a cohort of people,
so you would have a cohort of
like, like, um, you know, 10
grandparents because like all of
us, you know, you get, you
really get help from your
friends and family. So if we
build a cohort of grandparents
that know each other, you know,
maybe they could, you know.
When you're just exhausted,
maybe they'll take those
grandparents for a weekend,
right? Uh, when you just can't
do it anymore, when those
teenagers are driving you nuts.
Maybe they'll take him to a show
for the night and you can have a
night at home. So, so it's
really building that cohort of
friends that we want to do and
then once a month we would have
training for them. They'd come
in and that's when we'd hand out
the, the, you know, the cards,
uh, because the way to get
people to come to a meeting is
hand out money. I can tell you
that. And um then we do the
train.
meaning. Uh, we talked to them
about how you do that. So we've
put a lot of thought into it
that isn't in the bill, but
that's kind of how the staffing
would work and, and if you know
a foundation, I'm gonna see how
we can put that language into
expand the program and, and if,
if a foundation wants to come
in. Now, remember, this one, you
know, this won't start till
July, so you have time. Uh, so
if we can get more family, I'd
love that. I'd love that if
every rep would find a.
Foundation, that would be my
dream.
That would be my dream
representative block. So I hope
you can talk to your foundation.
I hope we can do it in Otero.
So much, Madam Chair
Representative, and I, I agree
and that like I hear the idea,
it sounds like a great idea for
a nonprofit.
Like I don't see why the, why
the government has to swoop in
here if a nonprofit could start
statewide.
Get a coalition of these
nonprofits in all the counties
that do this.
And then also have these
mechanisms to give out money.
They could even give out actual
money they wouldn't have to go
through gift cards and stuff,
and, and I mean, I, I think it
might just be easier, and I, I
love the idea. I do, but for me
it's just
It's so, it's so limited when it
comes to the the counties, at
least in the current, current
legislation.
And also aging and long-term
services, I, I think it's 4.5
million they will need.
What is, what is this 4.5
million do if it's not going
directly to help with these
kinship and guardians, etc.
Madam Chair. Madam Chair, um,
Representative Block, thank you
for the question. Uh,
It'll, it'll do the work of
advising them about what's
available to them that, you
know, you hire staff through the
Department of Aging. I didn't go
through CYFD, you know,
grandparents hate seawi. Well, I
should, I, you know,
a lot of grandparents don't
trust CYFD, I should put it that
way. Um, and, and they want to
keep their distance, but they
trust taging, they go to those
senior meals, they, that, you
know, the aging department knows
them, they help them, so, so we
wanted to run it through an
agency where there
was a level of trust, and
that's, and it'd be great if a
nonprofit would do it, but I
don't, I don't see any
nonprofit. I used to run a
foundation. This would be a very
expensive program if you did
this in every county, 33
counties times a million
dollars, that's $33 million a
year.
Uh, for a even a large
foundation would have a hard
time. I'm talking Major Kellogg,
you know, uh, Annie Casey,
whatever, a large foundation
where they have a hard time
making that kind of a lift. Uh,
but if you know one, bring it
on.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, and I, I think
that's great and I know there
are some foundations out there
that have deep pockets. I don't
know how deep, but I know in
some counties like Bernaleo
County.
Donana County, Sandoval County,
Santa Fe County, the population
is so huge. I, I would assume,
Madam Chair, that that.
Amount would be far exceeding a
million dollars a year.
And so I just
If this comes up as a statewide
issue or a statewide initiative
in this pilot program, I would
just hate for us to
Start
The groundwork
With this 4.5 million.
And then we see, oh, it works
statewide, and then we have to
come back for an appropriation
for.
$500 million or something large
like that, if we include these
big counties like Bernalillo.
And then
It would stretch the budget
then, and then what if, what if
a a budgetary
Crisis happened, Madam Chair,
and then we would have to pull
back all these funds if we did
indeed have that. And I just
I, I, I like to look long term
in these bills and I love the
idea, and I would love to, I
will contact that foundation for
you for Otero regarding this
bill, but I just have a little
concern about that, especially
cause we don't, we are not in
the bill as currently, so I
don't know if I could support
it.
As it is now.
But I do think that
I like the thought process. I, I
sure do. I like not going
through CYFD because that would
just be another dumpster fire we
would have to put out years from
now and uh yeah, so I'll listen
to the debate and I don't know
if you have any other thoughts
on that, but
I'm still very, very on the
fence on this one, Madam Chair
Representative.
Madam Chair, representative, I
personally would have no problem
spending $500 million on on
grandparents in this state, just
my response.
Thank you, Representative Lujan.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
And thank you for bringing this
forward. Actually, I've been
listening to work on this
throughout the interim. And I
know some of those that are
participating, um, the, the
nonprofits that are
participating in.
Good friends with one of them
that's been helping, um, who
came back to New Mexico to do
just this type of fundamental
work.
I would just note that in
especially Ria Reba.
We want to start a pilot program
with the highest needs, like
this, and I would, I would say.
Based on data and statistics due
to the opioid crisis that our
state has that Yoruba is is a
county that, that we need to
really focus on. And if we look
at federal,
Funding in the past and, and
we're looking at these, this,
um,
This crisis in in other types of
funding sources.
We have, um, allocated uh as uh
A percentage to this area
because of what is going on
there. So, we need to add in
data and information as to why
this pilot program needs to
start and be focused in this
area, um.
I mean, I'm, I'm one of the
counties listed, and I get that.
We do have a lot of issues that
are going on here, but I would
just say I'm proud of the work
you're doing for your district.
You reach into Taos as well.
Representative, and throughout
our rural communities in the
North, they're severely,
severely, um,
It's by, by what is going on and
I, I'd also add that this isn't,
this isn't a new issue. This has
been going on. We have great
grandparents now.
That are that are raising
children and though this is a
cultural thing that we um accept
and multigenerational housing,
um, and families, uh, I too.
Live in that situation and I
understand it, but when you add
the crisis and things and see
what is going on.
This is just one of the most
fundamental things that we could
be doing and the way that you're
doing this, I want to commend
you because I'm there in these
communities. I'm from these
communities in the North, and I
see, I see what is going on
there. So thank you all of the
sponsors. I, I, I'll sign on the
bottom, of course, but I can't
say enough also to what is going
on in aging and long-term
services. I think that this
money and this, this focus as we
look at some of the things you
said that would happen, Madam
Chair, um.
The home visiting, particularly,
it's probably going to be one of
the most beneficial things that
we can do and having the
oversight, is that what you, is
that what you foresee? That's my
one question.
Uh, uh, thank you,
Representative, um, Muhan and
Madam Cha. Oh yeah, it's, it's,
it's not really oversight. It's
just to go in and help, you
know, I, a part of it is
oversight, of course, but, uh,
but I think it's, it's really an
effort to get close to that.
Family to get, to have that
grandparent be able to open up
about real problems is, is, is
important. I know from doing the
research with the RAND
Corporation on uh home visiting
for just, you know, uh, young
families that
That a person really didn't open
up.
To a uh a home visitor until
they had known them for 6
months. And does that make
sense? Yeah, would you tell
your, your heartfelt feelings or
your problems to somebody that
you just met in a day. No, it
takes a while to build up trust
to to really have um have people
understand you as a home visitor
and and uh for that home visitor
to to respect and know that
person, so yeah, that's, that's
is a part of the, uh, an
essential part of the program.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and when
I'm talking over.
oversight of the funding, which
these are public dollars. And so
to, to have uh to be um have the
oversight from the agency is
important as we're using public
dollars. I just say that. So
thank you for bringing this
forward and that's all I have.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Vice Chair
Little.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'd like
to move a due pass in House Bill
252.
motion for to pass in a second.
Do we
Coral.
Representative Vanarian.
Representative block,
respectfully now.
Presented Borego.
Representative Lujan.
Representative Mia.
Yes
Madam Floor leader, yes.
Representative Zamora. Yes.
Is it in Mia?
Yes.
Madam Vice Chair.
Madam Chair.
Yes. Thank you, Representative.
You have a due pass and I just
wanted to add my thoughts about
this bill as native people and
people from all walks of life, I
think.
We don't just sit back and watch
our children who need care. We
step in and we start to take
care of our children.
And uh some of us are fortunate
to have been raised by a group
Anti, group uncles, group
mothering.
And some of us not.
And I think in those cases, this
is gonna be really a tremendous
help. So just thank you for
your, your, your thought on this
bill. Thank you.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, and
I, I deeply appreciate this
committee's vote. I, I know that
it can be difficult for some
because it does involve money
and something we've never done
before, so I appreciate this
committee taking the risk. Thank
you. Thank you. And this summer
we'll send the kids with
representative block.
Go ahead and take a quick recess
so we can work on our online
system. Thank you.
Uh, 3 minutes, yeah.
everything else
checking, checking, OK. I'll
keep making noise here,
yeah, it's coming through.
But.
checking,
checking, can you hear me.
No,
checking, checking.
Hello,
can anyone hear me? Hello, Lou.
I
look, look, look.
Well
our
OK
Check, checking, check, check,
check, load, hello.
Thank you everyone. Let's go
ahead and resume our committee
meeting. Representative Dow.
You're not. Next.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, um,
today, I have before you a bill
to make the month of August red
and green chili month, and it is
something that we can all agree
to and all celebrate, um, but
also it is important. It's, it's
an important issue for us to
bring up and it's important for
us to promote the, the culture
and the this crop. So New Mexico
has a couple of things going on.
One of them being an aging
population of farmers, and we're
putting a
A lot, a lot of time and
investment into getting new
producers.
Uh, another thing that we have
is growing competition for our
chili crop outside of the hatch
green chili area where they
actually have a trademark, and
they have a niche, and they're
selling nationwide and around
the world, uh, we are chili
producers are competing with
Overseas crops are competing
with a lot of crops. This gives
us the opportunity to celebrate
the month of August, which is
when most of the harvesting
occurs. And to capitalize on the
opportunities that are coming
out of the Mexico Department of
Ag and tourism department for
agriculture tourism.
And to uh get more involved in
New Mex New Mexico magazine to
have tours of breweries that
have green chili in their beer
that uh wine that is infused
with chili to be able to promote
have a red and green chili tour,
whether it's Mexican food or
green chili cheeseburgers and
just to promote the crop in
general. Um, and with me today
is Travis Day, and he is uh
representing the Chili Growers
Association.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee and
Representative. I just want to
kind of give the committee a
background of some numbers as
far as the chili industry and
what we've seen in the past and
kind of where we're going as an,
as an industry in New Mexico and
trying to offset some of these
issues that we're seeing. So
historically, back in the 1990s,
there's about 34,000 acres of
chili harvested in New Mexico.
If you look to 2023, we're about
8800 acres and we typically
hovered now around 8500 to 8800
acres depending on, you know,
weather and and other issues
that we're facing.
But I mean, it does play a
pretty significant role from an
economic standpoint. Chile is
anywhere from about 40 million
to 45 million um in value each
year creates about 5000 jobs, of
course, most of those are
seasonal, um, but we definitely
are having our issues. Um, we
are declining
industrypresentative Dao said,
you know, we aren't aging
population. We're not really
seeing a whole lot of movement
into, into our industry and and
a lot of that I think is
attributed to. It is a very
labor intensive crop, um, as we
all know historically, Chile is
handpicked um by different.
Cruises and, and, you know, I
always like to say that Chile is
looking for its weight. It's
always looking for a way to die.
Um, you give it too much water,
it dies if you get too little
water, it dies. And so it's a
very finicky crop, and so it
does take a lot of love,
passion, and, and hard work. And
so as an association and as an
industry, we are looking at
different avenues to help offset
that. We are looking at more
technology-based initiatives
within the industry and and a
big part of that is the
development of a mechanized
harvest machine that can go in
and actually pick chili to help,
you know, fill some of those
gaps, um.
And the lack of labor that we
currently have, um, uh, with
that comes the development of
what's called New Mexico
Odyssey. It's a new chili
variety that is made to pick um
pick chili, or excuse me, is
made to be able to be picked by
a machine. And so we are, you
know, I don't want to leave the
committee and the legislature
with all these negatives, um,
you know, it's an industry, we
are trying to tackle them and
we've had some success in doing
that, but, you know, I think
it's always a good thing for the
legislature to promote its
signature crop. That's what we
are known for worldwide.
Um, and if, you know, anyone is
still on the edge, Colorado does
not have a chilly month, and so
this would put us another step
ahead of of that argument in a
very, you know, non-competitive
argument, but I'll be happy to
answer any questions, but I'm
sure.
Thank you. Let's go to the
audience, those in support,
please raise your hands.
OK.
Let's go ahead and take one
minute comments.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee,
Clayton Abbey with the Mexico
State University. um
Some of y'all may know, but the
Mexico State University is home
to the Chili Pepper Institute.
Uh, we also have the Fabian
Garcia Ag Science Center, Fabian
Garcia was sort of uh the
Uh, the, the first to really
experiment with green and red
chili varieties and help us to
make it a more sustainable crop.
Um, obviously, I want to thank
the sponsor of Representative
Doo and Travis for their work on
this.
I can just say that living in
other states for a long time,
there's one thing I missed about
being home is the chili, so, uh,
thank you and we urge you to
support this. Thank you.
Are you hold it for me?
I'm the mayor of Socorro, Ravi
Bhaskar, Madam Chairman and
committee, we're also a large
chili growing area, not as much
as hatch and perhaps Travis is
probably the king of Chile down
in Hare and all that area, but
uh we certainly will support but
we have a statewide chili uh uh
taste off that we have in
Sequcora. We've had that for the
last 4 years, and we will
certainly support having more
tourism, uh, dollars come into
that kind of uh event because it
is expensive for the.
city to be able to put that in
our budget.
Any comments on Zoom?
Anyone zoom, please raise your
hand if you'd like to make a
comment.
And no opposing comments. OK,
committee members,
representative Zamora.
Madam Chair and move with Du
do pass a second.
Any opposition seeing them? You
have do pass. Congratulations.
And
I just, we do have some salsa
coming that we will leave in
your guys' offices. So if you
haven't signed on, feel free. I
think about half the caucuses, I
mean half the chamber signed on,
so please go sign on.
You. We'll have you come pick
chili with our family.
OK. All right.
Move along to House Bill 203,
Representative Dixon. I believe
we have a handout.
OK, go ahead.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um
Madam Chair, members, and my
expert witness is on her way.
She is in the building, um, but
just to kick us off, um, I'm
here this morning to present
House Bill to03, uh, which
relates to electronic devices,
uh, and CYFD.
Um, so this bill
Seeks to uh
Sort of address the fact that
TYFD currently lacks a formal
data retention policy.
Um, there have been numerous
instances in which CYFD does not
follow standard data, uh,
standard practices for data
retention, uh,
You know, that we have for
government agencies, uh, even as
the data it's responsible for
collecting and keeping of
critical importance to the
vulnerable children and families
that it serves.
So, uh, this bill amends the
CYFD Act. It mandates that
employees of the department use
state-issued electronic devices
for work-related communication.
It requires the backup and
retention of electronic records
related to departmental duties.
Um,
It requires that employees must
use only department issued
electronic devices, uh, for
official duties and uh that
noncompliance.
Could may lead to termination.
Um, it also, um, establishes a
retention period of 24 years and
requires the department to
implement a system for hourly
backups of all of the electronic
records. Um, with that, uh,
Madam Chair, I am happy to stand
for questions, and I think my
expert will probably have some
additional insight, uh,
For folks when they have
questions as well.
Thank you. Let's go to the
audience. Do we have any
Who are in support of the bill.
Any opposition?
OK, let's hear from you one
minute.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I'm Joseph Bottles,
the Chief Information Officer
for CYFD currently.
Uh, at this point in time, we
are backing up.
Devices we are issuing out only.
Laptops and phones for use by
the agency, we are working on a
new application for retention of
records currently at this point
in time.
Creating this bill would.
Makes backups so large.
That the retention over time,
space and money invested in
this.
We can't quantify right now
realistically. Best example I
can give you is of a backup is
you do incremental backups when
I used to do them Monday through
Friday, you do a weekend backup
on Saturday. You do full backups
for that entire month, which is
a full week of that. You do them
backups for the entire year,
which is all of those backups.
And every communication would be
included. So emails, text
messages, uh, phone calls is my
understanding, conversations,
this conversation right now
would also be included in that.
Uh, thank you.
Thank you. Let's go online. Do
we have any comments in support
of the bill?
Anyone hoping to comment, please
raise your hand.
Any opposition, please raise
your hand.
Seeing none.
Let's go back to Representative
Dixon to introduce your expert
witness.
Good morning and I apologize for
my tardiness. My name is Sarah
Kreka. I'm an attorney. I ran up
the stairs. I'm a co-counsel on
the Kevinness lawsuit. I also
represent
Children who are in the custody
of CYFD. I have done that since
2001. And I was plaintiff's
attorney in the wrongful death
lawsuit of James Dunkley Cruz.
And
Thank you so much for having me
and for your patience with me. I
really want to add on to what
Representative Dixon said about
the need for this bill.
During the
During the pendency of the civil
rights lawsuit against
CYFD on behalf of a child who
died.
James Dunkley Cruz. We learned
in the depositions of the
employees that
There simply is no data
retention policy, and the reason
that that became an issue,
is that this little boy died on
December 10, 2019.
And
His worker had begged her
supervisors not to send him
back.
To the home where he, they knew
he was being abused. He had
named.
He had named his mother as his
abuser. He had named.
Numerous of his mother's friends
and male partners as abusers. He
was 4 years old.
The agency and that includes
The Investigative supervisor,
the county office manager and
the regional director who were
all not only not fired after
this incident, promoted.
Signed off on his return. 40, 41
days I believe later he was
dead.
The day that the worker who had
begged for him to not be
returned.
Learned of his death, her
supervisors came in and asked
her where her notes were. She
had given notice. She decided
not to stay with CYFD even
though she had done her
internship there. It just become
a licensed social worker and
cared about kids.
In part because of the
malfeasance in this case.
James died a week after she gave
her notice and her supervisors
were more concerned, most
concerned.
About the entry of.
Truthful facts.
Into the long standing data
system known as FACT,
ironically, the FA system,
because once entered, those,
those comments and notes could
not be erased.
They asked her where her notes
were.
Um, and said, the only thing
you're gonna do for your final
week of employment is work on
these notes, print them out and
give them to us.
I'm going to read to you some of
the allegations taken.
From directly from.
The
CYFD documents and deposition
testimony in this case.
Because her supervisors directed
her to erase the portion of her
notes.
That stated that a law
enforcement officer
Had agreed to come and do a 48
hour hold on this child.
to erase the fact that she
disagreed with her supervisors.
To alter her notes.
In a way that reduced in their
mind, CYD's liability.
The original and unedited copy
copy of her observations and
conclusions was saved on the
hard drive of her work computer.
She did not save a hard copy.
She at this point, she testified
she still believed.
During that week, her
supervisors were looking out for
her interests. Only later did
she realize what was going on.
The Friday after he died.
A few days after his death was
her last day as a CYFD employee,
so she turned in her state
issued iPhone.
which contained numerous photos
of his abuse, text messages to
and from our supervisors and the
team on the case.
And others pursuant to her
investigations.
Investigators are in the field.
They use, they rely very heavily
on their devices.
They are hardly ever at their
desks. So all of the important
investigation evidence was in
this phone, as well as her text
to her partner investigator.
That Friday, because it is
standard practice on the
employee's last day to turn in
their phone and work up, their
laptop computer. She did that
and she gave her supervisors who
had changed her notes that week.
Her passwords. They wiped her
phone and her laptop. And the
reason we know that they were
aware that there was going to
potential lawsuit is because
The texting on the personal
devices between her partner in
the investigation, and her
supervisor remained 2 years
later when we deposed the
partner. The partner read me the
text, and they said, you're
going to have to testify.
The supervisor was well aware
that week that there could and
would be a wrongful death
lawsuit.
So it was an intentional
destruction of evidence not only
relevant to the wrongful death
lawsuit on behalf of this little
boy's family, but a criminal
investigation into who killed
him and why.
Photo photo evidence of his
abuse prior to the death was
critical to that criminal
investigation, and it was
destroyed forever.
With intent.
The reason that this bill is so
critical, is not only because we
owe it to these children.
To preserve and expose what this
agency, the employees of which
work for all of us.
Did wrong in that case.
There, they knew there would be
an internal investigation, which
began right away.
That was fatally flawed.
It couldn't, all the evidence
was gone. On top of that,
The spoliation, which is a legal
term of art.
Meaning it doesn't even mean
intentional destruction of
evidence. It's just destruction
of evidence relevant to a legal
claim is itself a claim under
New Mexico law. And that
The fact that they destroyed
that evidence.
Caused the
Resulting payments to the family
in this case to be much higher
than it would have been had they
not destroyed the evidence. So
we're talking about
Preserving evidence because it's
right, but also the fact that
the spoliation caused the state
to pay $4.9 million in a
settlements of the civil rights
claims.
So in summary, this
Not only is the right thing to
do because our children are
worth it.
It actually will mitigate the
risk.
If employees learn, they cannot
do this. And it's not a one-off.
Insiders have told me this is a
widespread practice. Employees
are terrified of being deposed,
and they don't, they do not want
to have to be involved in
lawsuits and that evidence is
destroyed.
Thank you for your
consideration.
Anya Nonu.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair, and thank you,
Representative and expert, um.
for bringing this bill forward.
I just had a fairly simple
question. I just want to know
why.
24 years was the time frame set.
It's just, you know, it's not
20, it's not 25.
How did this, um, time frame get
decided on.
Or
Thank you, Madam Chair. um,
thank you, Representative. Um,
the reason that 24 years, um,
was uh utilized in this uh bill
is because um it's
Planning for 18 years.
After birth of a child, um, and
then additional years for um
Legal reasons.
OK.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair.
You representative Zamora.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative for bringing
this bill forward. So, on, on
the employee must only use
department issued electronic
devices are official.
For official duties,
noncompliance could lead to
termination.
Madam Chair, uh, representative,
is there gonna be any warnings
or anything and education
upfront or this sounds pretty
stern, pretty hard for somebody
that's working in, in, uh, or
CYFD and its com.
Compassionate and and
Really a good worker, a good
person, and then all of a sudden
because they didn't understand a
rule that was implemented and
I mean, how much time are we
gonna give this and are we gonna
train them? Are we gonna give
them a chance to learn.
Uh, it sounds, it sounds pretty
strong, the, the, the.
Language sounds pretty strong,
Madam Chair.
Representative Zamora, thank
you, thank you for that
question.
So
One thing CYFD actually excels
at is creating program
instruction guidelines,
training, and New Mexico
administrative code regulations
and policies. So the agency in
response to any change in the
law or change in the Children's
code.
Automatically has to train too
closer to you.
I, I can't figure out these
mics. I'm either too close or
too far. Is that better? Thank
you. Thank you, Madam Chair.
So the, the agency actually does
have an entire division devoted
to rolling out policy and
procedure and um has a robust
training division. They, uh, the
secretary has actually been
testifying recently about how
they've increased the training,
and I sat through the um the
House Appropriations Committee
hearing of which Representative
Dixon is a ranking is a vice
chair the other day and heard
all about the allocation
financially for the agency to do
additional training. So,
I anticipate the agency
absolutely would train on this
and also, um, very importantly,
it is may be terminated, not
shall be. Thank you.
Thank you for that. It just, I
just don't want anybody to get
fired over some rule that we
changed that
But they didn't understand or or
get training on or something.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative Block.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
Representative, I thought you
were gonna keep, keep asking
other questions. I, I guess I
was.
I'm still recovering from last
night, Madam Chair
Representative, but I did have a
few questions. So,
I'm looking at section 1A, and
it's talking about how the bill
Where the employee must use
state-issued electronic devices,
but Madam Chair Representative,
I'm wondering what mechanisms
are in place to ensure that that
does happen.
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, Representative
Block, members of the committee.
Actually, the previous
administration, um, under
Governor Martinez, the
secretary.
created a rolled out every
single worker gets a state
issued cell phone. And that
actually was critical because
workers were relying on personal
phones and there was no
uniformity. So every worker not
only gets a state issued cell
phone, it's an iPhone.
And they have boxes and boxes. I
learned all this, by the way,
through our deposition testimony
and inquiry in this lawsuit
because it's a really important
question. Um, there are boxes
and boxes of
Phones from exiting employees
that have been wiped because
that is the standard procedure
as well as laptops. Just the
other day, I received a call
from who I thought was a
supervisor, but she had
transferred that. She left and
transfer that number was now in
my phone as the new, so they
just roll over the numbers, um,
and so they are trained already
not to use personal devices, but
I would like, um, all of the
members of this legislative body
to really notice anytime CYFD
come before you. They often have
two phones. And so they are
often relying on the personal
phone and that is actually the
only reason, um, the texting
about the death and what's going
to happen and we're also so
upset we did made bad decisions
and in the case was the reason
that we had any understanding of
what was going on in the
supervisor's mind. So,
They all have iPhones, they
could be backed up to the cloud.
Um, but the agency is not doing
that. I hope I answered your
question. Thank you so much,
Madam Chair Representative. You
did. I just wanted to make sure
that there was some kind of
monitoring mechanism and, and so
we're, I know that the cloud is
something that.
is super important when it comes
to keeping that data. Do we know
currently does CYFD have a cloud
storage.
From, I guess it's probably,
probably would be through Apple,
right? Like Apple storage and
How do we ensure that we keep
those
Everything. How do we know that
every single thing that's ever
been saved on that phone.
is backed up on the cloud, and
even if you delete it, it stays
because I know that that you can
reverse engineer it and ensure
that it stays with metadata and
all that stuff. So, how, how is
that work? Just for someone
who's not super technical, you
know, I, I have a phone. I put
things in the phone. Maybe they
stay there, maybe they don't, I
don't know, but
I'm pretty sure I'm already
being monitored by like China
and everything. So I just want
to make sure that there's some
way that we can absolutely
ensure these documents stay on
the cloud, even if there is an
accidental wiping, Madam Chair,
representative.
Madam Chair, Representative
Black, members of the committee,
I think that's really a great
question for the data division
at CYFD. What I learned in this
lawsuit, um, in our discovery
phase is that
Either the agency is not
currently backing up, or they
just don't care to. We were not
provided with any backup data.
Now, again, that was 2019 was
the area of inquiry, and now
it's 2025. So I don't, I can't
really represent what their
current practices are on that,
but there, the fact that there's
not a policy, the fact that it's
OK to erase. Um, so even if it
was backed up and we didn't pass
this bill, we can't guarantee it
would not be spoliated. OK,
thank you, Madam Chair. I'm
wondering, could, could we have
gentleman from CYFD.
Just go into that, what, what's
happening currently, if, if
that's OK with the chair and the
sponsor, Madam Chair.
Oh, I can hold it. Thank you,
sir.
Um, Madam Chair Representative
Bloch.
Currently we are on the dot
cloud for any and all documents
and emails to all of that is
being backed up. We also have a
mobile device management system
that we're currently
implementing that is going to be
backing up all the funds. So as
you asked Representative Block,
are we making copies of that?
Yes. Do the numbers get recycled
out for new positions? Yes, but
then a new backup is created for
that new employee. So we have
that information. The other item
that I want.
bring up again is with the
backups of it. Uh, they will
vary in size. They will vary in
document type, for example, if
you grab your own phone, take a
look at your phone, the size of
the images, documents, or
anything that you have, that
will vary depending upon what
the image is, what the document
is.
Without a standard which I agree
there does need to be a standard
for document size in order to
save space and, you know, be
fiscally responsible in creating
these backup solutions, um, that
needs to be addressed.
Example I can give you from past
employment, I worked with a
nonprofit in which we
implemented imaging.
And we are keeping images of
cards, uh, documents, etc. We
ran out of space in a six-month
period because we did not do the
proper analysis on document
size. We had individuals saving
pictures of ID cards and your
insurance ID card is about this
big.
But it would take up anywhere
from 100 kilobits all the way up
to 6 megabytes depending upon
what.
Your setting was at so standards
need to be established as part
of the New Mexico Impact
project, we are rewriting a lot
of the policies. We are working
on a document retention policy
as we speak.
The system itself is going to be
cloud-based. The system is also
going to be able to be back up
and restore wrap up your answer.
That is what I have to say,
Madam Chair. I apologize for
going over. OK, thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you,
Representative. I started to get
the weeds on this. I just, I
find it very interesting how
what's currently happening and
then also I, I assume your law
would just pretty much codify a
lot of that, make sure that in
the future, if there's ever a
new administration, they can't
just wipe down that policy and
so this would keep that in
place. Is that kind of what I'm
Understanding Madam Chair
Representative. Madam Chair
Representative Block, yes. Um, I
think there are two good points
there, um, number one, you know,
the ability to enforce this, uh,
by putting it in statute and
then number 2, if there is a
change in administration, um,
this can't simply be arbitrarily
altered.
Cool. Thank you so much, Madam
Chair Representative, and my
last little point, I think, I
think the
I think he's an executive
something from CYFD CIO for C
CYD and I think he talks about
document size, and I'm just
wondering, Madam Chair, about
that. When it comes to documents
and like discovery, for example,
if there's a lawsuit.
I would say we probably want the
highest quality for a video, for
example, if there's a video of
abuse, and we need details of
who's abusing and and where this
is and to determine that, and
you guys get that much
information if there is
something standardized like only
1080p rather than a 4K video or
rather than 720p, etc. and I'm
just wondering if that, if that
changes anything when it comes
to litigation regarding these
cases, Madam Chair
Representative. Madam Chair, um,
Representative members of the
committee. First, I'd like to
point out that the gentleman
that joined us in
answered the questions for CYFD
is not with the data division,
he is the public information
officer. The data division, it
Oh
CIO, I apologize. The data
division is having to build out
right now to meet the needs, um,
and comply with the order in the
Kevins arbitration, which noted
significant flaws in data
capacity. So there is um already
an allocation by the LFC to
build that out, and that will
have to be worked out. This is a
big ask. This is important to
our, our children are worth the
amount of money it takes, the
capacity building it takes to
retain the data that not only is
relevant to their lives.
lives, but not incidentally,
they have open litigate every
child in custody has an open
lawsuit. It's the state versus
their parents. The rules of
civil procedure are violated
every single day that that data
is not retained. And that's a
key issue. Thank you so much.
Cool. Thank you so much, Madam
Chair Representative, and I, I
agree and I think uh
Exfoliation is bad, like we
don't want documents to be.
destroyed. I actually learned
that word by watching Better
Call Saul, actually.
So, I think that's very good
that we have that in place to
ensure that
We can keep these documents and
I think this is pretty common
sense bill, and I, I'll listen
to the rest of the debate. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Little and then
Representative Lujan.
Ma, I'm sure, I'd like to, uh.
Move.
It do pass on House Bill 172.
Representative Lujan, did you
have a question before we take
the.
I do.
I'm sorry. I'd like to 203. My
apologies.
Um
I, I'd just like to say I
understand the intent and the
reason why we need something
like this.
Um
But again, um.
Not my, um, it's a huge concern,
and I, and I, I think it's very
valid. I I support the validity
of what you're doing with this
bill.
My questions will go to
How are you or are you going to
standardize this with the rest
of this state agency.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Representative Lu
Han. This is a very unique
agency.
And I, I propose that we would
you
I'm sorry. May I'll repeat my
question. How would you
standardize what you're doing
with this, uh, piece of
legislation for the entire, all
the other state agencies, madam
check.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative Lu Han, members
of the committee.
This is, uh, this is a unique
agency. What they're called to
do is something unique to any
agency in the rest of the state.
And what I think we're calling
on this legislative body to do
is to treat the data regarding
these children the same way, for
example, New Mexico tax and Rev
is required to treat financial
data.
What is more valuable to us than
the lives of these abused and
neglected children.
Financial data or their data?
We just want equal, um,
Regard
For the, the valuable data that
is collected by an agency that's
acting as a parent of this
child, and that has well, a well
established record of
non-transparency and of covering
up its own neglect.
Thank you, Madam Chair, but I
would, I would, I would say
there are other populations that
are just as vulnerable, and
we're looking at those, those uh
guardianship.
Uh, and in populations with
disabilities and, and so I would
say across the board that this
would be relevant and I just
ask.
Having worked with the state
personnel, um,
And being an HR director for the
state, how are you working with
the state personnel to maybe
extend this to other agencies,
Madam Chair.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. Um, I
think that's a wonderful point.
Um, and at this point, the bill
solely addresses CYFD, but that
is certainly something, um, that
could be taken up and discussed
further.
Thank you Madam Chair, I would,
I would like to have that
conversation with you because we
do have many, we have different
populations that are just as
vulnerable and we're looking at
and you want to make sure that
we're applying uh the same
practices across the board, if
you will, and that's, that's
really where I'm at with this,
um.
So Mr. Madam Chair, um,
has the state personnel office
weighed in on this, I'm sure.
Madam Chair and representative,
um, I don't know if.
We have a response.
Oh
Oh
Um,
Oh, we have the FIR for 203.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, uh, Representative.
The spo
did provide an analysis. I
apologize that, uh, when I
printed my, oh, yes, actually.
I do have the
Um, the analysis. Uh, Madam
Chair and Representative Lujan,
what was the question regarding
spell?
How they weighed in on this,
madam chair.
Is it
Thank you.
Um, Madam Chair and
Representative, um, in terms of,
um,
Conflict, duplication,
companionship, um,
SO identified, um,
Brought up, uh,
classified employees are able
to, uh, appeal their
termination, um.
That CYFD, uh, may need
additional personnel and
increased costs. Um, and that's
all I see. Thank you. I think in
the AG as well, um, mentioned
that the due process is that
implied to the bill, or would
you need to have extra language
for that? Or would this bill
Allow for the those uh
proceedings for workers for due
process in the future. Thank
you, Madam Chair and
Representatives representatives,
can we stay with the CYFD.
topic
Thank you, Madam Chair, this is
all related to the bill because
this regards uh the
There are, um, these are rules
that we have to state personnel
office and the board through our
state that apply to all state
employees. This bill is taking a
section
of that.
Thank you, ma'am.
Thank you.
Question, Madam Chair. I'm just
trying to create like, what is
the, the, the, the playing field
here when because when we uh we
take a section out from what is
already in place.
And I, I, I, I don't apologize.
I work for the state as an HR
director and have many cases
that we had to pay out because
maybe they're, you know, things
need to apply across the board
is what I'm saying. So I'm just,
if you want to talk about that
after this, I do support what
you're doing.
Do this, Madam Chair, but I'm
concerned about how this affects
the rest of the state and the
rest of our state employees and
agencies. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um, and
Representative, um, I would just
go back to um that this uh page
one, line 24, uses the word may
not shall.
Um, which I think provides um
flexibility.
you met him.
Thank you. Now we're back to our
motion. We have a motion for to
passed by Madam Floor Leader
Little, a second by majority
floor uh madam vice chair little
majority floor leader Skipanski,
please call roll.
Representative Waya Nordin
was a block?
Yes, sir.
Representative Borego,
Representative Lujan.
Representative Mejia.
Yes.
Madam Floor leader.
Just
Representative Zamora.
Yes
Madam Vice Chair.
Yes, Madam Chair, yes, you have
a pass representative.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you and we will move on to
House Bill 205, which is.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, um, I
get to sit before you right now,
again, uh, to present House Bill
205, um, and with me, I have uh
the co-sponsor, representative,
um, and Leader Armstrong and my
expert witness um is Rachel
Mercer Garcia. Yeah, uh, who is,
uh, from the LFC and is our uh.
Program
Our CYFD analyst.
Um, Madam Chair and members of
the committee, um, this bill,
House Bill 205 um is a CYF or
I'm sorry, it's an LFC endorsed
bill, and the reason that it's
an LFC endorsed bill is because
it takes a number of the
recommendations over the past
several years that LFC has done
in program evaluations, um, and
thorough study of CYFD and come
up with several recommendations
that the LFC um has determined
based on, uh, best practices and
um an evidence-based studies
would
Benefit, uh, CYFD in terms of
reform. So there are a couple of
components. Um, would you like,
Madam Chair, uh, and would you
like for us to go through the
different sections or uh would
you like for us to stand for
questions.
Let's go ahead and uh
Would, would
Does your expert witness have a,
a comment?
Chair of the committee, good
morning. What I'll do is I'll
walk you through this bill
essentially does 5 big things,
um, the first one is this bill
would codify the federal family
first prevention Services Act.
This is a bill passed by
Congress in 2018, um, that
allows states to draw down
federal what has historically
been foster care funding, Title
IVE funding, if a state
implements a specific types of
evidence-based programs.
They're supposed to prevent um
maltreatment and repeat
maltreatment. Our state has made
several attempts at submitting a
plan to the federal government.
We don't yet have one approved,
but what the bill would
essentially do is say in state
law, our child welfare agency
will put in place a plan that
meets the federal standards, um,
to provide prevention
programming and then allows us
to draw down federal funds to do
that. So that's the first piece,
uh, codifying family first. Uh,
piece number 2 is to
make updates to the, the statute
in uh in New Mexico related to
plans of safe care. That's often
uh referenced as Kara or the
comprehensive uh addiction and
recovery Act. There was federal
law that directed states to do
uh to implement plans of safe
care in instances when um babies
were born substance exposed.
Back in 2023, um, LFC did a
program evaluation, uh, on the
implementation of this program
and found really substantial
gaps, and so the bill would uh
try to address the gaps from
that evaluation. I'll talk about
a couple of them. One, making
the recommendation that the
healthcare authority, not the
Children, Youth and Families
department, be the lead agency
on implementing plans of safe
care, um, for children and
families, when children are
substance exposed. 2, allow for
those plans to be created
prenatally. So, um, right now in
statute, there's a plan created
at the time when a baby is born,
but we know through research
that.
It would really be helpful, um,
if there were plans in place and
moms were able to access care
and support that they need
before at the time of birth. So
allow for that.
Uh, she would also, uh, 3, it
would also um direct HCA to
direct hospitals to implement a
universal screening protocol
called Sper, um, which is a
verbal screening process, um,
and involves intervention and
referral to treatment.
Um, 3, it would require that um
plans of safe care, so these are
the plans created when a
substance uh exposed, baby is
born, include a referral to home
visiting and substance use
treatment. What we found in the
evaluation is often these plans
did not include any referrals to
these types of programs.
Um, and then last it would
specify what and when CYFD is
supposed to do certain actions
again in that evaluation, we
found the existing law was
really unclear about who was
supposed to do what when. And so
what this bill would do is it
would, it would, um, clarify
that CYFD is notified when only
when um a plan of care is not
complied with a family can't be
found or that kind of thing, and
at that point for every case and
the previously the law was
unclear and gave you the
discretion. This would clarify
in every case CYFD would do a
family assessment to determine
the the needs of the child and
family, um, refer families to
services and then if a family
did not access services and they
were deemed to be essential to
the um safety of a child, CYFD
would um move to investigation.
Previously, um, the language was
unclear about what CYFD must do
when. And so the bill clarifies
that. So that's one of the big
pieces.
Uh, is, uh, plans of safe care.
Uh, then item number 3 is to uh
require to updates the state uh
multi-level response statute to
remove language related to
piloting the program and instead
require statewide
implementation. So back in 2019,
you all as a legislative body,
passed a statute that would
require the state to implement a
multi-level response system in
child welfare cases. That's an
evidence-based practice, and it
aims, um
To provide an option that's not
investigation, um, in cases of
uh potential abuse and neglect,
typically low risk cases. CYFD
uh was supposed to pilot the
program, uh, and then, um, move
to implementation statewide
around 2022. That didn't happen.
And so with this, uh,
essentially what the bill does
here is clarify 2022 has come
and gone, and now, um, see why
do you want pilot, they will
implement statewide in several
years. And TFD is actually
working on on.
that. And then the last thing is
moving probably what is a little
known entity in state
government, and that is the
substitute care advisory
council. Um, what that function
does is review cases, uh, foster
care cases and make
recommendations for system
improvement. This is actually a
federally required element of,
of the federal Child Abuse
Prevention and Training Act
states must have what is called
a citizen review board, um, that
reviews, uh, cases of foster
care.
Our state places that function
in the regulation and licensing
department, which is kind of an
odd placement, uh, and it hasn't
been very robust, uh, and at
least the last 5 years. So what
the bill would do is move the
function out of the regulation
and licensing department. Put it
in the administrative office of
the courts, and then expand upon
uh and enhance their oversight
function to require a minimum
number of case reviews in a
given year. Uh, and then the
last key thing the bill does is
establish a
nominating commission committee,
uh for the CYFD secretary
position. What's proposed in the
bill is a model that is
essentially very similar to the
way the PRC operates, where
there is a committee, um, that,
uh, the bill outlines kind of
who is involved in that
committee that performs a
vetting function and then makes
a recommendation to the
governor, um, regarding the
selection of a secretary. From
there, uh, the process would be
relatively similar in terms of
the governor ultimately making a
decision about the secretary
position.
as well as confirmation by the
Senate, but it would replicate
what exists now in state
government for things like the
PRC with the aim of getting a
broader pool, more expansive
pool, and potentially a pool
that um could allow us to have
more sustainability consistency
across administrations, uh, when
it comes to leadership. So that
was a lot of talking, um, but if
you look at the FIR there's sort
of 5 bullets and it summarizes
the 5 things I said, uh, in the
FIR.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
we'll stand for questions.
You. Let's go to the audience,
those in support of the bill,
please raise your hands. OK,
let's do one minute supporting
comments.
Thank you, Madam Secretary and
members. My name is Marilyn
Beck. I'm the founder and
executive director of New Mexico
Child First Network, dedicated
to improving the lives of
children in foster care. That's
a lot of feedback. Uh, we,
Entirely support this bill. I
also wanted to share a map of,
um, this is the FFPSA
implementation in the states who
have had a plan approved, and as
you can see New Mexico is one of
just 3 states with red, and in
fact, we are the only state that
has ours twice denied. Um, and
that's pretty alarming. So
tribes, Pueblos, and rural
states have all had their plan
approved.
Thank you.
OK, we'll stay with the
audience. Do we have any
opposition?
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Kathy Kunkel. I'm
currently a health policy
consultant to the office of the
governor. We stand in opposition
to this bill. First of all, the
Cara program is in its final
stages of transfer from CYFD to
DOH with a robust program of
navigators who can do excellent
intensive case management. The
Family First application has
been submitted. We have not had
a response on our final
application.
The uh multilevel response is in
piloting, as I think LFC noted,
the move of the substitute care
commission from RLD to the AOC
seems like a minor, uh,
potentially a conflict of
interest since they do the
council does review court
actions and finally the
nominating committee actually
reduces the governor's choice of
candidates in the Senate process
for confirmation exists to
identify.
qu al ified candidates. Thank
you.
OK, let's go online. Do we have
any supporting comments?
Anyone who would like to make
supporting comment, please raise
your hand.
Do we have any opposing
comments? Anybody who would like
to make a comment in opposition,
please raise your hand.
OK. Who do we have?
Madam Flor majority Madam floor
leader Skapinski.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair. um, and thank you.
Representatives for bringing
forward this legislation, um.
I really applaud you because
this is a lot of work,
obviously, it's very detailed,
um, and it's very hard to put
together a bill like this that
addresses so many different
aspects of the programming, um,
In in such a clear way. I, I did
have a few.
Questions about this, but um I
am
Uh
Really pleased to see this level
of detail um and consideration.
So, um,
Firstly, I might just address,
uh, something that was raised in
public comment, Madam Chair,
and.
Representatives, so on um.
Page 16, this is regarding the
plan of care being
Uh
Transferred.
And um,
Just firstly.
How, how did you, uh, end up
with recommending Madam Cha and
representatives, expert, uh,
that, that the healthcare
authority take over.
The rulemaking and sort of
oversight, it looks like of.
The plan of care.
Program, um, versus the CYFD.
Or
Department of Health.
Madam Chair, uh, representative.
So the recommendation to move
the program to the healthcare
authority as the lead agency
stems from the 2023 LFC program
evaluation. Um, and that
recommendation took a few things
into account. The first one is
New Mexico's intention in the
original legislation to approach
um plans of safe care from a
public health approach. And so,
um, potentially a location in
DOH or the Healthcare Authority
could make sense. Um, in
particular, the
C recommended the healthcare
authority for a couple of
reasons. One, as DOH has been
reorganized, one function that
moved to the healthcare
authority, um, includes the
oversight of hospitals and thus
would provide the agency with
the authority to direct things
like um universal screening
processes. The second one is
that uh many of the services to
which families are referred are
overseen by the healthcare
authority, things like, um, you
know, Medicaid and the delivery.
of behavioral health services
located within the healthcare
authority. Income support and
things like that. And so put in
proximity, um, the, the
leadership of the program with
the services that may
potentially be be delivered. I
will note the proposal to move
to the Department of Health is
not included in statute
currently, uh, and so would also
likely require that the governor
is taking action, um, statutory
change as well.
Madam Chair Representative would
expert, would you mind just
saying that last point? Again, I
didn't quite catch that.
Sure, um, Madam Chair
Representative, so, uh, we are
aware the governor is taking
steps to move the program to
DOH. That is not the, the um
structure outlined in statute
right now. Right now, CYFD is
the lead agency on plans of
care, and so that move would
also require a statutory change,
though it has already been
initiated.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
That, that is clear. Um, is
there anything in this
legislation, Madam Chair and
Representative, that would
prevent
HCA from contracting with DOH
type providers for the
navigation services or the care
coordination services.
Madam Chair Representative, what
the, this bill would require is
that HDA is responsible for
ensuring care coordination
happens. It does not specify um
whether they must contract or
provide directly.
Thank you, Madam Chair and uh
Representative, so it seems to
me that if, if DOH does have
promooras or other navigator
type services available that are
already sort of trusted in the
community, it seems that HCA
could choose, in addition to
Medicaid care coordinators could
also choose to to do an MOU with
DOH, uh, or, or whatever legal
vehicles required to to access
the services of the promotorist.
potentially as well.
Is that, is that right, Madam
Chair Representative HCA could
potentially contract with a
variety of entities. I will note
in the bill, um,
An attempt to be pretty specific
about the type of care
coordination provided. So in the
LFC evaluation as well as kind
of just hearing a lot of
conversation about the program.
Real concern about what does
care coordination look like? It
can't just be someone who's in a
back office phoning it in. I'm
like, you really need someone
working in person with someone,
providing active support, and
the bill actually is pretty
specific about the type of care
coordination. And so while HCA
would have latitude to contract
with different entities. The
bill is pretty.
Prescriptive about what care
coordination should look like
and the level of service to
provide.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
you know, that satisfies my
concern on that. Um,
I just had a couple of
Uh, actually, one more
substantive question, Madam
Chair. So page 23, line 18, um,
I see a change here on
A person we're adding the word
shall we're adding the word not,
so a person shall not have a
cause of action for any loss or
damage. Uh, would you mind just,
um, representative and expert,
just explaining uh why that was
included.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
this was a a flag from the Bell
drafter trying to do a statutory
cleanup, um, as they kind of do
when reopening the statute. So
this one is not in a substantial
change. It's a place where they
needed to clean up some
language.
I see. OK, I got you. OK, and
then just two more things, so,
um.
Back on the.
page 16 where you are swapping
the healthcare authority and
CYFD lines 14 and 17, um.
Madam Chair Representative, I
would just recommend that you
look before the next committee
to see whether that date should
be changed also because
basically that's a retro date
and so I'm not sure how
healthcare authority would then
now further
It just seems a little bit
unclear to me, representative
expert.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
thank you for pointing that out.
I, I imagine that might be an
additional technical change
needed, uh, because it would
otherwise be retroactive.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I think
you might just want to update
that date so that it is uh a
date in the future so that HCA
has the opportunity to put those
regulations forward. Um, and
then I think my very last, uh,
this is also a technical thing,
page 9.
Um, lines 4 and 5.
Um
I would add that, Madam Chair
representative to the list of
sort of technical amendments
because, uh, Senate Bill 3,
which is reforming the way that
behavioral health services are
delivered, repeal section
24A-3-1.
And so if both bills are
enacted, uh, this will be a, a
reference to a statute that no
longer exists, so it might, you,
um, Madam Chair Representative,
I would just recommend you visit
with a drafter, but I think
Perhaps just a generic, you
know, um, shall be in compliance
with laws and rules or you know,
some things just a little bit
generic cause I don't know how
the
New statute would be compiled.
Um, so that, that I, I just
would close by saying I just
really am grateful. Um, this is
something that I have been
incredibly concerned about and
um it it really takes some great
teamwork to put together a bill
like this and it is very much
appreciated.
Thank you. I have on the list
Representative Block and Vice
Chair Little.
Representative Bloch.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
Representative, I'll try to be
as quick as I can be, but your
bill is like
It's very intricate. Let's just
say, say that, Madam Chair, uh,
representative. So, I guess I'll
start off here.
I have a lot of pages that I
just
flip the corner on them, so, OK,
Madam Chairs representative, I
guess I'm gonna start.
When it comes to, I think I'll
just start with the cara
portion. I think that starts on
page.
Maybe 16.
I'm sure, so.
I'm wondering, does this change
anything regarding
Cara, when it comes to
The
Individual parent or the the
mother.
Being discharged from the
hospital. Does this change
anything when it comes to having
to have some kind of plan of
care, and then is there any kind
of mechanism to ensure that they
indeed are doing whatever is
recommended, Madam Chair,
Representative, and I know
that's a really big question. I
apologize, but I'm sure you can
answer that. Um, Madam Chair
Representative Black, thank you
for the question. So, um,
already in statute, hospitals
were required to develop a plan
of care upon discharge.
Following the birth of a baby
who was born to substances. What
we found in the evaluation is
the plan was created and there
were just major gaps in what
happened from writing the plan
on paper.
And then what happens? And so
what the bill aims to do is put
in place um
Uh, language around who needs to
do what when to try to support
the family to access the
services, uh, referred, so
you'll see language in the bill
that that I mentioned, for
example, pretty prescriptive
type of case management care
coordination, um, specific
language around active efforts
to get the family engaged,
connected to services and things
like that.
Then, um, the bill also makes an
amendment to the section of
statute, um, that previously
said CYFD shall be notified in
cases of noncompliance for plans
of care. The problem was the
statute didn't even say who
should notify, and so there was
the creation of the plan of care
and then kind of a big gap in
implementation. What the bill
then does instead to update that
section is say that um HCA or a
care coordinator, shall be the
one to notify CYFD.
cases of noncompliance, CYFD
changing the language from me to
shall complete a family
assessment and refer families to
services and then um shall
proceed to an investigation if
the family then refuses or does
not engage in services that are
essential, um, to the safety of
a child and so kind of puts in
in several different places, um,
where there used to be a big gap
in what happens.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
Representative, and then my next
question is regarding that. So
when we made these changes in
the bill.
Will these be federally
compliant then, and currently,
are we losing out on federal
dollars because of current
noncompliance and Madam Chair,
Representative block, um, the
compliance comes from the
federal uh CAPTA grant. So to be
eligible for the CAPTA grant, we
as a state had to do a couple of
things. We're not currently out
of compliance with those things,
and this bill won't put us out
of compliance. What we are
required to do as a state is
report the number of plans, uh,
Plans of care created annually
to the federal government. We
have to report, um, kind of
aggregate data around the number
of referrals made and uptake.
Uh, this bill will, uh, not, uh,
impact that reporting with which
we were already in compliance.
What it will do um is put in
place actual support and
services, and who does what when
related to the plans.
OK, that clears that up for me,
Madam Chair.
Representatives, yes,
representatives, we got 2 of
you.
Uh, thank you. So next here, uh,
I'm sorry, I'm just looking
through your bill and I, the
way, the way that I legislate is
I, I read the bills and I read
every single word in the bill
and see what it's changing. So I
apologize if I'm a little slow,
but I'm, I'm trying my best to
be as fast as possible. OK,
Madam Chair, page 22.
Line 6. We have reporting.
an annual report to the
Healthcare Authority or the
healthcare authority has to
report to the legislative
Finance Committee. Why did we
choose that one as well as the
health and human services and
then DFA.
Why did we choose those specific
report reporting.
Entities to be reported to.
Um, Madam Chair Representative
Black, um, uh, these reporting
entities for a couple of
reasons. One, the Legislative
Finance Committee, both because
uh LFC, uh, you know, develops
budget recommendations and the
reporting has to do with things
like where where there gaps in
services in terms of access. LFC
also provides kind of a
performance accountability
oversight and so hence the
report there. Um, the
Legislative Health and Human
Services, uh, committee interim
certainly has an interest.
And uh what is happening when it
comes to this public health
area. Similarly, the Department
of Finance Administration serves
a function on the executive
side, similar to LFC related to
budget and performance, uh,
management.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. I just, I think
that's interesting that
One
Executive branch is reporting to
another executive branch.
So we've got healthcare
authority reporting to DFA and
I'm just wondering,
Why that is. I don't know if
that's currently how it is in
statute, but it just struck me
as interesting. Madam Chair
Representative Block, um, it's
pretty common in statute to have
executive agencies who perform
certain functions, sort of
required to provide annual
reports and we include this
language and statute so that
there's not just that you post
the report online, but we would
also like you to explicitly
deliver a copy to these entities
to make sure that they get it.
Perfect. OK, thank you, Madam
Chair.
That clears it up for me. I'm
gonna swoop all the way to page
31.
We're halfway through, I promise
you. OK, Madam Chair,
representative, so
I see online, it looks like 16
to 18, we're changing some
language when it comes to the
reporting of this section which
is
Oh, that's the man she
represented the multilevel
response. So why are we doing it
to the Health and Human Services
Committee and then CCJ. Why did
we choose those, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair Representative
Block, um, this section of
statute is the multi-level
response, uh, statute, and um uh
one interim health and human
Services Committee also has an
interest in kind of this public
health area. The interim court,
the, the state's child welfare
system, um, is intricately
connected to our court system,
um, and so for that reason,
recommend including a report um
to that interim committee.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, and I, I'm on
that committee and I'm also on a
Uh, health
Health and Human Services and
yeah, that's those are very busy
committees and I just want to
make sure that they can put that
in there.
The work plan, I know they get
very busy, so that is something
that
We just want to consider for
those folks. I'm going to
continue on here. I'm gonna
swoop over to page.
Oh,
I think I might have missed my
page, man, I'm sure. It's
regarding the board, the makeup
of the board. Oh, it's page 49.
Let's go there.
So, or maybe it's an advisory
council committee.
Whatever, I think it's a
council. So Madam Chair
Representative, we're changing
the makeup of the council, we're
adding an additional member.
Looks like uh
It's in the AOC.
is where we're putting it.
From RLD.
And then we're changing who gets
to be on the board, Madam Chair
Representative, I'm wondering.
Why we made made it so.
Because we have 4 public
members, we have the secretary
of ECECD we've got.
Health or health designee.
Healthcare Authority.
And then CYFDR designee, but
that's not a voting member if
they're just designee. So can
you just go into that a little
bit for me really quickly. I
know it's hard, but thank you,
Madam Chair. Madam Chair
Representative Block, what I
will note about the SCAC section
of the bill is much of it is
directly lifted from a bill, you
all actually already passed
several years ago that got
vetoed. Um, so this composition
of the board, um, was in fact
the same composition that you as
a legislative body, that was a
bipartisan bill. Uh, it was
sponsored by
Um, representative Marion
Matthews and former Senator, um,
Kernan, and so this takes
essentially the composition you
all uh previously developed um
and recommends that composition
again.
Perfect. Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative, and let's hope.
That it makes it through.
OK, Madam Chair, Representative,
uh, I had another question. I
think the rest of this bill I'm
cool with. I've read it,
thankfully, and there was
another thing I saw in the
analysis somewhere, it talked
about.
There was a similarity between
HB3.
HB 343 regarding safe or plans
of safe care for certain
children. I'm wondering, Madam
Chair Representative, is that
included kind of in this, in
this legislation in some way and
do we need to roll that into
here to kind of an omnibus that
you have already. So, do we need
to just add that to change
whatever they need to change in
that section to make sure that
it's compliant and we're all
golden, Madam Chair. Madam
Chair, Representative Black, I
imagine we would leave it to you
all, but the sponsors of the
bill is to deter.
Thank you. Um,
but they, the, that bill does
make additional changes to the
same section of statute related
to plans of safe care.
Got it. OK, thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you and uh good
answers. I, I will keep reading
the bill and I appreciate your,
your time and I'm so sorry that
it's taking me so long to read
through this, but I appreciate
the intent of the legislation
and the the accuracy that you
want to make sure that we get it
right. So, thanks again.
Representative Vice Chair
Little.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I would
like to move a do pass on House
Bill 205.
Have emotion for to pass by our
vice chair on 2nd.
And please call roll unless we
have any opposition.
Representative Onon Nonu.
Yes. Representative Black.
Yes, sir.
Rorigo.
Representative Lujan.
Representative Mejia. Yes.
Madam Floor leader, yes.
Representative Zamora.
Madam Vice Chair.
Yes, Madam Chair.
To.
Thank you. You have a good pass.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee members. Uh, we
appreciate you being bold and I
would like to thank Rachel for
all her hard work and um my
co-sponsor as well. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you. OK, we
are adjourned.
