Representative Ortez.
Here.
Representative Rehm.
Representative Zamora.
Your.
Representative Gallegos.
Representative graders is set
presenting an education session
notified me and asked to be
excuse thank you thank you.
Mr Johnson.
Madam chair.
I'm sure with that we have
reached a quorum with one
excused.
And one.
To excuse sorry and seven
present great thank you good
morning everyone thanks for
joining us for the house state
government elections an Indian
Affairs Committee we have first
on the agenda house bill thirty
five we will make sure that
Representative Matthews and her
experts are moved over to
panelists mode.
And then we will be can.
So.
Should be happening shortly good
morning can you hear me.
Good morning Representative we
can hear you okay now you see
you.
There be light.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee and that was kind
of tense moments there wondering
if I was on the right flank or
not.
That seems to be this the the
theme of this legislative
session where is the link
the morning so and also if you
could let in
after Shannon Allen.
And Angela Fritz.
Those are my experts.
Okay we I we're moving over.
Angela
Sandra and who is the other
individual
and and Alan and Alan okay.
She should be here.
When and I'm sorry also should.
Sasha pool.
You madam chair you might note
that there are well we're doing
this that there are
Representative Rehm has joined
us.
Thank you good morning
Representative.
Good morning how are you all.
Well thank you.
Representative Matthews we have
a couple of your experts on
we're still looking for one more
I believe you said.
It at madam chair doctor Allen
doctor chan and Alan.
We do not see doctor Allen.
I'm.
With the following and by chance
well I don't think so she's in
Hobbs but she's always been able
to get on
our at earlier hearings so let
me.
Yeah let's go head when you can
text and I want to thank you
that you can and
Defer to the experts that are
currently on and then once we
get her we can still try on
getting her in the panelists
mode.
Okay.
And just a second here she is.
That was.
All right I've center a text and
hopefully that's going to take
care of it we can keep keep an
eye out for that would be good
thank you madam chair.
We'll do that thank you okay.
so if it's okay I will go ahead
and start madam chair thank you
thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
I'm sorry.
Thirty five it is a a tale of
two threads one thread is
involves health care and one
thread involves legal changes
over a couple decades and I'm
going to talk this morning
outlined the legal thread that
This bill relates to and then my
experts.
When you look Fritz health way
Dr Asian Alan and then session
pool who's head of the and New
Mexico board of nursing is also
available to answer questions
It.
And doctor Allen are both of
certified nurse.
Certified registered nurse
practitioners.
We are in a is for shorts I'm
sorry not nurse practitioner
nurse and and this this is and
H. B. thirty five is all about
certified registered nurse and
and this is this on hopefully
get their title right.
C. R. in a is for short and I
will use that because it's much
easier to say and she are in
Asia one of the four advanced
practice certifications
available to nurses with
advanced training under New
Mexico law.
H. B. thirty five seeks to
delete and then certain portions
of the statute which relates to
their practice and which is been
around for several decades.
and the purpose of it is to
clarify that Sierra C. R. N.
A.'s may work independently or
in collaboration with other
health care providers.
which is actually the practice
in New Mexico for C. R. N. H.
and.
And it it reflects now the legal
evolution evolution and the
practical evolution of C. R. N.
A. authority and their provision
of health care in our state so.
The legal story goes back to
about nineteen ninety one and
the C. R. N. A. statute at that
time the woman that we're
seeking to amend now.
Said that siRNAs cloture
function under the direction of
and in collaboration with
various physicians osteopaths
dentists and so forth.
But in nineteen I'm sorry in
twenty twenty one federal law
was changed and federal law
change and it authorized
independent billing by C. R. NH.
So to take advantage of that
change in the federal law New
Mexico needed to do two things
and in twenty two thousand one
the requirement that the C. R.
N. A. quote show function under
direction of.
End quote was deleted.
And in two thousand and two then
governor Gary Johnson signed a
letter signed notifying the
Medicaid and Medicare
administration that New Mexico
was electing to exempt C. R. N.
A. from the requirement for
physician should prevent
supervision.
and from that point on they were
able to practice without the
direct supervision of a.
Various positions again our
medical dentist osteopaths
medical doctors and the doctors.
As a result.
SiRNAs became independent
providers of and
need anesthesia services and
could bill independently and so
what's happened is today and
particularly in rural New Mexico
but not only rural New Mexico C.
N. C. R. NH are often the only
providers of an anesthesia
services available and even in
our cities they are important
critical health care providers.
They're availability increases
the affordability and testing X.
accessibility of health care
throughout the state.
Because your rates are far less
than medical doctors would be
Eight but old attitudes Die Hard
in the statute still contains a
few words a little bit of
language that doesn't make it
absolutely clear how independent
siRNAs can practice and that is
the purpose of this.
It HB thirty five.
It's so I'm ditch doctor Allen
get on yes I see here okay.
So
doctor Allen who is from hi this
and who just won the C. R. N. A.
of the year award
I'm asking she's going to talk a
little bit of that what I see
are at a practice expect today
and the education that they have
in order to provide these
critical services and then I ask
Angela Fritz to also talk about
her job as head of anesthesia as
a C. R. N. A. the Memorial
hospital in Los crucis you so
I'd like to yield to doctors and
if that's alright.
Madam chair members thank you so
much for having me here today
led to talk about my profession
I'm very passionate about it
I'll tell you a little bit about
what one of my days may look
like so sometimes we work in
collaboration down here in the
small areas on from Lee County
have been the C. R. N. A. twenty
years here my whole career and
there are times that we work in
collaboration with our surgeon
and our teammates and what that
might look like would be perhaps
we bring in a patient for
surgery and so we have to stay
in constant communication with
our team and let them know about
this patient stability as we go
through the surgery so perhaps
one example might be on
monitoring the blood loss for
the surgeon as we go through
that surgery.
Yes the bleeding increases it's
really important that I stay in
contact with the team let him
know how the patients doing I'm
measuring the patient's
perfusion through things like
their blood pressure their heart
rate are they making urine urine
output reflects that the
teenager be in perfused so we're
constantly sharing the patient
status I have to give
medications to maintain the put
patients blood pressure as they
lose a lot of blood their blood
pressure will start to lower and
so we have to maintain that
blood pressure at a healthy
state so we give medications at
based on their health history
based on the response that
they're having to medications we
have to know how the state drugs
are gonna work where she can
contraindicated as to why we
wouldn't give it we have to know
the correct dose thing and this
all comes from our many years of
advanced pharmacology that we
learned when we were in our
anesthesia training we also have
to give fluids and blood
replacement especially if
there's a lot of blood loss and
this is based on the patient's
lab work their body weight
mathematical formulas that we
use and comorbidities that the
patient may have and so as we're
doing this keeping the stable
the surgeon is concentrating on
his part of the team work and
I'm taking care of the patient
but we do stay in touch with
each other and we even have a
debriefing at the end I tell him
this is what I gave I gave blood
like a fluids in this drug the
patient stable she's refusing
her urine output is this and so
that's a great example of how we
collaborate down here's a team
but there's also times in little
areas like where I work that
we're independently working in a
really great example of this
let's say a medical physician
admits a patient to the medical
floored he specs they have
meningitis.
Which is the infection in the
spinal fluid and so he might
call me that night and station
and I just put this patient in
the hospital can you please come
and do a lumbar puncture and so
the the layman terms for that
would be a spinal tap so I went
to the hospital Domingo that
night I'm the only one there
no other physicians may be there
may be no other advanced
practice nurses in the teens so
I have to assess the patient
assess their history look at
their vital signs look to see
what drugs they're on because if
they're on medications that are
blood thinners in this procedure
would be contraindicated.
In that I have to determine is
it safe to do and I perform the
procedure if I find that it's.
Safe to do at the moment and so
then I stay with my patient my
recover my patient afterwards
give patient teaching and so
this would be a scenario where I
worked completely in an
independent manner and see them
doing this especially in rural
Japanese like mine with back to
the seventies even even in the
eighties we have a C. R. N. A.
here by Holly who covered all of
Lake County so they needed their
appendix out down in jail she
would drive down the challenge
she would work with the surgeon
and perform anesthesia for them
so you know those are probably
some really good examples of of
both forms of what we're asking
for the nurse practice act and
as far as education pursue your
names we start out as nurses
with the four years bachelor's
degree.
Then we have to go to Anastasia
training and are certified CRT
program in so that's anywhere
when we get through with that
six and a half to eight and a
half years of post high school
education and we either graduate
with a master's or we graduate
with the doctor it's here in the
next couple years all of the
incoming siRNAs will graduate
with a doctorate and once we
Are also also whatever working
as nurses we have to work in
critical care for at least a
year to you before we can even
apply to that program so this
critical care experience is
really important because it
helps us to have a little bit of
a leg up and learn things like
your weight management
human pathophysiology
pharmacology Year way that a
later management so this really
gives us a leg up as we come in.
Once we actually graduate from
the C. R. a program then we have
a really rigorous board exam
that we have to pass if you
don't pass it you don't get to
practice and then we also are
held accountable even as we go
through our career because we
have to sure that we're
maintaining safety so we have
modules every four years that we
have to complete
the an airway management
pathophysiology pharmacology
Care seizure technology we have
a exam we have to pass every
eight years to maintain our
certification and so we really
have strict rigid
Ways that they they make this
prove ourselves and and stay
accountable so
You know either are there any
questions or anything about any
of that that I presented.
Thank you we'll take questions
are ones were in discussion with
the committee so thank you thank
you.
Representative you're on mute
yeah I think I got it madam
chair it now if that Angela
Fritz could tell you something
about what she's doing as the
head of in this issue.
In Los crucis.
I hear that I'm okay thank you
madam chair and committee
members and thank you for your
time today my name is Angela
Fritz and I have been a nurse
for thirty years ten of those
years I've been performing
Anastasia I am currently the
chief nurse anesthetist at
memorial Medical Center in Los
crucis.
Part of my responsibilities
include the management of
fourteen full time siRNAs and
three full time physician
anesthesiologist.
Each member of our team works
independently performing their
own Anastasia cases.
The siRNAs are staffed in house
twenty four hours a day.
We are the primary providers to
deliver care to the obstetric
patients in labor the patients
who need C. sections as well as
the Anastasia to emergency cases
throughout the night.
Our hospital has chosen to have
a collaboration model where we
collaborate with the
anesthesiologist and or surgeons
as needed for individual patient
care.
Therefore we do have fourteen
siRNAs rotating twenty four
seven coverage in house as the
primary provider to perform the
Anastasia Care independently
with an anesthesiologist on call
from home as a back up should we
need to collaborate with them.
We all function it very well
together and we work very
closely with our teammates
whether that's a year and a or
an anesthesiologist.
Currently I am the only on site
leadership at this facility we
have been recruiting a chief
physician anesthesiologists for
over a year now but we simply
have not had
that position filled due to lack
of availability of candidates.
There are no indices are cases
that only a physician
anesthesiologist performs at our
facility we all do every case
and this year needs do open
heart surgeries as well as the
M. D. S..
Position anesthesiologists do
not supervise us they are
available to collaborate with us
it is rare that we would ever
call them and during the night
for an emergency case.
The only reason we would do this
would be to have an extra pair
of hands for like a very
complicated case where would be
safer to house to providers for
that patient.
But we also have C. R. needs on
call as backup and they would be
called prior to calling an
anesthesiologist.
Yes this is a collaborative
model but sometimes we
collaborate with each other or
other C. R. needs
the hospital chooses to have a
physiologist available to us but
in the case.
But just in case we should need
them however this is the
hospital's choice for that model
and again we all do our own
Anastasia cases.
So in addition to being the
chief of our department at
memorial Medical Center I have
also served in the military and
have been on deployment to serve
on the front lines as a nurse
anesthetist.
And I'm the current president of
our state association The New
Mexico Association for nurse
anesthetist thank you madam
chair and committee members for
your time and I welcome any
questions.
Chair.
We also have one other experts
and I'm so sorry I forgot her.
Pamela Blackwell if she could be
admitted.
Representative we don't see her
listed in the attendees issue
using another name.
well I don't think so
hi some of the I got a text that
she was available.
Missy.
Well maybe she'll show show up
when we do as we're doing the
questioning.
I mean has it audience a.
Okay I'm is that all for your
introduction Representative and
we can move along to willing.
Yes madam chair thank you very
much great thank you so now we
will open up a pole for about
twenty seconds if you are in
opposition or in favor and
you're currently in the audience
you can vote for this bill is
now open.
You have about five more seconds
to vote if you'd like.
The pool is now closed we have
nine four house bill thirty five
and three against so let's hear
from the opposition first if you
would like to speak in
opposition please raise your
hand and we will get to you.
Jason Thompson you are now and
muted.
Thank you madam chair can you
hear me we can.
Thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name's Jason
Thompson I'm I'm here on behalf
of the New Mexico society of
anesthesiologists I am there
register lobbyist here in New
Mexico and those who are on the
board of the society would of
like to been here today but
unfortunately our on their
shifts as a apologize for not
being able to attend give their
comments but I'll be a speaking
on behalf of them today.
and first off I'd also like to
thank the sponsor Representative
Matthews very much for spend
some time with me to hear me out
here out that are particular
concerns with this legislation I
know how busy you all are to
really appreciate that sitting
down and talking with me about
that and also just for some
context and we we have met and
sat down with this year in As
previous intention to try and
work out are here there are a
lot of areas we have some common
ground and amongst the different
health care practices here but
there is just some some issues
this particular bill and that we
were just unable to get some
consensus so I'll I'll speak to
to those in a in a general sense
here
the anesthesiologists society
acknowledges and appreciates the
important role courses here in
as siRNAs play in the anesthesia
care team here in New Mexico and
its overall health care system
and they understand the problem
of how underserved our state is
in health care as we are one of
the more underserved states in
the country.
I am.
In addition anesthesiology is a
practice of medicine what the
primary concern is that the
society has here is what this
current what this change in law
what do to the future role that
position anesthesiologists will
play in ensuring the best
standard of patient care and
Anastasia what will this
potentially will due to any
opportunities that are left for
them to practice in the state to
ensure that that care that
requirement adds to ensure my
part to ensure that that care
since the requirement of
collaboration with a position is
no longer a specific mandate in
this bill just other health care
providers which positions are
part up but not a specific
requirement it's known that we
have a serious problem with
reaching underserved communities
and and say that that's well now
that's out and also that of
recruiting and retaining
physicians and physician
anesthesiologists serve those
communities in rural areas and
it's documented by our state's
medical school that anywhere
from twenty to thirty five
percent of our med school
graduates leave New Mexico to
practice elsewhere there a
Marianna reasons that dis
incentivize them from staying
and banned from staying here if
passed this bill could
potentially be another thing
that contributes to that that is
a very good chance of these
changes could potentially drive
out more position
anesthesiologists from New
Mexico not just from the rural
areas but also from urban areas
where some facilities are
already adopting C. R. center
and sees a care models and the
language in this bill will could
not say that could allow
hospitals to choose to have no
anesthesiologists at all making
it even more difficult than it
already is to bring
anesthesiologists here and to
keep them here
the the essence of time I'll
leave my comments there but
again I appreciate the sponsor
bring in this and speaking to me
and always happy to engage any
further conversations with the
other stakeholders in this
group.
So thank you for time manager.
Thank you I'm next we will go to
support if you would like to
speak in support of house bill
thirty five please raise your
hand.
Sherri Dodson here now and
muted.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is sherry dots and and I am a
volunteer advocate for A. R. P.
E. A. A. R. P. strongly supports
house bill thirty five and as a
retired registered nurse myself
I have had experience with a C.
R. N. A. as a frequently and all
of them I found to be highly
qualified and ethical
professionals house bill thirty
five will improve access to
health care in our state and
especially in our rural areas
thank you.
Thank you.
Gloria Doherty you are now and
made it.
Good morning chair members of
the committee thank you for
allowing me to speak as you
heard my name is Gloria
Dougherty I'm the current
president of the New Mexico
nurses association and vice
president for the New Mexico
nurse practitioner council as
their sister organizations and
for myself personally I support
house bill thirty five I've been
a nurse for thirty years twenty
of them as an acute care nurse
practitioner also in life saving
clinical settings.
The benefits to the state of New
Mexico being the four runner in
creating independent practice
with full prescriptive
authority.
In nineteen ninety three are
bountiful The New Mexico still
considered an underserved stays
access has improved and the
quality of care has been
maintained and or improved
depending on the area of care
and the literature shows that
chronic illness programs ran by
advanced practice nurses
improves outcomes.
Nurse practitioners and other
advanced practitioners continue
to provide high quality care
with similar or better outcomes
regardless of their practice
location in the literature in
particular to vulnerable in
under served areas were rural
and urban alike.
And despite the fact that rural
New Mexico is predominantly
staffed by siRNAs for
anesthetics the supply the
supplies of curb Care throughout
the whole entire state and when
it comes to the quality and
safety it is recognize that
nurse anesthetist provide
seventy percent of the
anesthesia and our state and
there are zero malpractice
claims from twenty fifteen on
for any certified registered
nurse anesthetists.
In nineteen ninety nine midwives
attained independent practice
and since that our state has
more than one third of their
babies delivered by midwives
with excellent quality and
outcomes this year in is are the
only advanced practice nurse and
the nurse practice act singled
out to have interdependent
language in actuality they are
practicing independently.
Let's crucis is that
predominantly would see Arnaiz
truth or consequences only has
to nurse anesthetists if they
didn't exist if they were not
there practicing independently
there would be no operating
Grumman.
The.
Army one of the is to see our
enemies who are in tier C.
practices at this is surging
he's a surgical commander in
charge of all surgical
operations he was the sole
anesthesia provider in a combat
zone on numerous occasions in
both places the military and
truth or consequences the
senator defer to this yearning
to make decisions regarding life
saving medications pain
management and anesthesia.
As I mentioned earlier I have
been practicing in critical care
equipment and hospitalist
medicine for twenty years with
ten additional years of critical
care experience as a registered
nurse.
There is not a day that goes by
where I do not consult or
collaborate with another
licensed profession whether it
be a nurse for wound care and
religious for a patient having a
stroke or any other licensed
professional I'm not I'm not in
it I am not god to think any
provider of any license type
works completely independently
is simply unrealistic we all
work collaboratively inter
dependently physicians and
advanced practice nurses nurses
respiratory therapy and other
health care professionals we are
a team we have the honor and
privilege of caring for the
people of New Mexico safely with
the highest quality and level of
safety wherever they may reside
urban or rural however
collaboration is part of
everyone's practice and
everyone's responsibility
there's no need for it to be
part of any medical or nursing
statute.
In summary I stand in support
personally and through
representing both the New Mexico
nurses association and the New
Mexico nurse practitioner
council of house bill thirty
five where we recommend the
nurse practice act to be
amended.
With words matching the current
rules of the statute we're C.
Arnie's are independent this
merely updates the statute to
meet actual practice and serve
our state thank you madam chair
members of the committee for the
time to speak.
Thank you response on our you
are now in muted.
Welcome chair members of this
committee on crystals on the
register lobbyist for the New
Mexico association of nurse
on the separatists and the I'm
here speaking on behalf of the
membership office association
that madam chair members of this
committee.
I want to make sure that this
committee
and and and understands
the three important things on
this piece of legislation house
bill forty five.
The first one is that we are not
changing scope of practice on
this piece of legislation.
A second we're not allowing C.
RNase to projects Medicine this
doesn't do that and third we're
not expanding C. RNase graphics
and when providers.
In addition to that madam chair
members of this committee at on
the on it's interesting to to do
here the the opposition
throughout the this past two
weeks I I I appreciate that
they're saying that I appreciate
all role in a community and
rural community what we do
but it's difficult when we have
a smear campaign going around
with agency information about
what this your needs to have
done for this state and continue
doing rural areas.
In regards of the comments of
the hospital and recruiting M.
D. Sanchez Yala just I'll let
Pamela Blackwell the represent
of the New Mexico hospices
ciation address that I think
they are the ones that.
And actually have the authority
to talk about on for the hospice
perspective and view on this
Representative members the
committee I I ask you each one
of you to to think about this is
about rural New Mexico this is
about updating the act so that
this year and ace are
the their their
their projects aligns with all
the nurses advanced protection
is out there in the working
independently already
collaboration is always there it
is not be but was not removed
the actually is enhanced you can
see that on the piece of
legislation as well so please
support this piece of
legislation house bill thirty
five thank you madam chair.
Thank you we will now now go
back to Representative Matthews
did you have.
Of Pamela Blackwell I see she's
joined you want her to say
something.
Madam chair please if if you
could please yes I'm madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Pamela Blackwell I am the
director of policy and
communications for the New
Mexico hospital association we
stand in strong support of house
bill thirty five this bill as
you know codifies what has
already been in existence and in
practice in New Mexico for over
eighteen years since two
thousand two R. C. RNase had
been eligible to practice
without supervision of
physicians this has allowed our
hospitals across our state
especially in rural communities
to access necessary anesthesia
Services provided by C. R. N.
A.'s including surgical
obstetrical as well as those
pain management services these
services have helped to ensure
that New Mexico residents may
receive quality care closer to
home as noted it may it might be
in your packet it's not I'm
happy to provide it the Federal
Trade Commission has taken a
position on this and that in a
September twenty twenty letter
to the Texel Texas Medical Board
it clarified its position are
stating that requiring CRT
supervision can actually impose
significant competitive costs to
health care consumers and
patients and that it can also
impede rather than foster the
development of effective models
of team based care so a lot of
people are talking about the
team based care model that still
exists that does not change and
that's a very important part of
providing health care services
Garcia Arnie's our leaders on
our hospitals critical care
teams they work collaboratively
across health care professional
disciplines and during the
pandemic C. RNase have played a
critical role their training
education experience and life
saving critical care and airway
management as well as ventilator
support and advance patient
assessment have helped to save
the lives of those most impacted
by a COVID nineteen so with that
madam chair members of the
committee we thank you for your
consideration of this let.
Ation and ask that you please
support passage of house bill
thirty five thank you.
Great thank you.
Representative are we ready to
go to the committee of madam
chair members of the committee
yes and we stand ready for your
questions and we also have Dr
Satcher pools that the board of
nursing to answer the questions
also thank you great thank you.
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair
I come from a community of of
two counties I represent are
both counties that don't have
any.
Messrs doctors that we're all C.
R. N. A.'s and so right I may be
View this works are we're we're
some some buyers in that regard
but I am also concerned with
the with the statements that of
Mister Thompson may cause in our
state we Walker pretty fine line
with respect to medical care
generally in the recruitment of
our physicians to our state.
Particularly in rural New Mexico
and.
I certainly
one the.
Law to reflect reality.
But I also want to make sure
that we're not putting up
barriers.
To encouraging our investors
service to come to New Mexico or
anesthesiologists to come to New
Mexico to practice their trade.
And so this is one of those are
those bills that are are we we
have to be very careful walk a
fine line I don't have any
questions of the Representative
river experts.
I I would like
I would like to our maybe see if
if there's something that could
be done to address maybe some of
the doctors concerns and and
maybe there's not going to
support the legislation I I am
concerned that we don't do
things that we're.
be perceived by the medical
community is not there are.
Being sensitive to their needs
as well.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you representative.
Representative Chasey.
Thank you very much madam chair
Representative Matthews.
Is this bill from is it from the
health and Human Services
interim committee.
Chair Representative Chasey it
was endorsed by the interim
health and Human Services
Committee yes okay so in during
the interim when and I would
have served on that committee so
I know that generally speaking
thank hear from all parties.
And
I expect that during that time
in the interim you heard from
the physicians and they
sits right.
Madam chair representation yes.
I want to say that you'd ever
since.
Representative John Hayden who
deserve we're both elected in
nineteen ninety six and he's a
retired pharmacist.
He he really I've never
forgotten what he said it that
we're just really not qualified
to make scope of practice
decisions.
And it's very difficult.
When we're asked to do so what
we've been asked again and again
we had
Prescriptive authority for some
psychologists to receive.
Quite a bit of special training
we eventually did that
I think that by the time I was
serving
There's practitioners already
had restrict authority I don't
think we have to deal with that
but you know there was a time
when they didn't have it a
certified nurse practitioner and
my primary care person is nurse
practitioner but then we also
had the
Ophthalmologist in the time
interest.
It might have time at your said
basically.
Unless we passed the law.
She would not be allowed to
perform which is actually trying
to do so
you know it's just really tough
and and in.
In all those cases so far the
legislature has tried to act
like it knows all the science.
And
But mostly we opted.
To expand the authority because
of the lack of services in New
Mexico and.
This isn't to say that I ever
thought we were taking safety
risk because I I guess I never
thought we were.
But
it's tough it really is top and
What.
I understand and and it's it's
sort of a question if you if if
I'm right you can just say
that's right but if you think
I'm wrong it doesn't seem to me
that we're doing more than
codifying what has been.
The practice if that's right.
Representative Chasey that is
absolutely correct it is since
the nineteen since two thousand
one as and that's why I went
through the evolution of the law
in this is because it it was an
evolutionary process.
It went from direct to provision
and then it changed in two
thousand one and with that
there's been a growing of field
of C. R. N. A. a group growing
number of C. R. NH practicing in
the state in providing critical
and vital services
as well or better.
It's not a competition but as
well or better than
It Indiana CGH and it's
It is implication in this
argument which which really
concerns me which is that
somehow if the C. R. N. A. does
this instead of an M. D. is
somehow second rate service and
that's just not true these are
dedicated professional well
trained people who work very
very hard and who when you look
at the malpractice rates on do a
better job of then in DC in this
field this is just one of the
fields where we've seen an
evolution of allowing advance
care people without an actual
indeed agree do greater provide
perform more.
Provide more health care
services
as the population grows as the
cost of health care goes up this
is probably an inevitable trend
and I certainly appreciate as
legislators that we want to be
absolutely sure that the people
who are doing this are well
trained that they know what
you're doing and that we don't
allow people to do things that
are not qualified to do that
that is not the case C. R. NH.
Thank you madam chair I have no
more questions.
Thank you Representative.
What is the committee
Representative Eli yeah madam
chair I moved the past.
Past motion by Representative
Eli and a second by
Representative Chasey is there
further discussion.
Okay the clerk to call the roll
please.
Representative Chasey yes.
Representative Eli yes.
Representative Gallegos.
Representative my part yes.
Representative Ortez.
Yes.
Representative Rehm yes.
Representative Zamora yes.
Vice chair Johnson.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Yes.
Madam chair with that we have
eight in the affirmative and one
excuse.
Thank you Representative
Matthews you have a do pass on
health special.
Thirty five thank you madam
chair members of the committee
thank you very much we
appreciate your you're at
listening and and consideration.
Next we have House Bill fifty
one Representative Chasey.
Thank you madam chair I would
like to ask that my expert
witness Judy calling be promoted
to the panelists.
Okay we will get her.
Into the panelists mode and
she's there.
Well.
Committee members I believe you
have.
An amendment.
Before you would you like me to
just explain the billing go
ahead take public comment
because the amendment is
so what technical and it sent an
effort to cooperate with
industry and I guess I just want
to assure those industry members
unity president back on what
okay here are are are
This Madam can give you a
synopsis of it.
Of the new amendment before we
go to public comment just to
allay any concerns.
Thank you I think that would be
great that way folks can address
the amendments I think you guys
have been working with them so
that would be great thank you.
Yes okay so.
The environmental database built
is is a very
Excellent opportunity for to.
Provide information that
currently exist in state
government.
In with all of the agencies that
People can access now but what
this does is put it together in
one place and that would be done
at they would use existing.
Agency data that is available to
anyone and it's going to make it
easier for the public and for
permit applications to find out
what the
Environmental data are in an
area in which they wish to
Either they're going to do a
project or they're interested in
and various possibilities I'm
gonna let it's common to become
his an attorney who is with the
New Mexico Audubon.
About the.
Really how it came about.
And thank you madam chair and
representative Chasey so I'll
just give a brief overview of
the bill and then maybe I'll
just quickly explain the
amendments at the end before we
go to comment in question so
thank you for having me here
today to help present this bill
and Judy comment New Mexico
policy director for the Audubon
society Representative Ortez is
already or this presentation and
its last committee so sorry
about that Representative but I
do have some new information to
share and this one I'm so as
Representative Chasey said this
is a very simple bill and it
would just create a single map
based database website that
centralizes the state's basic
environmental data the database
what then be searchable by
agencies industries and the
public so it would include
information like threatened and
endangered species and locations
of oil and gas wells and rare
plant data and locations of
hazardous waste sites and we
want to do this because right
now it's really hard to figure
out the complete picture of
what's happening in the state if
you want to know everything
going on in a certain part of
New Mexico you kind of have to
take through like eight
different agency websites to try
to piece it together which is
difficult so this database but
actually let a user zoom in on a
map to an area of interest in
the state and know right away
what's going on in that area by
seeing all the different layers
of information at once so this
will help the public and it'll
also help agencies to have a
comprehensive view of what's
happening some agencies are now
hiring landscape planners for
examples of these employees
would benefit from being able to
use an easily searchable map
that has other agency data on it
as they try to make plans and
decisions and the State Land
Office actually testified to
that in our last committee.
We believe it'll also be useful
for industry project proponents
in the state as they go through
their own complicated process of
securing state agency permits so
we model this idea on a similar
tool that the game and fish
department already has for
species data and natural
heritage program at UNM manages
this current site for game and
fish and they're willing to take
on this additional database to
and other states have more
comprehensive map databases like
this and find it very useful so
we did a presentation on this
bill at the November water
natural resources interim
committee which included
information from Virginia's
department of conservation about
how they use their expanded
database.
And while the initial impetus
for this bill was to make inter
agency communication better and
improve transparency for the
public as I noted earlier
industry uses something we also
hope happens I'm in our last
committee we got several
comments and questions at which
for skeptical that industry
would use the database so I did
a little bit of research between
then and now an industry already
does use the databases so you
amendment tells us that over the
last two years The New Mexico
game and fish tool which is
currently active and eight
hundred and eighty six reports
generated the highest percentage
of those users were state
agencies that forty seven
percent but the next highest was
industry at twenty percent
followed by NGOs and fifteen
percent and there is similar
statistics for the Virginia
comprehensive database which
looks like what we'd like to
have here so just in twenty
twenty they generated two
thousand ninety four reports
through their database and their
biggest user was also other
state agencies but seven hundred
fifty one of those reports for
for industry users which is
about thirty five percent I'm
and lastly it just I'll note
that because we want to
consolidate data that the
agencies already have on hand
the process is pretty easy and
relatively inexpensive
so I think that's all I have for
the summary of the bill I'm just
in terms of explaining the
amendments a little bit so as
Representative Chasey said we
did have a bunch of meetings
with different industry groups
and interest groups and there
are a couple of amendments that
they wanted to see mostly just
for clarity I'm so I don't know
if Representative Chasey and
madam chair do you want to
should we walked through the
amendments one by one and you
just.
I don't know how you want to do
that.
Would you just summarize the
amendments for.
Just for today.
The was on today okay yes so
I'm.
So the first amendment just adds
a definition for environmental
data which clarifies that it is
geospatial data that corresponds
to the sections in the bill so
that was just at a clarifying
definition another change is in
section three D. eight at we
just kind of re worded that so
that it's clear and explains
that each agency has discretion
to add additional agency
develops data when they think
it's useful for making the
public understand the
environmental data that's on the
database.
And then we did it take out
applause from section three D.
seven
we are taking out the words
including information about
areas where development should
be avoided if possible only
because that ended up being sort
of speculative and not something
that the agency is already have
on hand as a data years so.
It didn't really make sense to
include it just on a database
that was data focused and then
lastly and section four C. which
is the last page we're just
adding the words or security
after the words safety so
there is I confidentiality and
exemptions section at the end
and we had an exemption where
states state agencies can make a
determination that data wasn't
appropriate for the database if
there was a safety concern and
so we got some feedback that we
should also put in the words or
security after that just in case
there's a different sort of
security issue so we agreed to
do that so that's that's the
foreman's behalf.
Let me just say madam chair that
the it was the New Mexico gas
company that asked us to put the
or security in although I think
there were others who were very
Glad that we did so I think
we're ready to go to the
audience.
Representative Chasey are we
ready to go to the public I'm
sorry I thought I thought I I
said that is sorry I hope I
wasn't needed when I said it
yes.
Great thank you so let's go
ahead and pull the public it
will be open for about twenty
seconds if you are for against
house bill fifty one as an
amended and including the
proposed amendments.
You now have about ten seconds
to vote.
Great we are closing the pool
and we have the sixteen for
house bill fifty one.
As Amanda and three against.
So let's go ahead and hear from
the opposition first if you
would like to speak in
opposition of the bill please
raise your hand.
we are taking opposition okay.
General Winchester you are now
and it.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Jim Winchester I'm with the
independent petroleum
association of New Mexico
Representative three hundred and
fifty independent operators in
the state just want to say
foremost that I PAM understands
the need to ensure a operators
are hearing to regulatory
requirements in the associated
reporting requirements however
we feel that efforts to grant
new regulatory reporting years
threatens to cost significant
time and money to achieve an end
result that is already available
in existing form within the
various agencies
in existing like the set of
operational environmental
permits.
Already do exist and oil and gas
producer's in permit holders
must adhere to the store sets of
regulatory state requirements
that do protect human health
fresh water sources in the
environment
I do want to point out that the
searchable facts available for
public inspection already
include but are not limited to
when it comes to oil and gas
production everything from the
type of well drilled the
construction the material used
the service well had planned
emergency response eccentric
said dry and there are in least
a half dozen more other
reporting requirements that are
out there in available to the
public
it is the inevitable goal of
this database that by adding
additional reporting
requirements
it would disproportionately
punish small and independent
producers who don't have armies
of lawyers and compliance
officers to process paperwork to
do their everyday business in
this raises the question of
focusing more on reporting then
on environmental protection
itself
does reporting into this
database which already exists.
Beginning Monday we should
implement a full.
I'm sorry.
I'm sorry.
Sure I'm just reason question
that does reporting into this
database which already exists
make the environment any safer
finally the reason associated
costs the state in excess of a
hundred thousand dollars and
that's not without fully
understanding the additional
funds that will be folded into
the budget is this additional
cost justified for information
that's already available to the
public so for that I'm we do
stand opposed we do hope that
the activists involved in
writing this bill at some point
do reach out to us even though
they are saying they are
discussing and consulted with
industry we've not heard from
them thank you.
Thank you and again I apologize
for the interruption.
Jonas boys you are now and it.
Madam chair members the
committee good morning my name
is Jonas moram the executive
director of the New Mexico
cattle growers association in
the New Mexico will growers in
corporate IT
Although the end of the
amendments are friendly and the
we do have been reviewing them
as they came in we still have a
few do different problems from
the agricultural in a cattle
production sheep point of view
that are associated with this
bill
and the majority of the problem
is still on the associated costs
the state for the information
that is ready Representative
ready available to the public we
are also a little bit concerned
on still on the security of of
private landowner data and that
have data if compromise may
affect our producers so I thank
you for a the opportunity come
into thank you have a great day.
Thank you Health Security
staffing you are now and muted.
this is Mary Feldblum with the
oil and gas accountability
project not representational
security here and this is a
fabulous a proposal and I think
the sponsor for we're doing this
it's not only going to be good
for industry as Judy common
pointed out and the general
public but students as well and
as a former college professor I
think you so wonderful
opportunity for students to
easily can't gain access to
already public data it's not I
would say thank you.
Thank you I'm we will now hear
from support.
You like to speak in support
please raise your hand Jessica
Johnson you are now and it.
A good morning madam chair and
Committee members my name is
Jessica Johnson and I'm the
chief government affairs officer
for animal protection voters we
strongly support this
legislation a comprehensive
centralized searchable database
would be incredibly helpful for
us for example to identify
wildlife conflict locations and
habitats status that could
inform are nonprofit at program
work to contract public
education and provide services
for communities so we we urged
passage of this bill thank you.
Thank you Charles D. selain you
are now and it.
You might have to admit yourself
on your and Charles.
Okay let's get back to Charles
and we will go to Gary Payton.
You are now unmuted.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is Gary
Payton and I'm representing the
coalition of the single
Communities New Mexico.
Our coalition is comprised of
the elected leaders of the
cities of Los crucis Albuquerque
Santa Fe and Santa Fe County.
These member communities
constitute approximately forty
percent of the population of the
state of New Mexico.
We support this bill because of
what it does to provide for
additional government
transparency additional agency
cooperation and information
sharing and access to current
scientific data we're
particularly pleased with the
improve language that addresses
issues of safety and security.
We urge you to support this bill
as you consider this morning
thank you very much.
Thank you and I believe Charles
now is unmuted.
Thank you
madam chair members of the
committee can you hear me now we
can.
I apologize thank you for the
opportunity to speak today in
favor of house bill fifty one my
name is Charles to sail and I'm
a staff attorney with the New
Mexico environmental law center
the bill would set up a
centralized accessible
searchable database of
environmental data.
Vied invaluable information for
government agencies care in
carrying out their
responsibilities and for
researchers and academics and
for interested members of the
public the bill would provide a
useful tool for local
communities in identifying
potential threats to their
environment it would increase
transparency and accountability
the bill would also help to to
to conclude that that in some
cases threats do not exist.
The bill would also provide
useful information to the
legislature too often the
legislature must make important
decisions affecting our land our
air and our water based on
incomplete information this bill
would help to fill in some of
those gaps so again we support
the bill thank you very much
madam chair and members of the
committee.
Thank you Gary increasing you
are now and muted.
Good morning madam chair members
committee Gary Bennett costing
with New Mexico wild.
you know watersheds and habitat
and wildlife corridors always
cross jurisdictional boundaries
with agencies and tribal lands
and.
And private lands and it's
really important to be able to
assess specially watershed
functionality and health in sort
of a one stop shop and that's
what makes this so X. exciting
so you know it's a simple bill
it's similar to the water data
act that was passed several
years ago again it's it's it's
exciting opportunity to to do a
real
Deep assessment on on our
wildlife and watershed so we
very much support this bill
thank you very much.
Thank you Jeff Pappas you are
now and it.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Jeff
Pappas and I am the state
historic preservation officer
stating Mexico on I also direct
the.
Stewart preservation division
which is under the department of
cultural affairs and I'm
speaking on behalf of the
cabinet secretary Debra Garcia
Y. Griego.
It's not that we're necessarily
or that we are in support or in
opposition to the to the bill we
just would like to
bring to the attention to the
committee some of the concerns
that we have in regards to the
language in the bill both fiscal
and regulatory concerns that the
department has if you can note
on page five of the bill section
seven which is specific to the
store preservation division and
database that we maintain just
simply states that the at the
state or the state department
would require a link or offer
a link to our database we can
certainly do that but at that
point though access to the
database is password protected
under under regulation we use
that database actually to
generate significant.
Fees to pay for the operation of
that database and again that's
statutory and regulatory so with
this would be a significant
financial.
Our consideration to the
Department and also a regulatory
issue as well too so perhaps I
can talk to you before
Representative can talk to
Representative Chasey or two
miss Callebaut some of the
concerns we have about language
in the bill and thank you.
Thank you.
It.
Christodoulou
Lulu excuse me you're no needed.
I think she.
Chris then I think you lowered
your hand.
Okay there you are your unmuted.
You'll just have to and you on
your end.
At the.
I think of their okay I didn't
realize that money thank you
very much.
Madam chair committee members my
name's that the increased to do.
I am the political director for
the Atlanta progressive caucus
but I'm also more importantly an
application a software
application owner.
And so I know how important it
is to go ahead and take
advantage of the digital world
which is what this bill is doing
it is truly going to make this
data accessible and searchable
data that is already supplied
not new data that is being
requested but data that's
already supplied and then just
being offered to the public who
has paid for the government and
entities to collect this data to
offer it to the public in a
transparent manner manner it
will be helpful as many people
have already mentioned in
different areas both
governmental and in industrial
as well as to environmentalists
and in a big growing tourism
outdoor tourism so I am in full
and my organization is in full
support of H. B. fifty one as
amended and ask for to pass.
Thank you and Roker.
You are now and made it.
Thank you and good morning
committee members some my name's
Dan Roper and I work for trout
unlimited gets probably my first
time ever I speaking in front of
this committee we're at a
national nonprofit organization
and much of our emphasis is
around watershed health the
health of our rivers and streams
and and native fish
and that clean water values and
I do have some experience using
some of the existing databases
and online schools that exist in
the state and based on that
experience I think it would be
very valuable to have all of
this information in one place.
I have the luxury you know being
in in this profession of being
connected to some really smart
experience colleagues and so I
often I have this kind this
option to phone a friend when
I'm looking for something that I
can't find Mike on water quality
impairments
past projects that have been
funded by the state restoration
projects things like that but
not everyone has that ability so
I think you know from elected
officials to community members
to natural resource
professionals this will be a
really good pool and just comes
down to good government good
data management so out we are
supportive of of this house bill
thank you.
You know I am going to allow the
next speaker to
talk and then after that I will
hand the chair over to vice
chair I have to step away for a
little bit so Antoinette right
yes you are now unmuted.
hi my name is as flat rate yes I
was speaking in support of this
bill on behalf of this year
could be a grand chapter and are
thirty five thousand members and
supporters this bill is.
Great to make the information
more publicly accessible make it
more the government more
transparent and more straight
forward as well as make it
easier for other departments to
have
better planning when looking at
a region and saying what other
departments are doing as well.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr now we will move on
with comments from Michael tax.
Hello.
Okay.
We move on to Sonny Lee Stewart.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
totally Stewart and I'm that
deputy commissioner for
operations of the State Land
Office we are in support of this
legislation anybody who's been
in government for interacted
with government knows that there
is a core distinction between
available information and
accessible information it is
true that much of this
information is already available
I have two different government
agencies
including the information that
the state land office will have
to report but that doesn't mean
that is easily accessible and
put in any one place and I from
our perspective I will advance
public transparency advance good
government and really you bring
information that already is
available to the people who know
how to look sophisticated Lee
navigate government
to the general public and that's
a really important things so for
that reason we stand and support
thank you.
Thank you now we will move on to
Greg Peters.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee thank you for
the opportunity to comment my
name is Greg Peters I'm in the
public lands and wildlife
advocate conservation voters New
Mexico I'm here to stand in
strong support of HB fifty one
this common sense bill addresses
the simple need for staff
wishing a comprehensive easily
accessible centralized
repository to everyone across
the state nexus is we do more
comprehensive and smarter multi
jurisdictional land use planning
by New Mexico state agencies
help industries that navigate
state permitting process sees
and provide more transparency to
the public granting more
equitable access to state
agencies we will see everything
going on at once and to be clear
no agency departments asked
disclose any type of
confidential information were
disclosed any archaeological or
cultural data without permission
from relevant proposed tax.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you for your
consideration of this
legislation again we urge
passage of HB fifty one.
If you.
Thank you Mr Peters Marco
Gonzalez.
Good afternoon a good morning
madam chair members of the
committee my name is Marco
Gonzales and I represent pattern
energy and I wanted first to
just thank the sponsor and her
expert expert for have you
visited with us on the way when
this bill was on its way to this
committee we did have some
concerns and just because of the
busyness of the session weren't
able to communicate with the
sponsor and and of fantastic
collaborative fashion in between
now that after expressing some
concerns you know we visited
with them and we we are going to
rise and support of the bill I
want to just tell members since
we don't appear before this
committee very often pattern
energy is sixty two develop
about four thousand megawatts of
renewable energy in New Mexico
which is about a seven billion
dollar investment into the state
and you know we feel that the
responsible development of
renewable energy is critical to
our nation in the state future
and that means that you know
considering the existing
environment of the proposed
project from the outset and the
environmental database it's a
valuable tool to for bringing
the relevant data from different
state agencies together to help
inform companies like ours in
making use of the data and
informing renewable energy
development at the early stages
of the process so I want to
thank the sponsor and the expert
for the city and thank you
members of the committee and
madam chair.
Thank you and now we will go
back to Michael dax if he's on
the I'm on the phone or online
now.
Okay I don't hear anything from
Mr dax is there anyone else who
would like to provide public
comment.
I don't see any other right
hands right hi madam chair this
is Michael dax okay thank you hi
I was elected as a panelist I I
don't know what the issue was
before but but thank you for
coming back to be madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Michael dax on the New Mexico
representative for defenders of
wildlife I won't take up much
time only to say that we support
the bill strongly we frequently
hear criticisms of New Mexico's
natural resource agencies being
stove piped and not necessarily
coordinating or collaborating
with one another as much as they
could I think this bill goes
along with a tool that problem
as well as giving the public
opportunities to see all this
data in one place I am one of
those people who frequently
looks at maps on on different
agencies websites especially New
Mexico environment department's
Water
water map as well as given
fishes Environment road few pool
and the idea of having all this
data together in one place will
be extremely helpful for the
public as well as agencies and
project planners thank you so
much.
Thank you very.
Okay I don't see more hands that
raised four comments
Representative Chasey.
So madam chair just in response
to the public comment before we
put the amendment on I I do want
to say.
Please keep in mind this isn't
adding work for the agencies the
HSD is already collects these
data so this is to build did.
And with that let me
Propose the amendment madam
chair it's the two oh two number
is two one nine five four four
point two.
And.
Members do you have this it
should be in your share file or
I I'll take the chairs lead.
Basically.
What.
I'll be happy to go I think it
be better to just go through it
so on page one between lines
twenty and twenty one insert the
following.
Subsection and then Bayern
mental data needs geospatial
data relating to the
environmental resources
specified.
grant one through seven
subsection D. section three of
the environmental database and
remember the sixty day session
subsections accordingly.
Madam chair and representative I
think it's actually point three
I think that was right that it
should say sections one through
eight not sections one through
seven so I think there's and you
have the point three in front of
you.
I'm I do hold on one second I'm
sorry thank you.
It might be more efficient what
was the first one right I'm
sorry to interrupt I just a few
recognize that we accidentally
and the first version that was
sent around said one three seven
initiative in one through eight
yes I do have it so
and I apologize madam chair this
is that a.
You know adjustment to our
virtual session I do apologize
so go ahead Judy and thank you
madam chair Representative
Chasey so if you just want to go
through it should be point three
and I think you all got it about
an hour after the point two one
was sent out and Shonda thanks
sent that around to the
committee assistance so I don't
know maybe it didn't get
switched but it's very close to
to the point two but the first
one is on page one between lines
twenty and twenty one insert a
environmental data means
geospatial data relating to the
environmental resources in the
state specified in paragraphs
one through eight of subsection
D. of section three of the
environmental database act.
And madam chair should I should
I just go through all of them
yes are you.
Okay I'm number two is just read
it organizing and re lettering
the succeeding subsections since
we added one I'm the third one
is that on page five line twenty
after the word sites strike the
remainder of the line and strike
line twenty one through possible
this is the amendment we talked
about where we're just removing
the requirement to sort of
speculate on on which areas
might be appropriate for
development on actual database
or taking that out
the fourth one is on page five
straight lines twenty two to
twenty five in their entirety
and on page six straight line
one in its entirety and insert
and Lou there of.
section eight it would say now
from each state agency at the
discretion of the state agency
links to available agency
developed data and research used
in decision making that the
agency determines will assist
the public in understanding the
state environmental data
reported you know that's a
mouthful that was just a
clarification of what kind of
additional data could be
uploaded by the state agency and
that was also in response to
some discussions with industry
stakeholders.
I'm really I don't want to let
me interrupt real quick go ahead
colleagues I understand that the
amendment is now uploaded on
share file.
If you want to look look look in
your share file thank you Judy.
Thank you madam chair.
I'm just too small last ones and
they were at both once we talked
about at the fifth one is on
page six line seven we're
striking the word's
environmental data and and so
that it just says additional
information this was because of
that the definition we put in
for environmental data it just
made sense to take the word
environmental data out of that
section just for consistency
sake and then the last one is
on page six line twenty four
inserting or security afterwards
CFD.
And that is it.
So madam chair I will say
amendment for discussion
purposes.
Thank you Representative do we
have a second.
I will second that motion and
the.
Every we will go back to
discussion.
Law.
Representative our case.
Hi thank you madam chair madam
chair I have a question is thank
you for these amendments they
think they're very helpful they
make a lot of sense I can you
address the the issue that Mr
Moore you're raised about
private landowner data being
accessible I just I I think that
is that is a concern I just want
to hear from you Madam chair
representative Ortez I can it's
just we're still on the
amendment so.
We have adopted.
All right.
It.
Sorry about that Representative
okay so we have a motion to the
adopted amendment we have a
second.
And do we have any opposition.
On that motion.
I don't see any opposition so we
can move forward to discussing
the amendment correct so the
amendment is adopted.
Yes sure yes all right so we're
ready to talk about the amended
bill so Representative more test
script.
Sorry about that and about that
you know we did actually have
madam chair that discussion
earlier but I want to that this
Madam respond.
But she's better at eight.
No I'm not.
Madam chair and Representative
Ortez thank you I'm I I don't
entirely understand why that's a
concern only because this bill
only requires uploading
information it's already
collected by state agencies that
only applies to state agencies
doesn't require uploading
confidential data in any way for
anyone I'm and so it should just
be information that's already
publicly available I'm this
really is just about
consolidating existing data up
to one match so that it's easier
to see and easier to use and
easier to understand it's not
about additional reporting
requirements or compliance of
anything and it's just about
making a comprehensive database
and so it's only applying to
state agencies that we did get a
question in the last committee
about federal data I think you
know there probably would be
some federal data on the website
but it's federal data that the
state agencies upload it on
state website so it's things
like but habitat for threatened
and endangered species that are
listed that kind of thing would
cross different land
jurisdictions including you know
potentially private land just
because they're state lots of
areas that are most appropriate
for endangered species but it's
not private land data so I don't
think that would be an issue.
Thank you.
Representative neighbor.
Thank you madam chair I was
trying to find the share files
and I'm still not very good at
that so that.
No idea what what the amendments
that the.
You very.
Questions I have.
Where are pretty specific and.
I noticed that we.
On the one hand.
Are concerned about solar and
wind projects limited State Land
but yeah we want all active oil
and gas wells I assume that
would include state federal and
State Land what's the
difference.
Go ahead.
Sorry Madam chair representative
nine very it would only include
information collected from the
state agencies so it should just
be oil and gas wells on state
land that are administered state
oil and gas wells I'm sorry so
oil and gas wells that are
administered through the energy
minerals department so you know
there is split the state so
sometimes the state is running
wells that are you know like the
state as the minerals in the
sense that the service or vice
versa so you know there might be
some say information that
crosses federal land but we're
only talking about information
from the state agencies so that
oil and gas information is
through different agency also
than that the renewable energy
projects on state land so the
land office has leases for
utility scale renewable energy
and they're the ones that have
that information and and art is
the one that has well and gas
information but it it would only
be fair oil and gas information
we can't I mean we can't.
Require reporting from federal
agencies so just the stuff that
they have.
Yes madam chair I don't
understand the distinction wide.
Solar and wind projects are
limited to those on state land
where.
We want all locations are active
oil and gas wells in there is
not a similar limitation.
Madam chair representative my
right eye.
Our intention was just to
include oil and gas wells from
EMNRD so it would be well
information they have and it's
under their subsection.
And what they're not have.
Solar and wind project data on.
All lands as well.
Madam chair representative never
my understanding is that the
leases for renewable energy
projects on state land that data
information is from the Land
Office.
Program why did you included
under EMNRD.
I thought it was.
Maybe I'm let me pull up the
bill.
Madam chair representative can
you point out what.
What the language is where
you're concerned about it the
page in line.
H. three
The oil and gas is lines nine
and ten the solar and wind this
lines thirteen and fourteen.
Go over the State Land Office
that's on page four wind of one
of New and there's only two
categories that we want from the
State Land Office we're spending
we're either of the thanks
requests are for energy minerals
and natural resources and I'm
sorry madam chair and
Representative neighbor I got
confused the land office has the
leases and EMNRD has the permits
and that's the difference so
they would have the actual
leases of service and I would
have the permits for both
renewable energy and oil and gas
so I apologize.
Okay back to my original
question.
Why.
Our solar and wind projects
limited to only those that are
on state lands where as you want
information on all act four one
Taos wells.
And Madam chair representative
I'm very the intention was just
for state information so we
probably could have not
included.
On state land in subsection do
we could have just said
locations of utility scale solar
and wind projects because
they're only collecting as far
as I understand they're only
collecting information for their
own permitting anyway.
Well thank you madam rose and
natural resources department the
I would be surprised to.
On solar wind projects.
Whether they just limit their
records to state trust lands I
suspect it's broader
R.
A. Y. that that distinction that
makes sense if we're gonna be
limited to state lands on may be
relevant everything state lands
and and not all data.
We're getting cemex messages
there.
Page three line twelve locations
of active minds and I also
notice that the we want
locations of pipelines and.
What my concern with respect to
to use that is if we're giving
out precise data on locations of
mines and things.
There are a number of things
stored at mines and on occasion
at oil and gas wells locations
that I'm not sure.
You want to advertise their
precise location so the.
There are some some stuff for.
That I know Stewart at some.
Money locations in the Carlsbad
area that the you would not want
the public to our.
Have notice of the precise
location of.
Because our.
Potential for someone to go in
and steal things and costs for
our.
And so I'm concerned about the
the rest of that I've been here
general stuff is okay.
Specific locations and brands
are.
Could could be a problem
What about logical data from.
Energy minerals and natural
resources department why was
that not included.
At.
Madam chair representative my
right if I can address your
first point first really quickly
in the last committee there was
an additional amendment that was
passed that took out the
requirement for pipeline data.
so I don't know if you're
looking at the the first
introduced version of the bill
and not the amended one from
house energy and natural
resources but we did take that
requirement out because people
did raised a safety issue with
putting that on on the database
in terms of the mines are just
note again that this is
information that is available to
the public already if you if you
did.
no pun intended of mines but you
can already see that data so I
understand that there is some
safety concerns but at the same
time that data's already public
so we're just talking about
consolidating stuff I did want
to note that the pipelines are
not in there anymore I'm so that
donations on page five lines
thirteen sixteen.
I'm I'm looking at the original
introduced.
L..
It was.
Yes those two lines for struck
in the last committees so
I don't know if maybe the
amended version didn't go around
somehow but.
shin should be in the Here file
where they they actually put the
amendments in context.
So that makes it a little bit
easier to read.
And I know we did add to it this
time but.
Madam chair and members came in
the the.
Pipeline.
Information was deleted because
of safety concerns of repealing
their locations.
So Madam chair representative
neighbor there was so that data
is also publicly available and
approachable and provide a full
and there were concerns on
industries part about putting it
on like us really accessible
website I guess.
What we were told is that
sometimes there are terrorism
threats against pipelines
because of.
That's you know the mechanism to
get energy transported and so
they can be the subject of
threats and they were concerned
about having that as easily
accessible as it would be on
this database and so we agreed
terms of that.
They did not raise that same
concern about oil and gas wells.
The the madam chair the the same
issue is true with respect to
elector transmission lines as
well
the energy council that I serve
on
that is one of the major our
concerns national worry is the
protection of our.
Infrastructure specifically
elector transmission lines and.
Product pipelines that
allow energy to flow to all
corners of the nation and how
easy it would be to disrupt.
This nation by.
Targeting transmission lines
yeah and I want to do.
But both of those there are have
some national.
Anson and security applications
on but
The the energy minerals and
natural resources department.
That I'm most familiar with.
Has a lot of information on oil
and gas as it should.
For it to properly
do its job in regulating the oil
and gas industry data is
imperative.
However.
Some of the data that is given
to the Department.
Is.
Given to them want to
confidential basis and is not
generally disclosed by the
department.
At the present time some some is
held for for that time period
for competitive reasons others
is the confidential maybe for
longer periods of time but
energy minerals and natural
resources department does
contain a lot of data that the
industry.
The reason gaps that to the
agency that is held by the
HSD is confidential yeah when we
look in the confidential
information provision which
begins on page six and section
four.
There's no general criteria.
That would allow energy minerals
and natural resources department
to continue to hold some of that
data that they accept is
confidential as confidential and
in fact it it only allows for it
to be kept confidential
your information is confidential
by state or federal law our
you're gonna talk about some of
the things that are really not
affable to and gas industry so
my question is
should this not be expanded to
allow the agency to continue to
hold its confidential
information that they currently
treat as confidential for the
time periods that they hold it
is confidential.
Mr chair and representative
neighbor so.
For one thing we did just
expands the confidentiality
section through the amendment
that was adopted today that does
say information required to
remain confidential for safety
or security reasons we just
added that I think that gives
the agency more discussion and
then I would also say you know
this bill just the only years
that are required to be uploaded
are the years that are listed on
the bill and in terms of
additional data beyond that we
made sure to get the HSD quite a
lot of discussion about what to
post both in the confidentiality
section and and sections eight
and twelve subsections eight and
twelve section three so I'm both
of those very clearly state that
the agency only has can only.
Add additional data if it uses
its discretion if it thinks it's
appropriate and if it's data
that is developed by the agency
says what it's like require that
it would be internal agency
information being uploaded and
they still have discussion about
whether or not to post it
so the only things were actually
requiring them to upload and the
list that's in here and I think
beyond that they have quite a
lot of discretion to decide not
to if they feel like it's an
appropriate.
And
madam chair I'm not so sure that
the language here is comforting
because it talks about the
state's environmental data
including the word including
generally is not
A limiting word it is just
showing by example the type of
data that that they're wanting
to put online and so I think if
you're.
If you want to retain if the
agency.
If you want to make allow the
agency to continue to call this
confidential information that is
not go to our the state law for
what Mr Mentzer was security or
safety related
then there needs to be a broader
exception to allow the agency to
hold that information is
confidential and this bill does
not do that.
nor do they members to.
I noticed notice on page five
one eight.
New Mexico Audubon important
bird areas who'd who determines
what and New Mexico audible on.
Bird area is.
Madam chair representative
neighbor that was included so
that's a data layer that is a
national data layer and we
included that because it already
is a layer on the existing game
and fish tool that they already
run
so that's already up loaded on
the environmental review tool
which is the one that that game
in fishing already has so it's
already up on S. similar map
based database and that's that a
national data later.
So that's a a designation that
The New Mexico game and fish
designates.
Mr madam chair and
representative my right at no it
does come from the Audubon
society but it is a nationally
recognized data layer about
important bird habitat and
that's why again it's just
departments all over the country
use that as a as have to have
more.
Mr Stewart from State Land
Office of talk a little bit
about the.
Accessibility of data and I
certainly agree and I have I do
find it the.
The bill on the the information
requested from the State Land
Office is is very
Slide.
This
Locations of active rights of
way and locations of active
state trust land leases
The state land office holds a
lot more information in fact of
the State Land Office is you
want to are repositories of
public data that provides
constructive notice to the
world's surface of the State
Land Office holds our entire
rooms full of of data that the
public.
Has a right to go and and and
review and stacked them and is
recognized by statute is as
providing constructive notice
which means that everyone of us
is on constructive notice of the
contents and both rooms and yet
that information's not not the
not part of this December.
And it just seems.
Our.
For State Land Office.
when asked to provide a couple
years and it could be much more
broader than that.
the cracks of the matter is use.
I wind seventeen through twenty
one there was a we should have
portion of the alliance twenty
twenty one.
Since the.
As I see the crux of this is
that our this data would be.
Accessible to the public free of
charge and you have a lot of the
data that is compiled by
agencies is accessible director
for three years as already
pointed out and
you know I I think.
State government public data one
of the of the public my real
concern is is with the lack of
the ability to to hold tight
certain information that are
private industry individuals
provided to agencies that is
deemed confidential for a period
of time for.
Maybe is is confidential forever
but the.
There's nothing in this bill
that the well there's there are
some things in this bill that
would keep it confidential but
it doesn't go far enough and I
would hope that the.
If this moves forward that we
might see some some more efforts
to address some of those those
issues because the confidential.
information
that state agencies sometimes
secure from from industry
whether it be the oil and gas
industry or whether it be
Facebook or whether the
companies coming into the state
for for economic development
activities are using state trust
lands are or what have you of
that data does need to be kept
confidential
or else we will not be
encouraging those companies to
come to our state to look at
what we have to offer and the to
be assured that the the
information they're providing to
the agency will will of the
deadline for for at least
periods of time until they can
get the get their deals put
together so I am concerned about
that aspect of it and like I
said I hope that maybe region
deal with some of the other
issues the same goes forward
thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative Rehm
did you have your hand up.
Yes ma'am.
I I do thank you
It.
Representative night bird is
touched on part of it but a of
when I was a police officer I
was on a domestic terrorism task
force.
Many of the things you identify
in here we're targets that we
identified.
And so that's very concerning
I'm concerned about the private
property issue that's been
discussed.
This data is already available.
so I don't see a need for this I
understand what you're trying to
do and in fact a madam chair and
Representative Chasey or miss
Caroline.
What you're trying to do is
create a state needs is that
correct.
Madam chair.
Representative right this is
just a website.
Okay madam chair and
Representative Chasey I see this
as the first step for state the.
And that's concerning to me
because when I talked to the
Forest Service and BLM that
process for approval for
projects is so onerous that it
takes about three years.
But anyway from what I've spoken
about here
I can't support the bill thank
you.
Thank you Representative Rehm.
Madam chair I move the deposit
HB fifty one as amended.
Thank you.
In that okay thank you we have a
due pass by Representative Ortez
we have a second by
Representative Chasey clerk to
take general please yes.
Close.
Yes please thank you.
Additional confidentiality and
when I want to be clear in and
out Representative neighbor's
house
I think
language I'll be happy to talk
to him about it after this.
This.
Bill and that's written down and
then it doesn't require an
agency to disclose anything that
isn't already disclosed.
So I I would make that perfectly
clear.
If there is.
Anyway I think that insurance
I'm stronger I'm I'm all hear
about it from Representative
night later and I do think
Representative
there's some confusion that
because I've had a bill on it
say the but before that that's
this bill this is building a
website it's about actually.
Publishing in one searchable
database everything that
departments already collect so
it's not us this state agencies
are one of the speakers said
this is going to be costs us
with the state.
Your information is already
available to the public.
This is the these are the data
that each agency puts out now so
it's not anything new for the
Or the agency itself and we need
to clarify that with a couple of
comments that.
Folks may.
I do want to.
Remind everyone that this common
presented some information at
the beginning because we had
talked so much about how it will
be helpful to the agencies to
have this together so actually
cut down on their work.
But what we didn't know before
she did the little survey.
Nationally of what how these
databases are used in other
states is that industry is using
these searchable databases to to
their advantage in the
permitting process so without
madam chair we're ready for the
vote.
Thank you representative it is
moved to pass house bill fifty
one as amendment as Amanda Clark
to take the role for the please
thank you madam vice chair
Representative Chasey yes.
Representative Eli yes.
Representative goes has been
excused Representative neighbor.
No but I I hope I get to that
point wonder.
Representative Ortez.
Yes.
Representative Rehm no.
Representative Zamora no.
Madam vice chair.
Yes.
Madam chair with that we have to
excused for in the affirmative
and three and the negative.
Thank you Representative Chasey
you have a do pass on house bill
fifty one as amended.
Thank you very much manager
appreciate it thank you madam
chair.
Next on the agenda we have
listed house bill five as
amended however we're going to
move that.
Per the sponsor.
To the last item on the agenda
so we're gonna move next to
house bill twenty one and I see
Representative Garrett is has
been promoted so Representative
Garrett you have the four.
Representative you need to and
mute.
Sorry I'm just going committees
so sorry about that madam chair
what and committee it's great my
it's my great honor to introduce
this bill again it passed two
committees two years ago we ran
out of time and so I'm back
again with this bill that was
brought to me by my constituents
house bill twenty one relates to
public works it requires
contributions to apprentice and
training programs or to public
works apprentice and training
fund the Pequot apprenticeship
Fund for all public works
construction products and.
Some technical language in the
public works apprentice training
act which again is not as P.
what.
Requires contributions to
apprentice and training programs
or to the public works
apprentice and training fund for
all public works construction
projects as a long time educator
and at a time when we're
striving to really expand
professional gateways and
ladders to careers and to expand
job opportunities across the
state
and also in all of our industry
and workforce categories I think
this bill is really important
especially because we have a
shortage of highway journey then
such as operating engineers
laborers ironworkers
electricians and carpenters so
this bill expands and promotes
the expansion of apprenticeship
programs it also encourages
industries to join start or
support existing apprenticeship
programs so in my opinion it's
really a win win for everyone
but the biggest one of all is
for all of those New Mexicans
who are seeking to identify and
build a career ladder so in this
bill you either pay into your
all registered apprenticeship
program or you pay into the P.
what public works apprenticeship
training but at the end of the
year if you are fund the split
among the forty one
apprenticeship programs and use
for education and training of
apprentices and I might add that
this is Pueblo of the city of
Farmington has for partnership
programs private industry has
of many apprenticeship programs
and then many of our statewide
unions have some superb
apprenticeship programs.
So with that
I'm going to turn it over to my
expert witness who introduced
himself Brian Condit.
Thank you Representative Garrett
madam chair members of the
committee my name is Brian
Condit I'm executive director of
New Mexico building construction
trades council are we represent
fifteen construction unions
having jurisdiction throughout
the state of New Mexico so I'm
happy to be here this morning to
provide insight and detailed
information regarding any
questions you might have on this
bill are the legislation simply
aligns type a construction with
types B. C. N. H. all that have
been in place R. for a number of
years so with that
I would be happy and pleased to
answer any questions.
Thank you representative Garrett
and Mr Condit we will now move
on to conducting a poll.
So those.
Can express their vote whether
they're in favor of the bill are
in opposition.
And the poll has begun.
And you have ten seconds to.
Thank you we have seventeen.
In support of the bill and we
have six in opposition of the
bill now we will moved to Care
opposing and supporting comments
and we will begin with the
opposition.
To see any hands raised for
opposition.
Begin with Jane.
Chair Jan.
Correct me for spelling your and
you're pronouncing your name
thank you.
Morning
then with New Mexico utility
contractors association.
And although we are.
We're not opposed to our
partnership programs back we
think they are great avenues for
training but many public works
contractors do not have access
to or have a question programs
in place and therefore be forced
to pay into a fund that they
could not receive a benefit
from.
I'm sorry approximatelyof sixty
cents an hour essential
partnership will take away funds
for an in house training and
other training by the businesses
by the business due to limited
funds industry in drugs that do
not have a group of friendship
or grams are still highly
trained are held to the same
safety and training standards of
at all public works contractors
additional costs to the project
will increase the cost.
Basis due to the in the
increased payments into the
program and projects can be
large I once for years as an
example of a company that will
have two hundred people actively
working on a public works
project for one year in the
field not process person what
equates to two hundred forty
nine thousand six hundred
dollars a year at sixty cents
per hour I'm we would be we
would love to see businesses
that could receive some of these
funds if they pay into it to
help with their training costs
that do not have access or not
have apprenticeship programs in
their in their crafts so that is
why we're against our house bill
twenty one respectively asked to
vote no thank you for allowing
us to comments that.
Thank you next speaker David.
David you have the for
president.
Can you hear me now.
Yes thank you thank you madam
chair I am David O. Tuskegee.
With mountain states
constructors and we are against
the bill for the following
reason.
Part of the association that we
belong to comprises.
A heavy highway and utility
contractors close to five
thousand different people.
not only do we recognize the
critical nature of having access
to quality training and
certification programs but we
are eight we currently have all
that in place at or association
we have the necessary training
the resources.
And order to be able to perform
everything that we need to do
for our industry.
we believe house bill twenty one
addresses the critical nature
and value of providing quality
workforce training for the
entire industry and we further
recognize the quality and
importance of the apprentice
training programs currently
available for states
construction workforce this
training helps the contracting
community in their efforts to
hire an offer continuous
employment to later leave
thousands of qualified and
available New Mexicans the bulk
of the work our members engage
in this through the New Mexico
department of transportation and
the department is heavily
reliant upon the federal
revenues received from the
Federal Highway Administration
to construct and maintain New
Mexico statewide network of
roads AC amendment which is
associated contractors of New
Mexico which we've been a member
a sense the sixties.
In conjunction with N. M. D. O.
T. has continued to offer our
industry training and
certification programs that meet
the Federal Highway
Administration requirements
since nineteen ninety three our
programs address industry
specific training needs that are
not currently found in the
apprentice training programs
offered elsewhere.
For example traffic control
trenching and shoring fall
protection mine safety health
administration materials testing
all that certifications plus
many more while we recognize the
tremendous value the
apprenticeship programs provide
to this specific trades they are
designed for contractors
performing work for an M. D. O.
T. and other transportation
related construction entities
are not in a position to gain
substantially from these
worthwhile programs their
primary needs are more relative
to industry specific programs
required by FHWA and then M. D.
O. T..
Requiring contractors to pay
into this fund to support
training programs that will
likely not have significant
participation in simply because
these programs do not offer the
industry specific training that
their employees are required to
receive and that is available
elsewhere will result in
increasing construction costs to
the ultimate owners and or say
we respectfully request that
consideration be given to
exempting transportation related
construction projects from this
proposed legislation which has
historically been the case so
that contractors can continue to
receive the necessary industry
specific training that is
currently available.
So based on that we definitely
oppose this and just to let the
representative from the union
now there are only.
To Senator contractors being
Franklin's earth moving.
And.
J. supply who even would
participate from nascent
Franklin's earth moving they're
very rarely bets on any DOT work
so it's in my belief that the
union is just trying to get this
implemented in order to get non
union union contractors to
participate in their program
that is probably needs
additional funding we already
have the funding available to us
and therefore we don't need to
be.
Give additional dollars to a
fund that we will never use and
the mid.
Virtually every single highway
contractor that works for the D.
O. T. as a non union contractor
anyway so based on that we would
never use this service there you
are requiring us to pay into
right now we have roads that are
in need of great repair in New
Mexico and if we have to start
paying more money into a fund
that we will now can you please
wrap up thank you Sir means that
we will never we won't be able
to repair the roads that are
needed but thank you for your
time.
Thank you and audience for
public comment would you please
make your comments as concise as
possible we have other
individuals who'd like to make a
comment next we have Jim Garcia
thank you.
Thank you madam chair thank you
members of the committee my name
is Jim Garcia in N. executive
director of the associated
contractors of New Mexico.
I wanted a CNM includes a
majority of contractors
subcontractors material
suppliers and professional
service providers across the
state compromised Mexico's heavy
highway New Mexico utility
contracting community accounting
for over five thousand industry
jobs first of all we'd like to
thank the sponsoring H. B.
twenty one in that we believe it
addresses the critical nature
and value providing quality
workforce training for the
entire industry.
The the bulk of the work our
members engage it in is through
the New Mexico DOT and the
department is heavily reliant
upon federal revenues as David
task you just attested to.
Requiring a contact us page of
the P. what fund to support
training programs that will have
will will likely not have any
significant participation simply
because these programs do not
offer industry specific training
that their employees are
required to see and that is
available elsewhere result
increasing construction costs
the ultimate owners in the state
our industry training is
specific to the industry having
in place apprenticeship programs
is unique because our workers
require specific training
because of the safety measures
that that are required.
in the spirit of the bill we're
more interested in language that
includes having
the exemptions for the utility
I'm sorry for the associate
contractors members so we would
like to have that it's been in
place for years
on behalf of associated
contractors of New Mexico we do
oppose this bill thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Mr Garcia so we will
move on to the next individual
schon hammer speaking in
opposition of the bill thank
you.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Sean hammer a service board
member on the associated
contractors of New Mexico thank
you for providing me with the
opportunity to apply my thoughts
regarding HB twenty one the
proposed amendments in H. B.
twenty one would provide very
little benefit to New Mexico's
workforce as a whole an
absolutely zero benefit to those
thousands of individuals
employed in the street highway
bridge road and utility sectors
the primary outcome of the
proposed amendments which
have it be an increase in cost
for the street highway brew
Bridge Road and utility projects
for all parties involved
particularly the NMDOT
municipalities and county
governments and do little to
further the training and
education of New Mexico's
overall workforce at this time
when all government sectors are
experiencing extreme budget
shortfalls now all turns would
be imprudent to enact
legislation that would increase
cost of vital infrastructure
projects that are the lifeblood
of commerce in New Mexico.
Not only with the proposed
amendments increased the cost of
crucial infrastructure projects
there is also the fact the
apprentice posts Representative
pretty sure programs related to
street highway bridge road and
utility projects need to be
approved and accepted by the
FHWA in order for federal
dollars to be available for use
as you are aware federal funds
are the primary funding source
for New Mexico infrastructure
projects by knocking the
proposed amendments federal
dollars could be put in jeopardy
in the process of establishing a
new acceptable purchase proche
program would have to start from
square one again with the
extreme budget shortfalls it is
an irresponsible to enact
legislation that can only
affecting minute portion of New
Mexicos workforce when there is
already an established accepted
and very successful training
program that is in place for
twenty five years the benefits
the many thousands of
individuals employed in the
street highway brick row
construction to the sectors.
Associated general contractors
of New Mexico has an established
and approved a privilege program
that is specific to street
highway bridge road and utility
sectors that is the envy and
model to many agencies
throughout the nation is open to
any and all private sector and
government who want to take
advantage of the programs
offered the training program
offered by the associate
contractors of New Mexico is
everybody in improving to
continuously meet the needs of
those working in this industry.
So thank you for your time we
are opposed to HB twenty one.
Thank you Mr hammer we will now
move on to Richard mentor area
for an opposing comment.
Good morning madam chair members
of the board my name is rich
Montoya I services on the board
of directors of associated
contractors of New Mexico and
we're in opposed to this bill.
As a as echoed by the fellow.
Occurs up.
Currently we we do have a such a
program that adheres to federal
highway requirements and having
that specific industry training
such as nuclear did Solomon or
training asphalt training those
trainings are vital to adhering
to FHWA.
Requirements which insurers the
state receives federal funds
which is the main source of
funding for for highway projects
for street projects right
projects for those reasons we
are opposed to house bill twenty
one thank you.
Thank you next we have Daniel
Silva.
Thank you can you hear me.
Yes thank you yes thank you very
much.
Madam chair and committee
members we appreciate your
service to your communities in
the state of New Mexico and
thank you for that.
I'm not going to repeat what the
the previous speakers talked
about their need their the
owners of the companies that
hire a lot of people are they
can have they cannot have an
untrained.
Our people employees working on
our highways it's very dangerous
the weather conditions can be
very bad day or night but
they're the ones a builder
highways so this New Mexico can
prosper the same the
bus routes for kids to go to
school the safety.
Issue if we don't have a safe
highways and roads for our for
our families for our kids for
tourism so this industry is so
critical and I've wondered
myself what on this the because
we do we have to do so much
training for the people we hire
and I wondered will wipe why did
the exam
These are the builders of the
highways of transportation
related projects for at least
six sixty years and governor's
previous governors previous
legislators exempt these
projects transportation projects
for a good reason and to do away
with them now when when we're
trying to put people to work
qualified people we train them
they're trained by.
Trainers that have worked in the
industry for many years both
from the private from deal to
the private sector from cities
from counties from tribal it
we've been trying to train
people from the tribal regions
from all over the state so if we
could just the exam the
transportation projects it would
be very helpful madam chair
committee members and I just
want to thank you again for your
work I know how difficult it is
to be.
In the legislature in this time
so thank you very much and
please consider exempting the
transportation projects.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you Mr Silva our last
Committee will be James field.
Can you.
Yes.
You madam chair committee
members my name is James bills
also member associate general
contractors of New Mexico.
The.
We understand more of this bill
we are opposed to this bill I
would contractors have been
exempt from this type of bill
for many years the type of
training being offered does not
fit the industry does not fit
our industry we are we have been
doing our own training for years
and it benefits our industry the
way it is and in the needs are
industry has.
This will be a huge costs not
only to the department of
transportation which gathers
federal funding but you heard
prior to the also be huge costs
the taxpayers in New Mexico
therefore we do oppose this bill
thank you.
Thank you next we will open the
floor for public comment in
support of the bill.
Okay we have shown.
Workshops.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee John Lipschutz
with The New Mexico federation
of labor AFL-CIO we
Representative the forty
different unions throughout the
state that number of which are
involved in the private sector
specifically with the building
trades and all we speak with
United voice in art in support
of this bill we feel that I it
is only fair that are all
contractors and all projects
have to have to pay into a
system that will properly
trained and build up our future
workforce and of course we
believe that unions do a great
job with that I certainly at all
all contractors doing business
here should be are contributing
to that effort so with that in
mind and on behalf of our tens
of thousands of members
throughout the state we very
much hope that you support this
bill.
Thank you next we have Steve
single Terry.
Yes can everybody hear me.
Yes okay my name is Steve single
Terry and I do appreciate madam
chair member of so this
committee for me to speak
towards this I am of the
training course of facilitator
for the southwest carpenters
training fund and the all the
opposition I keep hearing that
there's no means for.
For training if they have in
house training that is been done
approved by the feds there are
more than capable of putting an
application in with the state
apprenticeship council for
approval.
Now as far as the the do what
you want is been very successful
for all of us in the partnership
programs both union and nonunion
and I am support have support
for this bill thank you madam
chair.
Thank you I say as empty your
next to speak please.
Hello madam chair members of the
committee my name is is is empty
I am the lobbyist for the sheet
metal workers local forty nine.
The the federal highway Act does
not exempt employers from
contributing to say approved of
public works a prince of
training fund the current
training the highway contractors
have does not follow state
guidelines for the New Mexico
state apprenticeship policy then
these contractors will now have
an opportunity to provide
approved approach of training to
the work force.
We stand in strong support of
this legislation and we hope you
do as well thank you for your
time.
Thank you next we will move on
to Adam Valdez.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee can you all
hear me.
Yes okay thank you for your time
we appreciate everybody's hard
work I just want to say my name
is not involved as I'm with
local for twelve plumbers and
pipefitters union and we
definitely strongly support HB
twenty one
I don't think it makes any sense
for one specific group of people
to be exempt from this
contributing to the people up.
This is very valuable in the
state and everybody in and I I
think we should all support this
bill thank you.
Thank you next we will hear from
Ashley long.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Ashley long with the American
federation of teachers New
Mexico we had a F. T. believe
and highly skilled trades trades
people who attend for
apprenticeship programs and with
that we appreciate the sponsor
and support the bill thank you.
Thank you our next speaker is
Rhonda Lopez.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Randy
Gillen Lopez and I am the
executive director of the
mechanical and sheet metal
contractors association we work
hand in hand with our labor
partners with our permission
programs and we feel that is
important that anyone who has
apprenticeship programs should
contribute into what if they are
providing qualified treating
thank you very much.
Thank you next we have mapped.
Sure it's.
Good morning madam chair my name
is Matthew slot as I am the
pressure lobbyist the south
regional council partners New
Mexico we stand strong support
of the legislation providing
more partnership opportunities
prostate New Mexico and be able
to lower the cost for our rural
projects I make see more
purposes with skilled journeymen
and women to provide more
training opportunities for the
future generation of men and
women across the state thank
you.
Thank you Bobby gaps is our next
speaker.
Can you hear me.
Yes.
Thank you for your time today
madam chair members of the
committee the director The New
Mexico joint apprenticeship
training committee for the
electrical industry.
Representative IBEW six eleven
and what is a very good you know
it's been a great resource
throughout the years we're
growing in the industry not only
us but all traits throughout the
state union and not you so you
know this will be a benefit to
everyone across the state as
we're in need of journeymen
we're going to you know we're
hiring more more premises you
know we're always looking for
more ways to get better
candidates and.
Whether B. career fairs you know
how Mr hard hats the veterans
into electrical program we got a
couple of those princes here now
trying to look at getting that
into our partnership.
And you know these these
practices are working and
earning all their learning and
advancing you know the
department of workforce
solutions tracks all their hours
advancement Hey so it's a great
opportunity yeah I won't waste
much more time to Davis thank
you very much for your time and
we are in full support of house
bill twenty one thank you.
Thank you we will now move on to
Courtney at course.
Good morning madam chair
committee members my name is
Courtney I coursed I am the
business manager for your local
for twelve summers and
pipefitters and the president
for New Mexico building and
construction trades council I've
been involved in a partnership
programs here in the state since
two thousand and one and it's
great to see him growing I know
there's a priority to grow our
printer programs.
One thing that we've noticed
throughout the years is our
workforce is aging half of our
workforce right now in the state
is in their fifties how in the
world are we going to replace
these folks without proper
partnership programs.
The training provided by all of
our partner programs covers
transient and excavating covers
has met I mean we cover a
variety of things that would
benefit everyone in the state so
I would like to thank the
sponsor
Representative Garrett for
bringing this forward this is a
bill that New Mexico desperately
needs this will help grow our
printer programs and help
assisting of valuable workforce
thank you.
Thank you next we will hear from
local for twelve.
Can you madam chair.
Yes my name is Rachel he on the
train director from your local
for twelve retired military and
Training is always been a big
deal throughout my twenty five
years in the military and I
brought that over into the
apprenticeship programs I beg to
differ that this this is only
benefiting unions there sixteen
programs that are registered in
the state of New Mexico and not
all of them unions
it it's easily it would be easy
for the for the DOT for them to
become a registered program some
of the benefits are is that you
know if forces you to have state
standards which means you're
going to have to meet some
criteria demographics for
instance what is the available
demographics of throughout the
state of New Mexico it is that
reflected inside of your program
what about you have to have
initiatives to for recruiting
women into a program which New
Mexico fifty one percent of the
workforce is women and so we
have to actively as part of
being a register programs we
must have initiatives in place
trying to read actively recruit
in those areas also with women
now I'm proud to say that we at
local for twelve we meet or
exceed all of the demographics
racial demographics in the state
for instance it may say a two
percent of the billable
workforce is African American
what we have to present
Representative in our
apprenticeship programs and so
on with all the other
demographics
but the the alluding to what
things that were said that
they're they're not they won't
have the ability to adapt to
industry requirements that's
what apprenticeships do we are
separate from a college which
has to be locked into a
curriculum for about three years
where is an apprenticeship
programs we can adapt easily and
quickly to the industry needs of
the contractors and we're in
full support of this bill and I
thank you for your time madam
chair.
Thank you the last two comments
next we will have Gerald hero
and then James and then we will
move to committee members thank
you.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Darrell DLL and I'm the local
president for the labors
International Union of North
America of the sixteen and we
stand in front support of this
bill for all the reasons
previews previously stated but
I do want to add that the what
this amounts to really is
insuring that we're investing in
our workforce is future.
These apprentices that the the
graduate these programs become
tournament they're more likely
to hold a steady job.
And make this a career as
opposed to just having a job.
And this pressure programs also
provide continued awareness it's
it's not just a one and done
type of thing is it's not a a
job site specific orientation
this is geared toward an actual
career path so with that the
again we stand the strong
support of this bill thank you.
Thank you our last comment in
support of the bill James.
Thank you madam chair my name is
James be here with New Mexico
labor's training and as the
previous.
Speaker spoke Daryl D. Aguero I
too am with local sixteen and I
am in support of this bill I run
the apprenticeship program for
the labors and he what money is
instrumental to helping change
you know apprentices lives you
know like many industries
construction continues to evolve
it continues to change and those
monies that we get from P. what
help train our premises help
them get quality training which
is what this is all about this
is in a.
nonunion verses union thing this
is a quality training thing and
the monies from P. what help can
reach that goal so again we are
for this bill thank you.
Thank you we'll move to the
committee members Representative
Rehm.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Garrett this
my question is may be more for
Mr Condit but what is the amount
per hour that you're asking.
For each hour worked.
When you're fund.
I want to thank you madam chair
woman thank you so much
Representative ring before
Mister Condit answers I want to
remind you that this is a state
law it we're not changing the P.
what contributions but Mister
Condit if you can address that
question.
Madam chair representative rang
up thanks for the question of
the what.
Public works minimum wage act
provides that.
Of the the director of labor and
industrial establish the
contribution rate required for
partnership training is sixty
cents per hour.
Okay.
Madam chair and Mr content is of
the AC and M. already have an
apprentice program where they're
training their people.
Is that question directed for
may madam chair.
Madam chair or do you work for
your okay currently currently I
don't believe a CNM is a sponsor
of an apprenticeship program
kind of in a review and maybe
capturing a few of the other
questions you might have there
are are four recognized training
types for contractor based
training all by the New Mexico
department of transportation
only one of which is our state
certified apprenticeship
programs of which not exist at.
A C. N. M. all the
apprenticeship model is the only
one that is compliant and
recognized by the public works
minimum wage act so all we do
recognize all in of the Federal
highway administration's
approach to job site training
all there is funding that comes
to employers to the
administration eighty cents per
hour all but specifically and
appendix B. subpart a of part
two thirty training special
provisions twenty three USC all
registered apprenticeship
programs shall be considered
acceptable so any notion that
state certified apprenticeship
programs are not allowable all
for any type of construction in
New Mexico all federally state
funded programs is just is just
wrong mind so I hope that
answers your question.
Madam chair and representative I
just want to add that I I'm too
weird ACM's training facilities
they're wonderful but also
labors International has fifty
courses and many of their
predecessors work on public
works projects and are hired by
contractors as several people
mentioned
it's it's quite easy for those
contractors with the kind of
training that they're giving to
start apprenticeship programs
that would embrace the state
board qualifications thank you
madam chairwoman and
Representative bring.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative Garrett I I have
actually toward the AC and M.
training facility and they do
and I'm sorry Mr Condit they do
offer those
basic apprentice ship courses
down there but let's ask a.
madam chair and Representative
Garrett all.
Where do you obtain traffic
supervisor training that
certified by DOT.
Madam chair representative Rehm
a CNM offers said labor's
international offers offers that
there may be others that offer
it I I don't know
Mr Khan did you know of other
training training facilities I
am pretty certain that AC and
and probably our provides of
that specific training but as
you mentioned all labors
International Union of North
America local sixteen of their
registered apprenticeship
program offers it all it's it's
it's up all generic curriculum
that is available
and easily acceptable by by
anybody choosing to teach it is
not it's not a secret trade
secret type of thing it's it's
all up training that is readily
available of throughout the
industry.
Okay well madam chair and
representative of I think that
the local for twelve sep does
best he said this budget the
union.
And so in my research there's
two union contractors when we're
talking about heavy highway work
at a hundred and twenty seven
private so this is kind of like
us going to U. and M. and saying
we want you to pay money to see
and M. to go ahead and help with
their training program and for
that reason I can't support it
it's been a that is of the AC on
the has been exempt forever and
there's a reason why because
they work with DOT thank you
madam chair.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Rehm and I would
just remind you that if you have
your own apprenticeship program
you pay into your own program
and and something else that was
pointed out in our last
testimony as when you have
apprentices it's a big concern
for me how much we pay for
building roads and I would have
brought this bill forward if I
thought it would raise
construction prices when you
have apprentices working side by
side with your journey then your
experience people they do not
get the full wage that
journeymen would get so your
prices remain the same and I
think that's important to
realize that contrary to what
some people suggested this will
not raise construction prices in
our state it simply provides a
professional.
Ladders so that those people who
are working on our roads and P.
what projects
they don't just get a job and
then they get released after the
job they're actually building a
career and resume that will
benefit them and their families
the rest of their lives thank
you madam chairwoman
Representative.
Madam chair I have one more
follow up question madam chair
and representative Garrett if
there is an additional sixty
dollars sixty cents per hour
that it's going to be paid to
the union school.
Where is that coming from.
Madam chair representative
that's for people that don't
have apprenticeship programs it
does go to a union school well
it goes into the Pequot
apprenticeship Fund maybe Mr
Condit you can add to that.
I will be glad to provide an
answer to that
apprenticeship programs in this
state or union or nonunion.
He what he what the assistance
are funded is established in law
that provides assistance to
apprenticeship training of
supports and and and provides
resources to union and non union
apprenticeship programs so the
notion that this is a you can
only bill is just yes wrong
representative will call to
inspect.
Madam chair representative I'm
happy after the meeting to send
you a list of all of the people
that participate and as I said
earlier it includes up for.
Programs in the city of
Farmington.
Thank you madam chairwoman.
Thank you madam chair if you
increase the cost of labor costs
by sixty cents an hour that goes
into what the cost of the
project would be thank you madam
chair.
Thank you next is Representative
my part.
Thank you madam chair.
We heard testimony from the
highway contractors that their
programs were working and did
not feel the necessity for to be
brought into this program so
much my question is
what's broken that needs fixed.
Madam chair please Mr Condit.
Thank you madam chair
Representative neighbor I'd like
to I'd like to take a shot and
to your question I don't know
necessarily is it's it's it's
it's not broken all.
You're not the parent
organization of a CNM all the
national agency organization
Bloomberg news any of the other
construction periodicals
anywhere in the country are
reporting in every region of the
country a shortage of qualified
manpower this nearly all helps
helps provide of.
The ship training union and
nonunion programs to actually
all address the the the what's
broken right now
both of the organizations I
mentioned will also say that the
number one causation of cost
overruns in the United States
right now is a labor shortage
so.
Whether a C. N. M. R. bills
compelled to acknowledge
of the facts that that the rest
of us can see all I would I
would just disagree that it is.
Not.
Mr chair with a broken but we
certainly need to provide a more
robust all in process and
funding level on a partnership
on training in the state.
Madam chair representative I
would add is an educator as we
work to build our career
technical education having
apprenticeships are which can
start giving high school and
college credit as northern New
Mexico college does for some of
its apprenticeship programs I
think it's a win win for the U.
young adults are even people
changing careers our state.
Thank you madam chairwoman.
Matt madam chair if you're very
current system is not broken and
the contractors that are
performing the street highway
bridge building sector that's
being deleted in this proposed
legislation
Will serve their internal
programs are are working this
seems to just simply be an
effort to get more money
directed toward a program that
they traditionally have not used
that may not be years in the
future so.
You know why.
I see this more as an effort to
to bring in more money for us.
Maybe apprenticeship programs
that they deal with other things
but it's not going to
Currently help with contractors
who need of people who can
operate the specific machinery
that that builds our roads and
repairs are bridges and deals
with the utilities and if
they're so specialized and they
have their own program that's
working it seems to me that we
ought to leave well enough alone
thank you madam chair.
Thank you representative
Representative Eli.
Yeah madam chair I'll be brief I
really don't have a question and
I usually don't do this but I
love this bill I think the whole
idea of providing training we we
we all talk about a trained
workforce and we all talk about
a diverse work force with women
and minorities to provide
strength for our economy this
does that and so I love this
effort and I just wanted to say
I usually don't take the time
and committee to do that but I
just thought about this a bill
that I look forward to seeing
and I applaud you for bringing
thank you Representative care.
Thank you.
I.
Thank you madam chair.
I'd like to make an analogy by
could Madam chairwoman.
I'm.
Thank all get their finger nails
done sometimes.
Your nail place and the trains
the people.
But if that person wants to go
start their own business or what
I work at another place they
don't have necessarily all the
paperwork to show that they're
trained so to me it's a
partnership program is you're
not being trained at one company
but you're getting the
apprenticeship resumes so that
if you go to another state or
you move to another company or
another location you have that
career ladder documentation that
travels with you and it isn't
exclusive to one company so
that's just something I've
observed this I've talked to
various people in the
construction field thank you
madam chairwoman.
Thank you Mr Johnson.
Thank you madam chair I would
like to move a do pass.
Thank you we have a motion for a
do pass do we have a second.
A motion by Representative
Johnson and a second by
Representative Ortez.
Is there further discussion.
Okay seeing none eight call the
roll please.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Chasey.
Yes.
Representative Eli yes.
Representative Gallegos is
excused Representative my part
no.
Representative Ortez.
Yes.
Representative Rehm no.
Representative Zamora no.
Mr Johnson.
Yes.
Madam chair yes.
Madam chair with that we have
one excuse to I in the
affirmative and three in the
negative.
Great thank you Representative
Garrett you have a do pass on
house bill twenty one thank you
thank you madam chair thank you
committee for your comments and
questions thank you.
Next we will hear house bill
eighty two so it just give us a
couple of seconds to get
Representative Serrato and my
Estes into the panelists note.
Welcome Representative are you
an presenting the bill alone
today flying.
I believe so but if I if
Representative Maestas comes in
you know he's the expert on this
so okay we don't see Hamm so
we're we're ready for you to
begin wonderful thank you well
thank you madam chair for
allowing me to present my bill
each be what eighty two
historically underutilized
businesses opportunity act this
bill creates the health
certification for businesses
owned by women or people of
color or as we call them house
strictly under utilized
businesses it allows the state
to offer training to these Hobbs
as they bid for state contracts
or purchasing as well as creates
a sort of a searchable database
of these businesses and tracks
our state our contracting with
them as well in particular this
program with it would enable the
the department of tax and
revenue to identify New Mexicans
small owned businesses owned by
women and people of color or
people of color and at the same
time these hubs could work with
the business supporting
nonprofits to learn how to
navigate the state bidding
process and qualify officially
as a hop on it would also allow
the General Services Department
to keep a database of qualified
hubs and to track how often our
state agencies utilize hubs and
happened when they're contracted
and when their ward and how much
the total this contracts are on
it would also enable current
contractors with the state to
utilize database to identify
potential subcontractors it does
not create setasides it does not
create additional points in the
bidding process it simply
enables us to collect the data
and offer nominal support to
businesses navigating the
process as one of six states
that is a major people of color
state I believe we should not
only ensure that our state
dollars are going to spur
economic growth within the state
and job creation in the state
those those dollars are going
towards businesses that are a
reflection of our state so are
you know collecting this data
offering the training all these
resources is a good first step
on it will still stimulate our
local economies by promoting
full and equal business
opportunities by encouraging
goal setting and offering
resources for state agencies and
businesses.
On I do have an amendment madam
chair woman I don't know if you
would like to you to go into
that at this point if you like
me to go to my witnesses.
Sorry ability muted.
We are checking to see if we
receive the amendment that you
provided to the committee yes I
believe yes I believe it should
was received and and okay I and
I see folks.
Shaking their heads saying
excuse me nodding their heads
saying that it's in the Here
file so I'm.
Go ahead and if you want to
explain the amendment now yeah
absolutely it's it's a pretty
simple amendments one page and
essentially extra courses
friendly I was suggested by the
administration specifically at
department of transportation and
all it simply says is that each
department or agency would track
the the hub subcontracted at the
at upon completion of the
project and this came up
primarily because you know so
the cop maybe subcontracted
during the course of the project
and said hello since more
accurately Representative you
know if they were able to hire
hubs during the process.
Great thank you I'm so we'll go
ahead and do a poll to take
comments and then we can move
the amendment for discussion
hello my oh oh sorry so just for
the amendment at this point just
a second no I know so I just
wanted to to explain it in case
anyone wants to change the
public comment.
Yeah and one of the you have
three witnesses with me so
whenever you want you to have
okay sure go ahead and
They they have the opportunity
right now to speak thank you so
much madam chair chair.
I it's so I have with me today
are Jason Weaks who's with us on
a chamber I have the secretary
of the General Services
Department can thirties and then
I GSD director purchasing
Marquita on adjacent you want to
go to get this off.
Thank you representative madam
chair members of the committee
my name's Jason Weaks I
represent the Albuquerque
Hispanic chamber the Spanish
chambers actually working on
this legislation I think now for
this is the fourth year
We've we've we've you know taken
some painstaking efforts to try
to revise it in accordance with
what comments we got from the
relative departments on GST has
been great we've been working
with marketing for about a year
and a half now secretary Ortiz
was also great through this
we've all we've we've sought to
address all the issues we also
met with
couple other agency heads um to
make sure that we address their
concerns hence the amendments
that that's before this
committee today but we we feel
like this will be really great
in terms of one understanding
how many hubs the state's use
thing and to promoting their
usage through some of the
provisions in this bill as
Representative strada said it's
not a set aside this is really
just creating classification so
that we know exactly from a
contracting perspective what
types of businesses are being
used by the state in the state
contracts from this this I think
will lead to more economic
diversity more economic activity
honestly Texas's had a help
program in place for quite some
time and it really has been a
huge economic boon to some of
the
Local hub based ownership
businesses in Texas and so we're
taking a really later model of
that and implementing it here
and then hoping we get a good
robust a program in place we can
really promote the usages of us
historically underutilized
businesses thank you.
And then I'm at director market
in is okay at your own if you
speak next yes it's fine we
don't see secretary Ortiz but
we'll go ahead and continue
looking Grumman thank you.
In your fine to proceed.
Thank you chairwoman and
presheaf the opportunity
speaking secretary tees
apologize as he had a conflict
and and couldn't attend today if
you can jump on we may see in
any minute otherwise a I'll
leave charge for General
Services Department this this
bill creates two very important
things one is the database for
Hobbs to is the tracking of how
many contracts are going to
Hobbes.
This feature is valuable because
New Mexico has no disparity
study we've never done one
they are extremely expensive to
do Texas in Colorado recently
did them and they were in excess
of millions of dollars this bill
were will provide essential data
for assessing how many historic
underutilized businesses exist
in New Mexico and how many are
used by New Mexico our database
will be available for the
agencies to look at and for
contractors to choose from and
we we think this is a great
advancement for the state of New
Mexico thank you chairwoman.
Thank you and thank you
representative cerrado.
It is great thank you we will
now open the call for the
attendees that will like to vote
in favor or in opposition of
health bill eighty two the poll
is now open and it will stay
open for twenty seconds.
Okay we're having a little
technical difficulties.
If we can start the pool.
We are going to re launch I'm
not sure if that was.
Available.
Okay I'm perhaps no one's.
Participating.
Okay I see the results now we
have one for and one against
house bill eighty two so now
let's go ahead and hear from the
opposition if you would like to
speak in opposition please raise
your hand.
If you would like to speak in
support please raise your hand.
Okay I'm we took the pole and no
one wants to speak up so let's
move along to the committee
members.
Committee members.
excuse me yes that's correct so
Representative cerrado let's go
ahead and move that is the
amendment for discussion
purposes we just explain it just
briefly once more please Sali
thank you for it for that at
madam chair so this is a one
page amendment.
Sorry.
One moment
can you explain it just for one.
Sure.
Madam chair members the
committee so the amendment
it that basically it came from
and meeting with the
transportation are are not D. O.
T. department of top
transportation and their concern
was.
The projects are very large and
they issued contract to general
contractor who then often times
contracts subcontracts of subs
those maybe have based
businesses but they won't know
that on the front end because
they're not including them in
that and I propose on the front
end so they wanted just the
opportunity to be able to
provide the usage of pubs on the
back in so this amendment
actually accomplishes that by
saying report at the end of the
project as well on whatever how
do you used as subcontractors I
think I did that are a
Representative Serrato don't
know if you want to clean it up
a little bit but that's the gist
of the amendment.
The tail end of it it sounded
about right thank you.
Madam chair I move we adopt the
amendment.
Thank you Representative Eli we
have a motion to adopt the
amendment and a second by
Representative Chasey I think we
had a dog that was speaking in
support of the amendment as well
very loudly so
we'll take that into
consideration is there any
opposition objection to adopting
the amendment.
Seeing that we will show
everyone in attendance voting in
the affirmative and we have
adopted the amendment to house
bill eighty two.
Representative cerrado excuse me
now committee members going to
the bill as amended.
What is the pleasure of the
committee.
I'm a do pass as amended.
Thank you Representative Ortez
we have a motion for a due pass
as amended and a second by
Representative Eli.
Is there objection to the past
motion.
Okay let's go ahead and take
role in that.
Thank you madam chair
representative Chasey yes.
Representative Eli yes.
Representative Gallegos is
excused Representative my part
you know.
Representative Ortez.
Yes.
Representative Rehm no.
Representatives of our.
Representative.
Hi Mister Johnson yes.
Representative Zamora.
Yes yes.
Madam chair with that we have
one excused I in the affirmative
and two and the negative.
Thank you one at apercent.
Thank you with that
Representative cerrado you have
a do pass on house eighty two as
amended thank you madam chair
thank you today.
Great so now we will move to
representative Garcia going back
to House Bill five welcome
Representative.
You'll have to admit yourself.
Madam chair of we can.
Thank you madam chair off I
apologize for having to move me
back a little bit because they
had other stuff going on the
same time I appreciate the
opportunity presented funding
today this is house bill five as
amended is an act relating to
electric generating facility
could not be district providing.
For the appointment of
additional of the rise members
you can earn an emergency madam
chair if I may all hello I have
two extra witnesses with one is
cheese bad Wharton the other is
it in Williams.
If I need them would you please
put the money this record was
set up to help attract
replacement jobs to the district
as you well know the power plant
folgt this year.
And we're trying to set up for
the for the.
Well the forties Business it up
we just need more members ma'am
we need a we need a broader
policy you guys is that why we
need one more member from small
county and three from the
governor's office.
Thank you we'll do we will
briefly
The power plant closures.
Your December.
And that tool nine from the.
The company of
with the they had the right give
me one million dollars yes a
bowl of and a thirty million
dollar impact on now.
In our economy of ninety five
percent of the employees are
from support County and
The tax base goes to all
McKinley County.
Also have a question madam chair
of by need I we work with
business thank you madam chair.
Great thank you representative
we did promote your witnesses so
if you want to leave them for
technical assistance once we
moved to questions and from the
committee that is great and
let's go ahead and take a poll
on the attendees if they would
like to vote on being in favor
or opposed to House Bill five.
So the pool is now open and it
will stay open for another
fifteen seconds.
The poll will close and five
seconds.
Okay thank you everyone the pool
was closed and there was no
there was no active
participants.
So we will go to the committee.
Representative.
Either way.
Yes madam chair I see that there
is no comment and I'd like to
have lunch so I'm moving to pass
all second.
We have a due pass motion by
Representative Eli and a second
by Representative Rehm.
Is there any discussion.
Is there any opposition to the
do passed motion.
Okay saying then you have a do
pass on house bill five as
amended.
And showing everyone present
voting in the affirmative thank
you representative Garcia thank
you madam chair thanks
committee.
Thank you.
Foods our agenda for the house
government elections and of the
Indian Affairs Committee
members.
And thanks to everyone for your
attendance and your attention
and your participation we will
see you again on Monday have a
great weekend.
