Thank you, Madam Chair, whenever
you're ready. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Good morning, everyone.
Again, feels so funny, trading
spots, but this morning I have
with me my expert Kate Noble,
who's with uh growing up in New
Mexico, and we'll be discussing
house 227, which would add
childcare facilities, uh,
providers as entities under
LIDA. And so I know we've had a
briefing.
On uh Lita already with a couple
of bills already, but for full
contextEA was passed in 2002. It
was a constitutional amendment
to the Anti-Donation clause,
which enabled the state and
local municipalities to use
state funds to encourage
economic-based jobs in uh in the
state and to be specific in that
language, it points to, um, that
they're able to create new job
opportunities by providing land,
buildings, or infrastructure for
facilities to support new or
expanding businesses.
Um, so in that perspective and
very dear to my heart is the
idea that child care is
infrastructure. Uh, it has been
proven multiple times that uh
childcare enables women to enter
the workforce and to be a part
of the workforce in a growing
way, um, with this bill does, it
acknowledges their childcare
facilities in that, and it
allows them to be up for those
grants. Uh, some of the, the,
the analyses have mentioned that
there are $10 million in loans
that are available, um, or that
are up, that are in question
right now that
may be available for childcare
facilities, but the loan is not
the same as a grant. Um, as
we've already invested millions,
um, nearly billions, uh, into
our childcare expansion. Uh, I
think all of us know, especially
in our rural communities,
getting the brick and mortar in
the ground ready for childcare
facilities to start growing to
get their uh places up to code
is a is a really important
factor. I'm actually going to
hand it over to Ms. Noble to
talk about her experience, um,
when, uh when the buildings uh
changed, so I'll go to hand it
over.
Thank you very much. uh, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee,
I appreciate the ability, the
ability to be here and speak on
this today. Uh, I am the CEO of
Growing Up New Mexico. We are a
statewide early childhood
nonprofit, we have a, an early
childhood center that includes
spots for about 115 children
from age 6 weeks through pre-K.
Um, I also want to say I spent
10 years as an economic
development professional and
truly the road of economic
development led me to early
childhood because this is a two
generation, uh, often 3, or more
economic development strategy
both in giving kids a strong
start and in making it possible
for adults to be in the
workforce as Chair Serato
mentioned.
I do want to share a little bit
about our experience, we've
recently had a critical failure
of our roof when we had 3 inches
of rain in October, uh,
fortunately, we didn't have the
roof coming down, you know,
those, um, tiles that get soaked
and are sort of made of
cardboard in areas that are
inhabited by children, we had it
in some adult office areas. We
also have a failing HVAC system,
which has meant that over the
severe cold snap that we had
over this.
winter, we have had to close a
number of times and send people
home because we can't get our
classrooms up to the regulated
temperature up to 68 degrees. We
couldn't get them above 63
without those HVAC units
working. So that affects roughly
100 families in in Santa Fe who
then have to interrupt their
workday. Uh, we do a full day,
full year, uh, pre-K and
education and care program for
infants and toddlers, um, and so
that means that we are basically
a place where working families
put their children, uh, and it's
definitely an impact I'm always
blown away at how good natured
families are when they have to
come at a moment's notice and
pick up their children, but
there's no question that that's
rippling through businesses and
government uh in, in Santa Fe
when folks are unable to go to
work.
Um, as Cha Cerrado said, not
only is childcare
infrastructure, it is
foundational economic
development. I really appreciate
this bill. We have had a gross
underinvestment in childcare
facilities for decades now, um,
in our experience is not unique
throughout the state, we hear of
the need for infrastructure
investment, as we've made the
investments in our early
childhood systems and programs,
we need to support that with the
spaces where we can care for
children.
Uh, so with that, I will leave
it there.
Miss Noble. And so just to be
clear, the childcare facilities
would have to go through the
same procedures, the same
application process as any other
LIDA applicant. um, EDD
describes Lita as a tool to
assist expanding or relocating
businesses that are qualified
entities that will stimulate
economic development and produce
public benefit. Um, I hope this
committee agrees that the
childcare stimulates the economy
and is a public benefit. It is
no additional cost, it would
just be again they'd be
additional um uh applicants to
it, and especially as ECECD.
early child education and care
uh department is looking to
expand. They want to, uh, by
2027 have 27,000 kids in pre-K,
infant care, uh, and education.
They want to expand their brick
and mortar, but we need to be
helping with them as a large um
investors in our state like uh
Los Alamos National Lab, or even
uh the Santa Fe chamber has has
prioritized childcare, we should
be supporting that as well with
state dollars. And with that,
Mr. Chair, um, we open it up for
questions. Thank you.
Anybody in opposition, please
raise your hand.
Anybody in support?
Uh, if you want to come up real
quickly to give your comments.
Whichever.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee, uh,
committee. My name is Barbara
Tedro and I am a childcare owner
in Farmington, and I've been in
the childcare um entity in
business for 25 years, and I've
been fortunate enough to expand
to 5 licensed childcare centers,
um, one of them was a
collaboration with the city of
Farmington, they had an old
Halverson House transitional
building that we were able to
lease, um, another was a
collaboration with an oil field
business that needed um care.
their children, so they, they
funded that, um, but the other
three centers we um had to take
a deep hard look and say where
could we get funding to expand
for childcare and as Miss Nobles
um stated childcare is needed in
in communities in order to
expand and bring businesses in.
So it's a collaboration that is
beneficial to the community,
however, it's on the back of
licensed child care centers, and
I understand where small
businesses, but we're limited to
loan funding.
My husband was um district
attorney for 16 years, and we
actually had to tap into his
401k to seek funding because
loans are limited for for small
businesses. So, um, this would
just help to expand, open up
loans, um, just another
additional funding source, um,
in order to expand and get the
vision of what the state of New
Mexico has seen because it is
for mostly for profit minority
women that own these small
businesses and the
childcare centers. So we urge
you to please take a look at
adding childcare as an entity to
um be able to um take a, take a
grab at this leader funding.
Thank you.
Thank you. Now we'll go to the
committee. Any questions?
Brett Mason.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair, uh, committee, uh,
First, I guess.
Of one problem I have, I guess,
is it seems like this is
actually changing leader.
You know, later was, I, the way
I perceively then I understand.
Was a
Funding for
poor manufacturing business
starts.
Expanded New Mexico.
It, uh
Mainly instrumental in land,
building and lease.
And to me this basically
changes.
The structure of Lita.
In my thinking.
Representative.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, Representative for the, for
the, the thought. I, I, uh, so
just to be clear, the treating
uh childcare providers as a
qualified entities means that
they would still have to invest
those dollars in brick and
mortar, uh, infrastructure
pieces to their building. So
this isn't paying for new, new
facilities or helping them get
their license. That's, that's
their own deal. But if they're
going to invest in brick and
mortar in these communities,
that's what they, that could
potentially qualify for LEDA
under this bill.
Thank you, Representative, Mr.
Chair, also, uh,
This qualifies.
Nonprofits.
In order to apply for legal
funds. Well, let's open it up to
all nonprofits are gonna want a
piece of the pie.
And cut into the what I'm afraid
of it's gonna cut into the
amount of funding.
That later was to me was
originally
Uh, started for, you know, it's,
it's, it's gonna delete the
funds to some degree, the more
people that.
More pieces of pie you cut, the
smaller the pieces get.
Thank, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representatives. So
you're on page 6, it does refer
to adding that language in
there, but it specifies that
they have to be one or more of
the of the following uh things.
So in that's specific to an
industry, a commercial
enterprise, a business, uh, an
Indian nation, telecom sales
group, a facility for for
growing ag products and then in
businesses, the reason why we
added it is because some
childcare facilities are
nonprofit, but they would have
essentially the only definition
that nonprofit that nonprofit
would apply.
to his childcare facilities.
Mr. Chair and to that point.
Mr. Chairman
The nonprofits.
You know, to me, leader was
meant for for-profit business.
In order to grow our economy.
In the state of New Mexico.
So I guess it's the nonprofit
part.
It's to me it opens up for any
nonprofit.
Uh, granted, it's for
structures, it's, I mean, I'm
not.
Arguing the intent of the money.
It's just
Adding another whole group of
Entities into the program and,
and as I stated before.
Start slicing the pie.
Uh, thank you, Representative,
Mr. Chair. Um, growing up in New
Mexico is a nonprofit and I
guess I want to emphasize, um we
are a business, we are a
business with a different tax
reporting structure and
governance structure, uh,
expressly not necessarily to
make money, but to reinvest
money in our business, uh, and
ultimately what we see that this
does is opens up local options
because the local economic
development Act.
has always been about locally
led solutions and in providing
those options for local
communities to make those
decisions and not keeping a
class of businesses out, um,
this really would provide more
options for that locally led
economic development and
foundational economic
development effort. I also want
to say that we have been working
on a business development, uh.
Program called Crisa, uh, for
the past year throughout 2024
that did provide uh some
basically forgivable loans,
grants, uh, to childcare
businesses for investing in
their infrastructure, um, and
growing up in New Mexico was
partnered with the early
childhood department and West
Business Development Agency in
managing this, and we found the
need to be much greater and much
more diverse in terms of types
of businesses that needed this
investment and indeed local.
communities, including, uh, in,
in Hobbs, in Riodoso, uh, we've
worked very closely with the
Santa Fe chamber, but we found
that business leaders throughout
the state through this work that
we did in 2024 are looking for
options similar to what Miss
Tedro um talked about in
Farmington, where the city might
provide a building matching lead
funds and that sort of thing.
And so again, sort of opening up
the options for those local
communities to determine how
they want to.
their LIDA funds is, is what we
see that this bill would do.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Cha,
uh, representative, and, you
know, I don't want to seem, we
all know that childcare is very
important.
Uh, part of, of any business. I
mean, you know, I have
businesses and my employees
struggle with child care also. I
mean, it's expensive.
But I guess my core deal is
there's, as she spoken that, I
would like to see a, a different
way to address the childcare
than than to put it through the
leader funds. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Gonzalez.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
thank you for the presentation.
Um, I have, um,
Couple of, well, one question,
um, specifically with the
nonprofit status, um, just, um,
by placing this in, does this do
anything to the anti-donation
clause or anything regarding,
you know, nonprofit status, how
does that affect it here in the
bill? Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, uh, Representative.
Uh, no, it does not. Um, it says
in the language that it is under
the um uh guidance of whatever
we pass in the legislature, so
it opens it up to things that
will build out our
infrastructure, um, based on, on
whatever we pass in here. And
again, this doesn't open it to
all non
profits, it's just those that
fit those specific guidelines.
OK. Um, and the other just
general statement, you know,
when you're looking at um Lita
as local economic development
Act, um, it is intended to boost
as everyone has mentioned, a
growing economy and a workforce,
but to be able to have a
workforce, um, I think you also
need childcare and so by that
definition of economic
development and being able to
support working families going
to work, um, and
With the exception that this
would only cover the
infrastructure as attended, um.
Just as a just a general
comment, I do see this as
supporting um local economy um
without childcare facilities, I
think it's really hard to have
growing businesses. Um, it's
really hard to have a workforce,
um, if you don't have some place
for families to take their kids
to. So thank you for that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. I just had a
I question myself if we don't
have any other questions, um.
So right now, uh, they can't
supply just because they're a
nonprofit or what's the reason?
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you Mr. Chair,
sorry. Thank you.
Weird, uh, sorry, yeah, uh,
that's right, they can't apply
because they aren't one of the
qualifying uh entity statuses
in, and you'll see it on page
56, that's where we see it's.
Thank you. That answers my
question. Uh, what's the
pleasure of the committee?
I make a motion to do pass.
Uh, can I have a roll call,
please?
Representative Cullen, no.
Representative Gonzalez, yes.
Representative Lord.
Representative Mason.
Sanchez.
Yes.
Cerrado, yes.
of a do pass with 32.
Next door.
Looks like we have uh.
28 with uh Rep Martinez.
Whenever you are ready.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
committee for hearing this bill.
This is HB 228, uh, and what
this does is it provides
statewide guidance on electric
fences. Um, many of us know that
public safety is a key issue
facing the state right now, um,
and so an electric fences give
businesses the ability to
protect themselves, uh, with
these times. And so oftentimes
political subdivisions can have,
um uh conflicting laws or or
information about how to treat
an electric fence. And with this
bill does is offers consistency.
in regulation for businesses to
rely on. Um, the reason I got
became part of this bill is that
in Santa Fe, we have a business
owner who um went to the city,
asked, you know, to set up their
electric fence and the and the
business in the city said, yeah,
this is how you do it. They
invested more than $20,000 in
the electric fence, and then
later got a citation from a
different uh part of the city,
um, to, uh, you know, to that
they couldn't do that, and they
had to take down their fence for
an additional $10,000. Um, so it
was very frustrating for this
business to, to look at that and
to want to invest in our state.
Um, and so I, I know Santa Fe
has its own, uh, plethora of,
uh, you know, uh, decision
making, but you know, again,
there with this being such a
unique thing, um, this would
allow just consistency across
the state for business to take
that action. I'm gonna hand it
over to my co-sponsor, um, uh,
Minority Whip, uh, Martinez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee. This, this bill
Um
Clean and simple just offers
that.
That guidance across the board,
um, and traveling around the
state during the interim, I
talked to a lot of small
businesses, a lot of small
business owners, and one of the
things that they're most
concerned about.
Is what happens when they're not
there, when there's not eyes on
their property.
Um, property crime.
Is rising, and this is one of
the tools that we can use to
protect those small businesses.
Um, it also helps law
enforcement because they're not.
Um
Walking into a situation blindly
because this information will be
shared with law enforcement.
So
I hope this this committee sees
its way to.
Supporting this bill.
Um, and we would like to now
have comments from our expert.
Uh, Luis Parias, who is the
government relations director
for Amaro.
Good morning, chair and members
of the committee, um, as rep of
set in with Amro, uh, I'm a
government relations director
there. I'm speaking in support
of HB 228, and on behalf of
business customers who seek
innovative products like battery
charge fences with alarm systems
to deter commercial property
crime. This monitor security
technologies provided to
businesses located on commercial
manufacturing and industrial
sites. The security needs
include the protection.
of outdoor assets.
While in use for decades
elsewhere in New Mexico, the
system has been in use since
1998.
Today there are over 8000
installations in more than 1400
jurisdictions across the US.
The technologies of crime
prevention tool that detects
criminal trespassing and theft
of property. The battery charged
security fence provides a
startling but safe pause to
effectively deter and detect
trespass.
The world's foremost experts
have tested this technology and
determined it is safe.
The system interfaces with the
monitor alarm to detect a breach
and will alert a business in
monitoring operator to verify an
alarm event before officers are
called.
The system features warning
signs that are located every 30
ft to alert and deter potential
trespassers and criminals.
Importantly, the system complies
with recognized safety standards
established by the IEC standard
60335-2-76. This se security
device is battery power with no
more than 12 bolts of direct
current and the battery is
continuously recharged by solar
panels.
To prevent inadvertent contact,
the security system is always
located on the interior of the
property and behind a perimeter
fence or wall.
Because property crime is going
up, more businesses have
expressed a dire need for this
kind of technology.
In New Mexico, unfortunately.
This is his face lengthy delays
and uncertainty when it comes to
permitting.
Currently we have 95 customers
waiting for this technology.
On average, it takes 188 days to
get permitted, with some waiting
over 500 days.
In order to operate, businesses
need certainty around the
installation of systems and
technology.
HB 22A brings uniformity to the
permitting process, allowing
businesses to grow and expand
operations locally.
Your state has the opportunity
to join others like Utah,
Arizona, Texas, and Oklahoma and
passing laws that make it easier
to solve crime prevention
security solutions.
This security technology
prevents property crime at no
cost to taxpayers, cities, or
the state.
I respectfully ask for your
iPhone.
Um, thank you. He, he actually
added all the ending comments,
so we stand for questions. uh
the audience and those in
support, please raise your hand.
Those opposed, please raise your
hand.
Uh, we'll go to, uh, those in
support if you want to come up
and give some brief, very brief
comments, anybody?
Good morning, Mr. Chair,
committee members. Uh, my name
is Jane Jern again. I'm with the
New Mexico utility Contractors
Association, and we have members
all over the state. We support
HB 228 because it gives me
businesses facing
ever-increasing crime in our
state and avenue to protect life
and property in a safe,
effective way. This bill will
stop the red tape that can take
6 to 18 months to muddle
through.
With these guidelines and
restrictions in place, HB 228 is
an effective tool and safe for
the public. Please vote yes,
thank you.
Thank you. Uh, now we'll go to
the committee, uh, rep Cullen.
They didn't want to speak, yeah.
Mr. Chair.
So I do have a couple questions
because I'm more of um the type
that believes that these type of
things belong in local
government within your city and
county.
Um, so I understand that because
this came about because of
What entity said it was OK and
another entity didn't, and so
they required them to remove the
fencing.
So what can I ask? What entity
was the one, so I'm assuming
that the city was OK with it,
but what other interview was on?
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative. Um, it is a
uniquely Santa Fe issue where,
uh, well, no, I can't say that
it's, it could happen anywhere
it was where, and this is kind
of why this matters, um, one,
department saw it and said it
was OK about how we looked at it
and the other department in the
same city, looked at it and said
it wasn't OK, uh, with them. And
so that was where the conflict
came from.
So it's the department's not
within the city, Madam Mr.
um
and there's always remedies, um,
within city and county
government. So this is kind of
expanding. That is my concern
with the bill, um, because most
I feel that the most
appropriately done within the
city, uh, level, but uh I.
That was the only question that
I really had. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you, Rep Gonzalez.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you. Um, I did have a question
just kind of getting some
history on this, um, it mentions
in some of the evaluations about
bands like city bands or, you
know, whatnot, um, historically,
you know what, what bands have
been in place specifically
regarding electric fencing and
maybe what's the, what was the
purpose for them?
Um, Mr. Chair, uh,
representative, so I think
you're referring to like the
first section of this. That's
mostly included, um, to the only
only part that gets amended in
there just to be clear, is uh
page one, lines 23, and that
just provides you the exception.
And then the new material starts
on page 4 line 7. And so those
um those bands and everything
like that, that was already
existing language that wasn't
necessarily around this issue,
um, and, and just to kind of,
you know, kind of wrap this out.
a little more. Many villages and
towns don't necessarily have
language around electric fences
right now because it is a very
specific piece of policy. And so
I just want to kind of mention
that, that, that's also this is
filling in a gap that does exist
in a lot, a lot of the state.
Um, and thank you for that. Um,
thank you,
Mr. Chair Representative, what
this does is it offers
uniformity across the board.
Um, there are like, um.
Madam Chair said, some small
localities that don't have a
planning its own apartment. This
just offers across the board
uniformity, so business can
businesses can take advantage of
this and protect the property,
especially in the rural areas.
Um, thank you for that. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Um, one other
just, um, again, just wanting
just for clarity, it looks like
the New Mexico Municipal League
did have a chance and an
opportunity for comment. Um, I
do see the value in providing
uniformity specifically for
those areas that do not have
this technology and maybe are
looking to install it and maybe
looking for some guidance, but
has there been any kickback
about taking some of that local
control away, um, and, and maybe
an area where they feel that
they should have um.
You know, priority over, over
regulations. I know some
counties and cities can be
pretty sticklers about, you
know, they really want to retain
that local control over zoning
within their own area.
Thank you.
you, Mister Chair
Representative, uh, I have not
had any pushback from
Any of the municipalities
northern municipal League, um,
but I will say is that the
people living in the rural
areas.
I would love the chance, the
opportunity to have.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you for that. Uh, I mean, I do
agree. I think this is um there
is not a lot of guidance in
rural areas. There's not a lot
of technology available, so for
some areas, I think, you know,
this would be very welcome to
kind of give them a cheat sheet
of whatnot of what regulations
exist, but just wanted to make
sure that there was no, um,
No opposition, you know, that
has been voiced from um more
than likely larger cities or or
maybe more vocal counties. Thank
you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Rep Mason.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representatives, uh,
Just a few things that I
I, uh, is this
And I probably should have read
them.
Analysis reports more than
anything, but
You know, I have no problem with
regulating this product.
Like
But are we also regulating the
permitting of it, the stuff to.
To the state instead of the
localities.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative,
uh, so no, no, the zoning was
with, sorry, go on, Mr. Terry
Representative, no, it's not.
Uh, the fences and the
businesses would still need to
comply with local zoning laws,
but it would speed up the faster
it would speed up the process.
So because there would be,
again, uniformity in the
guidance when it comes to
electric fences.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Representative, I don't know.
That
Are, are we not taking control
of this.
Of this situation away from our
cities and localities.
I think Madam Chair
Representative Mason, uh, no,
no, we're not, um.
Like, um, the sponsor said those
those businesses will still need
to, to comply with local
planning and zoning. What this
does, it does two things as far
as I'm concerned. It, it offers
uniformity across the board,
because this is an emergency or
emerging technology, uh, this
just offers that guidance. The
second part is when it comes to
permitting, um,
I can't comment for uh Artesia
Carlsbad, but I know that
Albuquerque and Rio Rancho, the,
the permitting can take.
6 months, um, and we're losing.
Uh, builders were losing outside
investments.
Um
So I'd like a whole overhaul of
the permitting process, to be
honest with you, but this is
just gonna kind of speed that
up, because of the guidance that
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh
You, you say it'll speed it up,
sold the state will.
Over over.
I mean, if, if it takes.
6 months to get a permit in
Albuquerque.
Through your zoning commission,
even though we have this
regulations, it won't speed that
part up and if it's, if it is
still in the local.
Authority
To issue the permit to build
this facility.
Thank you, Mr. Chair
Representative Mason, it will
speed it up because a lot of
times, especially in city
government, there's silos, and
departments don't talk to each
other, which
is one of the problems um that
Representative Cerrado brought
up.
Um, so in that, in that case, I
think it would speed up the
process because you have that
uniformity and all those silos
can look at, at one piece of
direction and say, OK, this is,
this is what this is for, and
not have 3 different departments
in the city, trying to make up
their own mind.
Thank you, Representative, Mr.
Chair.
Uh, one question about this
technology, you know, we've been
using electric fences since I
was a baby.
You know, and they're all low
voltage, 12 volts. I've got
several chargers.
I've used them on my dog. We use
them at the ranch. We use them.
So what?
Makes this technology different
and so.
I mean, I can sort out your
electric fence and with a shovel
handle, you know, I mean, I've
done a zillion times to fix
fences, you know, you sorted out
up stream and go down here and
work and go move your shovel and
keep going again. Yeah, so what
makes it safe is that it's not
direct current. Well it pulses
1.3 seconds and the duration is
0.0003. That's akin to static
shock. So when I started with
the company, I went.
for training, I touched the
fence myself, um, I figure most
people won't be deterred, so I
touched it again, very
uncomfortable, memorable, but
it's safe. Thank you, uh.
The representative, Mr. Chair,
you know, the technology we use
now is also pulsating 12 volt, I
mean, it's, it's a low voltage
meant to deter livestock from
going through your fence. I've
touched them a billion times.
And they scare you to death if
you don't know you're touching
it, but they don't do any
permanent damage.
But uh
I don't know that I've.
This is
To me, it still seems
To me
If we're having trouble locally,
the local people should change
their local. I hate to get in
the middle of local problems.
Sounds like though is the Santa
Fe the only one that's voiced
the problem with this.
I don't see any mention of any
other city, county town.
Municipality.
Quoted in this, wanting this
legislation. Um, thank you,
thank you, Chair, thank you,
representative. Um, again, I, I
was speaking from my experience
when I came in, but in our
conversations with other folks,
it was appreciated language, um,
that would offer this kind of
consistency. And I think part of
the reason why we see it
speeding up is that the statue
is very specific about what
types of, you know, the charge
and all and all the aspects of
the height, um, you know, all
the details, it really allows uh
cities and and municipalities or
municipalities, I should say, in
political subdivisions to
understand.
And, you know, what is the norm,
and that would allow that to
speed up. But we've, I mean,
yeah, it's never been anything
against it. It's mostly been,
oh, this, this is a good idea
that we should have already had.
Thank you. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. You know, I have no
problem with the technology, I
guess my only problem is
is us as a state.
To me seem like we're infringing
on
The rights downhill of our
counties or cities or
municipalities and our, our
citizens in the country and, you
know, get the technology.
It's, it doesn't sound that much
different than what we've used.
I mean, it's all pulsating. It's
all 12 volt.
I have them with you run off of
12 volt battery.
You know, and it's all
A certain pulsating current,
it's not a, not like you're
plugging in the fence to your
110 volts.
Bill, it's not gonna hurt
anybody, but anyway, thank you
for your answers.
I'm not sure that I'm convinced.
That we need this, uh, other
than we could just regulate it
and not, not make them come to
this.
Uh
Like I said, I, I, I think I,
I'm
One that wants to shrink our
state government, not expand it.
Thank you.
Rep Colin for a real brief
question
Um, I
Didn't want to go back around,
but there was a question in
reference to the
The municipal League, and I do
have the analysis here and that
that they found that it's a
significant issue from municipal
league in reference to um that
these decisions are most
appropriately left to individual
local governments, so I just
wanted to say that was one of
the
unless they cause I think that
when you guys had talked earlier
that you didn't have any
pushback for the municipal
League.
So I just wanted check in
reference to this if there was
any comments to you directly in
reference to it.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Mr. Chair Representative Cullen,
um, my response was that I had
not personally been contacted by
the municipal League, nor by any
municipality.
Thank you. I just have a couple
of quick questions. Uh, I have
horses and cows I can go to Big
R and buy electric fence. Does
this apply to that at all or
limit, do I need to get a permit
for that now as a result of
this? Mr. Chen.
OK. Uh, my other question, uh,
Does the language in this bill
at all, uh, eliminate
competition, uh, I know, uh.
You're with a certain company,
does this any of your
competitors, does this block
them or what they're doing now
at all?
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I
think this encourages
competition.
Because it sets that uniformity.
So companies coming in with this
type of technology, you know
exactly what they need to
provide.
Thank you. Um, the reason I
asked that, I can write a
specification and I can block
out 90% of the.
competition if I wanted it to.
You know what I mean, uh, I just
want to make sure this doesn't
do that. Uh, it's a pleasure of
the committee.
Make a motion to do pass.
In your opposition?
Do we have a roll call?
Representative Cullen? No.
Representative Gonzalez? Yes.
Representative Lord.
Representative Mason? No.
Sanchez, Cheerrado.
If a do pass of 32.
Thank you committee for
operating without me. I heard it
went great. Just kidding. Um,
all right, uh, by, uh, minority
whip, uh, the floor is yours for
2:26.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. I appreciate
your time. I bring to you, um,
A bill that is another tool in
the tool belt.
For trying to attract
practitioners to the more rural
parts of the state. Um, I, this
bill amends existing language
and very simply.
On page 2 lines 3 and 4 and line
16 and 17.
Raises the current uh tax
credit.
For practitioners, um,
And then on page 4.
It simplifies the reporting
language that is required of all
tax bills, and with that, um,
I will stand for questions.
Thank you. Is there anyone in
the audience here in favor of HB
226. Uh, can you go ahead and
form a line and we'll uh we'll
have the sergeant at arms hold
the microphone for you for some
brief comments. Thank you.
Hello, Madam Chair, members of
the committee. My name's Kerrie
Robin Bruder. I'm the registered
lobbyist for the New Mexico
Medical Society. Uh, we've been
talking about the rural
healthcare practitioner tax
credit for a very long time. Uh,
our number one competitors right
now for physicians are Texas and
Colorado. Colorado has a much
lower income tax rate than New
Mexico does and Texas does not
have income tax at all. So when
our physicians are looking at
the best place for them to
settle. Anything
that we can do to help our rural
providers have a greater tax
credit so that their income tax
relief is higher, so it puts us
more on par with those two other
states that are our biggest
competitors is something that we
very much appreciate. We think
this bill would help a lot and
so we're proud to support it and
we urge its passage.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
member of the committee. My name
is Gloria Doherty. I am a nurse
and a nurse practitioner. I am
here on behalf of the New Mexico
Nursing Association and the New
Mexico nurse practitioner
Council, and we urge that you
strongly support this bill. It
has shown that it has improved
the nurse population and the
nurse practitioner population as
evidenced by report in House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee just this past week,
and this would certainly help
attract more. I hope that you.
support this bill. Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Emily Pepin. I work for
Julian Kub registered lobbyist
with the state of New Mexico. We
represent the New Mexico
Behavioral Health Providers
Association
as a licensed clinical social
worker and endorsed infant
mental health specialists, I
stand in strong support of this
bill, which would make life more
tenable for a variety of
healthcare providers. Most of
our beautiful vast state is
rural and the citizens of New
Mexico deserve quality
healthcare providers.
Who are invested in each and
every one of our communities.
This tax credit would help
people like myself live more
easily in the land of
enchantment, please support
House Bill 226. Thank you.
Thank you. And it looks like we
have some folks online as well.
Duval Westfall.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
committee members. I'm Deval
Westfall, executive vice
president of policy and programs
for the greater Albuquerque
Chamber of Commerce, and we
strongly support House Bill 226.
1 of the big talking points this
session has been the severe
shortage of healthcare providers
in our state and rural New
Mexico feels that shortage
acutely, and that's why it's
important to increase the value
of the rural healthcare
practitioner tax credit so we
can attract and keep more
physicians and dentists.
and psychologists and
optometrists and all the other
medical providers that we need
so desperately. Our amazing
state is not the only one in
great need of medical
professionals. And that's why
it's gonna take a whole bag of
carrots to get our healthcare
providers to New Mexico that we
so desperately need and we need
them to come and stay in our
state. The tax credit is an
important piece of that.
We urge you to vote yes. Thank
you.
Thank you. Um,
Mike McMillan.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, Mike
McMillan, operations officer at
Southwest Bone and Joint in
Silver City.
We strongly support this
increase to the tax credit and
thank the sponsor for bringing
it forward.
We believe
Currently, uh, the tax credit is
appreciated, but it is not
significant enough to continue
to retain and attract healthcare
providers to rural New Mexico.
And again, we, uh, uh, strongly
support this, and uh uh
recommend passage. Thank you.
Thank you. Is there anyone in
opposition in the room? Oh, I'm
sorry, hold on, we're still on
uh support and uh Richard
Montoya.
Sorry about that.
Morning, Madam Chair, members of
the committee.
Uh, my name is Richard Montoya.
I'm executive director for the
New Mexico Optometric
Association, and I just want to
thank the sponsor and everybody
involved for uh proposing this
legislation that will greatly
help us not only retain but
attract uh physicians and
optometrists and all other
allied healthcare providers to
the rural areas of New Mexico.
Thank you for your support.
Thank you, seeing no other hands
raised on Zoom, um, is there
anyone in opposition to this
bill?
In the room. Is there anyone in
opposition to this bill online?
All right, let's bring it over
to the committee.
Representative Mason.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you. Representative, not
actually a question, but uh just
the voice.
My support for for this
legislation, we have a
A great need in rural New Mexico
and, and even in
All of New Mexico for healthcare
providers and
Every little bit we can do to
support.
Our doctors and nurses.
We, we need to do, we need to.
Make our health care more
susceptible or not susceptible.
Provide more health care.
For all of our citizens in New
Mexico.
Thank you, Representative, for
bringing this bill forward.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative Cohen.
think about. Actually, I just
make the the same support um the
representative Mason had
mentioned, um, whatever we can
do to support healthcare across
the state, especially in the
rural areas, we see a high need
in those and so I fully support
this bill. Thank you.
Um, I see no other questions, I
just had one brief question, um,
I see that you're amending a
current statute that already
that already exists. I'm used to
seeing tax credits having a
sunset. There's no sunset on
here that you needed to change,
is that correct, Representative?
Madam Chair, that's correct.
Thank you. I just wanted to make
sure it was all done. Uh, what's
the will of the committee?
The motion do passed by vice
chair uh Sanchez, seconded by
Mason for House Bill 226. Is
there any opposition to this?
Emotion, seeing no opposition,
you have a due pass on House
Bill 226.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee.
And lastly, uh, we have house
bill.
peoples
so.
2:10, uh, Representative Do.
Uh, the vacant World Building
Act.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you members of the committee.
Um, I appreciate the opportunity
to introduce this bill that dies
in the first committee every
time I introduce it. Um,
however, it is a real problem. I
would like to tell my story, um,
we have throughout New Mexico
existing building code. A
building can literally fall
around and collapse.
You could be playing a game of
pool and ceiling tiles can fall
on your head. That bill is
compliant with the existing
building code as long as it has
the same occupant or they never
turn off the utilities.
We have historic building code.
Historic building code, and I'm,
I'm always compelled to
reintroduce this bill when I
visit Santa Fe at session. We go
every building I go into,
whether it's a restaurant, if
it's a store, if it's a um folks
who invite us to a meeting at
their, their operations. I see.
Waivers that have been granted
under the historic building
code.
Yet in rural New Mexico, where a
lot of our downtowns are vacant
and a lot of small businesses
like to reopen.
They cannot, if they want to
reoccupy that building and get
an occupancy permit and the
utilities have been turned off.
They must bring the building up
to international, the current
international building code.
Now, if the owner that owns it
vacated the property and never
turns off the utilities.
They can come in under the
existing building code. The
trigger is utilities being
turned on or off.
So the utilities of that
building are turned off
suddenly, it's no longer safe or
healthy for for people to
occupy.
So I've introduced this bill
many times before. I have
narrowed the scope, made it, uh,
the last time it died, CID said
we'll create a, a variance wave
because to, to be fair on the
front page of the construction
industry division, it says
subject to variances and
waivers, but those are not
granted.
As often as they should be.
So the variance is there, but
the barrier still exists. I
knocked a lot of doors and I
have only 12% of my old district
38 exists again today, and this
was repeatedly brought up, how
to occupy and how to start
launch a new business or bring a
new business into a building
that's been vacated and the
utilities have been turned off.
That's the trigger.
The folks that traditionally
opposed the bill are the folks
that that would want to have,
they don't want the waiver
applied, but it's OK for
existing and it's OK for
historical. So I'm here again.
Uh, what we're asking for is an
act that they could point people
towards, there would be a form,
and that people could look
towards the historic building
code in the existing building
code to find waivers so that we
can revitalize our downtowns.
And with that, I'll stand for
questions.
Thank you, either, uh, folks in
support here in the audience
today. Can you come up and form
a line? Uh, we'll give everyone
about one minute on this one.
If we start
Going over one minute too much,
we'll start putting on the
timer.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
David Savara, director of
government affairs for the New
Mexico Association of Realtors,
our organization is in strong
support of House Bill 210. This
legislation presents a pragmatic
approach to revitalizing our
rural communities by reducing
the regulatory barriers that
keep commercial properties
vacant and underutilized.
Vacant buildings in rural areas
are not not only stifle economic
growth, but also diminished
property values and discourage
investment, as referenced by the
Economic Development Department
and the fiscal impact report.
House Bill 210 helps turn these
liabilities into assets,
creating opportunities for
entrepreneurs, increasing
property values and enhancing
the vibrancy of our communities.
The New Mexico Association of
Realtors believes that strong,
thriving communities are built
on policies that encourage
investment and remove
unnecessary roadblocks to
economic development. We urge
your support of House Bill 210.
To help revi revitalize rural
New Mexico, and encourage small
business growth and build
stronger local economies. Thank
you.
Thank you.
Is there anyone online and
support?
Seeing no additional, oh sorry,
uh yeah, so we have a Carlos
Scamora.
Uh, good morning. Um, uh, chair
and members of the committee. My
name is Carlos Camorra. I work
with a lot with the rural
jurisdictions around New Mexico.
Seeing a lot of problems, um
trying to occupy vacant
buildings and uh I think that
this is a great first step at
being able to get um small
businesses, um, and preferably,
you know, in the future being
able to also get other kinds of
uses into vacant buildings. Um,
so I strongly support this and
think it will be something
really helpful for a lot of our
rural communities around New
Mexico. Thank you.
Thank you.
Seeing no further, uh, folks,
uh, in support are there folks,
uh, against who oppose this
bill. Uh, could you come and
line up and again, the sergeant
arms will hold the microphone,
we'll keep the comments to about
a minute.
Good morning, Madam Chairman,
members of the committee, my
name is Brian Conit. I'm
executive director of the New
Mexico Building Construction
Trades Council, uh, we've heard
this bill before, not a lot has
changed. Uh, we still oppose it,
uh.
Diminishing safety and building
code standards is not in our
purview.
Uh, it's a bad idea then, it's a
bad idea now. If the CID was
serious, they would develop.
Coat for vacant buildings, not
waivers, not, not these maybe,
maybe not, right? They would
absolutely uh get that done. We
stand in opposed to opposition
to this, some of the other
comments I hear throughout the
process of discussion with all
due respect to the
Sponsor, uh, some of these are
covered by ADA. They're not even
state building codes or federal.
I mean, if you need an elevator,
This isn't gonna save you, and
that was one of the
first pieces that I heard when
we entered in this discussion.
So, uh,
A bill that covers about 90% of
the buildings in New Mexico,
which are probably rural, uh, is
deserves its own vacant building
code.
So with that, we oppose the
building. Good morning. My name
is Barbara Felix. I'm with the
American Institute of New
Mexico, American Institute of
Architects, New Mexico, and we
represent more than 2300
licensed architects in the state
of New Mexico.
We clearly understand the
challenges of vacant buildings
and agree that we all want to
see these buildings vibrant,
occupied, and economically
successful. However, we believe
this bill is redundant and
unnecessary. The international
existing building code, which
the sponsor referenced, or IEBC
exists to deal exactly with
these types of situations as
architects, we take seriously
our job of protecting the
health, safety and welfare of
our fellow citizens, adding
another layer of redundant
regulation.
when the IEBC already regulates
how to bring vacant building
codes into compliance, including
fire accessibility, egress,
among others, is costly and
unnecessary. We ask you to vote
no on reducing or loosening
codes that will impact the
health, safety and welfare of
our fellow New Mexicans,
particularly in rural
communities. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, John Lipshutz
with the New Mexico Federation
of Labor. We represent over
40,000 workers throughout the
state, in every corner of the
state, both in the public and
private sector, uh, you know, we
appreciate the sponsor and what
you might be trying to
accomplish here, but for reasons
stated uh previously, we do have
to stand in opposition to this
bill. We hope you will as well.
Thank you.
Morning. My name is Mark Truil
with the International
Brotherhood of Electrical
Workers. I'm a licensed
journeyman electrician.
Um, for the reasons previously
stated, we stand in opposition
to this risk.
shape or form and lowering
standard.
Thank you. Is there any
opposition online?
I'm not seeing any uh great, so
I'll turn it over to the
committee.
What time
Representative Gonzalez.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair. I
actually have um a few
questions. Um, I myself am
particularly very interested in
rural buildings, um, there was
actually a few pieces of
legislation I was betting around
because we exactly have that
problem in Las Vegas, um, you
know, try to, to run some things
through that just didn't pan
out, um, in our instance we have
buildings that are vacant, um,
and they fall down and I too do
not see there are some in
existence that are not up to
code that are also falling down.
So I do see it just an
issue with older buildings, um,
with blight, with a lot of
issues that we have as a true
hindrance to economic
development, I want to start,
but I do have some concerns with
the legislation and just the
wording on it. Um, there's a
little bit of discrepancies, um,
you know, particularly some of
the language is to grant, you
know, to grant not holding up
some regulations to deem as what
would be safe or that are
determined, you know, for life
and safety.
My hesitancy is what exactly are
those, um, you know, there is a
lot of code, you know, I'm sure
there's probably more lines of
code than I can even imagine,
but, um, that's 11 who, and I
know you said determined by a
state or local code official,
but I guess I have an issue with
who is making those calls based
upon what current existing
statutes, um, and how do you vet
out which ones are safe and
which ones are not. Like is
something safe in Las Vegas
versus something being safe in
Al.
Turkey, and I say this with true
sincerity that we have had
incidents on building and
transportation. And so, um, I
just um have questions about who
is making those final decisions
as what codes can be skirted and
what just as expensive and what
codes are actually there
necessary for safety.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you for the question,
Representative, and it obviously
wouldn't be me. It would be
construction industry division
and they'd be looking at the
historical.
Code, historical building code,
which grants those and the
existing building code, which
also grants.
Um, thank you for that. Do you
have any estimation of, uh, you
know, like percentage wise, cost
wise of um, you know, what.
What is the expensive, like the
frivolous codes versus, you
know, some that are considered
as necessary. Is there any sort
of example you can give is maybe
what you're looking at
eliminated, that has been deemed
as frivolous comparatively to
what has been deemed for a
safety violation. Well, I, I can
give you, Madam Chair,
representative, I can give you
two concrete examples from my
old district and even one near
you. So in and both dealt with
an elevator. So Buffalo Bar, if
any of you guys are located out
in the annex when you walk down
that hall, there's a.
There's a picture of the buffalo
bar bar in downtown Silver City.
Um, it has been purchased by a
restaurant owner who has several
other restaurants in Silver
City, and this is one of the
reasons, you know, I brought it
was that was my old district and
um the barrier for him is the
installation of an elevator. The
elevator was also the barrier
for a, um, because it's a
two-story building and a lot of
downtown buildings either have a
basement or an attic, or, you
know, or a second story. So a
lot of times it's the elevator.
Another one would be um that
I've heard of.
When people have come uh to I
think they kind of given up hope
but have come to testify in the
past, was a midwife who
purchased a building in Taos,
and she does home deliveries and
her facility is not open to the
public, and she couldn't occupy
the building after purchasing it
because there was no elevator.
And so they're there.
In fairness, the front page of
the the International Building
Code of the Mexico construction
industry says subject to waivers
and variances. And, and every
single thing in there is about
health and safety. So I'm not a
contractor, that's certainly not
my role, but I definitely want
to see Main Street thrive. I
want to see rural communities
thrive and the bringing it up to
code for the existing, I mean,
negating historical building
code and existing building code
only when triggered by
utilities.
That's what's triggering this.
So if the utilities are on,
there's no health and safety
issue. The utilities are off,
there is. If the utilities are
off, that's what triggers it.
We've got to do better than
that. So I'm gonna keep bringing
this bill. If you've got some
other ideas that you're thinking
about, I want, I'll work with
you on it because there's been
interest from even metropolitan
areas this time, folks from
Santa Fe, uh, Chamber of
Commerce and commissioners from
Santa Fe are saying we have
these issues in metropolitan
areas. I'm, I'm trying to find
out a solution where the
expenses to bring it up to
building code to occupy.
a vacant building exceeds what
some of these small businesses
will ever generate in their
lifetime. Um, thank you for
that. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, just another question, and
then again, just historically,
being that you have brought this
up before, um, people have
talked about waivers or about,
you know, exceptions. Um, do you
know the percentage rate like
through the regulations and
licensing department, um,
specifically that there is
already a process and that's
kind of been brought up, but um,
can you, can you maybe give some
insight as to the timing for
that or maybe percentage of
acceptance.
rates or, you know, in what
cases have acceptances been um
been granted. Thank you, Madam
Chair and thank you
Representative since first
introducing this in 16 to the
current, I don't know of a
single waiver granted in my old
house district or new, but I did
talk to the superintendent of um
Regulations and licensing
yesterday, and he said that he
would look into that for me.
Um, and then, I think one last
one.
Um, is, is there ever a point
where, um,
Where businesses coming in would
have to get in full compliance,
whatever that definition would
be, um, you know, um, if coming
in if the intent is to to get
them in expediently.
Safely with, you know, again
still a vague definition of what
that looks like, but is, is
there ever a time where they
would have to then be in full
compliance. I know there's a lot
of grandfathering specifically
with ADA, um, that's a great
example I think of the elevator
at some point though, buildings
do need to be in compliance, um,
at some point they do need to
make accessibility. So, um, you
know, there's not a date or an
implication in here. Is there
some thoughts on that? Thank
you, Madam Chair and thank you,
Representative. You know, we
thought about that, and this is
the much narrow scope than it
was in
the beginning, um, but this,
and, and that's a, that's a
really good example. But in the
example of someone for the owner
and operator is not going to
have any public in that 2nd
floor, then that to me would be
that might be permanent, but
maybe it's a, a maybe that's
part of the process. I really
don't know because we're not,
I'm not trying to micromanage
the way CID grants the waivers
or what the timeline is on those
waivers, but I will say this,
this would not impact the
license, licensing process for
any sort of permit. So like this
wouldn't apply to a theater.
Even if a theater was granted,
uh, occupancy and someone owned
the building and went in and did
their paperwork in there.
There's not going to be a movie
theater in there because that's
going to have an assembly
permit. So it's not going to be
able to get out of the fire
safety or any sort of those
types of procedures, it's not
going to be a childcare center
is not going to get a waiver on
their childcare licensing. If a
charter school wanted to go in
there. I mean, that's that's not
going to change the licensing
process that happens by the, the
agency or bureau that permits
occupancy for
restaurants or grocery stores or
those sorts of things.
Thank you for those responses.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Representative, uh,
Representative Mason.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative.
So this, this is a problem.
You know, cost is.
Will the cost of getting a
building ready to occupy.
Is it recoverable cost.
You know, when, when you get
into the, and none of us want
buildings that are not safe.
That, uh
Structurally
That don't have
Adequate electrical and
plumbing.
So, I don't know, will this
bill, how will it change?
I don't know quite how to put
it.
Uh
What, how, how will this bill
change the ability.
In real time for people to
occupy these buildings.
Well, Madam Chair and
representative, I'll give a
specific example that I was
contacted from someone in your
district that apparently there
was a, um, some folks bought a
building in downtown Artesia,
which they intended to have a um
furniture store, and they did
the remodels and we're getting
ready to open and then they were
not granted occupancy because
there's a basement, they don't
have an elevator. And so that
building after hundreds of
thousands of dollars, it's my
understanding that it's remained
vacant for 7 years now, so I
would hope.
That if they were able to
demonstrate that the area that
was open to the public was 88
accessible and met the safety
requirements, all the others
that, that they would look at
historic code or existing
building code and those folks
will be able to open their, I
think those particular folks may
not still be on there, but you
could find another use for that
building.
But
It's uh
So my mainly the standards still
don't know.
It, uh, I mean, the, I agree. I
mean, we all see these buildings
but all every town.
In
In New Mexico has.
Some buildings that we would
love to see.
But when you look at them,
especially for a restaurant.
You know, it's just
Insurmountable, the cost of the
remodel of building that will
meet the codes for.
And then I don't see a way
because we're, we cannot.
You know, regulate away our
safety.
It, uh
It, I
mean, I really love to support
this, uh.
This
Don't know that it's, it's going
to
As any teeth to actually change
the status quo.
And uh,
I don't know what it's gonna
take to fix this problem, but uh
You know, the elevator, as, as a
personally, I can't see why they
can't say just.
To the board across it and don't
let anybody go up there, you
know, it uh.
But I know that's not gonna
happen, but uh that's what I do.
You know, but
If, if we change.
What you're saying if we just
change the regulation.
On utilities on or off.
Is that basically what you're
asking for?
Madam Chair Representative, no,
because I don't want to forego
health and safety standards.
I'm, I'm not suggesting that we
take away that trigger. I mean,
that would be an easy way, but
then we're going to have
buildings that have no upgrades
and may have, you know, I, I, I,
I feel like this is a we're
directing CID.
To make reasonable changes. I
call them reasonable because
they already exist in another
code. If CID wants to start a
vacant building act, that's
fine. If we want to do $100
million to bring these buildings
up to code, you know, create a
fund, the rural vacant building
fund and you want to put $100
million in it, so
The, the construction of a we
install elevators and in these
small downtown areas or we, I
mean, a lot of it, you know,
maybe there's just a lot of
barriers and so this is just
An attempt to try some way.
To revitalize our rural
communities.
Representative Madam Chair, and
just to like, you know, I, I
entirely agree with the concept.
I just.
As you've stated,
I don't know what the solution
will be, and I don't.
No, see where this will actually
change.
CID or any of them.
Their, their functionality, so I
agree we need some legislation.
And we may need some grant money
or we may need something.
But uh
It's, we would love to see those
old buildings back in use.
Thank you Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. Thank you,
Representative Representative
McCullen.
Representative ranking member
Lord.
Thank you. Close enough. Thank
you
so much I know look like twins.
It's very confusing. I know I
look like so many people here at
the roundhouse. Thank you
Manchurbs and apologize. I, I
went to a committee to discuss
my bills, and it's not wasn't
there, so here I am and that's
gonna happen from now until
we're done hearing all the bills
through committees. So, uh,
Madam Chair and representative.
So when I'm on page 2.
Uh, line 18.
So we want to provide a
procedure to grant a variance
from strict compliance with
building code requirements for
vacant commercial buildings,
which uh I have a lot of in
Torrance County.
As issued by the division that
have no impact on the safe and
the safe use and occupancy of a
vacant commercial building by a
small business of circumstance
occupy strict blah blah blah,
blah, blah, impossible and
practical and
Or not feasible.
So I understand what you're
saying because we have a lot of
historic buildings.
Well, school driver, I'm, I, I'm
in the Agua Fria district. I
mean, it's beautiful. I love it
there. I don't want anything to
change and I keep saying
somebody built a giant 4-story
house right next to the little
casin I'm in it's horrible. It
looks very modern and it doesn't
fit and I don't know how that
got in there.
But in Santa Fe, I think my
understanding is that we have
Some leniency because the house
I'm in would never pass code.
The houses in that district
would never pass code, not in a
million. I'm walking around
looking, this is not, no, this
is right. This is not the right
breakers. This doesn't have
anything, but, um, and you may
not be an expert on that, and
maybe I'm asking a rhetorical
question, manager representative
doesn't in New Mexico,
especially like in Santa Fe,
don't they already have
leniencies for our historic home
residency.
Madam Chair and Representative,
yes, it falls under the existing
Building Act.
OK.
Or his or historic building Act.
OK. So, Madam Chair and
Representative, so what if I'm
understanding what you're
asking, you're saying, OK, this
is completely ridiculous, this,
this business wants to open up
in this building. It's done to
measures that are still safe.
But for them to put in something
so extreme like putting an
elevator in, that would cost,
how much does it cost for an
elevator, Madam Chair, a a lot
of money, I would imagine that
you're just saying that's kind
of ridiculous, so we should not
force them to have to put in the
elevator, we should let that
slide and let them go and have
the businesses that time my
summer is that correctly, Madam
Chair and Representative, I
don't know what the individual
instance will be for each
building, but I mean if you are
a CPA with one bookkeeper, and
you're trying to revitalize the
downtown business.
And this is, this is in a
community of less than 50,000
people. This is a, it has to be
an underserved area. I mean,
it's just the barriers are so
great to bring them up to the
current um international
building code. And so I'm saying
look to existing waivers. I'm
not going to determine what is
health and safety.
But I, I would say that they
have put a lot of thought into
it because we do have an
existing building code and we
have a historical building code
and waivers are granted based on
that. And so they wouldn't do
that. Grant those waivers or
have those variances or have
those differences in code, if
they hadn't determined that
there was other ways to occupy
buildings.
That were safe and healthy for
communities. And, and in the
same absurdity exists when
someone's occupied that building
for generations and decades,
someone bought it from them, but
the utilities weren't
transitions from owner to owner
without utilities turning off,
they can be much, much, much
more dangerous than any of these
buildings that, that we could
bring up to partial code or
almost everything, almost all
compliance.
Thank you Manarian
representative, that was the
point I'm trying to get to.
Sometimes we lack common sense
and governance and the way we
govern things, and this is one
of those things. On a side note,
I mean to represent I'm also mad
that I have to pay somebody to
come in and put in my water
heater when I remodeled the
house from top to bottom, and I
don't want to do it. It's making
me very angry, so I'm trying to
find the cheapest person I could
find to come in and do that,
which I'm gonna do everything
all the way up to it, but we
passed this thing where I have
to have somebody come in when I
know how to do it just fine to
come in and replace my water
heater. So sometimes.
I get it. We want to be safe,
right? Like going back to
elevators, uh, mentor
represented by co-signed onto a
bill that we did not have
anybody regulating our
elevators.
up until just recently. It's
just seriously, I'm like, how
are we the state that doesn't
regulate elevators. So that's
really important. If you said
that, I'd be like, no, we're not
doing that. I'd say no elevator,
period, but I can't understand
we do need some common sense
approach when it comes to
historic buildings because you
could drive around some of the
districts and you see buildings
falling down and collapsing
because they can't get them sold
and they and no and no one's
gonna go into them because it's
gonna cost too much money, so I,
I, I, I support your bill. I'm
sure. Is there something else
you want to say on that?
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you Representative. And if you
look at the scale of operation
in Santa Fe, we have historic
hotels that have been completely
remodeled in the scale of scale
of operation is there.
And you know, I mean, market
steer's new restaurant location
is absolutely phenomenal. There
is nothing wrong with the
building before. It was just as
beautiful, the building, the
restaurant that was there before
was beautiful too, but the scale
of operation was there, or, you
know, you can tear down a
building and replace it when
you're in a metropolitan area
because, you know, I mean, even
trying to get a fast food
restaurant, a new build in rural
New Mexico is hard because you
have to have a certain level of
traffic to attract those
businesses. So these are going
to be our small local, local
owned local operated businesses
that even give it a shot.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, ma'am is all the questions
I have.
Um, thank you, Representative
for the bill. I, I really
appreciate this, as you know
that I'm the new chair for this
committee. And one of the things
that we all have been discussing
here is that we want to talk
about this as rural economic
development in a lot of ways. We
want to talk about, I think, uh,
was it?
Was it Otero's day, one of the
days they were talking about
rural investments, like how are
we doing these world investments
and it is and just looking at
some of the materials that came
forward, you know, there's a
vacant building ordinance white
paper in 2019 on this. I really
do. And and what I what I
appreciate and what you talked
about already was, you know, are
there A, B, and C other ways of
like, we should we have a fund
for this? You know, why aren't
we investing in these, giving
these opportunities. Um, it's,
it's funny because when you
clean the bill, I get a little
confused. Uh the why not. And so
I have a couple of questions
later that.
So
For a lot of these downtowns in
our rural communities, they
don't, they are not subject to
the historic building, uh,
ordinance or uh Madam Chair,
applying for a historical
designation, uh, comes with an
even higher price of remodeling.
And so it, it's very, very
difficult to um get that
historical designation is not
easy, and then there's some
preservation requirements. It's
not a speedy process and it
isn't quite the expensive
endeavor.
But they're still buildings that
are historically significant and
by definition, that's over 50
years old.
Thank you. That was gonna be my
next question is that a lot of
these buildings are in that same
realm. And so with your bill
would ask is that the CIC
would look at uh those other,
uh, those other, um, uh,
ordinances in order to look at
this. I'm sorry, I'm just kind
of working this through as well.
Um.
OK, I.
I think that's all my questions,
but I will say that whatever
happens to this bill today, I
really do want to continue to
work with you on this in the
interim, because this is
fundamental to what we see as
important in this committee. Uh,
every single analysis says that,
um, uh, a lackluster Main Street
is destroying our, our, you
know, our state. So I appreciate
that and I'm gonna leave it to
the committee. What is the will
of the committee?
I move a do not pass.
presented to pass.
I'll do that.
Is there a second on the do not
pass motion that's on the table.
Second,
We would do not pass on House
Bill 210, seconded by Vice Chair
Sanchez and a second by um
representative uh Gonzalez. Uh,
let's go ahead and take a roll
count, roll call count roll call
vote on this, my goodness, I'm
sorry, it is.
Can we do it? I'd like to call a
table for the tabling motion
that was a fun activity guys
college kid in me is gonna say
now with table motion supersedes
any other motion, um, I believe.
I believe that's correct. So now
we're on a tabling motion by
representative Mason. Is there a
second?
Seconded by Representative
Sanchez. OK, so now we, this is
fun, guys. Now we sorry, so
we're having fun at your expense
there is a, there is a tabling
motion on House Bill 210 by
Representative Mason seconded by
Vice Chair Sanchez. Uh, let's
get a rule called uh vote on
this.
Representative Cullen.
No.
Representative Gonzalez.
On the table. Yes.
Rips uh ranking member Lord, not
the table.
Representative Mason.
Yes, the table.
Vice Chair Sanchez.
Cerrado.
Yes, the table.
That is 4 to 2.
Uh, thank you so much for
bringing this. You have a, so
we've tabled this this bill
again, it is my hope that we
will continue to work on this. I
really appreciate you bringing
it. Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, members of the
committee. I know every one of
you are just as concerned about
this issue as I am, and I've
learned, especially being in a
minority, but it's OK if a bill
dies, it doesn't have to pass to
get stuff done, so I'll take you
up on that to work on in the
interim. Thank you so much.
Thank you.
With the bill that we will get
through this committee, that's
what's gonna happen. Uh sorry.
So with that being said,
everyone, all right, we have, I
believe
I love it. Oh, so we, so right
now we're gonna go ahead and uh
and committees for today. I
believe we have 4 bills on
Thursday, um, so let's make that
happen. 5 bills on Thursday
since we have so many, I'll work
on getting some burritos. So
thank you everyone for a good
and productive day.
