Cheto here.
The.
Thank you. Uh, so it looks like
we have for our first bill up
today is House Bill 135 housing
study requirement for the funds,
not Ortez representative will
hand it over to you.
you might have to members of the
committee. I'm here to present a
um HP 135, uh, which amends lead
to require entities that are
receiving data of funds to do a
housing study, um, before they
get those funds. The the reason
for this is that
You know, leaders used for
expanding business, creating a
business, bringing in lots of
jobs, we absolutely need that.
Most of our communities, I would
say all of our communities
across the state have
experienced a terrible housing
shortages, so awful. I, I, I can
imagine each of your districts,
um, we're experiencing this. So,
The fear is that if we're
bringing people into our
communities and into the state
with, with state funds, we
should be ensuring that there is
housing for them, um, and that's
really what this bill is about.
Um, I have an expert with me. I
think you should probably sit
here, Roger, uh, Roger Valdez.
Um
And there is an amendment.
here.
And you confirmed the 202
number?
Yes, it is 230463.1.
Everyone, you should have that
in your finders right now. Um,
can we have a motion to discuss
the.
Fister
uh go ahead and.
So, um, after some consultation
with members and advocates, we,
we realized that um it was
important to cap the the cost of
that housing study, um, and if
you, um,
If you receive LIDA funds, we're
capping the study at 2.5% of the
Total project cost.
There, uh, the discussion or
debate on the amendment
Uh, can we give a motion to
adopt the amendment to HB 135.
by uh vice chair Sanchez is
seconded by Representative
Gonzalez.
Uh, so you're um you're
bill HP3 guys in it.
Uh, so we can go ahead and
discuss, or would you like on
your bill? Thank you, Madam
Chair, uh I stand for questions.
Uh we have folks online who are
in favor of this bill, please
raise your hand. It both folks
are raising their hand online.
Uh, are there folks in the room
who are in favor of this film?
You hold the microphone
attendant and then um you can go
ahead and.
for about a minute.
Morning, Madam Chair. I'm a
member of the committee. My name
is Monet and I'm the executive
director of the New Mexico
Coalition on Homelessness, and
we stand in support of HB 135.
Over the last 5 years, we have
seen a steady rise in
individuals experiencing
homelessness and the threat of
homelessness looming at the
doors of many New Mexicans.
We know that affordable and
deeply affordable housing is
needed in our state to help
address this issue.
We also know that jobs are
needed, but more importantly,
secure jobs are needed.
So New Mexicans don't end up on
house.
We need to make sure that as we
build these homes and create
jobs, and we're also making sure
that these projects and work is
viable and helping to solve the
issue.
We are, and that we are not
inadvertently creating the
problems as well. Thank you.
Is there anyone else there that
would like to speak on hospital
135 and support.
Online, do we have any folks
that want to speak in support.
Uh, we fell off like. Let's give
it a one minute, uh, just give
me a second.
I know.
my
Cause you're
We'll give it a minute to see if
we can get back online for a
second.
I was just speaking with uh the
vice chair and we think if
there's folks in the room that
are opposed to this bill, we can
go to your comments in the room
and see if in the meantime the
you know I can get back up. So,
uh, folks that opposed to 135
attended to bringing the
microphone over and just try to
keep it to about a minute.
I'm sorry.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Jason Espinoza a
registered lobbyist for New
Mexico idea, which is the
statewide economic development
professional association.
be completely understand housing
is an issue in New Mexico. We've
supported in the past housing uh
for affordable housing and
workforce housing bills and
we're gonna stand in support of
those bills, uh, this session as
well, but we do have concerns
about this bill on the impact of
our ability to effectively use
LEDA.EA is used to reduce the
cost. It's also to reimbursement
program, so this does present an
upfront cost for these companies
that we're looking to expand,
relocate, um, or retain the jobs
here too. Additionally, I think.
There's a perception that Lita
is only used for big companies.
Lita is also used for small
companies in rural communities.
Uh, it was used recently in two
carry to do expansion of a
retail, I think they received
$150,000 in LIDA, uh, my
understanding and hearing the
amendment this morning that
would cap the cost of the
housing study of 3000. I, I
don't know how effective a $3000
housing study would be an
additionally a lot of these jobs
are pulling from our low labor
force participation rates, so
they're not necessarily.
The community, but pulling
people in the community in the
workforce. Uh, so we do think it
does present challenges and, and
this is not the appropriate
place to put the housing, uh,
study, uh, it'll create
barriers. We know there's an
issue, um, and we look forward
to working with others to
actually fix the issues, but we
think this is inappropriate in
terms of the leading mechanism.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Kent Craven's
registered lobbyists with the um
New Mexico Realtors Association.
And uh we too uh regretfully
stand in opposition to the bill
for many of the reasons Jason
mentioned. I won't, um, repeat
that. Uh, but one of the, one of
the issues is, um, you know, if
you can, if you can envision
trying to fill up an industrial
park, and you have a tenant that
comes in just because he's the
first on the block, he's gonna
take the hit on the leader. The
other issue is it just seems to
be changing from one pocket to
the other. You give them the
lead of money and they spend it
on a housing study instead of
developing their
project. So, um, Madam Chair and
sponsor, um, with all due
respect, uh, we, we do stand in
opposition.
That's it from the inside of the
room, uh, does not look like we
have anyone online on this bill.
Um, we are back online, by the
way, uh, so we'll go and bring
it over to the committee for
discussion.
Uh, are there any questions?
Sure.
Representative Gonzalez.
Madam
Madam Chair, um, I do have, um,
a couple of questions. Um, one
is, um, well, first comment, um,
I do thank you for the amendment
because that was actually one of
my questions is to see the right
range of, of cost that these
studies would take, um, secondly
is um once the housing study is
done and you've given the
results of whatever that may be
positive or negative for a
community. What then is the
Accountable action after that.
So if it comes to find out that
there is not adequate housing in
a community, um,
Does that have any impact on
business going forward, or, or
is it just there for
informational purposes to make
an informed decision.
Uh, I know that, um, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
I know that uh
That data seems like it's sort
of OK now what do we do with
this? But uh I think what this
allows local jurisdictions to do
and businesses and communities
is to have an understanding of.
Where the potential housing
demand would be and to be able
to advocate for that and plan
for it, you know, in the Netflix
deal, it took from about 2018 to
2021 to come together, had there
been a study in Albuquerque,
there could have been some
planning ahead to determine, OK,
where should we be planning to
grow our housing supply to
respond to the potential demand
for the jobs.
Um, thank you for that, Madam
Chair. Um, now I have a, a
secondary question with that,
um.
With, you know, the intention of
these funds is obviously to
stimulate economic development
in our rural areas and coming
from an area myself, I think
that is very much needed, um, as
well as the housing.
Crisis. I know there is
definitely a balance between
bringing in business and also
the fear of, you know,
outpricing locals to be able to
support the housing needs there,
but with that being said, um, is
there funding elsewhere that you
are aware of, or is there, um,
in the process, besides using
the specified LIDA funds to
conduct a housing study. So is
that already the responsibility
of a community government? Is
that already the responsibility
of economic development is that
already in place to
Conduct a housing and, uh, a
study, not necessarily using
these funds, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, there
is, there isn't any requirement
anywhere that I know of and
especially not within the local
Economic Development Act to
require that there be that kind
of analysis, nor is there any uh
funding out there that I know of
to conduct these kinds of
studies. I think it's a good
idea to have that available, but
there are other places that
communities could go to get
grants or that kind of funding,
but um
this is, I think, from the
proponent and the company's a
small price to pay to get that
information out.
Thank you so much for your
comments. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Representative Cullen.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So I had
a, um, a couple of questions and
maybe a couple of comments here.
My understanding is when I'm
reading over this is that um
you're asking the private.
Prior to them getting approved
for funds, is that correct?
Um, Madam Chair, Representative
Cullen, yes, part of their
application to lead and make
sure that they have that study
done. OK, and
Um, that's
Uh, Madam chair, that's pretty
unusual, um, to ask a private
business to do a housing study,
um, prior to asking for funds uh
for the business to help them
grow. Um, I've been in real
estate for 30 years and so I
understand the, the issues with
the demand right now. However,
um, typically the economic
development will be doing uh
studies, um, my concern is that
you're asking a private entity
to
perform something that in
economic development should be
doing, and it's another barrier,
um, it's very important for us
to be businesses in New Mexico,
and this is another added
barrier for them to come out
here and say, OK, you have to do
this study prior to being able
to move is my concern. Thank
you, Man. He represented Lord.
Thank you, Madam Chair. um,
thank you, Representative. Thank
you to our expert.
OK, so
Thank you, uh, Representative
Collin for also asking some of
the questions I was about to
ask. So explain to me how this
works. Walk me through the whole
process. So,
There's a study and who, where's
the funding coming from and
who's doing the study? Madam
Chair Representative Lord, the
To respond a bit to, to
Representative Cullen's comments
and to your question, the there
this is an incentive program,
which means that for example in
some of the larger ones,
companies are getting up to in
the case of Netflix, $400
million over 10 years in tax
credits and then $23 million in
state and local money. So this,
um, these studies range from 10
to $40,000 and so this would be
part of the requirement for the
company and the local
jurisdiction.
To
Conduct that study and to make
it part of the process for
applying and getting those uh
incentives.
Um, so that would be concomitant
to the rest of the process that
goes on into, you know,
Identifying the job numbers and
what kinds of jobs and all those
other things. So these kinds of
analysis are going to be going
on anyway during that process,
and the companies and local
jurisdictions typically are
responsible for putting those
applications together.
OK, so Madam Chair represent
experts. So what you're saying
is it's $1000 to $40,000 and
it's the business's
responsibility.
To pay for this study.
To find out about how their
business will influence that
area.
So then there's a study.
Then what happens, Madam Chair,
Representative.
Madam Chair, Representative
Lord, then they apply for LIDA
funds, which are public dollars.
If that's, that's the whole
point of this, right? that they
conduct a study before, um, to
ensure that there's not going to
have, there won't be a negative
impact.
To show, you know, the
department, the economic
development department that
They understand what impacts
could happen from expanding
their business on, on the
housing shortage that their
community may be experiencing.
And then they apply for those
funds. OK, Madam Chair, so now I
understand. So, so they pay for
that. That is not something that
they currently do, correct? This
is something we're asking to do
now, and are there other states
that do this?
Um, Madam Chair Representative
Lord, uh, I'm not familiar with
any economic incentive uh
packages in other states or
locally in New Mexico that
require an analysis. This has
been actually a nettlesome
problem everywhere, which is we
do a really good thing, we
create a bunch of jobs and then
there's not an adequate
understanding of what impact
that's going to have on the
housing market and um and I
think to speak to representative
Collins's experience is a real
estate agent, you know, we
could, you could find.
one community that the nature of
the jobs that are being created.
Actually filters pretty well
into existing inventory, so that
creates an opportunity for real
estate folks and developers to
say, hey, we're handling most of
these jobs effectively because
we have the inventory in our
market, or if the housing isn't
available, it would allow uh
folks from the development real
estate financing community.
To make the best investments
that they can make to build
housing where that demand's
gonna go. So we see this as good
for business because it actually
prepares local communities not
only to um
You know, avoid a housing crisis
down the road, but it allows
local businesses, real estate
agents, developers, lenders to
say, hey, we're gonna have a hit
to our single family inventory
we can focus our our permitting
and our building.
To increase that supply in that
particular uh
Typology.
OK, Madam Chair, representative
expert. So what happens if they
build somewhere and there's
nowhere to put the housing.
Then what happens? Cause
usually, cause I've lived all
over in multiple states. Usually
it happens a lot of
gentrification. People come into
older neighborhoods, uh, fix
them up, and then the people
who've lived there the whole
life can't afford to live there
anymore. So what exactly happens
if
Is there any penalization to
that business who wants to set
up in a certain area, so you're
saying no. OK, so then what is
the
If there's no penalization, they
can still get the LEDA fundings.
What is your ultimate goal, that
it goes to somebody and says,
OK, we need housing, but what if
the housing is still 10 miles
away.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative
Laura, let me give you a little
slice of my life as an advocate
for housing when something like
this happens and you're
describing exactly the problem,
uh, a good thing, new jobs, new
people come in, and we don't
have adequate data to advocate
with the local government to
say, hey, you're zoning and and
building codes and land use
codes are restricting the
ability of local businesses and
developers to build the kind of
housing that's going to meet
that demand, permitting time.
you know, all sorts of uh
inspections and all sorts of
other things that weigh down
that development process to
produce the housing that real
estate agents or apartment
builders want to build is hung
up. If we have this kind of
data, we could work hand in hand
with the business, with local
government to say, all right, we
know what we need to plan for.
We know where that inventory
needs to be. Currently we don't,
when these things happen, they
usually go on and without that
kind of planning, we can't
advocate.
For better permitting and
easier, uh, an easier process
for businesses to build housing.
Madam Chair Representative, what
happens in places like Santa Fe
where houses prices are through
the roof.
And there's zoning regulations
and everything has to look a
certain way with those zoning
regulations and be bent or
changed or who would that be up
to and how would you even make
Any type of housing in Santa Fe,
because I see a lot of
apartments going up and sorry if
anybody's working on those, but
they're not very attractive.
The, the apartments I've seen,
they're very gray and white and
don't fit into the scenario. So
how do, how would that end up
playing out if a business
decided they want to go to Santa
Fe and there really is no place
to put housing. There's very
strong regulations. How does
that, how, what happens with the
zoning? How, how do you
anticipate that being changed.
represented Lord that this bill
doesn't affect
Uh, city
For in municipalities process
for zoning or rezoning areas.
Uh, it's really a tool.
for the business to understand
where they're going to house
their people when they get state
funds to expand their business
or or build their business.
OK, Madam Chair and
representative, so a business
comes and they're like, OK,
we're in the film industry, we
really want to go to Santa Fe.
We found this great warehouse.
We're gonna, it's hire 1000
people.
We do the study.
How does that play out if
there's really no way to change
anything and there's nowhere to
build housing.
How, how does, how does, how
does that
Benefit anybody if there can't
be any changes or any end result
to actually add the housing
necessary for those people to be
put there.
Madam Chair, Representative
Lord, this does not mandate any
uh zoning changes or any changes
like that, but it certainly
gives someone like our like our
organization like uh uh Miss
Silva's organization. It gives
us the opportunity to go to
those local governments and say,
look, um as the Pew Charitable
Trust study about New Mexico's.
Housing inventory showed that
your regular regulations are
too, they're they're too, uh,
they, they create a barrier to
the market for new production.
So if we have that kind of data
as part of this kind of
relocation for the business
you're talking about. I can tell
you exactly what I would say to
the Santa Fe City Council. I'd
say we're creating 1000 new
jobs, that's fantastic. But your
regulations and your HOAs and
your design review process are
are preventing
Local developers and local
business people from meeting
that housing demand to avoid the
pressures that will create
problems for people already
living here as you, um, so
astutely described with
gentrification and displacement.
OK, Madam Cheruvston, I, I do
have a lot more questions.
Unfortunately, I thought I, I
had a better understanding of
this bill, so my, my vote's
gonna be no and that's mostly
when I, when I don't fully
understand something or I don't
see both sides, I always say no.
Sometimes it's a hard no, and
I'll just say no. And then
sometimes it's I got to do a lot
more research. So it's.
So the thought.
It's a soft note. Don't take it
personally. Your hair looks
great today, so.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, representative, I'm sorry,
Vice Chair Sanchez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, I
just learned some more about
this bill now. I guess I was
under the impression that the
money would come out of the
LEADER fund, not that it was
part of the application process,
uh.
So I guess the question is at
what point is the company big
enough to pay this and still
interested to apply.
Cause it comes down to uh.
I didn't say somebody put it in
for a $5 million thing like
that, that's, that doesn't mean
they're a billion dollar
company. It might be a, a small
business that's actually putting
in to expand and uh do they have
$75,000.
Uh, to risk not knowing they're
gonna get a grant.
Uh, I think I really like the
idea of this, uh, uh, I don't
know if we can look, maybe talk
about it more and put some
higher caps so we can figure out
where that medium is, where a
company might be willing to like
a Netflix, what did they get? Do
you know what they got, Madam
Chara.
When they got LED funds.
Um, Madam Chair representative
uh Sanchez, they received a $23
million from the state and the
city, and they also are, are the
estimate is $400 million in tax
credit over 10 years.
Madam Chair, maybe uh like a
Netflix, I'm sure would be
willing to pay 50, 75 million,
but that's uh knowing they're
putting in for over $20 million
dude, I mean, so.
Uh, maybe we can look at putting
some kind of cap where
We know the companies.
Wealthy enough to front this
cause like I said, even that 5
million you have small
businesses that are probably
trying to expand and putting for
that and they probably can't
afford 50 or $75,000 to risk not
knowing, uh, that they're gonna
get something. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Ma'am she may respond.
Actually, I'll go to ask some
questions, add your questions
there makes sense, um.
Oh, sorry, apologize,
Representative Mason, I didn't
miss you. I was maybe greedy.
Representative Mason.
Thank you Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representatives for
bringing this.
I too have some questions or
concerns.
You know, to me it's kind of
like we're mandating a private
industry to spend money with no
guarantee of reimbursement.
You know, that to me is a
problem with just like, uh,
Representative Sanchez.
It, you know, the, the bigger
companies.
I'm sure have no problem.
That uh
But uh
I just
question.
Why do we shift the
cost of this
Entirely on the private industry
when they Santa Fe has been
brought up so why shouldn't
Santa Fe?
Participate in
At least participate in the.
In the study, or at least be on.
For reimbursement.
Or partial reimbursement if if
they get denied.
Madam Chair Representative
Mason, um, businesses spend
their their own money all the
time to expand, you know, that
is, that's just what they do.
Um, not all businesses rely on
government support to grow or
expand or even build their
businesses. So the purpose of
this is really to say if you're
going to get
A certain amount of money from
state government to grow your
business, and we support that. I
certainly support that. I think
everything on this committee
supports it, but I don't want to
speak for you. Um.
You know, that's, you need to be
thoughtful about where you're
going to house those people. I
want to give you an example, not
related to business, but in my
district, uh, we saw, well, a
couple of years ago, we got an
increase for teachers' salaries,
right? The local high school,
the closest high school, that's
nearest to my house. I work
with, I used to work with them a
lot. They hired 8 teachers.
At the beginning of the school
year, those teachers came to
Taos from other places they did
not have a place to live. They
lived in a hotel for 2 weeks
thinking that something was
going to come up. It never did.
And they left, right? This
bill's not about education. I
want to be very clear, but
that's, that's what we're seeing
with all kinds of things. And if
we're using state money to, uh,
for a private entity to build
their business, expand their
business. We think that they
should let us know what it looks
like, what the landscape looks
like to make sure that those,
those folks that they're hiring
have a place to live that, you
know, that's it, really. Um, so
that's really the purpose of
this.
We're going to be expending hard
earned taxpayer dollars to help
a business grow. We want to make
sure that they're also taking
care of their people, making
sure that the people that
they're bringing to their
business.
Are adequately housed.
Madam Chair
Uh, thank you, Representative,
and I understand that and I
agree, you know, housing
shortages is a big problem and.
No,
but like I said, I just don't.
Lactose said, you know, the
bigger entities want to build
projects have no problem
fronting.
The money for studies.
But in smaller towns like
Artesia you mentioned the school
years ago that my
daughter-in-law actually.
boot.
Is a school teacher moved there,
but uh.
Artesia had that problem that
they couldn't.
Didn't have any place to put
teachers.
The Schools district actually in
Artesia.
But patriots.
At a
At a low they rented at a lower
rate for 3 years to a teacher.
wild she or she or he.
Had a chance to
Work a while and and get into it
wasn't a it wasn't a long term
rental.
Believe it was 3. It was either
3 or 5 years was the limit that
the teacher could take advantage
of this and it wasn't rent free.
But it was at the lower end. So
there's lots of ways on the
small scale.
Without asking private industry.
Fork out, like you said, $50,000
with.
And maybe no chance of.
Of reimbursement
But uh thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative Mason.
Um, I really appreciate this
bill for a lot of different
reasons. I think, you know,
housing is on a lot of our minds
and it's, it's a big concern as
a representative in Santa Fe,
we, uh, the very narrow the very
narrow margins of available
housing really impacted our
communities. Um, my, my concern
and I and all of my colleagues
have kind of hinted at this, but
it, my concern is that it almost
feels like an application fee to
apply for LIDA funds and in and
of itself, um, and I'm kind of,
and, and I'm just looking at it
from a business.
perspective that you may get
these funds, but you have to
provide a study that is uh
estimated between 10,000 and
$75,000. I saw another one
that's, I think on average about
45,000. Um, that's, that's a
steep hill to overcome, uh, for
New Mexico, it, it, you know,
uh, entrepreneurs. So I say
that, and I'll I'll ask a
question. So there's a concern,
you want to kind of get to that
that makes sense. I am curious
in the FIR they pointed out that
EDD does um already collect the
data on the number of workers
expected to move to the state
for the jobs. Um, how
you feel this accomplishes
something different than that.
Um, Madam Chair, I, I liken it
to sort of planning for a
graduation party for your kid or
for your relative and you say,
well, I'm gonna have 100 people
coming, and you know the number
of people coming, but you don't
know where the venue is or how
much food to order or how much
that food's going to cost. So
it's wholly inadequate for this
question to know just the number
of employees, because if we know
the number of employees, that's
great, but if we don't know what
the inventory is and we don't
know.
Sort of where those people can
go and where the gaps are in the
system, and again, we might find
that the, the inventory is
adequate for the nature of the
jobs that are coming, but
If we don't ask the question
about the other side of that,
the venue for the folks coming
to the party, the day of the
party, it's going to be a
crisis, right, when they show up
and the room is too small or the
room's too big, you order too
much food or not enough food, so
I don't see that. I, I don't see
this is a high barrier to entry
for most of the Lido deals which
average between um like half a
million dollars and up to, you
know, 3 or 4 million. And so
it's a relatively small and high
yield investment to do this kind
of work so that local
jurisdictions can plan.
For the knock-on effects of this
kind of thing. So if we don't do
this, you're looking at having
to subsidize housing, they're
gonna come to Santa Fe saying,
we have a housing crisis in
Artesia or Roswell or or Santa
Fe, we need you to back up that
up because we have all these new
jobs and we didn't properly
prepare for the housing. So
that's where we kind of come out
on that.
Me chair. I, I completely
understand your concern. I'm
thinking about the people who
the businesses that apply and
get $25,000. Are we going to ask
them to spend
You know, there might be
challenged to find a housing
study for at 2.5% of that. Um,
that, that doesn't make sense to
me either. So I, I certainly am
open to looking at some
constraints for, you know, the
amount of award if you're
applying for a certain amount
that where it makes them, if
you're applying for $500,000
you're looking at expanding your
business considerably a number
of staff members.
Possibly, you know, some of
those awards go to big
equipment. Um, but that's
something that, that I'm
certainly interested in looking
at, and I recognize that we
probably can't do that.
At this moment,
I, I, what I would point out is
that my favorite committee is
what we often do is we'll roll a
bill so that, you know, the
discussions can kind of keep
going. And I, I do think that
might be a, a good solution in
this case, um, especially
because again some of the things
we discussed. One other piece I
did want to mention, I, I didn't
hear mention already. It, it
seems like the language of
precludes or prevents, I don't
know either, but, but it, it
doesn't allow EDD to run this
study as part of their process
in LIDA, um, would that be
something you're open to? Do you
feel like the bill allows you to
do that?
Madam Chair, members of the
committee,
yes, I mean, I think that we, we
had, I had had discussions with
county commissioners about this
who pushed back on saying, wait
a minute, we don't want to pay
for it and we're hearing
business, we don't want to pay
for it. Nobody wants to pay for
it.
That's frustrating to me, but if
we require it that EDD do it,
um, I'm happy to have EDD pay
for it. I mean, and to and to
conduct it and I think that's
actually logical and if it's
centralized and there's sort of
a function there to perform
these studies as part of this.
That, that is entirely rational
response to the need and it and
it might make those studies more
uniform and coherent um as these
things go forward.
I wonder, and I, uh, just cause
of casual conversation I was
having last night, um, you know,
I think that might be something
that we can look into and see if
that's a possibility. But then
the last thing question I'll
bring up on this is that, you
know, as the rural development
committee, I am curious from
that perspective. We know that a
lot of r, you might work in one
county but live in another one.
And the drive times for a lot of
our rural communities are not,
my job is time is 15 minutes for
my job, but, you know, I live in
Santa Fe and I work in Santa Fe.
um, you know, not everybody has
that luxury when you're in a
rural area. So I'm just kind of
curious how you and um foresee
this housing study to kind of
count in that drive time aspect,
especially for rural development
that we want to see these
dollars go to.
Madam Chair, Robert, um, Madam
Chair, uh, I, I think that that
would be part of the housing
study traffic studies, what you
know what that looks like, um, I
think that's a really important
factor. Um, I'm really excited
about, I know we're not supposed
to talk about other bills, but I
am excited about a movement uh
in on the Senate side for uh for
sight readiness. That's really,
really exciting. And, and I've
had conversations um with those
folks about how to make sure
that housing is part of that,
um, cause it's not specified
right now, um, in that
Bill, but as as far um for that
site character characterization,
important to be thinking about
housing as well and certainly
open to economic development,
you know, putting some money
aside for these kinds of
studies, absolutely. But I do
think we need to be thinking
about how
Investment in local in
businesses, private businesses,
you know, they're that they're
thoughtful and they're really
thinking about this.
That's why I think I appreciate
the bill and I think this has
been a really healthy discussion
towards getting it towards, I
think what would work for folks.
We're gonna go to enroll it for
now, um, and then just let us
know if we should bring it back.
And again, we hope we can all be
part of this conversations as
well. Thank you so much, Madam
Chair. Appreciate it.
All right. Next up, we have, I
actually, give me one second
because I was
someone was passing me notes.
We're on here.
Um, great. So I believe that we
might have Senator Steinborn
here on the Slot Canyon
Riverlands State Park.
Um, were you, uh,
uh-huh.
So we'll hold on for one second
and see. We have 2 more bills
coming. We, we check on the
sponsors. Thank you.
All right, folks, it looks like
we have uh a representative
chair uh small. Uh, we're gonna
go into House Bill 191, uh, the
wildfire suppression repaired
misfire.
Uh, excellent. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you committee. It's
really a pleasure to be here
today. Uh, I, uh, Austin is
here.
From the legislative Finance
Committee, this House Bill 191
is uh endorsed legislation.
Madam Chair, committee, this
bill deals with the catastrophic
wildfires that we have had and
will continue to face as a
state, Mr. Chair, or excuse me,
I apologize, Madam Chair and
committee, um, the legislation.
Creates two funds, a
preparedness fund, and a fund to
actually um
Suppression fund to go after the
fires. Currently, Madam Chair
and committee members, the only
tool the state of New Mexico has
to fight these fires is
emergency orders issued by the
executive that is challenging um
for many different reasons,
Madam Chair, that's why we
brought this legislation, this
legislation, uh, takes into
account a great deal of work and
learn.
um
about how to uh fight fires, how
to in uh help our uh forester
and others do the sorts of
things following fires that are
gonna be critical to helping
those committees, uh,
communities, excuse me, and um
and then again, it creates the
preparedness fund so that we
start positioning resources in
order to uh respond more quickly
to fires, um.
All across the state and we've
included $12 million Madam
Chair, in the uh legislative
budget for that preparedness
fund, which will help us this
summer beginning be ready for to
fight fires. So summarizing
Madam Chair committee.
This takes a process that now
relies entirely on the governor
and the executive through
emergency order, it creates an
orderly process supported by two
funds of preparedness and a
suppression fund. It puts money
into that preparedness fund. It
adds new tools that we know are
going to help communities
recover, uh, suppress fires and
be more prepared. With that, I
would stand for questions.
Great, thank you. Uh, do we have
anyone in the audience that
supports uh House Bill 1981.
Uh, is there anyone online that,
uh, supports House 181, 191.
I think there is. Is there
anyone opposed to House Bill
191?
All right. Uh, we'll go ahead
and bring it over to the
committee. Representative
Gonzalez.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
thank you, Representative. Um,
first, I just want to start by
saying is someone deeply
impacted by
Wildfires, forest fires, all of
the above forementioned. Um, I
think this is uh uh an important
step. Um, I think there's a lot
of legislation on the rolls that
are addressing this and so that
is a very positive thing. Um, I
do have some questions,
particularly about some of the
funds, um, administered and
maybe the administration of them
and why, why the way the bill
was set up that it was, um, this
bill calls for two funds, um,
specifically preparation and
suppression, which
My experience being actually in
that area and just what I've
seen a lot of time those two go
hand in hand. Um, so why was the
intention to make two funds when
a lot of that goes hand in hand
with each other, and would it be
more efficient to combine into
one specific fund, not arguing
the dollars and not arguing the
support, but, um, you know, why,
why the differentiation between
the two, the two needs. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you, uh,
Representative Gonzalez. Uh, the
reason is so that we can help
communities.
24/7 around the clock. Prepare
for fires and so that we're
working uh aggressively
throughout the entirety of the
year to reduce fire risk to have
a clear fund for that with
transparency about what's going
in and what's going out. And
Madam Chair Rese Gonzalez, than
to have a separate fund to
actually fight the fires, Madam
Chair Representative, up until
now, it's sort of all been
lumped together again with a
something.
relies entirely on the governor
at a lower rate at the $375,000
per executive order. Um, this
will, in our opinion, Madam
Chair, and Representative
Gonzalez.
Uh, allow us to better prepare
communities to support them year
round and separately to have the
funding and the expertise, uh,
and the people power needed to
fight fires when they occur. So
we think this will expand our
ability, expand the funding, uh,
and give us all, Madam Chair and
committee members, uh, the
ability to see very clearly
where the money is going. Um,
thank you for that and maybe
it's just maybe a further
investigation into that. And so,
um, again, I do appreciate the
year-round efforts, um.
I think that is entirely needed.
Um, I think this dollar amount
versus an executive order is
entirely critical for a lot of
our areas that will see
continued fire threat in the
upcoming.
Years, upcoming future, um, but
with that, if there is an
instance where something relies
on both suppression and
preparedness, um, just
administratively, are they able
to draw from both funds, and I
guess maybe that's just where my
hangup is, is that, um,
In the heat of the fire, you
know, there are some things like
how if one fund dries up, are
you able to pull from the other
fun of it relies, you know, kind
of on both, and maybe that's
more the administrative, uh,
working out. I just want to make
sure that funds are accessible
when needed for the reason that
they're needed. And it sometimes
overlaps. Madam Chezalez, thank
you for explaining further. I
see no reason why uh they're the
The this the creation of the two
funds would stop any dollars
from flowing in times of
emergency and need are um our
focus is on flowing more money,
more effectively with more
transparency and so your concern
is noted, and I think we've,
the, the, it was, it's totally
doable in our new approach to
have funding flow from both
funds at the same time, if
that's necessary.
And this allows us, Madam Chair,
in uh representative to position
more money and more people, uh,
with more resources to serve
that purpose.
Ma.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh,
representative.
Uh, there's no doubt in my mind
that this.
We we have to do something.
I do have a
The
More or less the same concern
that she had on the two funds.
According to my analysis, the
LFC did a
Report in 2024 and they.
Recommended one fund, is that
true?
Madam Chair representative,
there's a great deal of work
that's gone into this. Um, I,
Scott is here from LFC. I think
our conclusion is that the two
funds are give more transparency
to the legislature up until this
point. This is entirely been an
executive function that has
Just that relied entirely on the
executive. There's no
transparency for the
legislature. There's not really
the ability for the legislature
to invest either ahead of time
or for emergency response. So,
Madam Chair Mason, I think
that's why we ultimately went
with the two funds so that
there's more transparency, more
legislative, um,
frankly control but and Madam
Chair Representative Mason, the
ability for us to flow more
resources instead of just one
thing. Like represented uh Madam
Chair.
In my report anyway, it said
that there was a 2024 Pew
report.
Presentation from the LShetic
that.
Recommended one joint fund.
Uh, what
Question was the forestry
department, uh.
What do they
What do they want? They're gonna
be the lead in.
And in a lot of the
implementation of Madam Chair
Representative, we agree they've
been involved in these uh
conversations going back several
different years. Uh, we've
spoken with the Forester.
They're not here in support or
opposition, but Madam Chair
Representative, I have great
confidence in the Forester.
We've invested more money,
including in the emergency
session for the Forester. If
you'll turn to page 6 of the
bill, Madam Chair,
Representative, as you go
through.
Many of these um
The amendments to the forest
Conservation Act.
Have been driven in concert with
and at the working very closely
with our state forester and
forestry department.
And we've those are included in
the bill.
Like you representative, Madam
Chair, and I, I didn't, I guess.
Completely qualify my question.
Uh
Will this put by having two
funds, will that not increase.
The workload.
On the forestry department.
Is there
One person, if.
They'll have to have two people,
one for each fund.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative
Mason, I've seen that analysis
that suggests potential workload
increases, Madam Chair
Representative, I think our
conclusion is that this offers
more transparency. So we see
exactly it from a process now
that's controlled completely by
the executive, by the governor.
This offers more transparency,
Madam Chair, Representative, I'm
not convinced that this will uh
increase workload where you have
to have one person sort of
doubling
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
uh, that said, we can certainly
adjust budgets to support the
forester in these efforts. Oh
and uh representative Madam
Chair, no, I, I entirely agree
that this needs to not be a.
Of
Afterthought or knee jerk
response to the disastrous
situation which is what we've
had, you know, we can't even get
any money until it's already.
An ongoing
Fire or or disaster and uh.
Uh
Madam Chair Representative.
It, uh, and I haven't I have to
admit I haven't.
Didn't spend as much time as I
should.
What intrigues me is how much of
these funds will go into.
Mitigating the occurrence of
more.
For me is more important than
Are as important
As fighting
The fires.
You know, we've got a clean,
we've got the defendable space,
you know, is what we've always
kind of called it in our force,
right?
Madam Cherpson Mason, I entirely
agree, um, that prevention is
key, more forest management in a
robust manner is essential, and
the creation of a preparedness
fund is gonna allow us to focus
dollars exactly on that year
round to do that work with our
communities in our forests, um,
exactly like you say. So I, we
fully agree and this allows us
for the first time to put
money specifically towards that
purpose.
Thank you, Representative Madam
Chair.
Uh
Representative, one last comment
I guess, you know, we've we've
neglected these so long.
Is there
It's gonna take.
An enormous amount of money to
clean our forces.
And uh
As a state, I mean, we need to
do our part is there?
I guess there's no way that.
We, we have a lot of national
force.
In our state.
That greatly impacts our
preparedness for.
For wildfires in our locality.
Is there any
There's no way
That any of this will impact any
of that, I mean.
Uh, Madam Chair, Mason, it's a
very good and important
question, Madam Chair
Representative, I think the good
news is that there are strong
partnerships, uh, particularly
with our tribes, nations, and
pueblos and Madam Chair
Representative, um, working
closely with Representative uh
Vincent and the Mescalero and
other stakeholders, and I know
that there's similar work in
other parts of our state, uh,
sovereign tribal nations in
their control over.
Uh, their land actually gives us
a great opportunity to partner
and perhaps uh sort of
innovatively show how we can
better manage, protect
ecosystems, expand local
economies, including through uh
harvesting of timber and other
things. So in answer, this
doesn't compel or control the
federal government to do
anything, but this is gonna help
us work more closely with
partners, especially sovereign
tribal nations to show that our
forests can be managed.
better.
Thank you, Representative, Madam
Chair, one last comment I I've
told people for years.
Drive through the Mescalera
Indian reservation and look
thank you Representative Madam
Chair.
Representative ranking member,
Lord. Oh, thank you.
Um
Representative, uh, I support
the bill, but I do have some
questions and I just want to say
something, and if this goes a
form that say the same thing,
uh,
Representative uh Harlem Vinson
and I sent a letter to
Washington.
Cibola National Forest, a lot of
our forces need to be thinned
out, cleared out, taken care of.
I have Sebola National Forest,
and I'm gonna say it right now.
It is a disaster. It is so thick
with dead trees. We also have
moths that are killing our trees
up there.
Nothing's being done. And
especially if you ride the tram
on the other side, you can see
it is a literal tinder box that
if one spark in there, one
strike of lightning, which we
have a lot of lightning strikes
up there, is going to take that
out and devastate my district.
So I just want to say that right
off the bat, it's very
frustrating thing to see and
nothing being done about it,
which I've been saying that for
about 5 years. Um, we, we have a
tendency to.
not want to clean up our forests
for some reason to be prepared,
and I don't know why that is. I
don't know why we're not working
more on the thinning, why we're
not working more and bringing
sheep and goats and other things
and then they can eat the
wildlife, but we're not, um, but
the question I did have, uh, I,
I did see, I'm looking at the
energy, minerals and natural
resource department had their
analysis, um, Madam Chairs
representative, and they also
had some concerns about the two
funds, but you're, you've
already talked about that, but I
think it's on the.
3rd page, um, they talk about HB
191.
So what I'm concerned about, and
I agree with this, the rising
costs and it says first the
total cost of wildfire
suppression is not including the
anti-appropriations process.
Second, the current process is
not proactively planned for
wildlife suppression costs. So
how are we going to estimate
How much money we need in that
funding, Madam Chair
Representative.
Uh, Madam Chair, ranking member,
great question, uh, Madam Chair,
ranking member, I think we are
gonna start looking backwards at
what the costs of fighting fires
has been, and Madam Chair,
ranking member, we're gonna, um,
in this year-round process begin
to really see how much we need
to spend in order to really
support preparedness. So I think
we have a little bit of
knowledge looking backwards at
some of the costs for our um
The, the incredible damage and,
and sort of catastrophic nature
of recent fires, Calf Canyon,
Hermit's Peak, uh, and, uh, down
in Riidoso, obviously this year,
most recently, um, the
preparedness we're starting with
a strong amount of money and
we're gonna see how far that
goes and be ready. I think
hopefully to.
Um
Also bring more economic
activity, Madam Chair, ranking
member in the form of, um, you
know,
Loosening the ability for folks
to, whether it's harvesting
timber or other sorts of
activities.
That that's also gonna, we, we
don't have to pay.
Everything for that we're
working to create more markets
that support that in, in doing
so support rural communities.
Thank you, Madam Sharonson.
That's very important. I don't
know what influence that will
have on there, but I just like
to state that.
Before we used to do a better
job, we used to allow some
people to go on and and cut some
of the lumber out of there and
especially it was helpful in our
land grants, and they've
expressed to me numerous times
that they would like to have
that ability back to go into the
forest and be able to trim back
some of those trees, cause
there's, there's a way to do it
very thoughtfully and carefully
and not slash. I've seen slash
in Oregon where they slash the
whole area out. We definitely
don't want to do that, but we
want to go into areas of marked
trees, knock them down and let
them be processed as soon as
humanly possible because what
happened in um in the north.
This applies to you,
Representative Gonzalez. Um,
what I learned in the land
grants is they let the the feds
let the woods sit there so long
it was unusable, and had they
let them go in there sooner,
they could actually still use
the wood, and that was very
frustrating. It's all things to
consider, you know, we're
looking at the prevention,
right? And we're also looking at
the preparedness, having
everybody ready, and then the
aftermath, all the three things.
So I, I support your bill. I
just, I'll ask some more
questions about the funding to
uh the forestry department that
is here today and see what their
holdup is on that. Thank you,
madam.
Sure it's all the questions that
I had.
Thank you. Um, I just had a
brief comments, um, I really
appreciate this. One of the
things that we did as a
committee early on was had
presentations from various
groups and and departments and
things. And uh the Eseki
Association, um, you know, Paula
Garcia came forward and said
that to even get a plan going to
2.5 years. Um, so the delays we
see are not, you know, only at
the sal we see at the federal
level. This seems to at least,
you know, mitigate some of that
offer some immediate relief. Um,
it does look to me and correct
me if I'm wrong, it does look to
me that some of this also
addresses not just wildfire.
itself, but um what happens
afterwards, the watershed, etc.
Um, is that correct? Is there
anything else that I'm missing
in that, uh, Madam Chair, it's
an excellent point. That is
exactly right. So much of the
after effects of fire are
continuing huge challenges for
communities and we saw, we
continue and we'll see that with
the flooding. And so that is
very much a part of this
legislation to integrate what
we've learned to be able to add
more funding, uh, to respond to
that and so
you're exactly right.
You, um, that's all I had. Uh,
what's the will of the
committee?
We would do pass, manager.
We have a motion by ranking
member board and seconded by
Vice Chair, uh, Sanchez, uh, to,
uh, or to do pass on House Bill
191. Can we get a roll call?
Representative Cullen, yes.
Representative Gonzalez, yes.
Representative Lord, yes.
Represented Mason.
Sanchez.
Madame Cerrato.
That's 602. Uh, you have a Du
pass on House 199. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair.
Last up today,
uh, we have, uh, back in the or
I believe we have Senator
Steinborn up. House Bill 219,
the Slot Canyon Riverland State
Park.
Great,
great to be with you. Um, I'm
state Senator Jeff Steinborn,
for those that I haven't met.
From Las Cruces, and I'm very
excited to present to you today
House Bill 219 to create New
Mexico's 36th State Park. It is,
um, it is an amazing property,
Madam Chair, committee, that's
already owned by the state parks
division. It's along a very
beautiful, um, ecologically rich
section of the Rio Grande in
kind of north central Donana
County.
It abuts federal public land on
all sides, including a really
beautiful slot canyon.
That, uh, has become probably
one of our most popular tourist
destinations there in the
national monument, but there's
no safe access to this slot
canyon. People have to park on
the side of the road, they have
to jump a fence. Um, this state
park on the other side of the
river actually has access.
Under the road through a culvert
to get safely to the slot
canyon, there's also in this
proposed state park, state park
land. There's two parcels, one
down by the river across the
street, one just south to the
Slot Canyon. So it's, there
would be uh
Camping, trails.
You know, boat recreation.
And um
Just um
A lot of wildlife watching as
well, because it's a very
ecologically rich area. So we're
incredibly excited. We did a
feasibility study as state law
says when you create a new state
park, you have to do a
feasibility study. So we did
that a year or two ago. Um, I
think it showed that it would
probably, if we created this be
the most visited state park in
Donana County, and it also
showed the mosaic of resources
that would exist that exist on
those lands and adjacent public
lands. So it's just really an
incredible opportunity for us to
create a very
successful state park, and with
that, um, very happy to stand
for questions. We have, I know
Beth Bardwell behind me who's
been involved in this for many,
many years, um, as well as uh uh
Toby Velasquez, who's the
director of state parks. Thank
you.
Thank you, I was looking the
wrong way. Good to see you.
Welcome.
And recognize it first. Um
wonderful. So do we have folks
in the audience, uh, in favor of
House Bill 219.
The attendant will hold the
microphone and you have about a
minute to speak.
Thank you,
Chair Serrado, Vice Chair
Sanchez and committee members.
My name is Beth Bardwell, and
I'm a longtime resident of
Donana County, where this new
park would be located, I urge
you to formally establish this
state park and open it up for
public recreation as stated, New
Mexico State Parks has owned
these lands since 2008, and
after state parks took
ownership, I worked with state
and federal agencies and non
profit organizations under state
park special permits to remove
acres of salt cedar and restore
a native Bosquey along the river
and bring in children and youth
for outdoor education, now all
state residents deserve access
to recreate on these state park
lands and enjoy this beautiful
scenic landscape and river
corridor, please vote yes to
open these lands up as a new
state park. Thank you.
Uh, Madam Chair, good morning
Toby Velasquez. I'm the director
of the New Mexico State Parks
Division. New Mexico State Parks
Division has 2035 state parks
found in 25 of 33 counties
across the state. They have a
massive economic impact on our
state, outdoor recreation is one
of the main reasons why we have
the land of enchantment, and we
support this bill, but we also
hope that you can support the
need to provide the capital, the
operating, and the staff
necessary to start up a new
state park, uh, and not expect
it to be done with.
existing resources. Thank you
very much.
Madam chair, the main sponsor
has
Welcome back, uh, Cherry Small.
Thank you, ma'am.
I don't believe we had anyone in
opposition earlier. Was there
anyone in opposition?
I believe that's it for public
comment. We'll bring it over to
the committee.
Is there any debate on this
bill?
Represented Mason.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative and senator,
uh, a few questions on here
that.
I have a
To ask, uh, what was the
recommended option on this state
part.
Um, Madam Chair, let me take it,
Madam Chair representatives, so
they recommended option 2, and
I've spoken to Director
Velasquez about this. It was,
and I don't wanna put words in
his mouth. He can tell me if I'm
wrong, but it was, it was a
pragmatic economic approach,
knowing that state resources are
hard to come by.
It was a way to kind of
Do something nice, but also not
have the, the most expensive
option in terms of building
infrastructure in terms of
staffing. From our perspective,
of course, we wanted the
Cadillac option 3 because it
included campsites. Option 2
didn't. It included more
full-time staff.
We felt that's really important
given the race horse. So we're
fighting for the resource. We
didn't just choose option 3, but
we're also fighting for those
resources in the state budget
and feel very good that we're
going to be able to rise to the
bar. So it's not that they were
opposed to option 3. It was just
kind of a pragmatic.
From a financial standpoint.
Thank you Senator. Thank you,
Madam Chair, you know, and Madam
Chair.
You know, to me from where I sat
in another county that won't be
as effective.
This, you know,
Being a little more
Pragmatic about the furniture of
state funds is very high on my
list, you know, $9 million is.
I uh
There's a lot of money.
And uh Madam Chair
representative.
Uh, it was spoken of, of, you
know, the
Laughing this thing.
Uh, aren't all our state parks
now understaffed as it is.
Where are we gonna, how are we
gonna come up with the extra
staffing.
Uh, Madam Chair, represent
Mason, thank you for the
question. Um, Madam Chair, I
think we, there is capital
funding currently in uh the
statewide capital framework to
support this. And Madam Chair,
represented Mason, to your point
about staffing, I think we and I
personally uh see a great deal
of um truth in what
Representative Doo and others
have talked about is that uh
appropriately supporting our
state parks, are great.
investments for local
communities. Madam Chair,
represent, uh, she's, uh, talked
to and we were excited about
this bill together, um, with
like Elephant Butte State Park,
putting more resources, Madam
Chair Representative, back into
our state parks is a great
benefit to um uh to those local
communities and so I think
following that sort of line of
thinking which is correct in my
opinion. We are, we can invest
and support those local
communities.
Thank, thank you very
represented Madam Chair, I agree
wholeheartedly that we all love
our state parks, but it is a
fact that we're understaffed.
So every summer,
In our area in Artesia cross
bad.
You know
That uh
They've even closed.
For
days somewhere where they have.
No staff to take care of, you
know, with, uh, and, you know,
the, uh
It's, it's a problem staffing in
any industry I mean any business
in the state including the state
parks staffing is a.
And of course.
You know, the, the year to year.
cause
Of option 3.
You have
On the according to my.
Uh
Analysis 4 full-time employees,
2 part-time employees.
But on top of that you have
utilities you have equipment you
have maintenance on your.
Because we have the campsites
and the travelers center.
You know, with uh
I, uh
From where I sit representative
and senator.
Option 2
The more less expensive. I'm not
against having the state park.
But
Uh, is this property closed to
the public now?
Madam Chair representative in a
way it is. You have to jump a
fence. It's really not.
Open to the public in that
respect. Some of the state land
next door, you need a permit to
get on it.
Um, so,
Yes and no. It's, but it's not
really conducive to the public
entering onto it now without
jumping a fence. It's not
marked.
And so
I don't know if anyone wants to
elaborate on that answer, but,
uh, Madam Cherpson, I just add
that uh there's not a parking
space and so parking on a busy
state road is sort of bifurcated
you'll see 30 to 40 people, you
know, 10 to 20 cars every single
weekend, and there is no
infrastructure to support that,
and this will allow that
infrastructure to come in.
Thank you.
The, uh,
And Madam Chair, I have a son
that lives in Las Cruces.
He's personally not been to your
this, but he has lots of friends
he says it's.
What you now, yes, so, uh.
You know, he didn't talk like.
The citizens there think of it
as being closed.
You know, and what the slack,
the, sorry, madam chair, the
slot canyon, which he's probably
referring to
is it is in a way because
there's a fence that you have to
jump into state land to get
there.
And park on the side of the
road. So there is a little bit
of that aspect to it. Whereas
with this state park proposal,
you would actually park in the
state park and use under road
access to be able to get onto
the federal land to safely get
to it. So it's, it's amazing
because it is so popular now.
It's almost popular as people go
to the Oregon mountains,
literally, consistently.
People go to the local
businesses, but that's why level
3 is warranted in this case
because we're gonna, we have an
incredible visitation
opportunity. It's going to be an
economic boon to the area and
it's also on the Rio Grande
Trail, which is going to draw
more people to southern New
Mexico and um to the whole state
of New Mexico, so I think it is
an asset for the whole state.
Thank you Senator. Thank you,
Representative.
That's like maybe we take a pair
of wire cutters and we can get
that deal
a lot cheaper and and uh so
question, option 2 will also
give them access into the park.
Thank you, Senator. Thank you,
Representative.
Representative Representative
Gonzalez.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
thank you both for bringing this
proposal. Um, one I'm a big
supporter of all of our state
parks. Um, I think they serve a
lot of functions, um, as a
frequenter of many, um, I
believe I haven't made it down
there yet. Maybe I don't have my
wire cutters.
But um
I guess not, you know, I'm not
opposed to pulling over, but uh.
Um, you know, and I think the
purpose of state parks one is,
you know, preservation,
education, recreation. Um, I
also want to come at it, um,
strictly with, you know, someone
who runs it.
An educational program who
really um outdoor education has
taken
Huge movement as of lately as
well as outdoor recreation. Um,
I think this offers, um,
A great opportunity, um, to
To encourage use of these to, to
really correlate with a lot of
the other initiatives that are
working in the state, um, and,
and from a standpoint, you know,
the option 2 versus option 3. I
think adding in the campsite,
um, adding in a lot of those
other items does allow.
The actual feasibility of being
able to add some of that
recreational tourism and
bringing to the community. Um, I
have seen in areas where there
is not facilities where there's
not overnight areas, um, you may
get the visitors in and out, and
it will definitely add to the
safety. It will add to the
preservation part, um, but to
have those lasting impacts of,
of coming in, staying the night,
exploring the community,
exploring the area. Um, I think
you really do need adequate
facilities to stay, um, and
enjoy the park, encourage the
the staying in the.
longer than just a drop in and a
drop out kind of time. So, um,
I, I do support this initiative
and, and I thank you for
encouraging again that
preservation, that education
immigration of our great lands.
Thank you.
Thank you member Lord.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representatives. Um,
I love state parks. I love
preservation. I like fishing.
However,
uh, when I see a bill, and this
is nothing against you guys or
the bill, and I see a lot of
concerns. It makes me hard to
vote for it without doing a full
investigation. That's how I've
always been here since day one,
if I, if you weren't here
earlier, sometimes I do a no, I
hate your bill and sometimes I
do a soft no. So that's what's
gonna be on this one until I can
do more research just cause
there's, I can't vote for
something has a tremendous
amount of concerns, and you guys
don't want me.
to spend 3 hours like I do on
CPAC asking questions. You will
hate me. So, um, until I get all
those concerns addressed, this
is gonna be a soft note. So
thank you, Madam Chair.
I'm sorry, vice chair Sanchez,
apologies, there's no move or do
pass anymore.
00, you got it. No, I don't, I
don't know we we have I mess it
up. So we have a motion on the
uh for a uh due pass on house
219. Is there a second?
Seconded by Represent Gonzalez,
we could roll call vote and
Madam Chair, can I close really
quickly or do we need to go to
that?
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representatives. Uh,
working, thank you for the
opportunity to hear this today,
Madam Chair, Representatives, I
would ask that we are able to
move forward from committee
today, um, respectfully,
particularly Madam Chair
Representative, this gives us
the ability not only to create a
new state park in a county that
is very excited about it, but to
also work with
Dow and others across the state
to make needed investments in
our state parks, which is
already included in some of our
budget from a capital
perspective, and Madam Chair,
representatives, I think us
moving forward gives us a great
foundation to invest uh on the
other side, particularly with
staffing and others. So would
respectfully uh hope that we're
able to move forward today.
Thank you.
So, let's do a roll call on uh
do pass on House Bill 190 or I'm
sorry, on House Bill 219.
Representative Cullen? No, and
it's only the.
Yeah.
Representative Gonzalez, yes.
Representative Lord, sorry, no.
Representative Mason.
No, and I'd like to explain mine
also.
Vice Chair Sanchez.
Madame Cherar, yes.
So it's a tight and so uh let's
going to go to Representative
Colin to explain her vote.
All right, thank you for the
procedure.
Um,
Based off with the option 2 and
option 3, going with the
options.
Representative Mason
mirror her responses I said
earlier, I have no problem with.
State parks and uh.
Love for that thing to be open,
but.
It, from where I sit spending.
The extra money
Is this not
Today, I'm just not willing to
go for it. Thank you though for
your presentation.
Thank you. So with that, you
have a tie on this, which it
does not pass out of this. Is
there another motion on, on the
table at this moment?
So we'll go ahead and hold on
this bill at this moment, and
then we can uh have other
discussions if necessary. Thank
you. That sounds great. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you
committee with that, uh, we're
gonna go ahead and and committee
today. We'll adjourn, uh, next
Tuesday we have, I believe.
4 bills up, I believe
Representative Dow's bill will
be coming up then and we should
anticipate amendments on that.
So keep an eye out. Thank you.
Thank you.
