Here we have a corn.
We have a forum this morning.
Good morning. Uh, we have one
memorial on the list uh
representative, you're ready to
present.
Um, House Memorial 62 is just a
memorial recognizing the impact
of the hermit's Peak Ca Canyon
fire.
On the residents and communities
of northeastern New Mexico that
I stand for questions. Is there
any, there's no one in the there
is, uh, is there one opposition
online, please raise your hand
online. Is there anyone in
opposition in the room?
not, is everyone in support of
this memorial. Please raise your
hand online.
Is there anyone in support of
this memorial in the room.
Please raise your hand.
Seeing now, we'll turn to the
committee. Is there any
discussion of the committee?
We have a motion for a due pass
by Representative Mason seconded
by vice chair, uh, Sanchez on
how Memorial 62, uh, is there
any opposition to this motion.
Sitting on mark everyone in the
room in the affirmative on this
one, you have a due pass on your
memorial, uh, before we all head
out, I do want to thank everyone
and all of our staff who's been
here for the entire time, um.
And, and I did bring more ponds,
so please grab some on the way
out, um, and but yeah, but thank
you all, you made this very
smooth, so we appreciate all of
you guys, um, uh, we, we've done
a majority of our bills we got
through. So great job. Thank you
and have a wonderful day. Me the
turns.
