Members we have a quorum and
we're gonna get right into our
agenda we just that one bill and
So we'll be hearing that one
and and as of today we have
nothing in line for
Where to stay yet but I'll keep
the committee informed in terms
of what we what does come in.
merry I see that etcetera Linda
it has crossed over to the
panelists column you also need
to cross over of the witness
expert witness what good are to
let that.
So kind of bring Arturo over.
okay very brains on board
Senator Lopez Lee one of the
other lady us it's always a.
Leisure senior committee and and
you have
Senate bill one eleven higher of
New Mexico licensed surveyor and
the journey Senator Lopez to put
on your bill.
When it was much has just yes
When is the US at the Los and Mr
chairman I am here to present
Senate bill one eleven and this
bill will course was endorsed by
the R. the land grant interim
committee and I know Mr chairman
you and I serve and of course
you service as the co chair of
the interim committee over all
these years.
Mr chairman what this bill is
essentially doing is
Hi us for the legislature to put
funds in to hire for the land
grant council to be able to hire
a a surveyor as well as a lawyer
that can help our land grants as
they go through some of the
difficulties that are they're
dealing with at this point in
time you Mr chairman I would of
course like to let our expert
witness and Mr to let that say a
few more words on the measure.
Thank you senator
I did all of their free to
address the committee in terms
of our.
Your support for legislation and
proceed.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
Lopez and members of the
committee again my name is our
divorce let IT program manager
for the New Mexico land grant
council and really what this
bill aims to do is just provide
some additional resources for
the council to be able to
supplement the work that we are
ready do for land grants legal
services as well as surveying
services are a pretty big need
on the drive for Land Grant
communities as you know Mr
chairman throughout the years
we've been able to advance a lot
of good policy and and the
implementation of the creation
of the council back in two
thousand nine is really made a
huge difference for Langer
Communities in being able to
sort of protect their common
lands right now we do have a
contract survey or in a contract
attorney but we're under we
sourced in the sense that we are
only able to do about forty
thousand in the.
Attorney contract on it right
now about twenty five thousand
in the survey are contracted we
have a long list of needs for
both services and often times
were unable to fulfill all of
the requests that that come
before us and so the intention
of this is to just try to help
supplement that ideally will it
get to a point where we actually
have a budget an annual budget
that's that's robust enough that
will be able to to cover all of
the needs just within our our
budget but until we get to that
point Mr chairman this is kind
of an idea that the interim had
to try to address some of that
shortfall.
Thank you a good is that it on
your presentation the Senator
I'm Mr chairman I do have one
more thing to add you will
notice of course that the bill
was amended our original request
was for a million dollars it was
amended down Mr Chairman to one
hundred thousand dollars which
is currently in the budget.
Thank you.
Thank you for that clarification
We go to I don't see anybody in
the in the tendons so we will go
to our all or C. and from
individuals in the audience but
we will go to a the committee
for questions discussion.
Representative Montoya.
Mr chairman and senator Lopez
what a what a beautiful thing to
to see you in our in our in our
club here that we love so much
this bill is very very important
my you know I I it would be
preaching to the choir to say
that this is not.
Important
Fostering such an institution at
the that the land grants serve
the betterment of our traditions
is a no brainer my question is
around the million dollars down
to one hundred thousand dollars
what does that do to the vision
how will you shape shift if this
passes with such a decrease in
funding.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Representative Andrea in my
discussions with chairman when
you offs in the Senate finance
committee we were trying to
figure how we could you know
because a million dollars is was
not feasible of course this time
so what I was also able to do is
to put some of my junior money
into the budget so there's
actually a hundred and fifty
thousand dollars that will be
dedicate that I know of I don't
know what the house is put into
the junior bill but what my
intention and is to make sure
that this for sure the hundred
thousand dollars recurring.
It is recurring
for next year and subsequent
fiscal years but of course we
have to keep our eyes on it I
just to make sure that it's not
you just put as a just a one
time money so that was my
discussion with a gentleman when
you Austin he was supportive so
this year it looks like it's
recurring but again we have to
keep our eyes on on the ball is
the same as your chairman
Representative.
Mr chairman and Representative
your answer brings is music to
my ears because I think that's
the best possible outcome you
know there was a reduction you
brought forward the junior money
enters surgical in placing it
where it's needed and capacity
right so many times these vital
institutions don't have that
power to do the work that's
needed I commend you I think
it's stupendous what you're
doing and I supported and I
yield back.
Thank you Representative Montoya
and
and and retirement yeah and and
Senator Lopez some of them
outside a did it contribute some
lower junior going to the land
grant council for
things that you've been closed
legislation before us Senator so
so there was more to add it to
the block them and what the
the senator stated that
Representative.
for the question discussion
members.
seen none before I go to the
wall Senator you do you wish to
close on your bill.
Mr just thank you for the
opportunity to be with you in to
see you even if it's over the
zero I so miss in your chamber
and your committee but I guess
the most just appreciate and
look forward to hopefully begin
on the Land Grant Committee and
maybe we can get back into the
community and to so you know or
share.
Yeah we miss those are just the
worst of the land grant you know
about the Land Grant Committee
has the hearing on the first
day.
And then we do the two are the
land grant or regional.
to our of the land grants and
that.
Area or of being hosted some I
see a Representative the land
with your hand up Representative
Eli.
Mr chair and madam what by state
so good to see you see you hear
committing even on them on them
and want to say how much I thank
you for all your work and in the
area and and everything you do
for the New Mexico and this is
just this is the prime example
how aware you are and how how
white thank you you you spread
your knowledge in your.
And your insight to help so
thank you so much and I look
forward to working.
I thank you members of what's
the wish of the committee the
motion to do pass emotion for do
best recommendation member
sentiment by out.
Second by Representative because
they are not
further questions discussion
seen done it is their opposition
to the best recommendation.
Seen them that the record
reflect that all those present
or impermanent Center you have a
do pass recommendation on Senate
bill one eleven
yes yes thank you thank you.
Members that does it for today
we'll be in touch in terms of
what we have for Tuesday so
