We get to the public compact
public comment part we will we
will
we will let in the interpreter
as the panelists.
And and I I will throw this out
there that this is not eight
sanctioned provided interpreter
so
so any mistakes or anything any
whatever we're doing this to try
and get as many people as
possible to have access but it
hasn't it's not that it hasn't
been sanctioned and blessed by
the powers that be but we're
giving it a shot so if again I
mean I know I sound like I'm
doing a lot of apologizing ahead
of time and I am Representative
Pettigrew.
Good afternoon and thank you
madam chair
with respect to house bill forty
two.
Leave in our
Many rules one our may last
meeting when we cover committee
rules we agreed that we would
receive our FIR is within twenty
four hours prior to the
committee meeting and so that
did not happen with this and so.
Madam chair I would would
request that we.
The move to table on this
because we did not receive the
FIR in addition to that we have
not received the any agency
analysis as of yet.
Representative Pettigrew I I I I
understand that I'm not happy
about it but if we I don't know
what's going on with the
With the people who are
responsible for doing this but
I'm a for we we have I believe
twenty two bills at this point
and we got a bunch more
yesterday and I'm afraid if we
wait.
Let's start this and see how it
goes I I I know that that was
the intent but were were kind of
going by the seat of our pants
and I I I feel like we need we
cannot waste a whole basically a
whole meeting considering we
only really have
you know like well what is it
eight eight I don't I can my my
math brain isn't working now and
and I hear your your concern and
I understand that but I'm going
to make that decision as chair
that we're going to move forward
so that we don't so that bills
don't die because we we didn't
get the analysis so.
You madam chair I appreciate
that and I just wanted to go on
the record I mean we have.
I our own house Republican
analysis in the fiscal impact
analysis that was done by
analyst for is and they both
indicate a significant impact on
on a decrease in taxation and
revenue and that's concerning
that we would continue to move
forward with something that that
We don't have the agency
analysis on thank you very much
I just wanna go on record I know
I understand that and and of the
madam chair and
in health and health health and
Human Services yesterday it made
a good made a good point that
that we are not the end of the
road this will be going to tax
committee so the way she the way
she described it is that we are
kind of looking at more at the
more it's at that it money bills
will go to appropriations it's
not up to us to decide what step
it's an appropriation bill if
there's money or not because we
don't have that information and
kind of the same thing along
these lines that this will be
going to tax and Representative
our tax why whatever the name of
the committee is that that will
be going to and they can take a
deeper dive on the the numbers
part of it but I hear you
Representative Pettigrew and I
wish things were different but
in in the in order to to get
things moving I think we're
going to go ahead and if you're
definitely on record and I am
not happy about the fact that we
don't have the data that we need
either but but I just I think we
need to move forward so with
that Representative Chandler.
Representative Romero I'm sorry
but chairwoman I just wanted to
make sure we called role before
we can just make it official
thank you I am so flustered when
you can't even get into your own
meat I mean it's bad when you're
late but when you know everyone
is waiting for you that that the
embarrassment and stress level
goes through the roof and so my
brain has kind of is on that
hyper a hyper vigilant mode and
I and so Allison would you
please take role.
Yes thank you madam chair.
Representative Barreras.
President.
Representative Lord.
I am.
Representative.
Thanks chair Mero president.
Madam chair Thomas.
Actually wasn't built in our
health.
But I'm here okay now we will go
ahead with the corn
Representative Chandler thank.
I'm sorry I.
Go ahead go ahead.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you committee members of we're
all learning and we're we're
just gonna have to try to be
patient with one I and I
appreciate your indulgence madam
chair and committee members I
have with me as my expert with
witness amber Whalen who as I'm
sure many of you know is with
voices for children and she'll
be able to provide a little
additional information I plan on
taking up the bill a bit and and
then if it's.
All right with you madam chair
last amber to just give some
additional information
background information about how
elector all came to be so this
is house bill forty two and it
is offering to and then the low
income comprehensive tax rebates
and low income comprehensive tax
rebate also known as Lichter and
I'm gonna use that phrase from
now on because I just can't
absorb the whole long phrase
that I just said many times
it was something that was
designed many years ago really
maybe three decades ago or so
and it was it was at the time
considered almost revolutionary
are at least pretty
I don't know you might say
progressive or
really forward thinking and what
it is it was designed to help
soften the impact of the
regressive nature of our New
Mexico gross receipts tax so as
all of you know we rely very
heavily on gross receipts taxes
to fuel are you know state
government take care of
infrastructure and all the
education and so on and so forth
but the downside of the gross
receipts tax is it's a very
regressive tax meaning it
disproportionately impacts lower
income people these are the
higher income people so
people at the law school and at
the school of you know came up
with this idea that a rebate
through the income tax program
to help soften the blow over the
regressivity of the G. R. T.
would be a good idea and some
decades ago it was adopted
unfortunately it has not kept up
with inflation and what this
bill do it does is very simple.
It just a just the income
brackets in the rebate numbers
by the cost of the live living
index that's essentially what it
does yeah that's it the bottom
line we're just trying to keep
elector up with what's going on
in terms of escalation and it's
been twenty two years since
elector has been adjusted so
that's my presentation madam
chair if I could open up the
floor if you don't mind to amber
whale and I really appreciate it
thank you.
Go ahead amber.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee and
Representative Chandler my
name's amber Wallin and the
deputy director at New Mexico
voices for children and as noted
by Representative Chandler
Lichter is a rebate that's
available to very low income
taxpayers of all ages in our
state including many kids
families and seniors it's
claimed by one in every five tax
filers in the state and provides
a really crucial support for the
families that need it most those
making currently less than
twenty two thousand dollars a
year those with kids and low
income seniors over sixty five
years old in the state who
actually increased amounts of
the rebate based on their age
and for just a little bit of
background on the rebate
Representative Chandler said it
was originally designed was
passed first in nineteen seventy
three and it was originally
designed to offset the
regressivity in our gross
receipts tax are most regressive
tax but currently we devote less
than one percent of the more
than two billion dollars that we
receive in gross receipts taxes
to make it less regressive for
low income residents in our
state and while our gross
receipts tax has continued to
rise significantly over the
years rising especially high
answered rural areas of our
state as noted by the sponsor
elector hasn't been updated
since nineteen ninety eight and
while elector remained stagnant
over the past twenty three years
the cost of living has of course
steadily increased and what that
means is that fewer and fewer
residents every year are able to
receive the rebate and the
claims have actually dropped by
about thirty percent since two
thousand eight in the amount of
the rebate the amount of really
critical economic support that
it provides for those in our
state that need at the very most
has dropped by about thirty six
percent so increasing elector to
account for the rising cost of
living since nineteen ninety
eight would mean that many more
New Mexicans would have access
to that relieve at a time when
so many fat.
M. as in our state are
struggling to buy food keep the
heat on and to provide basic
necessities for their kids this
bill would have the effect of
increasing the income threshold
for elector from twenty two
thousand dollars a year to
thirty six thousand dollars a
year it would also increase the
maximum amount of the rebate and
would mean that more than a
hundred twenty five thousand
more New Mexicans who need that
relief now more than ever which
see crucial economic support so
like many New Mexico families we
know that you all are facing
some incredibly difficult
choices right now and it would
just say that investing in
elector is one of the very best
way is that the state can invest
in our families and our
communities and our economy
because research shows that low
income families that receive
rebates like elector spend that
money quickly and locally
meeting their basic needs while
also hastening economic recovery
we sincerely appreciate the
Sanchez commitment to this
crucial relief for those
Representative residents are
most in need and her and your
commitment to these types of
programs that will ensure that
all New Mexicans can survive
through and right after the
pandemic thank you again and and
happy to stand for any questions
and support the sponsor of the
bill is.
Thank you so much so we are
going to go to public we're
gonna go to.
To the audience so if you are
here in opposition of this bill
please raise your hand and I
believe it's in the participate
if you click on participants
there it although I think
different different people may
have different versions of them
but I think that's where it can
be found so
So if you are in opposition to
this bill okay let's see.
Katie.
I'm not sure how this is all
supposed to work I can't imagine
a huge committee trying to look
at this okay so I see
I see two hands raised if you
would like to speak against an
opposition please keep your hand
raised if not please lower it.
Okay and Allison we're gonna
have to kind of figure out how
to do this so the first one is
Jacquelyn Rodriguez so if you
could allow her to make her
comment.
And Jacquelyn when go ahead
Jacquelyn you are muted we can't
hear you.
There it is okay I how are you
I have made a speech in Spanish
is that okay.
I can I can try to translate
English is that okay Jacqueline
are you in favor of this bill or
against this bill well actually
and what I'm would sell.
We're
not able to hear me I'm sorry
but we need all you know the
organization for this panic no I
have made a speech in Spanish
but at you want to translate in
English.
No
I I think you are in support of
the bill correct do you what you
you like this bill okay this is
for people who do not like this
bill this is their chance to
speak we will come back to you
when we get to people who are in
support of the bill okay you you
okay I understand okay I am so
sorry okay
And then we also have item and
Helicobacter share your and
Jellico.
if you could bring her on
Allison.
Okay and and how elector I'm are
you there.
Our engine and Angelica I'm I've
been married yes yes.
Okay.
Support of the bill or against
the bill the support this
support okay so that right now
we are on people who were
against the bill so we will come
back to you okay.
Okay okay so now I'm.
Okay so if if if now I'm gonna
ask for people who are in
support of this bill please
raise your hand.
Okay.
Okay I'm just scrolling through
I'm I've got a we've got to
figure out a better way than
this because that this doesn't
seem very okay so I'm Allison I
thank you the interpreter is
okay I'm trying to figure out
how to do this best so I think
what we'll do is if you want to
speak leave your hand up if you
do not want to speak please
lower your hand now.
And rather than go in the order
of how it's coming up on my
screen I think we are going to
start with this the Spanish
speakers who need the
interpreter so Allison if you
could let Maria Cristina Lopez
in that the panelists then I
will call on the on the people
who who I have on my list to
will need interpretation and
we'll do it that way and then
we'll go back to the right hand
with okay is everybody fairly
clear as we can get on this so
so first is Rossio all contract
I'm not sure I'd probably
murdering her name and I'm sorry
Representative zero.
Rose.
I will send you see her.
I don't see that name the first
name on my list is Richard Mason
okay this.
I'm throwing you.
Okay let's let's do it another
way back to and we will go.
Forth between the interpreter
thank you the interpreted that
translate whatever the
interpreted comments would just
go in order I'll just put in so
so Dick Mason will start that we
get to a Spanish speaker the
interpreter will be on.
Well we'll figure it out as we
go so Dick Mason go ahead Dick.
When you're when you're on.
We can hear you Dick.
Yes Mason chair the acting
committee of the legal entities
of New Mexico New Delhi has a
position that promotes
appropriate that supports
progressivity in our tax system
I won't repeat everything that
that news won't set down but for
all those reasons the league of
women voters in New Mexico
strongly supports this
legislation and urges it to
pass.
Thank you Dick and next we have
a lot of Martinez.
Hello this if you are on.
It go ahead.
We can hear you yes okay perfect
good afternoon.
And members of the committee
my name is Lydia Martinez a
worker just as a gonna that
would also include a one day
that it just in Albuquerque I am
also the problem of that four
letters in I let our members
know first that first.
That that is nothing more
important to New Mexico families
provided a broad future for our
children to date with that is
supportive HB forty two the low
income comprehensive tax rebate
because it's common sense policy
for working families who needed
more who need the most.
Especially in this uncertain
economic times we also know the
putting money back into the
pockets of working families is
one of the best way to stimulate
the economy I was sent through
we work with low income.
Let the next immigrants and our
more than five thousand five
hundred members many of our
families did not qualify for the
federal economic stimulus in all
safety net programs are in to
spend them.
Many of our families continue to
struggle we must ensure The New
Mexico is doing all it can to
help working families to survive
and thrive.
And for that reform is an
important step toward the goal
family needs money I mean it's
more money than ever it will
also pay up our fair share of
taxes so it's only fair that we
keep up in updated look toward
do though quite as was
originally intended to do that
is to help low income families
in New Mexico please both this
on a to be imported to the to
the thank you.
Thank you so much next is Page
night.
Okay whenever you're ready page.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Paige night with New Mexico
voices for children and we
strongly support this bill
because it would provide crucial
and targeted economic release
for New Mexicans of all ages who
are struggling to afford basic
necessities and at the same time
increasing elector would improve
fairness and equity in our tax
code by addressing the
regressivity of a gross receipts
tax which we know and as
Representative Chandler
mentioned the falls hardest on
New Mexicans with lower incomes
so thank you very much to the
sponsor for introducing this
legislation and for all of your
time and consideration on this
important legislation.
Okay thank you and next is Lara
right Dale.
And I apologize in advance for
slaughtering names because the.
I will.
So whenever you're ready Laura.
Can you hear me.
Yes right good afternoon madam
chair Representative Chandler
and members of the community I'm
a member of recheck our
democracy and retake strongly
supports this bill I also
supported as an independent
taxpayer however I have a
suggestion for making an
adjustment to the bill
as it was originally passed as
Representative Chandler has
proposed the maximum income for
eligibility is the same it's
thirty six thousand dollars
regardless of the number of
people in the family and I
looked at
what was considered low income
in New Mexico but other programs
and I looked at had staff in
Medicaid and representative I
hand out two of the committee so
you may have that somewhere in
your paperwork I don't know what
I stand just taking one program
was that the one person of
also would be eligible if their
income was less than twenty one
thousand dollars but the six
person household would be
eligible for snap if their
income was less than fifty eight
thousand dollars so it's a
progressive eligibility and what
I'm suggesting is that.
Of the eligibility for a one and
two person households be limited
below thirty six thousand
dollars and the money gained by
limiting that be applied to
households with more people so
taking
money saved from one and two
person households and perhaps
applying it to five and six
person school.
So that's my suggestion I hope
you consider it thank you very
much.
Thank you Laura next is Paul
Gibson.
Yes my name is Paul Gibson I
want to thank the speaker the
the chairman and chair vice vice
chair and all members my name is
Paul Gibson co founder retake
Our Democracy five oh one C. for
all volunteer organization with
over twenty five hundred members
statewide
and we've been lobbying at the
roundhouse for five years now
advocating for bills that we
identify in collaboration with
an alignment with an array of
partners including voices for
children
and it this year we're doing
something slightly different we
created what we're calling
transformational bills and far
fewer than the sixty five bills
are so that we would normally
advocate for and one of those
bills actually is not a bill
it's in a more of an umbrella
called attacks and Revenue
reform and our position is that
for about twenty years the state
has home or road its own revenue
sources significantly by
passing on why is tax credits
and for businesses and tax
benefits for wealthy New
Mexicans and this puts you in a
position where especially during
a COVID gas and oil it fueled
recession where you're looking
at way every possible way to
conserve resources and revenues
and this bill HB forty two will
consume revenue potential
revenue but it will divert that
revenue to the most and needy
people in the state and it's
been has amber Wallin testified
all over twenty years since the
eligibility level for this is
been raised and as a result
fewer and fewer families are
able to receive it there's an
abundance of revenue.
Research out there it shows that
this kind of legislation this
kind of tax credit boost
families significantly and and
that over time they begin to
my great off of this not because
the eligibility is been frozen
but because they've really
started to earn more money
because of a taking advantage of
opportunities that they are able
to take advantage of because of
elector or the working families
tax credit in some we strongly
support this bill HB forty two
as part of our role of tax
reform in New Mexico and we
strongly encourage you to pass
this I should also mention that
I'm a constituent of the vice
chair the.
Representative Romero.
Thank you very much for your
time and thank you for your
service.
Okay thank you Paul silly a
Martinez.
That is.
When I started this in Europe a
student them.
You members will meet that.
We know it is a Martinez so it
member of this almost assume.
It may be the New Mexico this S.
Sierra use.
And we'll see our methadone
Sanyo's.
You gotta be able to see if the
missus.
When you begin your.
You know I'm which is supporting
the others that are awful.
Hello in minimal medium the one
of the.
Look at I'm also on a missus
human good morning some.
So will they also believe that
this will meet our exit that
are.
I see it as an up on them yeah
but I mean some media.
In any of the businesses and but
also the only part I looked up
at the top awful to start on
the.
This year you guys saw me
that's your husband's universe
some on this.
You don't give a lot of them
eficiencia.
Okay.
It is one of those misses
me trying god.
Those vessels must your goals
within.
These guys model is less about
is me story are only.
But I would.
You can put in this.
Demi from media in which also
doesn't know Mexico.
You Mr chairman and point them
you can see that emphasized up
request them.
That's a big one and the eagles.
See your invoice for the still
not listed in the simplest
those.
May I do that yeah this mean
we'd industries.
But it will get on to that
you're not
in any box.
What are simple what about
into the distant those already
on the simplest is appropriate
that.
Open up I got a little grant
does gavel got this good thing
will get you about.
Even if it are located in
us to seat us one of the the.
Let's be the billion US for me
yes that are followed us.
There are harder courses in will
make you cool.
You will order the lock.
What entitles.
That's just what the import
drugs which are most you know
there's been the.
I am the interpreter can you
hear me.
You can hear me yes very well
I think I could I wasn't able to
tell the person speaking to us
to stop.
So I am going to give you a
summary of what she said this is
not I don't like to do it like
this but
this is what happens in these
types of situations the best
thing would be to have
simultaneous interpreting but I
guess that's not possible
I am from and Gallup New Mexico
I have two children.
one is eleven months old and the
other one is twelve.
I
I'm you know I hate living from
before the pandemic I was
working and living from day to
day paying brand my car
insurance my utilities.
But in life with and I do see
then what the pandemic happened
I was three months pregnant.
And I had an emergency birth my
child was born at twenty nine
weeks they had to fly me to the
hospital in Albuquerque and
I I with that you know I had a
lot of stress and problems and
now I have a lot of problems
making my payments
I would like to request from you
to listen to our needs and to
please pass bill H. B. forty two
so that we can continue living
and and get
The rebate that we need to do so
boards are working families
thank you very much.
Thank you Maria and can I ask
you now to maybe make an
announcement in Spanish about
how you would like and the
speakers to the the people who
are giving testimony are just
give them the directions that
you need to give them that we
can we can we can do the best we
can do thank you and they'll be
able to hear me okay yes I know
what I left those present that
if the president that August one
then done those who who present
that's the onus by noted but I
what I'm
I work in the in
the end and we will need help it
or do you all know where the cop
that.
That that is me know does that
but if and Bessie on in and the
memo yes yes K. CS impala SS
local unit that but it still I
think about it unit that put it
though the most but they mostly
that's the point of order set
aside at the stadium thank you
madam chair thank you for that
and hopefully hopefully we're
we're improving as we go.
Yes next and if you can please
New when you are not track
interpreting that would be
appreciated thank you so next we
have Noreen Kelly.
Whenever you're ready Noreen.
Thank you thank you madam chair
and members of the committee
thank you for allowing us to
speak on the bills that we are
passionate on is thank you for
continue to address
house bill forty two because it
sounded out in the rural areas.
Also in two cities with this
pandemic there were so many
children that were left out.
What homeless with their
families and had to resort to
shelters where they were exposed
to some of the worst
Pandemic the COVID nineteen and
to be able for them to rebuild
their lives we need this
break for our families and and
our children it will be our age
some day and thank you for
supporting this bill and making
their lives a little more
A little easier than they have
right now so thank you so much
and I am a member of the.
for together strong families and
we support House Bill forty two
thank you.
Thank you for being and it's
good to see you again and I love
seeing that baby.
You.
Still yeah.
We have Lorraine Lorraine L.
Sanchez.
Yes.
When this Sen your president the
members implement day.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee.
We know your land that nobody.
My name is Yolanda Rodriguez
easily memberlist almost
showers.
Global this goals are still.
And I'm a member of so most chat
with the local group of someone
sexy on.
Don't think one is the way that.
It lasted there were.
I have been living in New Mexico
for nineteen years in the city
of Roswell.
The gate again.
Low interest school.
Since I arrived I've been
working in restaurants as a
cook.
So you're not mothers all data.
It today along the.
I'm I'm I'm not a single mother
and I had.
Raise my daughter alone.
It is.
Hey.
Well my.
And you.
It will this is Milan yelp
Federal H. will be seen questo
solo sign is for the way they
and.
In the nineteen years I have not
earned more than thirty six
thousand nine year but I have
done my my eight taxes every
year nineteen years.
They don't they will also.
Unseal.
This is the statement is that
you're going up and they mean is
the man is a lost soul rest in
goals when.
I did I'm all set.
But now it's specially with the
pandemic
my eight hours have been reduced
and and Ross well.
Yes no I will just.
As personal medical.
Is that you will.
And I can.
The knees Mexico.
There's not a lot of help for
people like us and this money
that we're talking about would
help people like us families
like mine.
Is this one was a lady and for
yet analyst or sequels I will do
not report on the screen either
although not when I don't
because you don't.
This help with financial help
will have our children to with
our part with a good education.
Rules where I've bill Reese as
fast.
Is the most helpful young though
I should be appointed they
built.
Yes but almost given up with us
that it is not replace the
motions glass yes.
From Roswell Clovis and have.
We are also porting H. B. forty
two and we're hoping that you
pass this bill thank you very
much.
Thank you I'm and.
Madam chair you're temporarily
kicked off course I don't know
what happened and twice then it
came back and
I'm I might I can you hear me.
Okay because it says on my
screen I needed and so this is
just I was going to say to Maria
I think when we're getting some
feedback for some breathing
sounds I I assume it's from your
Mike so you might want to what
just I and I hate to do this to
you but when when you are
listening to mute your Mike and
then when you when you are
speaking to us you I'm and I
lost my list the participants
let me pull that back up okay
I'm.
Okay.
Okay so next we have Ruth
Hoffman and Ruth I have to say I
am so happy to see you even
though I'm not really saying you
know but but welcome welcome so
route.
Are you there right.
Your muted I got it now thank.
The group.
And I thought my video I was
waiting for my video to come on
yes madam chair members of the
committee I'm happy to be with
you today this is the first time
I've testified before committee
in over a year and idea.
This issue of elector and the
low income tax rebate is a as an
issue that's near and dear to my
heart of what I was a young
mother started back to work I
work for H. and R. block as a
tax preparer.
And then during the tax season
back in their early eighties and
before of.
The end of one tax season didn't
cut into full swing we would
have people lined up outside our
doors.
Low income people people with
disabilities wanting to file
their returns so they could get
their elector rebate.
And we charge them I think ten
dollars are for you turn and
they they were so.
In need of this small amount of
a rebate and that was in the
early eighties and it is hardly
been increased at all since that
I know is increased in nineteen
ninety eight so I've worn
different hats at the
legislature I should say that
today I'm speaking as a member
of the board of directors of of
the voices for children that now
serve on and that that in ninety
eight it was increased and we've
worked out over and over again
but this this is a rebate that
was originally meant like some
others had said to offset the
weaker said that he of the gross
receipts tax and it is and been
dire need of reform and
increasing all for many many
years and I strongly encourage
you to support this bill house
bill forty two.
Thank you Ruth and next we have
marked the right.
Whenever you're ready Martha.
When the status.
But.
Coming.
A chair person and members of
the committee.
I'm
at a test I'm sorry and then
balance center they want that
eat it you did it just.
And.
My name is Mike that a youth and
I'm a member of the center of
the one that the that it just in
Albuquerque.
I thank god that is Nino seat
that I had the easily come have
a look at it your process.
I have three children and I work
at home and I also clean homes.
I'm just a I keep Representative
up where they activate what
entitles.
I'm here to support H. B. forty
two.
Get this stuff on them yet it
didn't even granting that the
need for media.
Since during the pandemic I've
had a great impact in my family.
At check in no Santo is going to
go with the theme within.
We all got sick with COVID
nineteen.
Adult I mean I miss postal code
that also sort representative
laugh off.
And my husband had his work
hours cut back.
I mean a lot of guys us yeah
yeah.
People have canceled my the
homes that I used to the health
of that I used to clean.
How am impact and all of us most
of us is that really that
economic I'm.
In this way our economic
stability has been impacted.
Esteladas without lock in those
addressing most impact
administers the list included
most of that those instancia
Allen but on most of our media.
And this is resulting resulted
in not being high in our
payments and it has cost a lot
of
Straits and our family.
Is this is a good thing I'm also
not for mass that that's is get
adamant the apple yeah I for me
as a levels of forces.
It's very important that we have
a type of tax that supports
families in low income families.
As far as okay activate what
invades also granted in once
upon grants to you about it for
me as of October it will solve
and so I so I let the excel
correct that.
That's why HB forty two with the
rebate to low income families
this is the right step to help.
Our families.
S. stamp of the canisters for
mediascape going do we in fact
are going on me at each is the
most vulnerable uses yes it
considerable medical.
It's time that our families who
really contribute to the economy
of our state and I'm very proud
of helping our state grow.
It was those influencers you
said police in program must but
unless this madness to see that
as.
It's really important that our
efforts be valued and that
programs be created to help.
Families in need.
Is this this does impose a the
pandemic M..
I'm less I'm yes this is he done
the amendment but I say yes in
the optional you'd like on a
medium instead with specially in
these times of the problems with
the pandemic the families make
money to continue to make the
economy flow.
What then see an active effort
and they those oil but I already
which is good ask yes.
Vote yes for H. B. forty two and
thank you very much.
Thank you next is Jacquelyn
Rodriguez.
This.
Good afternoon.
When is this in your preceding
the members this the committee
the number a second lien for the
test so you need Mexico.
Good afternoon at.
Chair president and members of
the committee I am a member of
so much so what we'll see on
some sexy on.
It may be doing Santa Fe board
thank you know the annual school
needs today see our go ahead.
Okay I have lived in for twenty
nine years with my three
children.
What good then we just about
wrote is a see the impact that
local of funding in.
As many of the workers I have
been impacted by the pandemic.
Yeah so what I need to get that
how bout Senator I do need to
let up on the me.
The restaurant in which I worked
closed at the beginning of the
funding.
You put a secco sesso Loida
hello buddy of those.
And for that reason I've only
worked a few.
Times that a few times.
One bank wanted to have a
hopeful okay I see the leaf you
Madam then and then the.
I have worked a few times but
and when I find work so it's
been very difficult to be able
to support myself.
Yes I will the needs that they
need to ask Miss and to make
it's been very difficult to make
the payments that I need to
make.
In the imposed my listening
today so I see in the other
State into sync with other IT
Simmons on normal times my
payment my salary is two hundred
and fifty dollars a week.
Locate Connecticut so that have
either noise of the State
antibiotic what if those miscast
and that is.
There is not sufficient to cover
all my expenses.
One was gate probity I study
give NECC I'm gonna have the
lotus.
At.
I'm sorry that was the we the
repayment plan board so M. that
would benefit all of our workers
that this law provides that
would benefit all our workers.
Get your **** in Maine is a
thirty day cease meeting the
lettuce but a massive anti those
mean city at one of them which I
do that.
A rebate like this one that
would benefit workers like me
that make less than thirty six
thousand but more than twenty
two thousand would be a real
benefit for our families.
Can't hear what are you.
Nobody are you ready yes how
does how do.
This year you get one especially
given if he said that I have
always get Comeaux you'll us and
then is it that entices me to go
already spittle mas it into
those mid city at in which I do.
Hello the habitability want to
have a so repeating that this
law that would give every right
to families that earn less than
thirty six thousand and more
than twenty two thousand would
be F. great benefits for our
families so but what about
ability to seconded landed at
eight they with us most of Katie
the portal of funding.
Especially now to be able to pay
all the debts we have incurred
because of the pandemic.
Just about Harrison will make
you go back on the simplest of
like many workers in New Mexico
I pay my taxes.
You get okay so late getting no
se Act complete can be adult in
Mexico's they cast the indicate
police our C..
And I think that this law that
hasn't changed in more than
twenty years has to be brought
up to date.
But again even over a seven
mystical money that are going to
be able.
Because the level of poverty of
our community has changed.
Your daily one given massive in
this entering the single income
the estimable Mickey Ghani's.
Hi my self just like a hundred
and twenty five thousand other
family New Mexican families.
Get put them also a committee
that knows the most benefits
yeah that's going to stick on
the other lady.
That we contribute to our
community we will be benefited
by this change in the law.
Can be edited the building was
still going for a mailing for
less you on.
To change the credit of the tax
according to inflation.
Yes it can be in editing today
product and if you staff are you
that are you that are less from
the.
To make a change in the amount
of.
Maybe
would benefit.
Families the income families
make to make a change in the
income will benefit our
families.
See less money less committed to
see them but I think those of us
it goes either of you see that
apple race.
And it would in help our
families with basic needs and
they will reduce poverty.
In my stress that the.
In our state but he into your
planning said we could AT thirty
invoice those is Daniel but act
by guidelines that will best
address address EDD's.
For example I plan to use my tax
credit this year to pay my money
bets that are behind and get up
to date them like that look at
you that I steam lab like going
on the.
Which will help stimulate the
economy.
What is the speed up of herbal.
Representative Dale lane is at
the very lively activate
according to a those good ask
yes easiest was in the vehicles.
That's why I ask you to please
support HB forty two thank you
very much and god bless you all.
Thank you very much I'm and we
have and Helicobacter stay.
Whenever you're ready.
Yes
this number is calculated at the
ship.
Good afternoon my name is David
Kelly's got corrupted yes ma'am
but are there so most axiom.
I'm a member of so most axion.
What else B. B. and in hops New
Mexico I have lived in Hobbs New
Mexico four years.
Yes I am I'm but
I'm not sure what they those.
The budget deal.
Well talking about forty two it
would really benefit.
What is up with them though
based on this information
schools process I work taking
care of people at home who are
sick.
But
not me mythic the more turn you
know they will be the theme of
it.
Why I was very F. affected by
COVID nineteen.
He
bank that means the lettuce.
My income last year was twenty
thousand dollars.
The government.
By the thanks drastically.
On complet them and the Nissan
ideals me sort us.
Because of my hours one down.
you directly.
One eight the bus let them know
that.
That they would allow levy them
always the one eight one knows
be less.
Because our debt.
Many more with the debts that we
have are built.
Well you're not gonna be fecal.
But but I must be NATO.
So.
And I don't qualify for more
money with the rebate.
If I.
The most difficult that this.
I've had a lot of difficult
thing.
Enemies of them but I by no
means be list in fact it got
okay the makeup process since
the end pocket will yak ISS.
I'm gonna let this honest.
I I've had a lot of hardships
paying the rent my car and my
car think show because I go to
people's homes to take care of
them.
Focus on us good thing go.
Is this a simple Cibola.
But we decided on the land.
And with a few hours that I have
a work now it is very difficult
for me to.
Go forward.
You're free Google.
What in by those know that if
you study madam chair.
I support HB forty two it would
benefit us very much.
I'm which is a must be less than
that will make you go.
They would benefit many families
that from New Mexico because
most by Santa will not could he
see if nobody's the.
We are going to a crisis that
we've never seen before.
Which are assessed but.
Good I also thought that it
would be able.
Thank you very much for
listening to me thank you for
your time.
Thank you so much and I I'm I
was asked to make an
announcement that if you are in
in the capital and you are not
in your own office if you have
anyone else in your office with
you you should be wearing a mask
we are trying really hard to
keep people people think so if
you are in the office with
anyone else please put on a mask
okay and next we have lose a you
know our.
They they.
Choose they know our.
At least that loose.
Ruth are you there.
Most I think we know our if
that's the E..
May be smart to our.
I had to do something else so
I'm.
I don't know how to say it in
Spanish the actress Armand de.
The at the settlement that is.
Good afternoon everyone my name
is Beatrice of an audit and I'm
with affects young I currently
reside in the county which is
one of the poorest counties of
the state with forty percent of
children experiencing poverty
and the highest and unemployment
rates I am currently working or
trying to work from home trying
to keep up with my three boys
two of which are under the age
of three my husband is a foreman
with solitaire homes with the
title doesn't really pay enough
to make ends meet especially now
with the pandemic and the
reduced amount of production
being made for mobile homes
prior to the pandemic my husband
was able to work more overtime
hours because production was at
its highest while I was able to
stay home and focus on the
newborns and still manage to
work part time job financially
we were barely making ends meet
and we were able to pay for a
center three times a week so
that I could focus on my clients
and my son who was a my oldest
son who is in school.
But of course that all changed
in twenty twenty one School shut
down and other sitters we're not
available anymore due to the
pandemic so thankfully my
husband's hours remained a
consistent but I have to make
the choice to limit my mouth of
interactions with clients now
that I would be a hundred
percent working from home while
caring for my three kiddos.
Our second income from my job
all but dissipated and then my
husband's hours were reduced.
As the company was placed on the
the COVID watch lists for high
number of positive cases.
So many of the families here in
New Mexico began filling the
burden of having one reduced
income and the bills obviously
continue to come even before the
pandemic I'm like myself we had
does the prize additional
expenses for example my
transmission went out and having
to replace that and I just made
it more difficult to catch up on
bills that still continue to
comment to month.
We were in a financial limbo and
because we made twenty nine
thousand for a family of five
that was still considered too
much to qualify for some of the
resources in our community I
strongly feel that it's
important to invest and expand
HB forty two to include all
families like mine I firmly
believe that this will help low
income families such as mine
financially during this pandemic
to stay afloat as well as after
and it goes without saying that
I do urge everyone to vote in
support of HB forty two and all
that it entails to help our
families not just in Luna County
but across the state this will
help rebuild and help reset our
economies so that our future
generations can thrive post
pandemic thank you for your time
and your consideration.
Thank you and then I think Ruth
has her hand raised again I
don't know Ruth if you
If you had something you forgot
or if that's a mistake so just.
Madam chair that's a mistake of
okay okay so we are finished
with public comment and I want
to thank everyone who who made
the time to shoot let us hear
from you and thank the
interpreter and I think it
didn't go too badly for or
trying it for the first time so
I think you know it it wasn't
perfect but it wasn't it wasn't
the their horrible crash that I
thought it was going to be so
I'm I'm writing a little easier
now if any of you care about
that so we will now go to the
committee and we will go with
that hand raising
Both are so few of you I can I
can see you all I think so if
you have questions you can
either raise your hand in the
right on the nose or you could
just raise your hand to me are
there any questions.
Representative Romero.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Chandler and
experts representing this bill
this is excellent I think in
substance as far as what we want
to be able to do with New Mexico
and New Mexicans who are in
particular moving forward
struggling
with the income disparities that
we've seen so your super
appreciate the thoughtfulness
that has gone into this I do
have a few questions for you
just to kind of understand some
of the progressive ideas that
we'd like to see moving forward
with the kind of tax structure
that is been sort of proposed
with the thirty six thousand
dollar threshold
so that said I was doing a bit
of research on the poverty line
and then thinking about
household members
and I'm really curious as to why
the threshold is just you know
between one to one on and one
person twenty two thousand
dollar income is there any way
for us to look at basically a
household and provide this
rebate in a way that sort of
stair steps income to a ratio
that allows for a rebate for
those that have more household
members and and thinking about
thirty six thousand dollars as
as as sort of the the barometer
and then thinking about how it
would go for two household
members three house members for
etcetera
and so I'm just curious as to
how that decision was made and
if it's possible to think of it
in a more progressive way.
Madam chair and thank you for
that question Representative
Romero
there's always a way to think
about things in a more
progressive ways.
There's no question in my mind
about that
this bill was intended to build
off of a concept that was
established some time ago and
we wanted to at least what I was
approaching at we I my idea was
to keep it as simple and
straightforward as possible with
it so that it would be easy for
people to understand the origins
and where we are trying to go
I'm not quite sure I understand
your question though about one
person or two person there is in
some again I apologize I
misunderstand but there are
adjustment mains maids based on
the number of dependents if
that's what you are thinking
about and also on a level of
income so you get a larger
rebate the more dependence you
have and the lower your income
is so there is progressivity
invented in this concept and
always happy to talk about what
better ways to do things but I
think this.
Kind of addresses what you are
trying to get at for madam chair
and representative for more on.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Chandler that
that sort of helps just on the
dependent side
and and sort of thinking about
how how it works I guess
additionally what why the thirty
six thousand dollar threshold.
And why the update from ninety
eight to today is that the
decision on on that.
madam chair and Representative
were exactly the structure was
established some time ago and
and we debated when I was
talking to Legislative Council
staff and so on we debated how
we might approach it we chose to
go with the simpler approach was
which was a cost of living
adjustment pretty much across
the board.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representative just a couple
other questions when we looked
at the FIR that we did receive
it out when I did the back of
the napkin on what it said that
you know two hundred and eight
thousand New Mexicans received
approximately sixteen point two
million that's only seventy
seven dollars per person so I'm
really curious as to and then it
said it would be three times
that amount that we would be
expecting in rebate so can you
just help me with that number
crunching is that what you see
in your.
And your back of the napkin just
so I'm understanding what the
rebate really is for for New
Mexican families
Madam chair representative I'm
not I'm not sure I can help you
with that one I didn't see the
FIR before the meeting but madam
chair I might to for to ms
Whelan perhaps you might be able
to assist on that question madam
chair representative
approximately.
Madam chair and representative I
think that's right that lines
that really squares up with what
our own numbers showed in our
own analysis and would go from
about eighty dollars per
claimant to an average of around
a hundred ninety to two hundred
dollars per claim and so it's a
significant a significant
increase the goes right along
with the scale that the cost of
living has increased since that
was last adjusted.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative and agency we
for that response I guess what
we're thinking about what what
the impact has been I think
through the pandemic and and
putting that Fund back and into
the houses that need it the most
that makes a lot of sense to me
I guess because we didn't get a
tax and Representative of the
analysis on what that gap that
creates a you know times X.
amount of families and I guess
two thinking about twenty twenty
one and twenty twenty two and
the recovery that we're looking
at you know really interested in
seeing the economic impact to
the state but these are the
folks in in regards to me
supporting the bill you have my
support because they feel like
this is exactly who we want to
be able to put that back on in
the pockets for
but I do want to see what the
what the actual impact will be
to our bottom lines we always I
want tax and Representative this
year too so we always want to
know how we're going to be a
feeling that it will get to that
point later on when we're in
that.
In that Committee I'm sure but I
am really interested in seeing
this move forward and and seeing
that these claimants get that
refund and of course speak to
the sponsor more with any other
questions that come up thank you
madam chair and thank you for
sponsoring this representative.
Thank you Representative Romero
at kind of threw me that seventy
seven dollars it's almost not
worth the paper work to do I
mean it's it it's the.
Well I'll leave that there that
that that's like when when you
when you overpay someone and
they send you a ten cent jackets
yes we.
It's kind of worse than nothing
at all so I'm are there other
questions.
Okay I will entertain a motion.
Madam chair Representative okay
I Representative lord I'm sorry
I didn't see you.
Yeah you.
But others to get feedback from.
Just to throw this out there and
I don't know if this will work
in this situation when we were
doing some other things earlier
in this session which feels like
it was six months ago but last
week some of the reps were
sharing an office found that
they could really only work if
they only had one computer going
and then so I don't know if that
will work for you but that was
something that that another
group on opening day ended up
doing just just throwing it out
there but we'll wait till you
get somewhere where you will be
back and then then you can.
On I just moved can you hear me
now yes the White so thank you
madam chair and I apologize
yesterday was a nightmare for me
today seems to be following me I
just was kicked out of the
meeting a little while ago I
thought I'm never going to get a
chance to ever speak so hearing
them so I do have some questions
I did not see the FIR to right
now that just got printed out so
it looks like it's going to have
an impact of a hundred forty six
million dollars a year over
three years is that correct.
Madam chair is that a question
posed to me yes yes I'm sorry
madam chair and Representative I
have not seen the FIR on on this
bill
as you point at you and your
colleague pointed out earlier
and was not provided prior to
the meeting
I there is no doubt in my mind
there will be a fiscal impact
it's been twenty two years since
this these rebates have been
adjusted so I would not be
surprised if there some that
some level of impact that can be
identified by way of background
madam chair and representative
of the tax committee looks at
all fiscal impacts associated
with tax expenditures and what
we attempt to do and at least
it's the goal of many of us on
the committee is to ensure that
all tax expenditures have some
other source to adjust to so
that the impact is mollified if
not completely addressed and I
expect we'll be doing that this
year and taxation and revenue
okay yeah that was okay so
that's that question that I had
about that I'm a numbers person
I'm always very concerned about
the state of New Mexico because
you know we're we're losing our
money with oil and gas and I'm
concerned about the future of
oil and gas and that's where you
can see can you get a lot of our
revenue from and I'm always
concerned about how are we going
to pay for this because we can't
just always keep printing money
without balancing the budget and
some way.
I'm.
My other question is so at
thirty six I'm gonna go back and
look at this so at thirty six
thousand dollars a year that it
is if somebody is working and
that would be seventeen dollars
and thirty one cents an hour is
that correct.
Madam chair and representative
if you say it's correct that's.
It's correct I have no basis to
know what I haven't done the
math okay so that's for
seventeen dollars and thirty one
cents for someone making an
hourly wage and the current
minimum wage is ten dollars and
fifty cents.
Is still above minimum wage from
what I'm doing with all the
numbers I'm so when somebody
usually goes to pay taxes
usually at that low of amounts
they're looking at risk.
Worked like three four jobs in
my life and use you for getting
a refund so my main concern with
all of that is that.
First of all the we need to get
rid the G. R. T. and New Mexico
that's one of the main issues we
have and right now we're in a
situation where.
We're really strapped for
finances and my concern is
putting this on there without
knowing the full financial
impact and how are we going to
give rebates to people who will
need that and their life how are
we going to pay for the forty
eight million dollars a
specially when we just you know
got the more time or we can't do
anymore oil and gas struggling
for some time.
So I have concerns about that
I think that's all I can say
without having all the
information about the financial
impact I did have one other
question on here did see so the
rebate can be claimed by a
qualified resident that has no
taxable income is that correct.
Rectangle you are you are muted
but my apologies Representative
Madam chair representative
that's correct okay so somebody
that doesn't so one of the other
policies that are in place right
now for people that are of low
income so under this they're
still eligible for snap.
Is that correct
Madam chair representative I
don't know what the qualifying
cracked criteria is first now
okay those are those are just
all kinds of things up to look
at the bigger picture it like to
look at what are the things that
are happening to somebody so I
can make the you know decision
because we're trying to balance
some important stuff compared to
how much money we do and right
now don't have in New Mexico so
I know.
And that ranger usually eligible
for some had I think that's all
the questions I have right now
my main concern is I would
rather have seen a better
breakdown of how much is going
to fall over we anticipate
getting the money to pay the
forty eight million dollars.
Have that the money right now so
thank you that's all they have
manager thank you.
Just a reminder to go through
the chair and and I know your
freshman and it yes if you just
kind of get into a groove and
you and you start calling people
at dinner madam chair no no no
no okay the phone this is madam
chair no no so did I'm not
stressing it just trying to help
you kind of know please do learn
learn as you go and and as I
said very in artfully before we
anything that has to do with
taxes or money will go to those
committees we'll go to
appropriations so we we are in
general on this committee as on
health and Human Services we
look at the merits of the bill
it's not our job to figure out
where the money will come from
or whether we even have the
money because I guarantee you
having sat on probation for four
years if there isn't the money
it doesn't go anywhere so so
eight try try not to stress that
too much we we are not one of
that that real that numbers and
money committee so and it will
go on to them and and as as
things move on you will learn
that in probation they just
table everything until they have
everything in and then they sit
down and figure out what they've
got money for and I've never sat
on tax but I'm assuming it's
it's similar that that you know
everything that has the tax
effect kind of gets up put are
not put in a holding pattern
until we figure out how much
we've got and what we can do
with it so so that that really
isn't our role to determine
whether we have the money or not
because those committees have no
problem killing built by the
dozens because we don't have the
money for that so so think that
are there any further questions.
Okay seeing none I will
entertain a motion.
Madam chair I move a do pass
thank you sure so it's
Representative Barreras and
Representative Romero with the
second okay I'm not sure if it's
Gabby or Allison that's calling
Allison okay Alison.
Yes.
Representative Harris.
Yes.
Representative Lord more more.
The.
Representative.
Can you hear me I'm sorry I just
having I'm having.
You hear me yes okay passed.
Our Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Pettigrew.
I think he's having issues hold
on one second okay.
I share more.
Yes.
Madam chair Thompson.
Yes.
Representative Lord.
She
started you could you call me
earlier I didn't know if you
thought you were saying passed
or if you're passing the motion.
Okay can you hold on what's to
come back to me just one second
please yeah.
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you.
I'm highly conflicted here.
and madam chair.
If allowed
while I believe in the merits of
the concert.
You know.
Hi I go back to some of the
comments that were made earlier
with respect to.
Pardon me.
Separating.
How this this is structured.
Because the single person.
Thank you seventeen dollars and
thirty one cents an hour by this
bill.
It's a tax credit.
But it doesn't change for a
family of four.
And so it's it's not equitable
equivocal and it does grow can
so we are voting now and so
either you need to ask the
questions when we're having
discussion or you can when you
vote you can say yes or no and
I'd like to explain my boat I'm
so so once we get into the
voting it's either yes or no and
then I'd like to explain my boat
so so I'm and please keep your
mask on I'm talking is one of
the biggest the worst of of by
Representative so
I know it's our it's our
tendency to what to all our mask
down but make sure that they fit
over your nose.
And and then we we we just need
your vote right now and then if
you want to explain your vote we
will come back to you.
No I would like to explain of a
okay perfect thank you.
R. and Representative ward
Thank you I had to move out of
there so you could hear me
holidays for that this is such a
very hard time with this and I
do apologize for the
interruption I want to go to the
same thing I'm going to vote no
and I would like to explain why
thank you.
Okay thank you so by a vote of
three to two we have a due pass
on house bill forty two and we
will go back to Representative
Pettigrew to explain his boat.
Madam chair I would I would.
My my hope going on this is a
point made earlier that I don't
think it goes far enough for the
family.
It doesn't separate an
individual from the family.
As as a tax law would and and I
would challenge
the sponsors of this bill as you
carry it through to to look
Representative Chandler to to
maybe look at the amendment the
the the system along those lines
as well I mean I do have a
concern.
And I made some.
That.
You know.
With respect to the to the
revenues that we have right now
and.
The legislative finance is a
pretty good job of putting
together a package that that
money's gone to K. through
twelve higher education.
Well let's.
From other places to do this I
don't think that's a bad thing.
I don't think that there should
be some give and take care but I
I would ask the Representative.
Madam chair representative
Chandler
thank you that you consider
looking at something that helps
the the maybe do a little bit
more for the for the family.
Thank you very much thank you
Representative Pettigrew and
those are probably thank you for
we generally and and when you
say you explain your vote you
can say it's it's brief it's
like I voted against this bill
because I don't like you know I
don't like that it leaves out
children under twelve are what
you know it's it's so when it's
something longer that that
belongs more in the end when I
think you have questions they
can also be comments when we are
discussing the bill it doesn't
have to be a question it can be
as I said on our on our
organizational day you know I'm
not gonna let you start talking
about other you know go away
upfield on on what you think
about other things but but you
are perfectly welcome to to you
know make a statement and and we
are doing things a little bit
differently I think
Representative Chandler you did
say that that the woman who made
the comment was mistaken that it
does depend on the size of the
family and it does depend on the
size of the incomes essentially
so so I think we all kind of got
a red bear that I did the same
what we doing this so so
so just feel free to check out
those kind of questions and and
okay and now now we will go to
Representative Representative
Lord to explain her about.
Thank you and like you just
settle be brief thank you madam
chair Representative Chandler I
understand we're coming from
this bill that you want to help
others I actually get that I
think if this bill were to
progress forward with a little
bit more breakdown of with
families and I know you're not
saying that with the money but I
do get concerned about that and
I also I'm concerned about the
economic times and so that's
that's the one I want explain
it's not that I don't.
It's just I guess have some
concerns about the vagueness of
this bill thank you thank you
madam chair.
Thank you.
In all this craziness I have so
we do have a due pass and I
don't know what has have we
heard anything from
representative Al Capone is he
is he waiting is T. R..
Madam chair I do experts here
too so.
I'm I'm sorry.
Yes welcome to the committee
that he needed to begin sharing
at three PM.
And so he probably started that
by now okay all right thank you
so much and.
Change my vote if I can't.
I'm not sure how we go about
doing that and I think we have
Gabby on is that is that a
possibility Gabby to go back and
change your vote after it's been
reported out.
Representative top leader
chairman Thompson yes the the
reason for my for this is
because I made a vote based off
of the data that was incorrect I
I I I hear you
Gabby are you on.
And Allison I guess since you
you will be during the committee
report is that is that what I
understand or is that Gabby I
haven't done the report yet but
I will be doing it after the
okay okay and I'm gonna make an
executive decision and since it
was since it was a an error that
we will allow our so just to be
certain Representative Pettigrew
you are changing your no vote to
a yes vote.
Yes.
Okay and Allison do you have
that you.
Okay so now by a vote of four to
one house bill forty two does
have a due pass and of course ít
okay so since we do not have
Representative asked school
I Representative Romero you're
gonna be here anywhere anyway do
you have expert witnesses that
are being held that's all right
okay so then we will go ahead
and go back to work
Eight Representative Romero and
it feels weird that you don't
have to leave our little
digestive go down and sit at the
table with it's kind of weird to
be doing it this way but go
ahead Representative Romero and
you have an expert witness who
you need to have allowed it
thank you madam chair
let me think by name I know that
it's
We just make sure I know the
name.
Elisabeth gray Nunez.
Should be in the attendees.
I'm not seeing that name.
In the last year.
If I can't get
It was a bit in the room so
she's in there.
We see
I'm.
I'm trying to see what name she
might be under thank and it was
the best if you are out there if
you could data raise your hand
or chat to us so that we know
how to who who you are to let
you in.
And I wish I was an inventive
sort of person if someone could
invent right now a way to
organize zooms and organize our
calendars and organize our lives
at this point I think they could
be a billionaire but I can't
organize myself there's no way I
could come up with the way to
organize other people but I
spend so much time in my day
searching searching searching
for that what zoom information
and it's the wrong one and and
my stress level is and is high
and so
Elisabeth if you're there we
will give you one more chance to
work and and if if she's not in
the room chair just so because I
don't want to delay I I'm we're
prepared for house bill fifty
four as well okay okay so do you
have an expert witness they're
ideal
can you let Alice and know who
to let in.
Sure I'm I'm secretary are a
superintendent
Linda Trujillo is in the
audience I'm I'm not sure who
her if she will be the expert as
well and then you Secretary to
foil the Cerro.
Here but as far as experts go I
just wanna make sure I'm calling
on the right person all if.
If superintendent Trujillo can
speak to that I think that would
be helpful for now.
Will say that former Rep
Trujillo is an expert on
everything so.
Witnessed you can just you're
ready for that when you're ready
to be our expert on everything.
Okay so E. option I'm ready to
be an expert on everything madam
chair I know you are it's so
good to see you thank you
likewise so go ahead
Representative Romero but we are
now doing house bill fifty four
which is the third item on the
agenda for whenever you're ready
thank you madam chair so house
bill fifty four is essentially a
modernization you the regulation
and licensing for Bob barbers
and cosmetologists on a dozen
number of different things first
in.
Foremost it just streamlines the
administrative aspects of the
bill for the department
themselves and how folks can
apply for licensing
additionally
I'm sorry I think US secretary
to where
Lucerna strings also be elevated
to Alice my apologies for the
interruption of.
So the second bit of the bill
outside of the administrative
questions of the barber in
cosmetology Stevie's we're
looking to essentially are lower
the educational standard in our
state as we know we've had a lot
of trouble with graduating are
high schoolers throughout the
state for those that may not be
at the equivalency of a high
school degree we want to still
allow them to be gainfully
employed so this provides that
threshold to be lowered for
folks to be able to get their
licensure and registration for
at for the cosmetology or barber
license and then finally it just
makes it easier for the boards
to provide a threshold for
grounds for refusal on
a license so gives a real sort
of understanding as to what we
would like to deal with
ensuring that the the folks who
deserve to keep keep their jobs
and and whatnot would be left to
the boards of the side and with
that I will let our expert
Representative and now
superintendent Linda Trujillo
speak on the bill if I may madam
chair.
My good to go madam chair you
are good to go all right thank
you thank you madam chair and
thank you Representative for
your willingness to carry this
really high priority bill for us
there's a number of things that
this does but the biggest thing
that we are excited about is
that it really removes barriers
for individuals to get licensed
it's not that we don't want
individuals to be you know
graduated from high school and
having high school education but
the fact of the matter is is
that they're perfect if they're
proficient in cutting hair and
styling hair and they've been
through that program then the
the need for them to prove that
they've already completed a
portion of high school is really
irrelevant to their ability to
safely and with health standards
do that profession and believe
it or not it can be a real
barrier for individuals
especially if they're you know
far years away from graduation I
know I keep my kids graduation
diplomas simply because they
started calling me and asking me
you know where did I put my
diploma mom and and so now I can
just like take a picture of it
and send it to that's kind of
the norm for a lot of us is that
we don't necessarily know where
those are after many years the
other thing though that's really
important is that in the
Defining what the
responsibilities for the
department are we already
basically do those those
responsibilities that's just
codifies what we actually do and
how we administratively support
of the that are present
hospitality board and the last
thing that I want to point out
is that removing the felony
convictions and I know secretary
gonna talk about this but that
also removes barriers and again
the idea that you have to have
good moral character who gets to
define what that good moral
character as and we'd like to
remove that ability that
authority from of a board that
could could really it be
arbitrarily and capriciously
make decisions about who gets to
be and who doesn't get to be and
the the the language where we
changed a bit you'll use of
alcohol and drugs made it really
clear that it has to be in
relation to work so you couldn't
get three D. W. lies and then
have your license taken from you
because you've got three done D.
W. eyes although that is
completely unrelated to whether
or not you are proficient in
cutting hair now if you were
drunk under the influence while
you were cutting someone's hair
I still think that might be an
employment decision but we had a
lot of discussion about it and
decided that we would leave it
in there in case there was a
Vigil use of drugs or alcohol
while employed and again thank
you committee members for the
opportunity to present this
today.
Thank you Linda the.
Yes if I may I just want to
introduced
secretary Alicia to foil to
settle secretary of corrections
who's here also as an expert and
will fill in any gaps that we
just left out as to the a
portion of the bill that will
help the
for million street.
Thank you
Welcome secretary to play with
their
one hand if you if you have
something to add.
Thank you so much madam chair
members of the committee and
thank you so much also
Representative Romero and
superintendent you're here it's
just been a real wonderful
pleasure to work with such
experts I'm a bit of a rookie in
this process myself and it's
just been really excellent to
learn from the best so what
we're really excited about this
bill I believe that that
superintendent your heel really
said a lot of the the things
that were meaningful to us but
for for me it's very important
that we eliminate as many
barriers to employment as
possible for people who are
leaving our institutions and
trying to make their way back
out into the world and this
particular item is really of
great importance because we have
a program within our institution
that does trained barbers right
now it's being administered
through the Luna community
college it's currently on
suspension without the
restrictions that we're dealing
with with the pandemic but
typically that class has an
entry level group of of
participants as well as a
elevated group disciplines that
participate in the program and
they are able to receive real
instruction real practical
experience and then
certifications the issue is that
when these people were releasing
from institutions they were not
able to get a real license to
pursue this career post release
and this really would make a big
change and give another viable
career option for people who are
leaving institutions and
returning to communities and
with this change in law should
it pass we will intend to expand
the barbers and cosmetology
programs throughout our
institutions and to look at
options outside of just being a
barber but other areas of
cosmetology thank you for the
opportunity to speak and of
course all stand for questions.
Okay thank you Representative
Romero is that are you are you
ready yet okay thank you madam
chair so we will go to the
audience and again with great
thing hands is there anyone here
in opposition to this bill.
Thank you can okay anyone here
in support of this bill.
Okay so we have.
Five six so we can watch it go
up okay up and down obviously
and so we have and and you can
put it we had six people who
were in support and then if you
want to
thank if you want to give public
comment please leave your hand
up and we will we will go to you
so I'll give you a second to put
your hand down if you need to
I'm and we are Investcorp
portion of our program tonight
so so we will start with Ashley
Wagner for go ahead actually
when you're ready.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I'm
Ashley Wagner the director of
public policy and you Mexico
chamber of commerce.
We support house bill fifty four
because it's in line with our
recent economic strategic action
plan where we suggest finding
ways to improve New Mexico's
regulatory business claim it to
make it among the most friendly
in the US and we like that this
bill streamlines licensing and
removes unnecessary barriers for
qualified practitioners this
will only positively impact our
workforce and economy thank you.
Thank you and then you have I.
Sorry.
I lost my list for second okay
Lucille that Campos.
Whenever you're ready.
Are you there.
Madam chair I think it might
take a minute for it to them to
be upgraded.
I believe I'm unmuted now yes
you are good now thank you thank
you so good afternoon chair and
members of the committee my name
is Lucy let them Polis I'm a
policy associate at the New
Mexico nonprofit organization
called gold futures.
We know this bill is meant to
address many of the issues for
barbers and cosmetologist and we
support the professionals in
that field.
We are glad to see changes that
remove barriers to entry to
these positions on professions
we thank the sponsors were also
removing and take antiquated
language related to people with
convictions many New Mexicans
have former convictions creating
pathways to employment and
removing unnecessary barriers as
critical to people having a shot
at rebuilding their lives after
incarceration we strongly
support HB fifty four and are
proud to be working with the
sponsor on a broader bill to
address occupational licensing
and other yes thank you.
Thank you and then we will have
Kim Chavez Cook.
Thank you madam chair thank you
members of the committee I'll
keep my comment very short we
supports this legislation
because the ability to be
employed after having served
time it is a huge reduction for
at least a huge reductions in
recidivism and really helps
restore the stability of our
communities.
I don't know to record where
they're from are the
organization just for
consistency thank you madam vice
chair and madam chair this is
Kim Chavez Cook with the law
offices of the public defender
okay I'm not a practice thank
you what we were all out of
practice and even if we were in
practice this is different than
we've ever done it before so
we're we are flying by the seat
of our pants I'm gonna get a big
teacher or maybe a in the sense
that and and for those of you
who worked under organizational
meeting our our model this year
is the gentle on yourself and be
gentle on others so with that we
will go I will go to the
committee at to see if there are
questions.
Representative Lord are you are
you
are you raise okay.
Okay we will wait for
Representative are you are to
relocate as it were.
Again I apologize because we
have one can can you hear me yes
we can hear you and we're
colleges if we if we were being
gentle with each other thank you
I appreciate that has to be more
when I was trying to get a
question answered by somebody so
thank you madam chair and
Representative for more a I.
Much for getting are felons back
to work and I think everyone
should get opportunity after
they have done the time and turn
their life around but I do have
a concern and I'm not sure if I
don't know how we present an
amendment so I guess I'm just
going to ask
would you consider an amendment
on the part Representative line
thirteen about the more
perpetrated if you would
consider entering sex crimes to
be something that would be
excluded in here's the reason
why.
F. I took my grandchildren to
get their hair cut by someone
who is a convicted child
molester and I found out after I
might not be too happy about
that and the same goes with
if I was a survivor right and I
found out that my hairdresser
was a convicted rapist I have.
Can you hear me this was muted
again cut out perspective but
you're back okay I'm a college
and unfortunately with sex
crimes there's a very high
recidivism rate it's very hard
and the EDD's far as I know
especially with child molesters
to find a way to stop them from
doing that so I would ask you to
please consider making the
exemption of somebody who is
going to the sex crime thank
you.
Thank you madam chair if I may
response I think that's an
unfriendly amendment for are
Garcia great now we have
absolutely considered you know
any crime under the sun that we
you know would want to consider
for something like this are what
this still allows and will
always allow is the board to
make that does this distinction
as far as where it whether or
not they would allow for someone
to be in that profession
With their discretion what we
don't want is for moral
turpitude to be which would put
us in line with actually federal
law on to be sort of this
threshold that
is often very arbitrary so to be
specific and allow the work to
have that control is is why we
have worded it that way I would
love for my experts to weigh in
on on that decision as well.
Madam chair representative I
would just say that
in safety sensitive positions
those statutes are already
authorized under the government
or the I'm sorry the felony
reemployment act and so looking
at the business assessed City of
that but in in the in the.
In the instance of someone who's
a hairstylist we believe that
our responsibility is to
determine whether or not they
can come if they're proficient
in that particular job and there
are some areas of that
licensure that are left to the
employer and and so I would have
to agree with Representative on
Romero that is the it would
complicate things significantly
for the board to have to look up
on those types of crimes because
at this point we honestly don't
have the authority to do a
background check for these
licenses because they're not
considered safety sensitive.
Thank you madam chair.
The secretary there or did you
have
if you have something to add
their.
Madam chair and Representative
Lord I believe actually that
superintendent Trujillo said it
exactly up for me and and and
Representative Romero of course
our conversations before we went
forward with this bill was the
the goal was that the board
would still have the ability to
make its decisions as it needed
to and we didn't feel that it
was appropriate to eliminate or
exclude anybody on the front end
thank you.
Thank you and just as a
teachable moment so infirmity
you can you can not abandon of
the person you could not you can
during your question time you
can suggest that in that that
this sponsor think about it
amendment and you can say you
know I I I I will vote for your
bill if you agree to make this
amendment or something along
those lines but the only place
that we can then someone else's
bill is on the floor as use the
as you saw yes with that
yesterday.
Yeah that was so so just but but
it's it's you know I would say
that most sponsors are open to
hearing your ideas are in
committee and and frequently we
get a better fail because the
more brains looking at something
that the more we're going to
catch mistakes or or
opportunities to do something
even better so so it's fine to
just ask the question or make a
suggestion but you cannot you
cannot amended the other end of
the members bill until it
reaches before.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Romero Mister
Rogers today or stop.
And he's my hero so I'm are the
are there other questions over
for this bill.
Is it appropriate to give a
comment what does it have to be
a question right now it doesn't
have to be a question I it as I
said in an interview could you
can make a statement regarding
the bill I won't let you go too
far afield and talk and start
the the argument of whether
you're a cowboys fan or cowboys
hater and but but if you stay on
on subject you're good never
mind then I just wasn't going to
say that Madam chair
Representative Romero I just
wanted to say that the the
district that I represent we're
in the the southwest part of
Albuquerque we have a really
high track truck out rates we
have really high incarceration
rates and really high.
Greens so this this bill is
going to be very well received
in my area and I just want to
mention I appreciate it.
Thank you representative
Representative one thank any
other questions or or maybe I
should say court but I well
remember questions or statements
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair I thank
you Representative Romero I.
I was actually calling for this
bill until I got to page
fourteen provide twenty four and
twenty five.
And I I look forward to debating
this on the floor I know it's
going to make it to the floor I
look forward to debating that on
the floor and I look forward to
an amendment that disqualifies
sexual offenders I do not
believe I believe it's our job
to legislate I do not believe we
need to leave that up to the
point thank you very much.
Thank you Representative
Pettigrew any other questions.
Okay I will entertain a motion.
Madam chair I move it to pass.
Okay and I will second I'm okay
with that we please call the
roll.
Representative Harris yes.
Representative Lord.
Here's have stepped away from.
and that was not a feature.
Representative Lord.
I'm sorry excuse me so it was
asking a question we voting on
this bill yes I just going to be
in no with an explanation we
also think there are
Representative Pettigrew.
Building and.
First.
There is a no with an
explanation please.
Representative.
Yes thank you committee.
Madam chair Thompson yes you and
by a vote of three to two if you
have a do passed and I will ask
someone is not needed and we're
hearing some background talking
so so please if you are and of
course my dog start barking when
I say that
so I think we are ready to move
on Representative Romero your
and cramming and slamming if you
have your witness there is
explanation for our I'm sorry
who are right Representative
Lord.
Thank you madam chair
Connect this Representative
Robert and she really.
I think it's great I think we
should be having felons get back
to work and being productive
members of society I just would
ask that you consider that
amendment just because if I took
my kids to go see somebody who
is a child molester I don't want
them touching my children are my
grandchildren so thank you.
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair hopefully
I don't have to keep doing my
explanations
the tax somebody in the
concerns me and I want to be
crystal a crystal.
It crystal clear I have a
concern with respect to sex
offenders on this.
I just got given the.
And thanks for the sometimes
moral turpitude Senator is been
used to discriminate
discriminating against the LGBTQ
community and that is not my
intent here at all by
No desired to to go down that
road.
but I do have a concern the my
seven year old granddaughter
could be getting her cat from
sex offender thank you very
much.
Thank you and again as a
teachable moment it there's
nothing that prohibits you from
going I am not going to texting
or calling the sponsor and and
discussing these things we do
usually when we're there we can
go to their desk and figure
things out and that's not how
it's going to be but please you
know just just throwing it out
there for you freshman you can
talk to anybody want to talk to
you can what if you get the bill
before hand and use the issue or
when you see an analysis then
you see an issue you can you can
go to that person and say you
know I like your bill but would
you consider so we can do things
in committee but you could also
do things before committee or
after committee
And we're all pretty acceptable
so so we're all on the same team
essentially and that and it is
sometimes it really helps to
have have a new set of eyes
looking at being and so feel
free to go okay Sanchez of bills
and let them know I'm what your
concerns are.
So okay now that we are ready to
go on to our house bill twenty
eight which is also
Representative Romero clamping
and ramming and slamming Act
definitions thank you madam
chair and also just want to say
thank you to my experts for the
previous bill again
that said I will move on to.
House bill twenty eight.
And sorry everyone.
The court twice today thank you
madam chair do we are you okay
with me presenting and also I
believe Elizabeth is in the
attendees now Elizabeth green is
is my experts and she is in the
attendees so if we could get her
into the room thank you Sen.
Great I think I'm on okay great.
I am trying to be up there we
go.
Sorry for okay.
I will thank you madam chair yet
technical difficulties as to why
and of course I had the same
issue yesterday where
Representative was I when I was
meant to be voting with a
internet cut out so we will deal
with that that's the bidding.
You madam chair for your eight
students.
being flexible on this
submitting an act when it comes
to the telecommunications
industry and and and why I love
this bill because it really
helps consumers and on that side
it really makes it easy for
folks to do a number of things
through their their their cell
phone bill which currently New
Mexico is the only state and if
you see your infographic
Coming through I don't know if
it's in it's in Citrix for
everybody who knows that's
sitting on the panel it is
basically some background as to
why we're doing this so at very
straight forward to allow
consumers to add additional
access opportunities for other
promotional things like Disney
plus I know that that was a big
exciting one because I'm a big
fan of the Mandalorian to put
that on to your onto your cell
phone bill as well incident to
access other services in in
conjunction with your current
service with that all introduce
my expert was with gray Nunez to
discuss a little bit more about
the bill.
Thank you everybody thank you
very very much for your patience
with my technical difficulties.
I'm as Representative Romero
said madam chair and members of
the committee I'm Elizabeth
graining as I'm an attorney for
Verizon I'm government affairs
council and part of my job is
working with the business making
sure that they can do what they
need to do to give consumers the
best experience possible I'm as
Representative Romero said I'm
here to talk in support of HB
twenty eight specifically to
make sure that you all have a
chance to ask questions about
this bill it's really
straightforward this it's we're
updating New Mexico law that is
vintage nineteen ninety nine
that's the last time that this
law was updated and what we're
allowing is for customer consent
so right now if you in New
Mexico would like to put let's
say you would like to bill for
Disney plus on your home
telephone your cell phone bill.
You're not able to do that right
now because New Mexico law
prohibits total phone companies
from putting charges for
anything on your bill that is
not telephone or
telecommunication services so I
know at least one member of this
committee has had the personal
experience of we offer to three
promotion with Disney plus at
the end of the promotional
period all of our customers in
literally every other state in
the country are able to opt in
and say yes I consent
affirmatively to well I want to
keep my account with Disney plus
and just bill Ford on my Verizon
bill it's convenient it's
seamless in New Mexico we had to
tell customers that we we
couldn't offered that option and
they needed to they needed to
start over with their account
with Disney plus it might not
seem like a big deal but as a
parent in the pandemic I can
personally attest to the
importance of Disney plus to
your sanity and that convenience
matters to us as a business we
want our customers to have the
best experience and choices
possible you guys should all
have a copy madam chair and
members of the committee does it
all have a copy of my full
testimony I'm not going to bore
you with the long version of it
I'm really the best thing that I
can do in support of the bill is
give you all a chance to ask
questions which I'm happy to do.
Okay thank you so we will go to
the audience
and before we do that I need to
I was I was corrected and I'm
glad because that we're all
learning together so actually
the committee members can
propose an amendment during
committee and ask for a vote on
it.
So you can you can propose an
amendment thank you we'll go to
Legislative Council they get
drafted twenty four hours in
advance and request about even
when I'm friendly during
committee hearings so I misled
you never seen that one so what
we're all learning together this
is my seventh year and I've
never seen that done by but I'm
glad.
For for the people who are
looking out.
To make sure that that are you
having trouble hearing me.
Okay.
I don't know exactly what to do.
I will I will just try to speak
louder my husband is actually
cooking in the kitchen and had
me put me put headphones on so I
couldn't hear the civil and the
pop and the secretary and all
that so so what and with this
computer once I plug in my
headphones stand up I can't when
I unplug it doesn't so it's
technical issues all just put it
that way but we will now go to
and I you know I I've never been
accused of having a weak voice
and that so you made my day
so we will go to the audience
first we will go to people who
are in opposition to this bill
you can go when the participant
and raise your hand if you are
in opposition to this bill.
And I don't see anybody there
and so we will do the same thing
if you are in support of this
bill please raise your hand.
Okay and thank the okay I'll let
people have a second to find
things than that.
And figure things out okay so we
have we have people who are in
support and I will ask you if
you want to speak the please
leave your hand up if you don't
please take it down now.
Okay looks like we have two
people for comment and we will
go to Ashley Wagner.
Thank you so much again madam
chair members of the committee
and Ashley Wagner director of
public policy at the New Mexico
chamber of commerce we support
each be twenty eight because
we're the only state in the
country that doesn't allow
customers to build digital goods
and services services to their
mobile device since we're an out
liar it makes easy purchases and
transactions that residents in
other states do routinely more
confusing and difficult in New
Mexico thank you.
Okay thank you I'm and now more
programs all US.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee thank
you for the update it I am the
registered lobbyists of for
rising and and certainly this
bill is a straightforward as was
described by the sponsor who we
think it also is a bit I just
simply wanted to the point of
reference for the committee this
is the first time that this bill
has been hurt by this committee
in previous session this exact
bill was introduced very late
went through all house
committees to unanimous the and
then it died on the floor there
is an FIR for members I know
that was a concern and thank you
for the excellent organizational
meeting where we talked about
some of that and there was an
old FIR and others to do FIR
which is really good no fiscal
impact and it outlines the exact
problem which appears you agrees
so madam chair and members the
committee ask you to support
this we're the only state in the
union as mentioned and this will
help consumers everywhere
especially the pandemic and with
that thank you madam chair
members of the committee.
Thank thank you Marco okay and
now we will go to the committee
for questions and comments.
Representative bird but it.
Representative.
Thank you madam chair and I
think you Representative Romero
what would be included in this
it's it's probably here I'm
gonna be honest I'm not at a
chance to look at the entire
thing but it would it would this
include just all streaming
services or
Andrew anything with there be
anything beyond that.
Thank you madam chair that was
my question when I was pose this
bill all that our expert
Elizabeth great respond to that.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee and representative
so streaming services are are
definitely the the top services
that our customers want this for
so when when the business asked
us to work on this it was
because they were getting
complaints from customers in New
Mexico saying why why can't we
do this
and so streaming services are at
the top apple music Disney plus
but there are other things
beyond entertainment I'm
actually one of the big ones is
digital currency in games so
some people like to have the
option to say yes I would like
to pay for twenty five tokens in
farmville and and be charged
that on my monthly bill I think
that because I'm bringing that
up I think one thing that's
important for the committee to
note is that I'm both federal
rules federal law and New Mexico
state law
Prohibit fetters for prohibit
total phone companies.
From.
I'm limiting a customer's access
to their telephone services
based on unpaid charges that are
not telephone services so if you
accidentally you know maybe over
spend a little bit on your farm
bill currency and a month.
You still have an obligation to
pay your phone company for that
but we would not we're we're not
going to under both federal and
state law restricts your phone
service we would you know it
wouldn't affect whether or not
you're the phone portion of your
bill was delinquent and whether
or not your Sir your service
would be impacted by that.
Thank you Elizabeth and I just
had a a follow up question madam
chair
I'm with a cell phone company
that gives me a promotion of for
Netflix so would it with this
would this have an impact on in
any current promotions that that
are going on.
Don't miss it my Netflix
Elizabeth.
I'll defer to my experts.
Madam chair members of the
committee and representative
thank you that is a great
question and actually no that
gives me the opportunity to let
you all know that the wireless
industry across the board so all
of the major carriers through
our industry group CTIA.
Are fully in support of this
bill so actually what would
happen to you at the end of the
next looks promotion I'm I'm
guessing I can't speak for
whatever carrier you have but
what we would do if it were our
promotion is at the end of the
promotional period you you would
not get to say you know through
a screen Hager times about to
end would you like to opt in to
continue to pay for your Netflix
via your cell phone bill and
that's assuming that your
promotional period was ending
in every other state you'd be
able to say yes please I don't
want my Netflix service to be
affected for a day I need to
catch up on Ozark.
But in the current it because
you were in New Mexico.
Your carrier which state you
under New Mexico law we can't
allow you to do that which to
opt in and keep keep that seem
worse experience instead your
promotional periods over so
you're gonna go have to talk to
that flicks and establish your
account with them starting over
so it's it really is it's a
consumer convenience issue but
it does it's the kind of thing
that can bog down somebody's day
and and it's something that our
business asked us to solve for
our customers in New Mexico.
Thank you.
Any other questions from
members.
Representative Lord.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative Romero we meet
again
so my question is is this brief
can you explain to me why and
with this system how do people
how they gonna be informed are
they going to get text messages
of the gonna get emails you know
how how does opting in opting
out how does that all work at
these.
Thank you madam chair I thank
you Representative that was
additionally my question on
consumer protection just to make
sure that any service that they
didn't want what they be informs
and again there follow federal
law they are highly highly
regulated I will allow my
experts say continue that but
that was absolutely my concern
and I'll let her continue as to
how that how your protections
are in place go ahead.
Madam chair members of the
committee and representative
thank you for that okay very
good question so Representative
Romero is absolutely correct
that phone companies are heavily
regulated and under both state
and federal law
there are two things that are
really important to your
question the first is that this
is always going to be an opt in
rather than an opt out so it's
not like something where you
sign up and the building is
going to continue unless you
cancel what we're talking about
is something different than that
we're talking about a customer
making an affirmative choice to
consent to say yes I want this
so that's one thing and that's
that's according to both federal
and state law so it would never
be something that happened to a
consumer would be something that
consumers that I want.
And the exact means of that are
just going to depend on the
company and whatever is going on
with the promotion it might be
through an app that might be via
email but it would never be
something that you didn't say
affirmatively yes I want to us
and that's that's under federal
law in addition to New Mexico
state law.
the other thing that I want to
point out is that again under
both federal and state law
carriers like Verizon phone
companies are required to set
any charges for non telco
services in a separate part of
your bill so consumers in New
Mexico don't have this
experience but in other places
you have a section of your bill
that is labeled like
telecommunications services and
and has all of the things
related to phone service then
there's a separate section
that's other charges and that's
where you would see these types
of of services whether that was
a subscription fee for your
connected doorbell or whether
that was that you opted into or
whether that was as you know
something for your monthly
Netflix subscription those are
by both by law those that occur
in a separate section of your
bill and they must be clearly
labeled as not telephone
services.
Thank you appreciate that thank
you Representative Romero thank
you for your expert and thank
you madam chair that's all my
only question thank you okay any
other questions from members.
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair
The.
Representative Romero or the
effort to to make a decision on.
Its reserves.
I have elderly relative.
That.
Every couple months or so ends
up of five Facebook accounts and
ends up with you have.
You know we should show
something and buy something.
Or she can't figure out again
and Facebook social start
another one.
And and so then you get a
request we usually figure that
out from Facebook because the
whole family gets a new
framework quest right.
And in this condition.
Could you please talk about what
happens with somebody that it's
not always there that makes
sense and even though we we turn
off the options for for this
person to be able to purchase
anything.
She does a reset on our phone
guess what happens.
I'm that option goes away so
please tell me how we protect
the consumer sometimes that
don't that don't understand what
they just agreed to a seven year
old granddaughter that would do
the same thing but like so.
If you can please tell me how we
protect the consumer if if say a
parent or guardian of the number
of the person a month later when
they get the bills figures out
something happened.
And so.
Explain to me thank you very
much.
Thank you madam chair I thank
you Representative Pettigrew
your concerns or money I had
heard stories about kids you
know charging up a ten thousand
dollars worth of extra points so
they can keep a game played so
that was absolutely my concern
same thing I do take care of my
elderly grandmother and you
always worry with your tablet
what she might be purchasing as
far as understanding how that
works and what credit cards are
attached and and how the billing
works again as a consumer with
any of those it.
Angel problems you could always
go to the carrier to the
organization sells all at my
expert Phil and how how that's
handled currently with the
telecoms industry outside of New
Mexico.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee and representative
thank you for that question that
is that is absolutely one of the
things that we always get asked
about when we talk about this
issue as the parent of a five
year old myself I relate to it
and Representative Romero is
completely accurate
the Kerry carriers offer an
option for you to turn the
stability off at the account
level so if you never want the
ability for grandma if you are
if you're like this is not a
good idea for Graham what have
this purchasing power in her
hands you can call the carrier
and they I don't want my account
to be able to bill for not focus
services and that's something
that that you can elect so that
you avoid those issues that
you're talking about at the you
know at the phone or technology
or app level we also we also all
have programs and this is
required by federal law and I
think each carrier does that a
little differently but I can
tell you I I actually put myself
through the training for agents
for cases where somebody's kid
orders a ton of services or
something like that and we have
a program you know we work with
our customers typically you know
the only time that you would see
an issue for a customer would be
if it became like a really
serious repeat problem and then
we will probably would suggest
that they turn off that that
capability in their account but
we work with our customers if
there accidental charges and
typically that's not something
that there can see on their
bill.
Thank you madam chair that's
all.
Do we have any other questions
actually you all I ask my
questions I had that.
Our great nephew who ran up an
incredible bill on his
grandmother's phone great
grandmother's phone and the that
was kind of a mask but.
Kids will be kids I guess.
So with that I will entertain a
motion.
Madam chair good to pass okay do
I have a second.
I will second.
So Allison will you take the
role.
Representative Herrera school
yes
Representative Lord yes.
Representative Pettigrew yes.
I share more yes.
Madam chair Thompson.
And we have.
By a vote of four to five two
zero you happen to pass
Representative Romero and then
we will go on to our our last
bill for today
which is house bill fifty six
and Representative Lewis and I
are co sponsors on this bill but
I think I will just let that
Representative is so if you
could let in Representative
Lewis and mark Representative
also professed go.
Rhymes with the Basco pro Basco
Let them in and the and I will I
will continue as chair
And and let them present the
bill so I see there is more work
and and Representative Louis
should be coming on.
Okay yes yes okay okay we can
take our road show on the road
you too so go ahead whenever
you're ready.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you committee members
You're saving the best for last
since the bill that I've been
working with the representative
excuse me chair Thompson
for a while now so we're excited
to be in front of the group
today.
I'm I just want to talk a little
bit about human trafficking it's
a crime involving the use of
force fraud or coercion to
compel a group to perform some
type of labor or commercial sex
so human trafficking can happen
in any community and anyone can
be traffic regardless of ace
right race excuse.
Age race gender or nationality
traffickers might use violence
physical or psychological
torture manipulation or false
promises of well paying jobs or
amount of relationships to
entrap victims into trafficking
situations traffickers usually
target people in severe poverty.
What H. B. fifty six does is it
in places mmhm excuse me it
places increased emphasis on
human trafficking in the
criminal code and strengthens
laws on child prostitution and
protects child victims from
prosecution it increases the
stringency of sex offender
registration laws so as I said
chair Thompson and I sponsored
this bill two years ago.
We received bipartisan support
at that time and it passed the
house and it died in the Senate
so we're hoping that we can get
it passed this session and we do
have our expert witness mark
Bosco help is that the correctly
with the attorney general's
office and madam chair if we
could let him at a few things as
well if you like thank you.
Go ahead mark.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee for for allowing
me to.
Out a little bit more to to
Representative Lewis is
assisting presentation regarding
what this bill is about first a
special note I hope people can
notice that I mean I guess I
wear blue suits a lot but I am
wearing a blue suit eight I just
because it is a human
trafficking awareness month this
month in blue is the color to
help raise awareness regarding
this issue and so I think that
this month although certainly
this bill that passed
unanimously as amended at the
last session I still think this
is a great time to look back on
how our laws protect survivors
of this modern form of slavery
in one point we have a lot to
better protect survivors of this
crime and help them to
transition back set to taking
back control their own lives
with support from the community
you know especially at this
point in our state's history and
sort of the the national
enrollment there's a reckoning
regarding how our laws work and
what communities they can better
Sir and this human trafficking
law certain certainly fits
within that Moul this last month
late I had the opportunity to
presented at the human
trafficking conference and you
know as part of that research
for it I was able to see the the
state of New Mexico is not
immune to some of the historical
and structural if we have with
us this one looks back at our
territorial history some of the
earliest decisions during the
army of the Romero at eighteen
fifty seven decision where the
holding was basically that.
Yes debt peonage it's something
that is legally respected in the
territory of New Mexico but
without notice the court will
not allow that debt peonage
status to transmit the children
are our state also has the
ignominious are rather are
territory at the time of the
ignominious distinction of after
the thirteenth amendment was
enacted prohibiting slavery
entirely.
Our mention of New Mexico is in
and one of the first statutes
that was enacted pursuant to the
thirteenth amendment in eighteen
sixty seven an act prohibiting
the continuation of peonage
within the territory of New
Mexico so in considering that
legacy in in reflecting over how
the laws can better protect
those that are most vulnerable
in our community we are are the
office of the Attorney General
or where I work on the system
turn it all up partnered with
with representatives Lewis and
and chair Thompson and
legislation to address some of
the continuing shortcomings that
we have in recognizing the
incredible trauma that survivors
of this crime experience into
making the laws more effective
for their purpose and that is
protecting life protecting the
dignity and value if you.
Our hopes to make laws on the
books better reflect the model
of justice that better breaks
the bonds between traffickers to
those that are exploiting
survivors and the victims and
treats them with the dignity and
compassion that they deserve so
we've noted that passed
unanimously and also I just want
to close with the goal of this
bill is to provide a more
effective legal means against
track traffickers in to be more
protective of survivors and more
respective of their dignity and
to make sure that a lot reflects
the value of their lives.
It's approximately thirty one
pages I think it's the amended
version of the bill I think just
one page actually discusses.
Making sure that the the
punishment for this crime is
commensurate with the the the
degree of offense in the state
of New Mexico just revised one
example over sort of the
mismatch between how this crime
is treated in the criminal
justice system if one were to
trafficking a controlled
substance of something that is a
material thank something that
does not have hopes and
aspirations on its own first
time offense nine your penalty
in the state of New Mexico
second time offense mandatory
eighteen year events in the
state of New Mexico rescue take
a human and against the value of
that human being the dignity
that they have aspirations and
hopes that they have for their
own lives in the state of New
Mexico for adults it's a three
year penalty it's one third the
amount obviously that is fixed
in this bill the other thirty
pages are devoted to work
towards doing common sense
things like making sure that
when someone is reviewing a case
for human trafficking
prosecution they got to
communicate with the survivor of
that crime we make sure that
thank you in tracking is
included in the victim's rights
act so there's notification
about survivor that some of the
reported.
Just falsely the cracks don't
happen less likely to happen in
the future in terms of other
common sense reforms that are
here we we make sure that that
human trafficking is included as
a predicate offence for a
pattern of racketeering activity
to help make sure when the
mandatory restitution order goes
down one of the best tools for
effectuated having a survivor
get back on their feet that the
state can pursue forfeiture upon
criminal conviction for those
assets to help make sure that
that actually becomes a reality
versus something that you know
becomes an aspiration or dream
or something else finally in
regards to a reforming how human
trafficking is treated in
regards to registration
requirements this bill
introduces and invites judicial
discretion to prevent things
like the upstream case where a
multi billionaire prolific
rapist was able to take
advantage of the state of New
Mexico's lax treatment for those
crimes that are
disproportionately impacted not
just on people on color but on
women as well and to make sure
that those exact types of abuses
to happen in the future and so
we don't go through some
mechanical fixes to that while
also ensuring that there's
judicial discretion as noted in
the form of this bill I thank
you again for the opportunity to
speak at all me myself again
madam chair and wait until I'm
called on.
Thank you mark and
Representative Lewis so we will
go to the audience so first we
will go if you are in opposition
of this bill please raise your
hand M. on on the zoom and that
again that's under that
participate if you click on
participants you should see a
place to raise your hand.
So okay I'm so I see some people
here and and then again if you
want to speak leave your hand up
and I will call on you so we
will start with the Rikki Lee
Chavis.
Are you there we're hearing some
clicking I don't know.
Okay I see your microphone come
up I just need to be more
patient I know that we should
probably all while we're waiting
for the the person to speak we
should all make it a point to
take a deep breath and chill out
while we're waiting those few
seconds because I get antsy so
I'm telling myself as much as
you all so Rikki Lee whenever
you're ready.
Rikki Lee we can't hear you I
don't know I don't see your like
the more I was seeing it before
okay there okay I think are you
there Rikki Lee.
What I'm gonna do is I'm skip
over Rikki Lee until we can
figure out what's going on and
go to Kim Chavez Cook wait wait
wait I see Ricky Ricky Lee
microphone up again.
I'm.
Thank you madam chair thank you
members of the committee Kim
Chavez Cook with the law offices
of the public defender and I
want to thank the sponsors and
Mr provides go for their hard
work on this bill I know that we
did consult a bit last year when
this bill was also coming
forward and I will keep my
comments fairly short because I
think some of the concerns that
we have we might be able to
discuss and address between here
in the next committee but I'll
start with you you know the the
things that I do like about this
bill we of course support
protecting victims from
prosecution and ensuring that
they have the opportunity to
recover from these experiences
that adding them to the victims
of crimes Act makes complete
sense I do have some concern
about the breadth of some of the
language changes that would
include non traffickers into
what not only that the stigma
and and title of a conviction
like human trafficking but also
to receive the penalties that
traffickers are receiving under
this bill for patrons for
example but you know without
providing and in fact
specifically saying that they
there's no defense for mistake
of fact so I I flag that as a
potential issue we might be able
to address and just more broadly
and general we have and of
course good reasonable minds can
disagree on the policy but it is
our perspective that increasing
penalties does not actually
deter criminal conduct and so we
do have some concerns about some
of the increased penalties in
this bill many of which include
mandatory time which we also
generally have concerns about
mandatory sentencing so those
are just sort of broader policy
issues that we have I will point
out when it comes to those
penalties just as a practical
matter that on human trafficking
is sort of unique and statutes
in the criminal code in that it
specifically.
Authorizes someone to be
convicted of not only human
trafficking but other crimes
that are committed in that
constitute that human
trafficking that also exist in
the statute books which is
normally double jeopardy and not
permissible it is permissible
for human trafficking and so
what we do actually see in these
cases is that those crimes can
really add up to a very
significant sentence under
existing law so while third
degree felony sounds sounds like
and it's not commensurate with
the crime that is partly because
people will also be convicted of
crimes like kidnapping and C. S.
P. and battery and various other
things and I would point to
people to a case that we cited
in our our Agency FY are that we
that we submitted I don't know
if it made it into the LFC one
or not which is state be person
where a man convicted of human
trafficking because of all of
those other crimes that we're
also committed in the process
received a fifty six year prison
sentence and so I would just
point that out to the committee
to to maybe offset the sense of
of urgency to increase the
penalties because prosecutors
and judges already have quite a
few tools available to ensure
long sentences in these cases
and so I again I thank everyone
for their work on this bill and
I hope we continue to have an
open dialogue as it proceeds
through the process.
Thank you and Rikki Lee
hopefully we've got to.
Able to speak.
Madam chair you able to hear me
we are okay thank you I
apologize I logged in on a
different device so hopefully
this works.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Rikki
Lee Chavez I am the legislative
coordinator for the New Mexico
criminal defense lawyers
association and I'm actually
wearing two hats today for the
benefit of the new members I
also wanted to introduce and I'm
safe and I'm safe is a coalition
of more than thirty member
organizations that seek to make
the Mexico safer for children
and families New Mexico current
events lawyers association is
one of its members what we do is
as a coalition we give each
piece of legislation that falls
into these categories a letter
grade and the association and
its organizations review
different parts of that
legislation and provide that
report card on our website and
to the members I apologize that
the members were unable to
receive the report card for this
legislation we all are working
to make sure we get those to you
in advance and I will make sure
that the sponsor and the members
get this report card I would
just highlight for the committee
that the coalition did identify
that there is a strength with
this bill however the weaknesses
due out number that strength and
so it was given a C. letter
grade the strengths of the bill
is that it does protect human
trafficking victims from being
charged with prostitution it
brings state law in line with
federal age definitions for
child sex trafficking victims
however there are some
significant weaknesses I want to
repeat what Mr Chavez Cook said
and I apologize that I was an
annual to hear all of her points
but I would highlight for the
committee that eliminating
statutes of limitations
sometimes goes against the grain
of what the intent is in that
you do have things like
witnesses or statement that
become outdated memories fade
and you end up actually giving
people hope that certain thing.
As might happen when the longer
time goes on it's harder to
collect that sort of evidence so
I would like the committee to
pay special attention to that
issue thank you madam chair
members for your attention to
this matter.
Thank you okay and we will go
back to the audience for people
who are in support of this
legislation and again raise your
hand and we'll take a quick look
at that
Give you a couple more minutes a
couple more seconds to get your
hand raised okay and and and.
Okay and now if you want to
speak on this bill please leave
your hand raised.
Somehow I think we can turn this
into a game show of who gets
their hand up first and you get
to answer questions about
legislative history or something
and will.
I'm sure the members would be
glad to pitch in for lovely
prices so we will start with
that with Dick Mason go ahead
Dick whenever whenever you're
ready.
Madam chair members of the
committee first I want to
apologize for not addressing the
chair and committee before I'm
getting used to this environment
to so
so madam chair members the
committee and I I want to thank
the sponsor bring this my name
is Dick Mason chair the action
committee the league of women
voters.
Of New Mexico in twenty fourteen
are we going to Representative
of the United States past
resolution on human trafficking
and I'll just read briefly later
one voters opposes all forms of
domestic and international human
trafficking of adults and
children including sex
trafficking and labor
trafficking we can send a human
trafficking to be a form of
modern day slavery and believe
that every measures should be
taken and every effort should be
made for legislation and changes
in public policy to prevent
human trafficking and I that we
support this legislation and
urgent to bass thank you.
Okay we have no rain Kelly.
Okay good afternoon everyone
thank you madam chair and
committee members.
This bill because it protects
finally our native communities
in New Mexico also the our
children of New Mexico where
many of New Mexico and use of
New Mexico that they we have
finally have that protection
that we have.
And we will no longer have
billionaires coming to New
Mexico to take advantage of our
loss.
And I I appreciate your vote on
this bill to pass thank you.
Thank you marine and now we have
Dallas gas ball grasp all.
Thank you madam chair and fellow
committee members.
As a survivor of human
trafficking I believe house bill
fifty six is essential for the
safety of our most vulnerable
and it allows healing human
trafficking is a heinous crime
that involves our most
vulnerable populations.
Workers are violent sexual
offenders and should register
such forced coerced sex is rape
regardless of how it takes place
right this right.
Which makes this a violent
sexual offense and they should
register as such offenders.
As of now the statue limitations
does not take into the account
the fear and healing that many
times.
the fear that is.
There is a are out of the
environment and it doesn't take
into consideration the fact that
A lot of times survivors realize
that their victims the they
tried to.
Justify it because it is such a
year.
Painful painful experience to
lose your your freedom.
If we broke down human
trafficking into crimes involved
it is multiple rates today
assault assault with a deadly
lacked economic kidnapping and
stripping freedom and civil
rights and that is just the
beginning of what happens to the
survivors of human trafficking
so I will ask you to look into
your hearts and see that this
heinous crime need serious
reform when it comes to New
Mexico state laws yes they can
be charged with other crimes but
my trafficker got only thirteen
years in this is federally so
federal supposed to do more time
than say and she was charged
with kidnapping assault and
multiple other charges and he
only got thirteen years so.
Even though some traffickers do
get more time there some not
still seem to fall through the
cracks.
So.
S. history as this bill is
critical for the safety in
healing of all future victims
this is just the beginning of an
opportunity to make a difference
and we need your vote thank you.
Thank you so much Dallas we now
have Kathleen Burke.
Madam chair are you able to hear
me we can hear you yes casting
thank you madam madam chair
members of the committee thank
you Kathleen Burke of the
Albuquerque of Albuquerque and a
member of the New Mexico human
trafficking task force and the
southeast area community
policing Council.
Madam chair and representative
Lewis thank you for your
sponsorship of this bill HB
fifty six sex offender in human
trafficking changes thank you
for the expert witness in favor
of this legislation our
assistant New Mexico Attorney
General mark pro Basco.
To the committee an audience I
need to warn the committee and
audience that I will be
addressing explicit topics and
using explicit words please
protect us necessary anyone in
your immediate environment.
I have advocated for sex
trafficking victims for eight
years and twenty nineteen a
member of the New Mexico
legislature courts corrections
and justice House committee
stated that quote sex
trafficking is some of the worst
crime in America today on quote
he is correct sex trafficking is
never as simple as the sale of
forced labor law enforcement
reports the co occurrence of
these following crimes multiple
rape forced abortion forced to
drug addiction physical abuse
including beating with
implements and branding of
victims the same type of
branding Houston livestock
management.
As well as starvation emotional
abuse and removal of victims
from his or her support system.
In the state of New Mexico there
are an estimated eleven thousand
plus incidences of illegal sex
trafficking every day.
Which is considered to be a very
conservative estimate these
eleven thousand plus incidences
of sex trafficking crimes
include children teens and
adults these crimes commonly
occur up to street level at
truck stops online at massage
parlors and it then camps of the
oil and gas industry.
Sex trafficking is happening
commonly in numerous places in
our communities.
New Mexico has not notoriously
and I will add a gregis Lee
light sentencing for sex
traffickers.
All of the state's surrounding
New Mexico have stronger
sentencing for human trafficking
crimes.
Each and every state bordering
New Mexico has stronger
penalties for sex trafficking
offenses.
The fear of those of us
monitoring sex trafficking crime
is that New Mexico without
increases to sentencing is very
much at risk for becoming a
haven for sex traffickers who
are aware of low penalties and
therefore low risk of committing
sex trafficking crimes in New
Mexico.
After eight years of working
with sex trafficking victims
research and my experience bear
out that only a fortunate very
few sex trafficking victims
survive five years beyond having
been trafficked.
I will repeat that very few sex
trafficking victims survive five
years beyond having been
trafficked.
Even fewer regional level which
would qualify as rehabilitated.
Similarly as we have found that
it is incredibly difficult and
rare to rehabilitate victims I
know of no rehabilitation
programs anywhere in the world
which rehabilitate sex
trafficker offenders.
I strongly support HB fifty six
ladies and chairman of the
committee and I are to do pass
thank you.
Thank you Kathleen and now we
have hi there at C..
Good afternoon can you hear me.
We can.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is heather Act
see I'm of sure advocate for the
lifelink and I'm also survivors
of human trafficking
We are supported a bill fifty
six because it opens a lot of
doors up for resources for the.
Human trafficking committee and
the population
A little bit about my experience
as a pure advocate is I've been
I've been advocating for about
ten years and there are little
to no resources for not only our
youth are survivors who are
still actively being victimized
and we're still trying to reach
services in the mental health
field substance abuse and you
know homelessness
As the use of I come from the
billing of the Pueblo of the
gonna and as a use I left my
Pueblo very early and ended up
being victimized later on as
they became older teen and at
that time human trafficking was
in acknowledged or they don't
really have a term for it so
during my exploitation that was
in a lot of resources that was
able to tap into and tell I was
detained and you know
criminalized and
institutionalized.
Since then working with the
lifelink I've been able to
advocate on behalf of a lot of
survivors have come into our
program by housing them and you
know in navigating resources who
are open to working with
individuals who have such a
dramatic background.
This bill will help identify the
population that.
These traffickers not only.
Work themselves into but also
pretty them on the map learning
about you know different traits
a what a trucker looks like but
also it'll help.
Maximize and.
Raise awareness about our
wonderful populations especially
in Indian country here in New
Mexico.
It also helps survivors know
that once this bill passes.
That they can come forward
especially those who are still
being victimized.
Because at least I can see that
their traffickers are being.
You know called out an account
being whole held accountable for
what they've done.
It also gives you the chance to
come forward and have a voice.
To speak about how they've been
exploited in the community.
I'm sorry this is still really
touchy subject for me but.
Of the ten years that take your
time and and I'm.
We're we're hearing you just
take your time take a deep
breath.
Thank you madam chair.
I have been advocating for
survivors of the human
trafficking population did not
have been a lot of changes in
the community and helping them
stay connected to resources
because they do.
Fall back into.
The same patterns that they were
they were rescued from because
they don't how long term
supporters support services like
being financially supported or
housing long term housing that
they can access.
This bill helps bring to light
that.
Although we can connect them as
much as we can and the community
they still need a long term
support to address the trauma
that they've been put that on
and exploitation that still goes
on.
You know this bill really is in
representation of those who
still you know most silenced by
the traffickers who are still
being victimized.
Those who are lost.
We don't have a waste anymore.
So I ask for your support in
passing this bill house bill
fifty six.
Thank you.
Thank you heather we will go to
the New Mexico human trafficking
conference.
Someone is someone there from
the New Mexico human trafficking
and I can't see it anymore or
what that may be a mistake.
If you if you are representing
that group you are you can I
need yourself and speak to us.
Hi can you hear me we can hear
you hi my name is more in the
maxilla and I am a victim
advocate specialist with the
likely and I have been working
with
Image tracking becomes on and
off for nine years
and I do support that HB fifty
six bill
I do.
I know that this bill is very
important for the victims today
we are working with as well as
are you
There's no amount of time that a
traffic really thanks for what
they did to a big dam who is
traumatized for a lifetime
They really do need the support
of the community as well as the
legislation office.
And all that higher keepers
that.
Support and recognize why we
need to change our laws and make
constructive far harsher
penalties against traffickers.
It isn't a easy job working with
victims of trafficking
You see a lot of their trauma
extreme trauma and like heather
had mentioned earlier yes they
do it is hard for a lot of money
to speak for themselves because
they don't know that they are
victims and they don't have a
voice so we need the community
to come together and be a place
for them and to fight for them
and be.
Either advocates to stand behind
them and let them know that they
are not alone and that they have
the people and communities
around them support.
That will continue to fight for
them and I know that will open a
lot of doors for them.
That'll give them strength that
will give them hope.
To come forward and to not only
fight for themselves but to
fight for others as well.
And I thank you for giving me
this time to speak on this
behalf and I.
Thank you for all that are
supporting this bill thank you.
Thank you and we will go to
ebony Archie can Tana.
Hello everyone can hear me.
Yes we can hear you.
Hi my name is ebony archdeacon
Connor I am I work for the
lively as a victim advocate but
I am also is a vibrant human
trafficking I am in support of
this bill not only for myself
but for other victims out here
my case actually happened back
in two thousand and ten when I
was eighteen years old and I was
trafficked over the internet and
for me coming from North
Carolina to New Mexico to a
whole nother place are not
knowing where I was going or
what I was going what was gonna
happen to me
It was hard and once I found out
that my trafficker was out I was
never told to me I had to find
out through at a drug conference
that we had last year and for me
as a survivor we need this bill
passed because no one knows the
struggles that we go through
after.
The after being a victim because
it is like the.
The the pain never ends not just
the mental pain not the
emotional claim that the
physical pain as well I actually
have medical cards for building
traffic I can not carry my own
children and people don't
understand how much of the toll
it takes on your life and how
much it makes you the less of
the women and me coming into
this at eighteen years old I was
still basically that's high I
was raised in the southern
Baptist home where you know we
were not we were told don't ask
don't tell so for me I was stuck
in a place where.
I couldn't get the help that I
needed coming to New Mexico
state with the lively is what
saved my life and a lot of other
children and traffic late
trafficking victims they need
the same thing they need to know
that we do have the support here
that we're not going to get lost
in the system especially the
children
because the children nobody
really cares to be honest they
just say all this is just
another life to the it because
there are tracking with them but
we are human we have a ways and
also I work with the lively
blast because I want to give
other survivors of what to let
them know that they are no
longer a long they don't have to
sit there and go into hiding I
have been in hiding for eight
years before I started working
with this agency and because of
that I've lost myself I lost my
medicines lessons of myself and
myself where I did not know who
I was aware I was going to do so
passing this bill will not only
open the doors for the survivors
that are now working in the
field but also set for the
survivors that are still have a
ways out here too especially the
children the children need to
speak up and be heard instead of
being shut down and people
telling them that didn't happen
it should not be like that so I
am definitely in favor of
passing this bill not only by my
style and the pip my colleagues
but for all the rest of the
people in this world that no
longer have place thank you for
listening to me to.
Thank you have any and we have
Nicole Martin.
Hello can you hear me.
Yes we can hear any call.
Yes everyone a nickel more in
and I'm in support of this bill
because often times.
The respond or the response and
the reaction to people who have
been trafficked or are currently
being trafficked
Often falls to the wayside.
And I'm supporting this bill
because I hope that we can hold
perpetrators more countable
especially when it comes to
indigenous communities
I'm very very familiar with how
often times to it's not
strangers that prey upon others
to traffic sometimes it's family
members that traffic their own
families and.
That is not the core values of
the communities
traditions that we come from and
so.
Since.
We can help girl games and going
data these people.
I think having legislation that
will definitely hold the hold
the perpetrators accountable to
the fullest extent
is needed thank you.
Thank you and that's all we have
for public comment and I I want
to say to the survivors.
Thank you
if you are not if you are not
seeing us you probably don't
have a dry eye in the house
including mine.
And your bravery is.
Incredible and we thank you so
much for for being willing to
put yourself out there.
We will go to the committee for
questions.
So I'm.
If anyone is able to speak.
And has a question okay
Representative Romero thank you
for for give me a break to go
get a clue that.
Thank you madam chair and I just
want to echo your
thanks to the it the folks in
the audience sharing your
stories this is such a critical
issue for our state and updating
these laws is essential I
believe and making sure that we
are targeting those who are some
of the most egregious violators
of our laws and I there's no way
to as many have already stated
to
do revisionist history with the
pain and suffering that so many
have discussed but we will do
our very best to to find a way
in the law to to ensure that
there's justice brought and of
course prevent this from
happening to future future
generations and to those who may
be threatened by these
perpetrators
that said madam chair I do have
some questions on some of the
technical situations in the bill
I want to thank the sponsors I
had a bill I believe last year
on looking at modernizing some
of these laws in particular
in making sure that we did
increase penalties which is the
only time I would have agreed
with this that because it was
just three years and that was a
bit shocking to me but I did
want to ask about that
specifically to the sponsor as
to how so what we've understood
from a lot of the speakers and
and from the bill itself is that
the crime of human trafficking
was a three year threshold on
however when you are prosecuting
this you're looking at
kidnapping you're looking at
assault battery coercion itself
in other ways so I'm really
curious how do you define human
trafficking improve it outside
of what that threshold would be
with a fifty year sentence that
we've heard about another
regards of.
Proving this different things
how does this add to the tools
in the toolbox for for this
criminalization and and how does
it make it better if we're
worried about deterrence and
otherwise how to business help.
Thank you representative thank
you madam chair I'm going to
defer to to our expert witness.
If you could answer those
questions based market yes thank
you madam chair representative
Romero and and sponsor
Representative Lewis in order to
that question I think it's
instructive to look at the the
cases that we've actually had
developed here in New Mexico
take a loss Carson case for
example now lost Carson was
convicted of a bunch of fourth
degree felonies for promoting
prostitution Google third degree
felonies and that was in
relation to that are referred to
as victim eight the the person
is a victim maybe just because
of privacy concerns and we I'm
just gonna stick that format
thank you may with someone who's
a drug habit have been control
and conditioned and violently
controlled so that she relied on
the perpetrators for Carson for
controlled substances continue
to service that addiction
continues that as a mechanism
for all now eighteen years of
the signs that Mr Carson which
received was not for you know
this this month long years long
a period of time where he was
conditioning a person present is
it essentially boiled boiled
down if one reads the opinion to
a phone call he made for victims
to be who was a minor and
threatening her with physical
harm if she did not return the
case I think it is instructive
the distinction between crimes
like kidnapping in the crime
like human trafficking
kidnapping that requires a
relatively close and needs nexus
but a prosecutor has to show
between violence directed
violence and some further costs
for that individual wears human
trafficking deals with
exploitation sorry this light
sensor it's going out I'm in in
terms of drawing the distinction
between them think for example.
The victim who is punched ten
times.
Let's say that there's no great
bodily harm we're dealing
Senator territory there's a two
year statute of limitations ten
times so that it is right of the
eleven Onge compels that victims
to continue working in
commercial sex or labor or for
services and so the distinction
and not just improve ability but
also in actually still providing
a realistic Avenue for justice
for the survivors is is just
critically important take for
example
is there some discussion
regarding statute of limitations
so a trafficker does not need to
use violence in order to compel
someone to to to work.
Take one of the earliest
instructive example United
States be
Kosminsky the involves two
individuals who are mentally
they were deemed to be mentally
incapacitated that we're being
compelled to work sorry I waving
my hand it's just I don't know
like to keep flashing on and off
and you know I've been here all
afternoon in the likes of and
find I think it's because I'm
sitting yes we can.
Sign up for but in that case of
these two individuals were
compelled to work in subzero
temperatures for years and years
and years Representative wasn't
a gun to their head the threat
was not that someone was going
to go out and train them the
threat that they face was a
threat of being
institutionalized.
Being institutionalized that was
the thing that happened down
working at the spirit dairy farm
for years and years and years
and that was one of the first
cases that when the.
Or in nineteen eighty six
indicated that you know that
doesn't fit with our current
involuntary servitude statutes
Congress got around to it and
acting trafficking victims
protection act IDA are statute
is kind of similar in some ways
that statute but it was
motivated in part by something
that is completely distinct from
the use necessarily of a crime
of violence as instrumentality
all these two circles may have
some intersection in some cases
but in terms of delivering on
the promise of substantial
losses fibers it's an adequate
to be relying on one particular
species of control over that
because many of you could be a
threat of deportation it could
be a threat of being shamed
etcetera and so that's the way
that I would sort of describing
and yeah our part of those two
subjects Representative Romero
madam chair and sponsor
Representative Lewis.
Thank you madam chair and just
to clarify your increasing from
three years to how many years.
To a second degree felony for
adults to nine years.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative and Mr resco I
guess just a few more questions
on that in that regard on the
statute of limitations one of
the red flags for us is just
that you know when we're
thinking about procedure any
referred to a lot of court cases
you know how to make that
streamlines the every it's
really effective is to at least
know that again memories are
refreshed folks are are fresh in
the mind and I know that too
with a lot of these crimes that
we're discussing you know it may
take years for someone to come
forward with what's happened to
them I'm just wondering why it
fully eliminate the statute of
limitations verses provide sort
of a way to to make sure that we
can be a line in there that
justice is served without it
going you know I fifty a hundred
years I'm I'm just you know I'm
really curious as to what that
is in part in particular for
procedural purposes.
Representative Louis made may
answer this question.
So in regards to the statute of
limitations where where that
actually start around is it's
important that the statute of
limitations in every state
including state New Mexico as an
active Wendi essentially we're
not the on the street the reason
why human trafficking is treated
differently is take for example
a person who's threatened with
deportation now currently as a
third degree felony that is a
five year statute of limitations
all yes what in terms of federal
law let's say that the
trafficker actually is
successful executing their
threat of deportation yes you
can't return to the United
States for at a minimum of five
years and I I believe the
maximum that can be an outright
ban but I I believe it's five
ten and twenty years or a
lifetime ban.
The United States that's just a
person who perhaps doesn't speak
English as a first language
perhaps is not aware of the fact
that what they were going
through when they were given
false promises inducements when
they were harbored within the
United States and shielded away
from sources of outside help
that is where the statute of
limitations modification came
from a place of how do we make
sure that the law itself does
not become an instrumentality of
the the trafficker so there's
that situation we also modified
you know taking care of the rest
issue for things like
prostitution as well for sort of
a subset of that specific type
of problem in terms of the
actual effect on this issue
assuming that the change is
state law in New Mexico since
the nineteen ninety seven a
revision or statute of
limitations is that provide what
first realities there is no
statute of limitations and so
the question we're presented
with this do we cut it would
what a person come up with a
unique scheme for statute of
limitations for second degree
felonies or does it make more
sense given the fact that
victims are conditioned not to
trust outside help and that
there already is a natural due
process restraint in terms of a
pre prosecution delay the end of
the fact that in general cases
do not get better with time how
do we make sure that victims
know that they are not on the
clock survivors are not on Oct
and that their access to justice
and they're reports is not
diminished just because a
tractor happens to be better at
trafficking in terms of these
inducements that keep people
away from out or successful
deportation type scenario thank
you madam chair Representative
Romero and sponsor.
Thank you madam chair thank you
for that response it is still
concerning I'm this isn't
Judiciary Sicko I don't know
what the sweet spot would be as
far as procedural process you
know purposes go it's just that
you know to to let it go for
ever is is the worry and just on
procedural I'm a baby higher so
forgive me second year law
student and so with that because
it's it is a big bill so forgive
me for everybody for second if
they're out of here but
I do have some questions about
the residents of the of New
Mexico I understand this is that
we pull of the Jeffrey up
stealing poll is as was said in
the in testimony how do we
enforce that how do we I mean
from an enforcement perspective
but also you know what what is
this sort of foreseen situation
as to how we hold folks
accountable that may have a
residence in our in our state
and our you know trafficking
humans outside of the state but
they happen to have a residence
here I'm just trying to think
through the logistical
challenges of that and if
someone was going to report
someone or or how did how would
your office be able to enforce
that and and prosecute.
Sponsor Representative Louis
mansard question.
Yes and madam chair for the
purposes of moving forward more
carefree to answer.
And and just before you do
Representative Romero thanks for
all your questions just to
follow up on your last one this
bill was actually amended and
House Judiciary last year so we
take a I think we actually had a
committee substitute for that so
there was a lot of work done
before it actually passed House
Judiciary.
And just just to jump in there
on for for for the baby
legislators since we're talking
about babies is I'm if you
haven't ever sat in on Judiciary
it may be worthwhile to just to
I mean they sit there and they
they look at it a comma has
enough ink on it or not I mean
they they Representative they
break it down to to the tiniest
of the tiniest bit so what the I
mean I'm not trying to throw
throw responsibility for bills
on to other committees but that
is not our expertise we thank
you for your that's the only
lawyer we have on the on this
committee so we are we are not
task to to tear it apart from a
legal standpoint because that's
not the expertise of this
committee so go ahead mark.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative Romero and and
thank you for the clarification
Representative Lewis a regarding
being able to take into the
these specific technical
questions so context that it
comes up is that sorna has a
penalty to four three Phelps
county for failure to register
other contacts that it's come up
where I've prosecuted is been
someone's been arrested they run
a background check you were
convicted for criminal sexual
penetration state acts did you
did you register a tractor
registry there's no registry
there are or one of the things
of this bill did and it's a I
keep referring to it as an
amended form it's HB fifty six
incorporates the amendments that
happened HB to thirty seven that
was pretty similar and and like
ninety five percent of that
about one of the things that is
unique about the the treatment
here is in regards to sort out
and in particular the
reciprocity question mark is
that European in not everybody
knows what sonic is.
The sex offender registry
notification act and it requires
folks they're convicted of
certain sex offenses to register
and when you look at the case
law two of the the really
instructive cases I would
invite.
Those that are interested in the
subject look into a state the
hall the twenty thirteen state
Supreme Court decision and say
the planet for the New Mexico
border the peels at least on
this issue regarding those that
are moving in as convicted sex
offenders and the contacts of
those cases come up procedurally
is criminally you very well
could have situations where
someone is is uncertain
regarding their status of
previously and what you saw in
the theme case was basically a
back and forth dialogue between
one sheriff in the state of New
Mexico and this person this bill
fixes that unique problem by
providing a mechanism for
oversight to clarify any
confusion that out of state
registrant would have in the
state of New Mexico so that
instead of investing resources
preliminary hearing or grand
jury charges and dealing with
the criminally those things can
be actually determined by a
court upon petition by the
registrant but in terms of the
contacts that this is come up
that is through education of
that criminal portion that
previously we've been able to to
review it and this does provide
a mechanism for court determined
clarification that issue.
Thank you madam chair and
representative for more.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Mr Vesco just
to a couple other questions with
that
on the consequences of
association with human
trafficking you know we've
touched on felony murder in the
worries that causes with
somebody associated with the
crime
can you just describe how that's
being processed and and are they
also second degree first degree
felons if they were by
association also part of that
operation and how that would be
handled.
Madam chair representative or
more if I understand your
question this is in regards to
whenever you have an
organization or a conspiracy
between multiple entities and
and how that would work out.
Madam chair representative
Romero the the way it works in
in New Mexico criminally it is
through one of two ways the
state of New Mexico
of punishes the agreement self
it does not require any act in
furtherance of the agreement for
purposes of a conspiracy
liability so for a second degree
felony that the penalty would be
a third degree felony for
whatever folks are engaged with
each other in agreeing to commit
an act like trafficking for
purposes of racketeering the way
that that that would work
whenever you're dealing with
perhaps a more organized and to
see where there is an
association of factor perhaps
even a legal entity that's
involved in in in the specific
type of crime is the state would
be obligated to show what's
called a pattern of racketeering
activity so more than one
instance where this I'm referred
to as a station in fact that is
just one way to prove it I think
it's the simplest way to sort of
explain it so multiple people
that are United in a common
purpose have this community of
purpose I basically want to use
this entity as a more efficient
means for committing the crime
in and so what this work HB
fifty six does is it actually
makes the externality to pursue
more formally organized
trafficking groups the state is
required to be pretty stringent
standards and showing the
association between the group
showing the predicate a sort of
pattern of activity and we're as
previously the state would have
to kind of attempt to look at
other crimes to see how maybe it
fits in with human trafficking
this bill makes it much simpler
and much more straight forward
and being able to explain to a
jury this is a human trafficking
out that rather than a you know
criminal sexual penetration I
think is one of the the the
crimes that spare or a promoting
prostitution obviously does no
good in the labor trafficking
contacts for organized actors in
that sense and I hope that the
answer your question Madam chair
representative.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative in Mr Vesco that
does help me understand the sort
of combination and how would you
know go through the justice
system finally I just have a
question regarding the no
conditional discharge
Asian why was that taken now and
of course what we're trying to
look at how we obviously look at
the crimes that people pay for
and and do their time by no
means do we want anyone to get
out early but at the same token
if they've been sentence and
they've been able to prove that
they are able to do better
outside of that system you know
why would we take away that
opportunity for conditional
discharge in this circumstance
versus any other and why
specifically in this bill up for
that situation.
Answer the the question.
Madam chair and and
Representative Romero the case I
would point you to is it's the
the City University now it's a
court of appeals decision from
two thousand nine the vendor
neutral citation for is two
thousand nine NMCA zero eight
right the case involved a person
from Florida who.
The full record did not educate
guilt but the plea under Florida
law is treated as a conviction
for a sex offender registrations
required in Florida and the
court of appeals decided that
that was not functionally
similar to the conditional
discharge process happens to New
Mexico and so the desire of you
know how do we figure out how
other states handle their
conviction so that someone who's
state New Mexico actually has
certainty regarding how the how
the process works making its on
a big US as possible certainly
we we did provide the relief
valve for situations like the
receive no case where one could
petition the court for good
cause that they should not be
subject to that ten year non
public registry that is provided
under the spell of but that was
the specific issue that was
raised up just.
Pretty.
I I don't refer to it is
extremely ambiguity but I mean
it's confusing whenever one
state has a special methodology
for you know with holding an
entry of guilt you're still
required to register in the
state of New Mexico so it was a
request for for parsimonious
making it as simple and
straightforward as possible the
second thing to consider too is
that sorna is not intended to be
this punitive tool as part of a
criminal sentence to punish
anyone its regulatory measure
it's been consistently upheld
that way by our courts the peel
and reviewed with that in mind
and that the concern is just
making sure in addition to
parsimony that we're actually
performing at this this this
process of protecting the
community and protecting future
victims their subjects these
really heinous crimes like CSP
first through fourth I think is
is under sorna all the various
varieties of criminal sexual
contact and all the other
offenses that are listed to
include hopefully human
trafficking with passage of this
bill.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative in CS PS criminal
sexual penetration.
Just.
We we all get into our acronyms
and we forget that others don't
speak our language necessarily
so Representative Romero I'm
sorry I just I'm trying to I'm
trying to keep people up to up
to speed I remember my freshman
session and it was like.
It drinking drinking out of a
water hose a fire hydrant water
colors but all of the above so
and please any of you who feel
like you may not you know if
there's if there's an actor name
or word that you don't
understand you need to put in
the chat you could raise your
hand you can you can interrupt
I'm I want everybody to feel
like they they know what's going
on so Representative Romero the
floor's yours thank you madam
chair and thank you for that I
think they're all learning and I
definitely am still these are
very technical bills and I just
want to thank the sponsor and
the expert for answering those
questions I have a lot of
homework to do as far as looking
at cases but that said I
absolutely support the endeavor
to to update this as somebody
who's been working on some of
these issues properly on how to
do better with data and sharing
and understanding this sort of
operation this is this is really
important to us I don't
necessarily know if it's perfect
right now and again will and and
it's this is meant to go to
Judiciary again so I'm.
Grateful that we'll be able to
look at the the the commas which
is on the home so with that
I again want to thank those that
spoke up and I will be
supporting your bill and I you
know I do have still some
lingering questions but will
work with the Sanchez and just
want to thank you for for your
expertise and for the time and
an effort work working with this
and and how it's been updated
over the years that we've looked
at it so thank you and that
concludes my questions thanks
madam chair.
Any other questions.
I know it's a lot to take in and
if you serve on the interim I'm
L. HHS Committee our.
Co chair or chair and.
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino call that
the health and human suffering
committee and now and we hear
some things that are really
really hard on us emotionally
but it's it's it's what we make
the big Bucks for right.
For those of you who in the
audience who don't know we we
don't get paid and and people
find that really hard to believe
but it's true we do this because
we want we want New Mexico to be
better for everybody so do I see
any other hands.
Okay I will entertain a motion.
Chair commission to pass okay so
we have a motion from
Representative Pettigrew in the
second thank you okay from
Representative but address okay
it is is there anyone in
opposition.
Raise your hand if you okay we
will skip that and by a five to
five to zero vote we have a two
passed of house bill fifty six
and I think I'm and I am sorry
that I didn't say this before I
started early on but that but
that of course is not going to
come up now that Representative
L. Collins bill which I don't
have the number in front of me
because my phone did something
weird but that the sponsor is is
running his own committee and
couldn't be here today so so we
will get we will put that on and
agenda
although since our committees
are competing I'm not sure how
will make it work but what we're
magic will make everything work
and I think with that unless
someone has something else
Allison are you good on
everything that you need.
Yes I'm good thank you okay and
I really want to thank Allison
and Gabby for for work.
In cheating it things got a
little goofy within I'd say the
the hour before this committee
started and now and they took on
some duties that they weren't
necessarily expecting and I I
give them lots oh wait why just
the Rep Al Capone is here.
Is that true.
Yes madam chair he is on the
meeting okay so we are not
finished we are we have one more
bill to do and if you could let
Representative Belconnen and and
I'm sorry if I misled people but
that's that's another thing you
baby legislators will learn I
might is that provided time is
merely a suggestion and now we
we work until we get our work
done as best we can and we we
are very flexible and gentle
with each other to get our work
done so Representative al cone
welcome to to with the pack and
whenever you're ready we would
do you Representative al cone
once you get on please let us
know if you have an expert
witness that we need to also but
in.
Representative Akan.
I don't see your microphone up
yet so we will.
We will we will wait.
Let me see if I can.
Sixty I'm.
So be patient let me see if I.
Just an update I tried to call
him and it went to voicemail so
So then I texted him IAD.
We'll give him a few minutes.
If we were in the building has
offices right next to mine I
could go knock on his door but
it's a it's a bit of a drive
from Albuquerque to to the
capital and I doubt he's even in
this office so and your up
during floor sessions it's time
like times like this where the
speaker asked if anybody has a
good joke I'm well we're wasting
time before I'm.
But I gosh.
I'm sure it may be technical
because it shows that he has
been DO but no audio capability
in the.
Panelists position but I don't
know if that's if he's not
answering his phone of I have no
idea how to get a hold of.
From the limit let me try a
phone call again maybe.
I'll tell a joke.
Right Representative Romero you
have to stop blaming people for
the road you're on that's your
own asphalt.
I am
just for the record.
There's just a bunch of silence
is this thing on.
So I'll listen he says that he
is on but he can't get his audio
to work do we have.
Maybe I did ask him to you but
it didn't work it looks like
there's no way for him madam
chair and for him to have audio
where it would however he's
connected he can probably phone
in
separately okay okay.
It shows madam chair shows that
he has audio capability now okay
he said I think I'm on so
Representative Kokkonen are you
with us.
Thank you madam chair okay go
ahead.
One thank you for.
Give me.
I
would like to leave you but I
have the for us house bill one
nineteen one nineteen right.
Thank you my mind can get there.
You can hear me we can hear you
okay.
And I got house bill one
nineteen house bill one ninety
was brought to me from the.
Administrative office of the
courts.
And the reason for this is.
Symbol of Bill it's as though
the magistrate judge.
I was I always ask this question
I'm somebody gonna say days.
Okay I get will change my mind
when I tell the officer that I'm
going to mail the money in.
And come to court.
Well one to sign that citation.
You'll end up having to you tell
the officer that you're going to
mail the money in the process
that's what you have to.
This legislation all rural it's
all the stuff thanking students
will be sent.
To the magistrate court or to
the metroplex.
And this way if the person who
got cited.
The personal got cited has to.
Taking this is mine about
mailing the money in the and
going to court they can do that
if you use that person decides
that he wants to.
We have a question for
Representative the side.
They decide that they're going
to mail the money and or go to
court they can do it because
everything will be at the
magistrate or metric.
It's real simple process.
And with that that means that
I'm trying to do the committees
that ofsted for question.
Okay thank you representative Al
Capone and you have an expert
witness do you.
Mr check or do you want to speak
for you just here for for
questions all madam chair just
here if you have any questions I
can answer thank you okay so
let's go to the audience so once
again if you are here in
opposition to this bill please
go to the participate
link and raise your hand.
What is
it is okay okay so I'm so I'm
and and we have one and okay his
password right so I guess that
means that you get out well now
it's back.
And now if the the person who is
in opposition if you would like
to speak up please leave your
hand up and you will be admitted
if you don't then take your hand
down.
Okay I wasn't trying to scare
anyone away I'm just trying to
trying to put it out there.
Okay now we will go to people
who are in support of this bill
the same thing raise your hand
if you are in support of this
bill.
It's getting to be later in the
afternoon we've lost our our
throng of millions that we're
tuning in and hanging on her
every word so I'm I don't see
any one of them with their hands
raised for public comment so I
will go to the committee are
there questions are from any
committee members.
Representative Pettigrew and
lord I can't see you so if you
have questions you could just
Just jump in because I can't see
it Representative Romero are you
did you raise your hand just a
quick question for
Representative all corner for
his expert I I'm just curious
can you do this online or to how
does how does the functions I
think it's excellent madam chair
I think this is so necessary for
you just making those decisions
properly and giving some more
time to decide I know in I've
always tried to challenge the
ticket.
To this and there was like no I
don't know but I way to probably
pay the fee if those ever
situation so I so appreciate the
thoughtfulness that's got into
this from a perspective of just
making that happen
but madam chair and
Representative Oakland and his
expert how does this work when
you're wanting to change your
position do you get to do that
online is that a call how does
it work.
Madam chair should should I go
ahead and answered should I wait
until Representative go ahead I
think he's that he's trying to
juggle a lot of all we also have
on this but but please go ahead
Madam chair representative
Romero if if you chose that you
wanted to pay you do have
multiple options including
online access for payment.
That's all I needed snow madam
chair thank your support this.
Okay anyone else have questions.
Okay I will entertain a motion.
I move it to pass madam chair
okay so Representative Romero in
a second.
Representative but I.
do we have opposition.
Okay yes we do okay so we need a
roll call vote Allison.
Okay.
This.
Representative Lord you know.
Representative Pettigrew.
I would like to.
Yes.
Madam chair Thompson.
Yes.
Okay by a vote of four.
Three three three to two I'm
sure to short term memory last
year and Representative
Pettigrew you you wanted to
explain your your vote.
Chair and earlier conversations
desert fox news at one nineteen.
Raul until Thursday the people
that I had asked for Committee.
I thought they had another day
and a half and so it wasn't a
I won't make that mistake again.
It it's in there's no I mean
people want certainty here you
know what bills are you going to
hear what order what time and
and if if you flexibility
flexibility has to become your
middle name because we try to
get as much work that as we can
and not waste a second and you
know Sanchez as you can hear
Sanchez and I'm getting a phone
call right now but I'm going to
ignore
but Sanchez have other things
going I'm going on and now and
we do the best we can but I I
totally understand and I guess
my advice to you is to get as
much information as you can and
be as prepared as you can and
and be gentle with yourself if
you if you are.
If something slips by
so with that I believe unless
someone has something else we
will stand in recess until one
thirty well they're radically
one thirty on Thursday depending
on if we have a floor session or
or anything else that comes up
but and I have to tell bit this
this team that I got a text from
someone who said he had been on
four different committees zoom
since we started and this was
the best run wide yet so even
with all of our boo boos where
we're headed so folks.
So I really want to thank the
staff and the members for for
continuing to be flexible and
willing to pitch in and get the
job done so with that we stand
in recess until Thursday at one
thirty have a good evening all
bye bye.
