This today she actually got
called to get her second COVID
shot this morning and so she she
just to be often so good for her
and so we will we will be
rolling her bills which I think
is is right referenced in the
agenda for today we will also
be.
rolling house bill two oh seven
two from today till next to this
coming Thursday they have some
technical glitches in the
committee substitute and I bring
this up simply for transparency
purposes that you know with the
about two weeks ago I turned
away a committee set up from
another member of the the
legislature because of those
same kind of issues and so I
want to make sure that we're
treating everybody the same way
and that we have district twenty
four hour rule that we're not
going to to to lax on and so
that being said we're gonna make
sure that it's follow so that we
are our analysts have ample time
to look at these committee
substitutes hi.
Regardless of how minor houses
dental they are and then finally
house bill two forty six at the
request of the sponsor will also
be rolled and so that being said
we only have two bills today
folks which hopefully will give
you enough time to
Thank you coffee and get ready
for eleven o'clock four sessions
yes ma'am Representative result.
Mr chairman thank you very much
I would like to has
Representative small why he is
rolling that bill if I could is
this a need to make some.
Appropriations to the bill.
Question Representative small
hello.
At thank you chairman thank you
representative for our
potentially that and other
reasons.
What was no answer Mr Chairman
representative small.
The.
Eight Mr chair thank you
Representative I said for that
and the reason.
Well I think it's a pretty
important bill and I I just
don't want to see this program
that we're trying to get
reestablished in stages.
Blow up on Mr at the last
moment.
Especially since the
appropriation is potent.
The departments together and
trying to figure out where we
need to go with appropriations
school I was just kind of
curious.
Thank you Mr chairman thank.
Yes ma'am yes Sir thank you all
appreciate that and so at this
point in time because our vice
chairwoman is gone for today I
have requested that vice
chairman of appropriations
Representative can small help me
out of for the first bill that
I'm presenting this morning
which is a roll over from last
Saturday so and a lot of changes
going on so if you if you all
don't mind I can hand it off to
Representative vice chairman
small Chairman small now for his
hearing of house bill one ninety
seven so Representative small
fuel.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
thank you all committee Mr chair
if you would like to present
house bill one ninety seven we
would be delighted yes Sir thank
you Mr chairman Mr chairman and
committee members if I could ask
that the committee secretary
bring over state engineer John
de Antonio Mr Tony if you raise
your hand we can pull you into
the committee.
Okay.
Mr state engineer you there.
Mr Chairman yes.
It and and perhaps most way can
confirm perhaps a I think it may
be Mr ritually Greg originally
who will be one of the folks who
will be joining no I see Mr
Dantonio is there get on the.
Mr Chairman Mr Risley will be
answering help answer questions
also general counsel thank you
very well Mr Chairman if you
would please the committee
secretary or Mr Gregory Seay.
And a pleasure Mister chairman I
will get started.
Please thank you so house bill
one ninety seven is one that
takes into account the Authority
of our state engineer for New
Mexico the Mexico water code
grants state engineer
authorities to supervised a
certain issues and and and
matters related to water within
our state the issue with this
bill is that because it to
recent court interpretations and
and mind you he he has the
firsthand experience but I want
to give you a kind of a broad
overview
but because of two recent court
interpretations of a provision
within the water co
threatens to I always say
undermine his ability to fully
exercises supervisory authority
and to provide technical
expertise to the courts.
Specifically subsection D. of
section seventy two seven one.
And so The New Mexico court of
appeals in two thousand sixteen
or the state engineer to pay
litigation costs other than
attorney's fees of adverse
parties in an appeal to the
District Court from the state
engineer administrative decision
and so in that twenty sixteen
ruling the twenty sixteen Santa
Fe Santa Fe water resource
alliance decision was the very
first time that the court had
interpreted it to order the
state engineers office to pay
costs to numbers party on an
appeal.
Now at it happened again we're
in a recent these appeal by
another entity called the
aquifer science the state
engineer decision denying
aquifer science from application
that District Court ruled
against that aquifer science
organization in favor of the
protest and upholding the state
engineers did not allow the
permit.
In late two thousand nineteen.
It Vigil the state engineer
jointly S. and L. liable for
nearly four hundred thousand
dollars in expert witness costs
claimed by the protests and so
what we're doing now is that
there's a the the state engineer
and I think we've heard this in
in our very first meeting that
with this limited budget and the
amount of work that he has to do
a lot of other things there's
that he he would like a proposed
amendment that cost should be
taxed in the same manner as in
cases brought in the District
Court and bond for costs may be
required upon proper application
except that costs may not be
taxed against the state engineer
nor me any bond for costs be
required from the state
engineer.
And so at this point it simply
the reason why I'm bringing this
bill on behalf of the state
engineers at the risk of the
cost award against the agency
will do more than just
encouraged the state engineer to
settle on a basis it may distort
the state engineers decision
making ability that it should be
unbiased and that the any and
that his agency decisions to be
based upon the best available
technical information and the
best possible administrative
analysis and the state engineer
should not be subjected to
pressure to concede on these
points because of the risks
associated to the agency's
budget and so again Mr chairman
members of this committee the
state engineer is this the here
with us to to explain and and
probably better detail and I can
of the his points to this bill
with that Mr chairman and
committee members if I could
please before then to our state
engineer on house bill one
ninety seven.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr the
Antonio thank you Mr chairman.
And the members of the committee
good morning and happy this
morning is it snowing everywhere
in New Mexico one and we need
the we need waste yourself
that's a that's good thank you
Representative looking for
sponsoring this really or built
for us I think you get a really
good job covered me just
reiterate a couple items here of
this any of the liability costs
it really undermines my ability
in my office the lady B. R. the
new party neutral with respect
to decisions to make sure we
have technically based
administration of the state's
water resources.
If it's not addressed in this
possible ninety seven the risk
of costs award against the state
engineers office will distort
our ability to make decisions
that should be unbiased and I
one of the one of the things
that
I'm really concerned with is is
sort of gaming the system where
we're appeals that come to the
state engineers office is on
decisions that are made of it
and on and administrative
decision do applicants or the
the the folks that are either
protest ins or grieved they they
have to plan in case they may
not put on their best case
knowing that other than go ahead
and take it to District Court
and then bring in the of more
experts essentially see if they
can of get their costs covered
and it it's really of I think
that's really a problem for us
it'll it'll gradually displace
the initial decision making our
delegated the state engineer by
the water code it'll turn the
courts into this decision makers
of the first resort which really
is con country to judicial
efficiency so I'll stop there Mr
chairman and members of the
committee and would be glad to
answer all your questions and
like I said my up my general
counsel as it is on line also
thank you.
Thank you very much Mr Dantonio
thank you Mr chairman is there
any additional help are there
any additional points that you
want to add before we go to the
attendees Mr Chairman no Sir we
will not stand for any
questions.
Great thank you very
and and I would ask miss more at
to help me as we go through
we'll go now first to the
audience on house bill one
ninety seven first we're going
to ask is if there is anyone in
opposition to house bill one
ninety seven.
Thank you but I look in this
plan please tell me otherwise I
don't see any hands on
Going up in opposition now Mr
chair Committee let's go to the
attendees who are here today to
speak in support of house bill
one ninety seven.
I don't necessarily see any
hands going up there and so
we'll go back then Mr chair.
Thanks committee members will go
to the committee for questions
first to Representative he's
out.
Representative is out.
Mr Chairman thank you very much
Mr chairman I would like to
direct this question to Mr
Dantonio or even to Mr richly
since he is on board to when was
this original bill passed.
Mr Chairman Representative let
date of this this law has been
in place for nearly a hundred
years so there was there was
never a bill introduced on this
subject matter until now the
change a lot of the state
engineer always at the ability
to go after costs also and we
never happened we never of from
from other parties and so it was
a was really a somewhat of a
turnaround for for us to see
Tested.
Beijing and and putting this
what we call an antiquated law
into place and pursue it through
the District Court and and
prevail on it which really is a
concern again for budgets and
and a fair decision making that
we need to do to protect and
enforce the water code.
Okay well Mister chairman.
Mr Chairman.
You Mr chairman right now Mr
Dantonio of the reason I'm
asking that I didn't know we
were trying to fix a bill that
has been passed.
If you're going through more
research on this I thought there
was something passed in two
thousand eleven that we needed
to fix in order where there
would not be a case against you
so it maybe I just missed read
something here.
Mr Chairman and Mr chairman Mr
day Antonio.
I don't know if you're aware
with the house Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill for.
And that is the let me get this
out now right it just right off
it's called the New Mexico Civil
Rights Act.
Where anybody could sue any
governmental agency if we pass
this are you going to be example
in this new if if house bill
four does pass will you be
exempt.
Mr Mr chairman and
representatives out of it
depending on how the bill is
written I I would doubt it
unless they were on one of the
bills I know they're exempting
state agencies but I Greg Greg
stands up I think he may know
more about that other bill then
I.
Okay.
Mr Risley.
Thank you Mr chairman good
morning members Greg richly with
the office of the state
engineer.
Representative is it all up I do
the bill before you today would
not affect the house bill four
in the provisions of house bill
four the bill before you today
is specific to the cost awards a
question that is unique to the
state engineer and if I could
answer to your previous question
Representative the provision
that we are seek asking the
legislature to amend in house
bill one ninety seven section
seventy two seven one has been
on the books since the nineteen
oh seven water code was enacted
and as we said in our analysis
for over a century that
provision has said what it says
and you can see that in the bill
in front of you and courts have
not interpreted that to require
the state engineer to pay the
litigation costs of other
parties it was in twenty sixteen
the first time that that new
interpretation was made by the
courts.
Okay Mr Dupri share your.
walking me through the.
Straight.
A lot of things that have come
before the state office of the
state engineer and some of my we
really did need to go back and.
Update a few things that are
very very concerned about.
Bills on the house floor they're
going to have such a negative
impact over every aspect of our
governmental entities which
includes county commissioners
city mayors the list goes on and
on and on and I know it will
affect our.
Agencies that are affiliated
with our state to Mr chairman Mr
chairman Mr David tenure Mr
ritually thank you for your
responses and I am going to
support this bill.
Thank you very much
Representative these out next
we'll go to Representative
Matthews and then Representative
Representative.
Thank you.
Mr chair members of the
committee and Mr.
And then representatives from
the
State engineers office.
Sorry I was pulling my notes
and.
Do you have any it did the court
to the court of appeals give any
explanation as to why they were
awarding the making the word of
cost against agency.
Madam I think I'll present great
go ahead and answer the the
court issues
Mr Chairman representative of
the the court in the twenty
sixteen and then again in
twenty.
The last year in twenty in the
recent decision
merely looked at the language in
the existing law which is in the
bill on page two lines seventeen
through nineteen.
Which says cost you'll be taxed
in the same manner as in cases
brought in the District Court in
Bonn for costs may be required
upon proper application.
that's the provision has been on
the books since nineteen oh
seven this is a really
fascinating complicated the long
and winding road the the the the
the star try to summarize it
quickly in nineteen oh seven
when this provision was enacted
the doctrine of sovereign
immunity was in full force and
the.
Damage awards and cost awards
could not be made against the
state.
That was the context in which
that language that is an
existing lan line seventeen to
eighteen of the bill was enacted
and so was interpreted in that
way and then later in the middle
of the twentieth century the
doctrine of sovereign immunity
has been loosened a little bit
we have the tort claims act we
have other provisions that allow
the state to be held liable in
certain specific instances but
all along the rules of civil
procedure have said the.
Agencies the state agencies
shall not be liable for costs
unless there's a specific
statute providing otherwise and
it was that provision that the
courts in twenty sixteen.
Looked at and said well I guess
this provision in seventy two
seven one do is a statutory
provision allowing costs against
the state engineer it was not
the intent in nineteen oh seven
but maybe it looks that way in
twenty sixteen that's why we're
coming before the legislature to
clarify that your intent is not
to.
Have the state engineer be
liable for the costs of other
parties and that's important
because of the nature of appeals
from the state engineer most
state agencies are of the
appeals to the district courts
or the courts of appeal our
records review appeals in New
record is not made in the course
of the appeal appeals from the
state engineer by our
constitution and statutes are
different they are to novo
appeals and so proceedings in
the District Court can involve
extensive testimony by experts
hydrologists and others that's
what happened in the offer
science case were parties at the
the protest in group.
At the ultimately submitted a
bill to the court for their
costs they ran up in the
District Court of largely expert
testimony of about three hundred
and seventy nine thousand
dollars so it's critical the
fact that the state engineer
appeals from the state engineer
are to novo is really the
important factor here because
that just elevates the risk that
there will be expensive costly
cost cost claims in district
court proceedings that most
state agencies don't face.
Mr chairman and thank you very
much miss reject that really
helps explain what happened here
because I was looking at some of
the analysis that were done and
I was looking at all these
different.
Eight iterations of cost
statutes and rules and so so
forth and I was trying to figure
out how we got here so that is
really really helpful so
and I think that there was
another case in which cost
recess begins to state engineer
and did the state engineer
actually pay those.
Mr Chairman representative so
the first case was in twenty
sixteen the Santa Fe water
resource alliance K. the cost
award was a little under sixty
five thousand and yes the HSD
ultimately paid that cost out of
our agency budget.
The more recent case the nearly
four hundred thousand dollar
cost award we are appealing that
cost award to that as we speak
it's in the court of appeals at
at right now.
And Mr Chairman at thank you for
that answer Mr ritually
if we amend the statute.
It would be effective I'm
presumably.
Doing something July some I
so we're getting somewhere
with that affect the existing
appeal before the court of
appeals.
Mr Chairman representative the
bill before you is prospective
in operation only it does not
seek any retroactive effect so
it would not affect the the
ruling of the District Court
granting that cost award
I guess the the court of appeals
might consider the legislature's
action.
If you do pass this bill but it
is not intended to be
retroactive in the fact.
The court of appeals might look
to the legislature and if this
bill becomes law having made a
statement of policy but is
should not I think technically
it is prospective in effect
only.
Mr chairman thank you for that
answer Mr initially one one more
question are there any other
cases in the pipeline where's
the District Court has is has or
is conducting to renewable
hearings where there may also be
a costs award
I'm trying to understand whether
this statute should somehow try
to.
Influence what other things that
may be pending I'm done I'm just
trying to get a feel for that.
Mr Chairman representative
Very.
See your name on here.
Matthews I'm sorry first name
your.
Representative Matthews right
now of every single is a lot of
cases this bill stages Office
legislative go to our New Mexico
through our hearing units and as
soon as so there's several cases
that that are challenged on a.
To District Court so there's not
none right now that job that
we're aware of that which would
would go after a a cost
reimbursements based on on this
law the way it's written but
it's I guess the risk is out
there for all of them so every
time again if there's a every
any single decision that I made
as a state engineer.
There's a chance a chance that
it goes to a District Court the
Google review depending on of
the aggrieved party for the
applicant's depending on how the
decision comes out so there's a
multitude of opportunities out
there and that's what's somewhat
scary I would also like to say
that we we work through the risk
management division and their
certificate of coverage does not
cover something like this so
there you know they provide and
dispose provided the committee
to state agencies state
employees
and that's these decisions are
covered that so we're we're kind
of boxed in here and we're
really concerned that again I
can do a fair job and into that
in.
Defending the decisions that we
make that are really supposed to
be impartial based on on sound
science that couldn't come you
know come before us for us with
an appeal and and and force our
budgets even DML worst situation
that it is now so.
Hopefully that answers your
question a great in a pandemic
that if you'd like Mr Chairman
if I could add to that.
Yes please yes thank you Mr
chairman act.
Representative Matthews a the
state insurance actually right
at I think we president
president we have three or four
cases currently in the district
courts on appeal from the state
engineer decisions and each one
of those I think the agency is
at risk of if the if we do not
are not considered to be a
prevailing party in that appeal
being held liable for the costs
of opposing parties so I think
every time an appeal is taken to
the District Court from the
station years decision we're now
at risk of that occurring.
I thank you for those for those
explanations and answers
It.
Yes the state is a state
engineer able to.
Does it happen that the state
engineer recovers faster
parties.
The in these cases.
Mr Chairman representative
Matthews of the state engineers
number but after a cost
reimbursement on any cases that
I'm aware of.
Ever.
At.
Mr chairman thank you for that
answer.
And.
I'm just wondering if if and not
knowing what the status of these
are for other cases is or how
close they are whether or not
she considered an emergency
clause in order to get this law
change and work.
Rapid weight that may not be
relevant because of the time
it's taking so I'm just curious.
Mr chairman Representative
Matthews we we did not sell
discussed at mercy clause but.
my hope is that these decisions
are gonna speak strung along a
little bit better they would
come in after.
The session it's my hope.
Mr Chairman at.
Mr ritually at state engineer
thank you for your answers and
that's all the questions I have
thank you thank you very
Representative Matthews next we
have Representative brown.
Thank you Mr chairman and Mr
chairman I have a question for
Mr Dantonio it is regarding
something an existing statute so
it's not anything we're looking
at amending today but I'm I'm
just curious and want to ask
it's on page two starting at one
seventeen.
it's paragraph do and I'm
wondering about the word of the
the use of the word taxed it
says costs should be taxed in
the same manner as in cases
brought in the District Court in
the goes on so Mr chairman Mr
chair and and and Mr state
engineer up why is it why that
word choice taxed that seems to
apply in other contexts a little
more than it would here was
there something about the
process that I don't understand.
Mr Chairman and Representative
brown I think the law that was
written you know a hundred years
ago plus I think I think that's
probably the words they use tax
against the state engineer
That's my gas I don't know for
sure great you might.
You might have a different look
at but I think that's probably
the way it was expressed that.
If I could add to that the Mr
Chairman representative that's
exactly right that verb they're
basically means assessed that
the district judge may assess
costs against the state engineer
it's it's the yeah it's a little
strange a little jarring because
obviously divert Tax means other
things in different contexts but
in the context of litigation
costs it basically means of the
judge can award at one party to
pay the litigation costs of
another.
Thank thank you for that answer
a Mr chair Mr chair and and
It engineer Mr rigidly so often
times and we I'm and statute
will pick up stuff like that and
and make it you know a lot more
more for the president as we
understand it was probably I'm
guessing I have a lot of
reference to the were taxed in
other parts of the code so maybe
it be a bigger job and I and I
would think that I just I just
was curious Mr chairman Mr chair
I am wondering if of the state
engineer could tell us two
things one what is his overall
state budget for fiscal year
twenty twenty one and secondly
how many cases decisions or
whatever you want to call them
typically would go on appeal I'm
trying to get a sense of.
The overall cost it would be to
the office if this bill were not
passed and I know it's going to
be guess work to come up with
that sense of it.
Well Mister chairman and
Representative round of our
budgets close to around dollars
thirty thirty nine million
dollars roughly half of that is
general fund so between nineteen
and twenty million dollars of
the litigation education program
which is a program that
instrumentally hats of has their
own budgets and and.
I mean it's a state the state
specifically for completing
educations and and doing the
work at hand there's no there's
nothing in our budget that would
allow for us to pay these costs
awards without jeopardizing the
work that we're doing and taking
it out from from somewhere else
you know there's there's to be a
our story that we have that that
could happen but this one
thousand dollars a huge sum of
money and so you know from from
my perspective it's it's coming
that it would come out of.
It would come out at the expense
of us not doing something else
because there's no room in our
budget to pay for anything extra
sensually are you know last year
we we really have to augment and
supplement costs associated with
Texas being Mexico lawsuits
through some of our mediation
and other expenses in helping
because we weren't fully funded
there and so there's you know
every every everywhere we return
were really use in
the trust funds in particular
which are available to us but
those are dwindling and in
twenty twenty three.
They're looking at being
Nonexistent essentially based on
the rate of money that's coming
out of them so we have a lot of
challenges based on based on our
budget there was a five year
plan that the legislature asked
us to put in place to replace
general fund over a five year
period of time about nine
million dollars so that we're
our reliance on those trust
funds would go away and
Today to.
It's been difficult to over the
pandemic and other issues
associated with question for a
for for the legislature to take
that five year plan and put it
in place so hopefully that
answers your question
Representative Graham.
Yes thank you Mr chair Mr chair
right I think that does I.
I know you do tremendously
important work and we need to
really keep the focus on that
and that and that to to not pass
this bill would I think
potentially have a very big
impact on your budget to the
detriment of your work.
Mr chair Mr chair I want to
bring up one of the things that
are Committee apples pointed out
I think we need a technical
corrections bill it's a it's a
just a little bit thank you and
I know that chair when he has
said that he'd menace have to be
presented twenty four hours in
advance that however this is I
think just strictly a technical
issue and this little drafting
issue and I'm referring to page
two of the bill.
At line let's say it'll be line
nineteen.
Mr chair Mr chair members so
there's the there was a there is
in a semi colon after the word
application that semi colon is
actually added language and
should be under lines indicate
that so if Mr chair will
entertain a motion I would move
that we make that technical
correction the bill here in
committee.
Thank thank you very much
Representative brown thank you
for the questions we'll go to
the sponsor as it relates to the
specific technical issue raised
also Representative brown and
committee would know that this
goes next to house Judiciary
and so being not the chair or
vice chair this committee I
think we definitely wanted to
for to share Lynsey in his
general approach thank you very
much for flag in the issue and
go to the sponsor.
Thank you Mr chairman thank
Representative Brown that
Representative brown is a
friendly amendment and is
accepted and I appreciate your
your catching that on our
behalf.
Mr chair Mr chair I just like to
give credit to the committee
analyst otherwise I'd I don't
think I would have thought it.
Thank you.
Thank you thank you
Representative brown so we well
chair lends the do you know what
we can do we want to go ahead
and I will accept that motion
and and it's from the moment now
simply extending that underline.
That Mr Chairman if you would
please absolutely.
Okay great Representative Brown
just so that we capture
everything would you mind making
that motion one more time please
and we'll have a second just we
capture yes Mr chair I I move
that we make a technical
correction to line nineteen on
page two of the bill and that
involves adding an underscore
under the semi colon in line
nineteen.
Second.
Excellent it's been moved and
seconded and
it is a friendly amendment and
is there any objection to
adopting this small technical
facts.
Seeing none that is adopted I
will make sure that it's
captured thank you very much
thank you chair lengthy and
thank you very much
Representative brown and in
great job analysts.
Mr chair I yield.
Thank.
Okay but we do have a
Representative is L. your hand
is up.
Mr chairman and then now meant
that house bill one ninety seven
as amended to pass.
Second excellent it's been moved
by Representative that is L. to
pass house bill one ninety seven
as amended seconded by
Representative Allison is there
any objection to.
passing house bill one ninety
seven as amended.
Seeing none from committee
members.
The house bill one ninety seven
as amended is.
Past.
Thank you very much of thank you
so much chair lent the
And now is the.
Can we take it will kick it
backed you.
Mr vice chairman smaller
chairman small thank you so much
of feeling in during this time I
really appreciate it thank you
members for that vote thank you
Mr d'antoni on thank you Mr
Ristic for being here with us
this morning thank you Sir thank
you so then at this point in
time we will then move to our
second last bill of the morning
which is house bill two forty
three farmers market double up
program Representative you know
Armstrong agency are
Representative Armstrong if you
can raise your hand will pull
you over.
I see.
Okay.
Representative more from Good
Morning.
Good morning Mr chairman good
morning do you have anyone that
you wish to help you out this
morning yes please Denise
Miller.
Issue the farmers market and
then yes okay.
It is that it.
Very well in these and
representative Armstrong the
floor is yours and everybody.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee act Hey
of this bill
it's called the it's for double
up food Bucks New Mexico is one
of the highest rates of food
insecurity in the nation.
with one in five residents
enrolled in supplemental food
nutrition assistance.
what this bill is doing is
adding additional funds for the
for New Mexico to be able to
adequately apply for grants
these are matching funds up last
well from twenty sixteen to
twenty twenty of they got about
three about two million now
there they can access three
point three million what this
money does is it helps them in
additional funding for the state
of New Mexico.
This is a program that helps New
Mexico local farmers and also
help feed the hungry in New
Mexico with double up food Bucks
I would like to introduce my
expert witness Denise Miller and
let her say a few words thank
you Mr chairman Representative
misspelling good morning.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee thank you so
much for allowing me to speak
here today on behalf of the tens
of thousands of people that this
bill supports every year and my
name is Denise Miller I'm the
executive director of the New
Mexico farmers marketing
association which administers
this program across the state
I'm so as representative
Armstrong mentioned this
program the double up food Bucks
program is very important to
supporting both food insecure
members across up the population
across the state who are
enrolled in snap as well as
farmers local farmers who sell
their food to
To these people and the.
The currently there are as
representative Armstrong
mentioned one in one in five
people in New Mexico are
enrolled in snap and now since
the pandemic actually one in
three children do not live in
homes with adequate food that's
gone up since one in four so
there's a real need across the
state to make sure and our
families have nutrient dense
food such as the double up
program provides what the double
up program is it's a snap
incentive program it started in
twenty fifteen and it provides
dollar for dollar match for
shoppers who are using their
snap benefits and so when a when
a shopper uses their snap
benefits for every dollar that
they spend they get a dollar in
basically free New Mexico grown
produce and over the years this
program has served tens of
thousands of people and sales
have
far as sales for farmers has
averaged
over a million dollars a year.
The unfortunately last year
during the pandemic we saw an
increase in customer demand you
know which just spoke to the the
rising economic in security of
people and over the next four
years which is when our federal
grant that supports this program
we expected sales through the
program will rise about seventy
seven percent and the grant that
this program that this that the
state dollars will leverage we
will be applying for a four year
three point three million dollar
grant that's that's up from our
last four year federal grant
which was two point one million
dollars so the state dollars
that we're requesting will
leverage more than seven and a
half million dollars over the
next four years and
Yes the program can be accessed
by shoppers at more than ninety
outlets across the state that
includes farmers markets grocery
stores farm stands mobile
markets and CSAS I believe that
the bill in front of you may
only say farmers markets and
that is because the original
bill at the state supported a
five or six years ago the
program was only at farmers
markets Representative Armstrong
will be submitting a an update
to that bill so that it
accurately reflects that it is
actually at additional retail
outlets as I mentioned so the
currently there are about forty
farmers markets across the state
thirty grocery stores thirteen
farm stands and eleven CSA's
mobile markets except truck so
that's really creating very
important food access across the
state and
I think that's a general summary
of the program.
Thank you Denise thank you Mr
chairman and with that Mr
chairman I would like to move
the amendment to the bill.
so I move amendments of one with
the number at the bottom is two
one nine seven six three point
one.
And what that does Mr Chairman
is a online twenty three after
markets it inserts farm stands
grocery stores community support
agriculture and more mobile
markets.
So I would like to move that
amendment please.
Very well for the committee
members a focus does anyone have
that in front of them and.
Desirable.
Mr chairman I met the man up for
discussion purposes thank you
Representative is the second
segment small.
Okay Representative aren't you
believe that you have discussed
your amendment what it does
At this point time is a we have
any questions on the amendment.
The motion to adopt the
amendment that.
From the moves a second second
thank you no position to the
amendment.
Seeing none Representative
Armstrong you do have an amended
bill.
Anything else to add on the
presentation.
All right now thank you Mr
chairman thank you very much we
will now look the audience.
All those in the audience in
support in support of house bill
two forty three as amended
please raise your hand.
Will move down the list.
Seeing a number of folks that
are in line to to support the
bill the money that we will
start in eight o'clock and
fifteen minutes and allow for
your neighbors to make comment
as well and we will move down
the list and again we have
fifteen minutes to take public
comment for all those in support
of house bill.
Two forty three as amended first
on the list we have
Ridolfi hill Mister hill good
morning.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee thank you very
much for allowing me to speak on
behalf of our favor of this bill
almost small organic farmer in
tackles New Mexico I'm also a
board member of New Mexico
farmers market association and
chairman of the New Mexico state
your commission double up box is
great for a small farmers in our
underserved communities
especially in the community for
madam or fresh food has been
taken over by dollar general and
there's such a lack of it so
this assistance and for me
myself to be able to have a
farmstand another farmers to be
able to provide that double up
blocks were might produce more
than likely would be out of
reach being that it's certified
organic so this brings some.
That gap you know close that gap
and allows people to per
purchase that on good food so
please support this it's great
for New Mexico it's great for
underserved communities and all
our our throughout the state and
it's great for small farmers so
thank you Mr chair thank you Mr
be here let's go to Mr Anthony
Wagner Mr Wagner good morning.
You are muted Sir.
Mr Wagner your muted
I'm sorry.
Good morning Mr chair and
members of the committee thank
you for allowing me to speak
today in support of this bill.
My name is Anthony Wagner of
Wagner forms and I'm a former
growing fresh fruits and
vegetables and so coral and
Carell's.
New Mexico I feel the farmers
double a program has been very
successful with snap recipient
families gaining access to fresh
local nutritious fruits and
vegetables straight from the
farm customers can manage their
snap dollars each time they
visit a farmers market this is
provided additional revenue for
farmers we have been providing
fresh fruits and vegetables at
farmers markets for over thirty
years last year we sold a five
farmers markets roadside stand
in paralysis and school
districts throughout the the
state through the New Mexico
grown program so I encourage you
to today to support house bill
two forty three thank you for
all you do to support us farmers
here in New Mexico.
Thank you Mr Wagner let's go to
the the wi fi.
Good morning so we.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is that we think and I'm a
registered lobbyist with the
national young farmers coalition
also a farmer myself going to
burst pipe adjustables and both
Bernalillo in support counties I
urge you to really support this
piece of legislation the double
up food Bucks program is a huge
success and has a great track
record across the state well
that farmers markets and farm
stands and even had a couple of
grocery stores it really helps
connect and underserved
community with high quality
fresh and local produce
and it also supports the farmers
and and producers across the
state who work so tirelessly to
grow that great food so thank
you for your consideration and
appreciate this time thank you
Mr speaker have a great day
let's move that to Alison Smith
Smith you with us good morning
good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is
Allison Smith I'm the registered
lobbyist for the New Mexico
association of food banks we
want to thank representative
Armstrong for bringing this bill
forward we feel this bill offers
low income families the
opportunity to stretch their
snap funds to access locally
grown nutritious food and would
give them the opportunity to
make food choices that are best
for them and their families we
stand in strong support of this
this bill thank you for your
time have a great day thank you
miss Smith this movie to Carmelo
Martinez.
Good morning.
Good morning Mr chairman and
representatives of the committee
my name is Camilla Martinez and
I am the director of the income
support division under the Human
Services Department the state of
New Mexico thank you for
allowing me the opportunity are
what Human Services Department
is not here necessary to speak
for or against the bill we you
remain neutral we wanted to
highlight how we agree with the
benefits of expanding support
for the double up food Bucks
there are three fold
opportunities for smart
customers it allows low income
consumers to eat more healthy
food it gives local farmers new
customer base and the
opportunity to expand their
revenue and that means that more
from dollars stay with the local
economy currently the amount of
sales for all of our
participants
Specific to this program is a
very low percentage of it's
about
at around one percent of overall
sales and we would like to see
this effort increase so that
those sales will
Go towards benefiting the A.
four mentioned benefits of the
program so we agree to the
expansion and see the
opportunities that it can afford
to are statistics that customers
thank you for the opportunity
and have a great day.
Thank you miss Martinez this
gonna Derrick Lynn.
Morning good morning Mr chair
and members of the committee my
name is Derek lane and I'm
representing New Mexico voices
for children we are a strong
supporter of this bill because
food insecurity is one of the
most pressing health and
economic issues for New Mexicans
one in three New Mexico children
experience food insecurity which
is one of the highest rates in
the country in some counties of
New Mexico rates of childhood
food insecurity are higher than
forty percent snap double up
food Bucks is effective for
helping address this issue
because it gives New Mexico
families more money to spend on
fresh and nutritious food from
local growers.
Double up food Bucks is a win
win for New Mexico that helps
feed children while also
stimulating the local economy we
urge you to support this
important legislation thank you
thank you Mr land that's going
to Susan Susan Wilger good
morning.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee I also want to
thank representative Armstrong
for bringing forth this bill I
am the executive director of the
center for health innovation
we're New Mexico's public health
institute we're in full support
of the bill we are very
conscious of the connection
between nutritious food and our
chronic or or should say health
health impacts and we know that
nutrition is directly related
to.
Health conditions such as
obesity depression diabetes
heart disease high blood
pressure and so forth there for
having the opportunity for
families to have a choice of
nutritious food it is a very
good thing as well as the
economic value this that this
bill brings to local food
economies and the families of
producers so we're in strong
support of this bill thank you
Susan have a great day let's go
to Tim Davis Mister Davis good
morning good morning Mr chair
the system Davis with the New
Mexico Senator on poverty the
double up food Bucks program
supports local farmers and local
economies while fighting hunger
and we agree with everything
that's already been said the
only thing I'd like to add is
that snap is a vital economic
stimulus especially in times of
recession snap leverages federal
funding is you already heard but
it also is an economic
multiplier a recent USDA study
estimated that every snap dollar
spent boost GDP by about a
dollar and fifty four cents so
we strongly support this bill
and we urge the committee to
pass it thank you thank you Mr
Davis that's got a bill written
for built their.
Yes the.
Reverend bill Renfro.
Professional geoscientist.
I am have been all of my life
a fighter for read leaving
hunger and this bill the I think
should continue and the I am a
strong supporter of it.
This will help alleviate our
hunger.
Within our state here.
And I fully supported.
Thank you Representative and
your comments are noted have a
great day let's but Helga Garza.
Good morning you with this.
Hello good.
Yes yes hello good morning Mr
chairman and committee members
on behalf of a critical to the
cooperative network a network
and cooperative of forty plus
urban and rural farmers
throughout the state of New
Mexico and on behalf of our food
access program local set track
community supported agricultural
three hundred and twenty members
we fully support
this bill and just want to Rio
and reinstate that this has not
only help us feed three hundred
and twenty members that would
not be able to receive organic
food but also the economic
impact and capacity building
that it does for our local
farmers to article due to
network along with our food
exchange program local section
a fully support and ask for the
support of this bill thank you
thank you Mr Garcia let's but I
think he.
Scheme good morning.
Thank you with us here muted.
Sorry I'm here good morning
my name's Patty keen I
registered dietitian
specializing in pediatric
nutrition of calling in here
from Albuquerque and just want
to echo everything everyone has
said from the public health
perspective the nutrition
perspective the economic
perspective I in support there
is strong support of this bill I
had the opportunity I conducted
some research some years ago on
barriers and facilitators for
farmers and for markets to
participate and it's not double
up food Bucks as well as other
snap and WIC incentive programs
and so I I know very well what
some of those barriers and
facilitators are and so this
bill will eliminate many of
those barriers to participation
so from a registered dietitian
perspective of someone who's
done a lot of work in our rural
communities this is that a
really critical tool to get
healthier food on tables thank
you thank you that is correct
Karen would look.
Good luck with this.
Your muted.
chairman members of the
committee Karen what lock with
the national association of
social workers New Mexico
chapter and we can do the
actively support this
legislation for all the reasons
stated above with the students
in our area this really this
bill really has
shown over time to bring healthy
food to people who don't
necessarily have them have
access to them and the and and
it really does make a difference
in the lives of the people thank
you very much to the sponsor for
bringing the bill thank you care
it's good to see Rivera miss
Rivera good morning.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee Tiffany Rivera
registered lobbyists for New
Mexico formalized doppio thank
you for allowing me the
opportunity to comment this
morning we're strongly in
support of the double up food
Bucks program and are extremely
pleased to see the amendment
that was added on this morning
which expands the eligible
establishments it's extremely
important that we continue to
work to build that connection
between our state's producers
and the public to better inform
individuals as to where their
food comes from and what it
takes to get to them we think
the sponsor for caring this very
important piece of legislation
and we ask that we continue to
work together to collectively
build up the markets for states
producers while filling the
bellies of New Mexico residents
thank you Mr chairman thank you
Mr Rivera that's going to
really.
Really good morning to you with
this.
And your you.
Sh.
Good morning Mr chairman and
committee members my name is
lily Irvin Vitela and I'm the
president and executive director
of New Mexico first and one of
the things that I just want to
share about why we support this
is because so many New Mexicans
do in our town hall we had over
five hundred thirty P. people
participate in our community
conversations our town hall
implementation and this not
double up food Bucks program was
called opening the as one of the
most promising policy tools to
both build our local food
systems and build food security
for New Mexicans of all ages
so you know it's not only
important for low income
families because it gives people
access to nutritious food local
food it's important to because
it sends a strong message to
people who are of low income
that they get what's best no our
local food is is the best that
that money can buy and when
we're able to leverage state and
federal resources to get those
opportunities for people of low
income it sends a message that
they're valued also it helps you
know local farmers and ranchers
we think of the over twenty five
thousand farmers and ranchers
ninety percent of whom make in
terms of annual sales less than
fifty thousand dollars finding
markets that are durable
meaningful and good for other
New Mexicans what verses
exporting
our our local agriculture is a
really smart move in terms of
economic development and both in
terms of the short term impacts
for annual sales but also in
terms of long term building
stronger more resilient.
systems I would also just say
that not only were folks very
supportive from our town hall
but we also have a coalition of
over four hundred people and and
coalitions themselves who who
also stand in strong support of
house bill two forty three this
is a win win win and you know
it's good for all of our
community in terms of economic
development it's good for
farmers and it's good for people
who are food insecure we really
strongly encouraged to pass
thank you so much really this go
to Michael.
The state your full name
director Michael.
And M. S. M. eighty.
Michael.
You did my apologies Mr chairman
good morning to to all and
members of the committee my name
is Michael that the chain where
number of the value chain
coordinator for the New Mexico
farmers marketing association.
And I work and Representative
farmers across New Mexico and I
can speak firsthand to the
difference that double up food
Bucks program has made to our
New Mexico farmers by increasing
the amount of sales the customer
base and this program is not
only important to us right now
but moving forward it will help
keep our New Mexico agriculture
in New Mexico to feed our under
privileged population in the
state of fresh fruits and
vegetables thank you for your
time and your support thank you
Michael and Roy this Roy good
morning.
Mr chairman committee members
thank you so much for the
opportunity to just shared that
on house bill two forty three I
want to thank Representative
Armstrong for bringing this
forward and ms Miller for all
the hard work New Mexico for
miss marketing association as
you've heard
I'm here representing the New
Mexico food and agriculture
Policy Council firms table and
also the rocky mountain farmers
union
and screening of the New Mexico
never culture policy council
this is a a high priority for us
for all the reasons that
everybody actually mentioned
would like to share just a
couple of additional things ms
Miller brought it up that these
funds really help us bring home
funding opportunities from from
the federal side and of part of
the work of the New Mexico Food
Network culture policy councils
focus on federal programs and
those like snap and the double
up food Bucks we have worked
very hard as advocates to get
the double up food Bucks program
in place as part of the the
federal farm bill and are really
excited that that on the
opportunity for state funding to
actually help to
help to bring home matching
dollars to New Mexico secondly
on a personal note I've run I've
been part of farmers market
working in New Mexico for many
years and early on and it ran
for worse work at where we do
the very.
Her seniors.
Of.
I have no idea how that happened
so emails I'll finish up so
Five years ago and we're really
excited to see that snap is such
an important tool for people in
New Mexico and it is such a
driver for our local
agricultural economy and so we
look forward to your full
support of this bill the lawyer
that's going to done in Dania
and the last two the speakers
you know we don't have people
with just one first name in to
speak but done with the slide
please do state your full name
for for.
Thank you hello Mr chair members
of the committee my name is
Donna going.
And I'm here representing the
New Mexico astika Association as
well as the new.
Thank you madam and I am.
We supports this bill as well as
a mother who sees it that kids
need.
Well it nutritional value
and yeah stand and support site.
Back at the gate you're you're
you're legit this morning thank
you for bringing that to us we
appreciate it I go to to Chile.
Chile please stay in name for
the record.
Yes good morning Mister chairman
my name is Duane chili Yazzie
I'm here chip rock and I am
speaking on behalf of the ship
broke traditional farmers
cooperative and other indigenous
farmers to grow the state as we
all know the statistics Senator
one out of every four New Mexico
children experience of food
insecurity and that statistic
our with.
The higher on our native
reservations and this bill here
that your committee is
considering is extremely
important and it will
facilitate the process of the
local farmers getting fresh
nutritious foods to our children
and our senior citizen centers
and we stand and strong support
of the bill Mr Chairman thank
you know if you.
Thank you Mr Yazeed appreciated
stay warm other thing we've come
to the end of our our our list
of folks in in support anybody
in opposition from the public.
Okay very well then let's move
into the committee first on my
list I have Representative
hopping the hill.
Thank you very.
Thank you very much Mr chair I'm
gonna attempt video here but I
am at home and I just don't have
the same band with so if I
freeze or whatnot please let me
know and I'll turn the video
back off I'm Mr chair
representative Armstrong thank
you so much for bringing this
bill that seems like an
extremely important program and
I just had a couple of questions
regarding funding if you will
indulge me Mr chair
representative it seems like
this is a federal matching
program is that correct.
I thank you Mr chairman and
representative would be hell
yes.
Okay thank you Mr chair and
representative Armstrong so if
you don't get this appropriation
what happens is the program go
away.
Mr chairman I'm gonna let the
niece answer that Denise Miller.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Representative for that question
so right now so the state of New
Mexico contributes about three
hundred and eighty thousand
dollars to the double up food
Bucks program so that money is
recurring and we would have at
least that amount of money to
ninety percent of which goes to
incentives themselves so we
would have that we would have to
lower the request that we are
making up for the federal match
for the federal dollars so
that's you know that's what
would happen if we did not get
state funding we're also
pursuing some philanthropic
funding which may help balance
it out but we're waiting to find
out on that as well.
Okay thank you very much Mr
chairman and Representative
Armstrong and this Miller so if
you I just want to make sure you
guys actually are covered and
have a plan just in case you
know the appropriation does not
go through as we all know the
budgeting process could be kind
of difficult in that way so I'm
Mr chair representative do you
have any other alternative
approach are you going through
another state agency that acts
as part of their budgetary
requests are R. as this
appropriation that.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
Representative we.
It's really kind of strange how
all of it is funded it's in a
lot of different areas but we
are really going towards this
one and if if so be it possible
junior money and I would like to
enlist the help of other
representatives in this
committee and on our
Appropriations Committee.
The help to try to get this
funded because as you can see
we're always talking about Mr
chairman and representatives and
committee members about
Accessing federal dollars and
matching funds for federal
dollars and how we do it in
every single committee I then I
sat on the help committee and
Appropriations Committee and
it's it's always a big deal to
to get state funding to match
for federal funding so or to to
access so I would I would hope
that I could count on my
counterparts to help me get that
funding thank you Mr chairman.
Mr Chairman representative
Armstrong that's what I wanted
to hear happy to help out any
way I can thank you that
concludes my question.
Your muted Mr chair.
Thank you Representative Hochman
Vigil that's the Representative
brown and brown the floor is
yours.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative Armstrong just a
couple questions really about
logistics I'm wondering I
believe I heard that there are
ninety farmers markets and other
similar entities participating
in this double up Bucks program
right now is that correct
Representative Armstrong.
Mr Chairman representative brown
I'm gonna let to the similar
answer the specific on the
question thank you.
Yes thank you Mr chair and
representative there are about
ninety outlets right now and
that includes about forty
farmers markets thirty grocery
stores thirteen farm stands and
eleven CSA mobile market so it's
about ninety right now that
number will probably increase
over the next four years working
in New Mexico grocers
Association to help the
independent grocers at the
program on there's challenges
that smaller grocery stores due
to the POS system requirements
that they need to make the
program work but they're very
interested in adding in adding
the program and yeah we might
have new farmers markets are
being farmers markets as well it
will be adding the program so we
should be in the hundreds over
the next four years about let's.
Mr Chairman representative
Armstrong and miss Miller so I'm
gonna stay with ms Miller here
so ninety is not a lot for a the
state as large as ours and has
your big geographic region so my
next question is how easy is it
to add outlets and what is the
process.
They have to follow is it pretty
bureaucratic or do we make it
easy for them.
Mr chairman and Representative
thank you for the question we
try to make it as easy as
possible we are happy to allow
new outlets who desire to join
the program there are some
administrative requirements as I
mentioned for grocery stores
there are point of sale system
their cash registers half to
recognize they have to be able
to program your registers so
that they can read recognize
excuse from New Mexico grown
products
but it's very simple from the
customer standpoint for them to
you know for them to be used to
grocery stores farmers markets
it takes a little bit of
capacity internal human resource
capacity for farmers markets
because they do have to do
recordkeeping us some of the L.
UA ation work most of our
markets are more than happy to
do this we pay them a stipend
it's not very much but we do pay
them stipends they do have to
apply through FNS for the EDD
machines that we have excellent
support from the New Mexico
Human Services Department it
pays for the leases for all
machines that are at farmers
markets so we have excellent
support more and it's just a
matter of that the farmers
markets have the capacity to do
the record keeping and such
because the tokens are money and
we do have to make sure that
everything is tracked.
Okay thank you for that answer I
appreciate that so Mr Chairman
representative our survey I I
think to me that's one of the
pivot points here is that we
make this easy I mean truly easy
for people to participate from
the vendor side of things and I
I gather that this bump and
funding for at fiscal year
twenty two would be
maybe some of that could be used
to spread the word about the
availability of this program but
I I think that hi Mr chair that
we we we really should be
encouraging fresh fruits and
vegetables more so than frozen
pizza or anything like that I
think this is really going to be
good for the kids and the
families of the waterways but I
just want to make sure that that
recordkeeping I know we have to
have it we have to count for
funds but if that's true
roadblock I would hope we can
find ways to make it even easier
than it is now.
with that Mr chairman I think
that covers my questions thank
you thank you representative
brown that's good
representatives up.
Mr Chairman thank you very much
will representative Armstrong
yield.
Of course madam.
I really do like this bill I
liked it when we first tried to
implement something like this
many years ago the problem there
was it was specific to farm
state and.
And I know that doctor secretary
Wendy and I kind of got
crosswise over that because in
my particular area there was one
farm stand that would that could
accept that payment and the farm
stand a mile down the road did
not receive the same type of.
You know if my people think that
maybe something was wrong with
his stand were impacted.
K..
Mr Chairman representative
Armstrong your amendment stated
Cogeco that again it it also
includes farm stands and what
else.
Thank you Mr chairman and
representative it includes farm
stands grocery stores.
CSA which stands for community
supported agriculture and mobile
markets.
And and also Mr chairman and
representatives committee
I think most of you know me you
know me pretty well that I am
all about removing barriers are
regulations and licensing rules
that are burdensome to members
trying to do this and I do make
a promise to look at that and
see if there's a way that we
could make it easier thank you
Mr chairman.
Thank you very much for that
exclamation I didn't quite get
all of them whenever you're
ready the men and I have not had
a chance to pull them and yet.
This was originally enacted in
two thousand fifteen the program
I was talking about.
But I would like to ask you Mr
chairman and Representative
Armstrong in your expert witness
Mr Miller
of the five thousand dollars is
that going to be just for FY two
to or is it to be the next four
years.
Representative Mr Chairman
representative miss Miller I
believe it's to be split up is
that correct well actually
representative Armstrong in Mr
chairman members of the
committee of the hope is that
that is recurring funding the.
Sorry sorry to spring that I
mean are I you know he didn't
understand that it is you know
again we're trying to match
three point three million dollar
for your federal grant so right
now we have a gap of somewhere
between a million and a half and
two million dollars of match to
make up and we're as I said
we're also working hard on the
philanthropic fund us side of
things to fill some of that gap
but because this is a four year
program it would be recurring.
Health.
Mr Chairman representative miss
Miller thank you very much I'm
also dealing with excel energy
and the problems you're having
with the wind turbines Federal
frozen up and I'm really upset
about this I can just see a
repeat of what happened exactly
ten years ago whenever we have
well so I'm just gonna turn my
phone faced.
Representative.
I applaud your effort to get
healthy food out there.
The mass neediest of our
families out there and Mr
chairman I guess one of the
questions I do have for the
representative.
Is has right now that there are
twenty one grocery stores
statewide and they are lows
grocery stores in our particular
area in southeastern New Mexico
there are no laws grocery stores
how do you help us to see other
grocery stores coming on board
to be able to help the needy
families out.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative for that
question you know like I said if
we can remove some barriers to
make this a little easier I have
in my convenience store gas
station convenience store in
Magdalena New Mexico fresh
fruits and vegetables I have a
weights for to to apply you know
happy accept EBT at the store
the reason I have that in my
convenience store is because we
don't have a grocery store and
mentally then you have to drive
thirty minutes to Sapporo to the
closest grocery store or thirty
plus minutes to dabble New
Mexico where there's a grocery
store convenience store
restaurant there and so I would
hope that we do as much
advertising as possible
streamline it and give help to
the people that need assistance
in
Implementing this into their
grocery stores it would be I
believe
We I would hope that it would be
expedited.
And and the biggest part of this
is work feeding New Mexicans
with New Mexico grown food and
helping the farmers at the same
time so thank you and and I
don't know the specifics maybe
Denise may know a little more
than I do thank you on that
subject sh.
Representative L..
Excuse me I got distracted in
regarding excel energy and not
give me
his people's homes okay I'm I'm.
Anyway I will stop and a request
you chairman and Representative
a miss Miller earning your.
And I'm just throwing this out
there to lighten the mood a
little bit especially but it's
just it may.
Whenever you're talking about P.
O. S..
I'm assuming you're talking
about what legal or.
Yes Representative and Mr
chairman yes point of sale most
stores have a point of sale
computer system in their in
their grocery stores that's what
I have in my gas station okay I
just want to make sure that.
Was
little levity never does burn
okay thank you Mr chairman and
representative.
The only question I have for you
that is gives me concern why is
there an emergency clause this.
Very good question Mr chair and
representative.
I don't know the answer to this
the.
Chairman I understand the need
for get this out there to the
families rate I also understand
that will benefit our farmers.
Initially trying to promote what
they're trying to do in the
times that we're in right now
and the I think this is a very
good bill and I do I wish you
great success Mr Chairman
representative miss Miller thank
you for your responses that's
all.
As a result Representative
BIZZARRO thank you your last
question what what will be
referencing.
Well we're gonna skip over that
Representative.
Do I really have to wait.
You that see that's going to
Representative Allison.
will thank you Mr chair first
off I want to thank
Representative Armstrong for
bringing this forward I think
this legislation will really
help of the farmers and ranchers
and my immediate County and also
Are being Navajo agricultural
products industry so I just of
this is strongly support this
legislation for all the reasons
that we're we're given this
morning and again just to repeat
Armstrong I stand strong support
to your legislation thank you
Representative of Armstrong and
thank you Mr chair
Representative Nelson this go
then to Representative brown.
Yes thank you Mr chair and I
appreciate the opportunity to
have a second cut here and I'll
be very brief so Mr Chairman
representative Armstrong it's my
understanding from the the face
of the bill that this would be a
nonrecurring.
Appropriation half million
dollars it would add some for
expenditure in fiscal year
twenty twenty two and I thought
I heard miss Miller say that the
hope is this will be recurring
in the hope I understand but if
if this is meant to be.
The start of this additional
funding and currently there's
already three hundred thousand
or so devoted to this program so
I'm just asking for a little bit
of clarity on that I'm again I
think this bill indicates this
is a one time appropriation
thank you Mr chairman I think
you representative brown for
that question I might our hope
is that it is a one time ask and
the philanthropic comes through
and if it doesn't come through
then we will bringing the
bringing this bill forward again
next year.
But we're trying to be fiscally
responsible and only ask for
what we need in the year we
need.
Okay thank you very much that
answers very well thank you
thank you Representative Brown
but I see no further anticipated
the committee.
Mr chairman I move it to pass on
house bill two forty three as
amended.
Can lots of seconds we'll take
Representative moto second the
there any opposition to passing
house bill two forty three as
amended.
Seeing none Representative
Armstrong E. you have a if you
pass the house go to the as in
David thank you very much thank
you Mr chairman and committee
members.
The committee members this
concludes our work for the day
please do keep in mind that we
will meet on Thursday we do have
a floor session but that starts
at eleven and so we will pick up
on Thursday morning eight thirty
hope you all have a safe day
stay warm and we'll see you
again soon take care thank you
Mr chair.
