You guys wanna, are you guys
ready?
Good
Good morning.
Great to see you all.
So, um,
We are trying to get
Um, and I want to introduce my
Joseph Sanchez.
And provides an
Real quick, but it goes your mic
on? I don't see the green light.
Thank you. Thank you. I'm sorry.
Um, it, uh, provides an income
tax deduction for the cost of
legal services purchased by an
eligible taxpayer to recover
damages pursuant to the federal
Hermit's peak calf canyon fire
assistance or recover damages
directly to the salt and South
Fork fires and um and basically
that's what this.
I rep, does your expert want to
say anything?
Thank you, Mr. Vice Chair and
members of the, the committee.
Thank you for hearing this bill
today. This is an important bill
for victims of wildfires, not
just up in northern New Mexico,
but also southern New Mexico.
New Mexico has a long history
and heritage of generational
homes where, um, one family
member moves out and the other
family member moves in and you
never, nobody ever moves out of
a home. It just always stays
there. When we lose these
generational homes and
wildfires, um, it's very
difficult to replace them and
difficult for the communities to
replace.
with manufactured housing or
mobile homes double wipes. Those
are not going to be generational
homes in the Hermit's Peak Caff
Canyon fire we lost homes that
had been standing for over 100
years, and what we want families
to be able to redo and rebuild
is a generational home that will
be standing for another 100
years. In doing that, um, one of
the, the hurdles is the, the
groceryceipts tax paid to build
a home, to get an actual builder
into the community to build is
very, very difficult up in
northern New Mexico.
as well as southern New Mexico,
and some of the builders we're
looking at are out of Roswell.
They are rebuilding currently in
Ruidoso. They're currently um
getting ready to start
rebuilding up in northern New
Mexico. So this bill does two
things. It does give the credit
for to really incentivize New
Mexicans building homes that are
gonna continue to appreciate in
value as opposed to homes that
will depreciate in value. This
bill also gives a credit for um
the, the tax paid on legal
services. Many, many people
have had to go hire lawyers that
otherwise would not have had to
for the sole fact that they,
they cannot get through these
processes without some legal
assistance, um, this would
continue to put all of the
monies back into these families,
uh, through, through a way of a
deduction, as much money as
possible back into the family's
pockets. Now, the, this
legislature last year passed in
the governor signed into law a
gross receipts tax credit on
legal fees.
The difficulty with that credit
is it didn't quite do what what
the the legislature had it set
out to do. There was a cap on
that of $5 million and there was
also a, um, there was a cap of
$5 million. It did not apply to
all wildfires in New Mexico,
which is an issue now that
Ruidoso had their catastrophic
fire.
And it also created an unknowing
problem with equal protection.
Basically, as lawyers, we can't
treat any one client different
than any other client.
And with the cap of $5 million
what that means is that clients
who receive their settlements in
the first part of the year,
benefit from the gross receipts
tax credit.
Clients who received their
services or get their settlement
later in the year are not going
to benefit from that. So so what
it means is we can't take it for
anybody, and it really creates a
a problem. So, um, thank you,
Mr. Vice Chair and
Mr. Vice Chair, I just wanted to
clarify that this is a committee
substitute, so you may indeed
have to move the committee
substitute.
Have a motion to uh
Move for discussion, the
substitute.
Make a motion to discuss.
The committee subs to to move
the substitute. Moshe Gonzalez,
do you have a second?
Second.
OK, so we're on the substitute
for discussion, uh we stand for,
Mr. Vice Chair.
Can you read the 202 number?
Mr. Chi uh, chair, it's
0.231633.1.
one is the one we have 0.2.
We have a 0.2.
OK.
Madam,
Oh yes, thank you, Mr. Chair.
We're clarifying that real
quick. Did you turn this in 24
hours before? Yes. OK.
You know, if we sent it to the
committee last week.
OK. And
So we're on the substitute, uh,
reporego if you just wanna, you
or your witness wanna talk about
the substitute.
Mr.
I'm sorry, the button. Uh, thank
you. The, uh, analysis is the
same. I'm sorry, I was talking
about the committee substitute,
and I apologize I don't know
the, the rules that you have to
do the substitute first, but the
analysis is the same, the
substitute is the bill that has
um the necessary language.
what changed,
uh, from the bill to the subs,
uh, just for clarification, the
title changed. We came back and
realized that we had to change
the title in order to uh provide
the substitute, and that's why,
why you have a point to.
Uh, and if you look at starting
section D, the, the original
bill did not have the, the
credit for the site built homes.
So it combined the two together.
OK, so, uh,
Let's go ahead and uh we'll take
uh go to the audience after uh
we adopt the substitute. Do you
have questions on the
substitute?
Um
Lord.
I was gonna say, Mr. Vice Chair.
Um
Yeah, actually I do. So because
I hate substitutes with a
passion because it's so hard
because you're so prepped for
the regular meal, but somehow we
didn't see it, so I apologize.
So you said they changed the
title, but then you changed, you
added or you change section D.
Added section D. OK, and why did
you need to add section D, Madam
Chair, I'm sorry.
Mr. Vice Chair.
Honorable.
So the original bill did not
have the section D, which added
the uh the original bill was
just for legal services and what
this does is this deals with
legal services as well as the
GRT on site built homes, so it
combines the two together.
OK, um,
Mr. Vice Chair and
Representative, I ask you
questions about the bill itself.
Thank you.
And uh
I
Um, Mr. Vice Chair and or Mr.
Chair, um, and, and
representative Mason, um.
My copy does have that um the
hermit's peak.
I know, but the bridge. No, it
didn't. It didn't. That's,
that's why we changed it.
Right, this, this actually
addresses these particular
fires, yes. No, I, I understand
and, and I want that was my, my
vision is that I guess I'm
sorry, and I'm thinking about
future buyers, so, yeah.
I, I'm sad to say that I'm
thinking about future fires too.
Uh, Mr. Vice Chair.
And um Representative Mason in
the, the substitute, it does say
under qualified site built home
any taxpayer whose home was
destroyed by a wildfire in
calendar year 21 through 23.
Uh, that's in the very last
page, page 5, your mic when you
speak.
Thank you.
Sorry, uh.
It does, but then again in uh
The, it also says
damages from salt.
Balton South Fork fires were the
whitewater baldy fire.
I don't know what all those
names mean in parts of your bill
it names specific fires.
So
You know, I guess I'm kind of
getting lost in what is actually
The term the the names aren't
the same all the way through the
bill I guess what I'm saying.
Mr. Chair
Last year and
Representative.
I'm getting confused our title
is clear that it's addressing
these particular fires, but I'm
not sure, um, Representative
Mason, where, oh, are you
talking about beef?
Because B also calls them out.
Right.
But then
And she said, what, where did
you say that it was?
On the substitute page 5G.
I,
I don't have a
I've only got
3 pages. I apologize.
I'm really
confused me clarify, uh, we were
looking at the original
substitute and we have the
number 2 now.
So
That was the confusion. I'm
sorry about that.
And
As far as the substitute.
It does change. I just want to
bring the light that it changed
more than just what.
She said originally.
But I mean adopted, it's fine.
Are there any other questions on
the substitute?
Before we get on the bill.
No, have a motion to adopt the
substitute.
I'll make a motion to accept the
substitute Gonzales, the motion
back it.
Second by Mason, uh, and your
post.
We have a
Substitute adopted.
Uh, now back to the substitute,
do we have uh
Let's go to the
The audience who here is in a
favor of the bill, please raise
your hand
and those opposed.
Uh, those that are for it, if
you wanna.
Are the gentlemen will hold the
mic if you wanna.
Go and speak, and a gentleman he
is, Mister Chairman, um, uh, my
name is Kent Cravens, um,
registered lobbyist for the New
Mexico Association of Realtors,
and we're very much in support
of this and other kinds of bills
that are moving through this
session for the first time in
probably 20 or more years, I've
seen uh bills coming through
that actually put me behind the,
behind the bill itself in terms
of risk mitigation, fire
preparedness, uh, there's a lot
of bills running through that
actually have uh uh budget.
its inappropriation. So, uh,
nice, nice change of events,
nice to see and we're in support
of the bill. Thank you.
Good afternoon, Mister Chairman,
members of the committee. My
name is Gabriella McCarthy, and
I'm a registered lobbyist. I
stand in strong support of this
bill as it helps provide relief
to the individuals who lost so
much to wildfires.
Mr. Vice Chair members of the
committee, Deonza Valencia, I'm
an attorney that represents
clients that have been harmed in
the Hermit's Peak Ca Canyon
fires. Um, this is a critical
step, um, in actually making
our, our communities whole in
New Mexico and appreciate uh
DuPa's motion on the committee,
so. Thank you. Thank you. Let's
go to Zoom. Do we have a
No one's on Zoom. OK, let's go
to questions, uh, rep Lord.
It's all this
Thank you, Mr. Vice Chair. Uh,
thank you, Representative
experts. So, uh, I just have a
couple of questions because I
haven't seen this one yet, and
there were more changes cause we
went from 5 to 2 pages.
Does it still say.
Just site built homes in this
substitute, or is it open to
everything, including modulars
and trailers.
Sorry, madam chair
The chair just magically
appeared like that and nowhere
um, Mr. Chair and uh
Representative Lord, uh, the
substitute doesn't address
either one, so it's open.
The way we look at it.
OK, so Madam Chair, so.
So it's gonna be OK now if
somebody.
Decides
That, cause I know before they
didn't want trailers, so now
it's OK to put a trailer on
land. Is that what I'm
understanding?
Madam Chair, mobile home would
be allowed. I mean, uh, Adam.
Representative
We're, we're a cool committee,
so it's OK in terms of it's not
like one of my other committees.
Um, Madam Sharison, so we
changed that, so we, so what you
did from here to there, you went
from statewide to just see
specific areas.
And then you open it up more.
By actually removing things.
Um, and is this in
appropriations early, Madam
Chair, Representative expert.
Madam Chair, uh, Madam Chair's
back, um, and Representative
Lord, this is going to the next
committee, um, which I believe
is appropriations. OK. So, uh,
is Madam Chair.
Uh, representative. So is it in
the budget or anything, so
you're gonna go to a probes now
and ask them for.
Um
I think that's all the questions
that I had because I think that
was just I was looking quickly a
lot of stuff got removed, it
got, I always like when bills
are lighter when they come back.
That's always a good idea. Um,
so that's all the questions I
have. Thank you, ma'am
represented before, before I
totally let you give it up, give
up your, your time. I give it up
for a rep lord, uh, our
committee, uh, analyst was just
explaining, just to clarify that
in this committee substitute,
uh, this simply deducts legal
fees that were used in the
process of, of the, the to, to
After after the damage was done
to these properties. So it's
specifically for legal fees. I
didn't know if you had any
additional questions with that
in mind. No, madam chair. I
just, whenever I get something I
like to read through it and make
sure I have everything in order
before I can make a decision on
it, but I was just looking
specifically because I had stuck
out to me about the modular or
trailer so. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you,
Representative. Thank you,
ranking member, uh,
Representative Gonzalez.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair. um,
thank you, Representative. So
now that we are only on, on the
substitute that was provided and
it's only with legal services,
um,
What, with regards to say, FEMA
reimbursement or possibly other
costs that could be coming in to
cover legal services. Can you
explain how
You would be able to claim an
income tax if some of those fees
are reimbursable for later
things, um, down the road. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative. Thank you, Madam
Chair and Representative
Gonzalez. So FEMA is not paying
for legal fees and they are not
paying for the gross receipts
tax, so it's unlikely that a um
claimant would
Be entitled to this. So, and I
do do not anticipate that the
claimants would be receiving any
money going forward.
Or what the state is, um,
offering the deduction for here.
Madam Chair Representative, is
there a cap on the amount of
legal fees that can be claimed
in this credit.
Um, and Madam Chair and
Representative Gonzalez, yes,
ma'am, the cap, uh set by
federal statute is 20%.
Um, and Madam Chair
Representative, um,
Is there being that it is a
little bit late in the session
and the tax bill has been rolled
out for a lot of things. Um,
what is, maybe what is the
intention behind this as the tax
package has somewhat been
determined specifically with
regards to credits. Um, is there
an intention for maybe some
other alteration at another
later committee, um,
Yes, just looking at the credits
and the timing of the
presentation that it may be too
late to get put into this year's
um tax package. Can you maybe
elaborate a little bit on that?
Thank you, Adam Chang.
And Madam Chair and
Representative Gonzalez, I, I
don't believe there's this isn't
something else that's going to
be changed in the future, I
believe, I think the intent is
really to try to fix the what
occurred in the last session,
which was, uh, you did pass this
tax credit, but there was a cap
on it of the $5 million and what
again what that does is it means
that if, if a person receives
their settlement between January
and say March, they could take
advantage of that. If a person
by no fault
of their own receives their
settlement after that $5 million
is expended, they cannot take
advantage of that. So this gives
the taxpayer the opportunity to
take, take the advantage of the
um
Of the benefit of it, not just
the the law firm that's
representing the taxpayer. The
other thing this does is, as my
firm is doing, we are paying the
gross receipts tax. I have
offices in Mora in San Miguel
County. I am paying my grocery
receipts tax to those counties.
If a taxpayer does not qualify
for the deduction the credit,
you know, maybe it doesn't
qualify, but they don't need it.
Those counties get to keep that
gross receipts tax to continue
to build what they're doing. So
I think there's a lot of
benefits to this, which is
really, um, fixing something
that happened last year.
Chair Representative and, and
then, you know, just, just, just
backing up, um, you know, again,
just being, you know, in this
area where especially where all
this is coming through.
Um, if maybe you could even
maybe elaborate a little bit for
the committee on what is taxable
income. So if they were to get a
settlement, they were to get
FEMA dollars. What is taxable
income? Like that they're
actually being paid on, then the
legal fees.
are much are very high amount
comparable to maybe what a
person's taxable income is like
that the credit may be really,
really high, and if that's the
intention, then if you can maybe
elaborate a little bit on the,
on the amount of the credit,
like what's actual taxable
dollars that they're taxed on
that you were wanting to do the
credit against. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you,
Representative.
And, and Madam Chair
Representative Gonzalez, um, I
do not pretend to be a tax
attorney ever. I think that's
just such a dangerous place to
play, but I, I would say that
the intent is
The gross receipts tax paid on
legal services, so you are
correct that the legal services
could be
Could be uh uh this amount. What
we're really saying is the
grocery receipts tax paid on
those legal services, and that
may be something that that the
committee may want to amend, so
it's very clear and that would
be on page 2 of the bill cost of
legal services, it, it should
read maybe cost of gross
receipts tax paid on legal
services, first line of page
two, because that would limit it
further, but I do believe that
for the vast majority of of the
families that this
Affects the gross receipts tax
on the legal services is what
levels the playing field.
Madam Chair and Representative
Gonzalez, we would definitely be
open to an amendment if that's
something that you're
Suggesting
Um,
Madam Chair Representative, um,
within the committee, I wouldn't
want to
Messing this up.
In committee passing on sites,
but um
We should pass, like, you know,
I would suggest maybe some
clarity on on maybe some of that
is I do think it is a little,
little messy and the, the
description as to what the
actual tax credit is being
claimed on.
Um, and then I guess my last
question is, um,
Again, being in semi, being in
the area again, um, selfishly a
little bit, you know, this, this
would definitely help, you know,
my constituency, um, this also
does have direct um
Direct relation to the Riodoso
fires, um, but was there a
reason to not include any other
statewide fires within the
substitution as it was within
the original.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative.
And, and Madam Chair and
Representative Gonzalez, that is
also something as as a wildfire
lawyer, I have been all over the
state. I've been in, and, and
anytime there's a disa disaster.
We've been down in Roswell.
We've been all over the state
when these disasters happen, so
that would be something else
that if an amendment in the
future, that there's no
opposition to making this
available to anybody who needs
this to recoup from a disaster.
Madam Chair, we would definitely
be open to our next committee to
make those amendments if, if
that's what the will of this
committee is. Um, so I think
it's good that we're going,
going into this step in, in
general, I like it when we pass
out clean bills that are ready
to go. I will say considering
the late, you know, lateness of
this, you know, we have 1011
days, but who's counting? Um,
left in session. I would love it
if we were to give specific, um,
um.
Uh, uh
I don't want to edit specific
amendments that we'd like to see
passed forward. Uh, would the
committee be open to, to moving
that forward in that way? OK, so
it, it does sound like on page
one lines 24.
Um, that would be the
opportunity there to change who
would be that would be available
to.
And then uh Representative
Gonzalez on your first comment,
where would you see those
changes be?
Um, Madam, Madam Chair, um,
representative, I think it's
more um in the amount equal to
the cost of legal services, just
more clearly defining what the
tax credit would be on versus
it's the cost of the legal
services or the cost.
Of the GRT on the legal services
because legal services as a
whole can be
Pretty hefty. And so just to see
what that text.
Oh yes, no, uh, just, just to
be, just to be clear, we're
summarizing what the amendments
that Representative Gonzalez
would like moving forward. And
then we'll go, we have 2 more
commenters so far in this bill.
Should they have more as well,
we'll offer those as well. And
again, any movement for any
motion to move this bill
forward, we would anticipate
with those changes. But um I'll
let you finish what you're
saying on this. And what I'm
seeing real fasts representative
Gonzalez on page 2 around line
5. Is that where you're seeing
it?
Um, um, yes, Madam Chair
Representative, um, my two
issues is just inclusive of of
statewide and then just being
more definitive as to the tax
credit, as to what exactly it
pertains to. I think those would
clarify, um, specifically.
Um
Definitions in this Madam Madam
Chair and representative
Gonzalez, we have um identified
on line one cost of GRT legal
services and then line 5 equal
to the cost of GRT legal
services. Does that cover what
you're suggesting?
Um
Definite make sure and
comfortable that any definition.
Man
on that point, did you guys work
with anybody in those districts
when you drafted this, or did
you work with anybody in
taxation, in the taxation
committee, uh, about this bill,
but the substitute. So, um,
Madam Chair and Representative
Lord, um,
People in those districts, um,
I know, I know Representative
Sanchez represents Mora, and
then I represent over 2000
people who have been affected by
the hermit's Peak Caf Canyon
fire. I represent a number of
people who have, um,
been had destruction as a result
of the salt and salt pork fires,
so, um, and we've had tax
opinions, we didn't work with
the tax department, but we have
had private tax opinions on what
this legislature did last year
and how to apply that and what
fixes were necessary. And, and
Madam Chair said, did you, uh,
expert, did you deal with
anybody that's in the taxation
committee.
you ask them or where this is
going next about some possible
changes cause I'm now worried
about changes and changes and
more changes as it goes along.
Did you guys speak to anybody in
the further committees or in the
taxation committee?
Madam Chair and Representative,
we have not spoken with anyone
specifically, but we can before
the next committee.
All right. Thank you very much.
So it sounds like Rivers and
Gonzalez, we've summarized, and
then we'll move forward back to
our regularly scheduled program
Representative Mason, I will
hand it over to you.
Thank you Medicare
uh.
more from
On your, uh,
Um
Madam Chair and Representative
Mason were talking about adding
that, um, that was our
discussion with Representative
Gonzalez is the possibly this
committee would want us to add
it before we go to the next
committee.
Exactly.
On legal services.
Yes, sir.
Yes, Madam Chair and
Representative Mason.
you.
Yeah
And, um, Madam Chair and
Representative Mason, it's, it's
based on the federal in in what
is income under federal income
tax. That's the definition
there, but I think what we're,
what we're talking about with
Representative Gonzalez was
clearing up that definition.
Correct.
I, I think it would um.
Yeah, Madam Chair and
representative uh Mason, yes, it
would.
It would help because the
legislature already passed that
last session, but they, families
are not really able to take
advantage of it.
Um, in the way that it was
intended, so this means that if
families can continue to take
advantage of that, and by taking
away the cap, what it does is it
means that families, regardless
of the time they receive their
settlement or receive their
money, they have an opportunity
to
Have equal protection under the
law, if you will, to take
advantage of the tax credit.
Yeah.
they
So, uh, Madam Chair and
Representative, last year it was
a $5 million statewide cap.
That's what, that's what was
passed.
No, per.
Not, not the way this bill is
drafted. No. Please remember to
go to the chair. I'm sorry.
I.
So Madam Chair and
Representative Mason in the way
the bill was last year, you are
correct, that's, that's what it
would be because there was a
cap. The bill that we're asking
to be passed this year does not
have a cap, which means that if
somebody has a $20 million ranch
and they can take advantage of
this tax credit, but somebody
also has a $200,000 house, they
can also take advantage, and if
the guy who gets the $20 million
ranch if his settlement comes
first.
He doesn't disenfranchise the
person who receives their
settlement later.
Madam Chair and Representative
correct.
Madam Chair and Representative,
um, this bill goes through, I
thought it was 2031.
Yeah.
So, so what this also allows
families to do is as long as it
takes, these families have no
control over how long it's gonna
take for them to fully recover.
So it gives them an opportunity
to take this at whatever time
they can recover.
Between now and then.
represented
3 years, 5 years.
Madam Chair, and Representative
Masson, are you suggesting that
we add a sunset date?
Are you suggesting we add a
sunset date?
Like she said.
That
But
To
We don't have much time to study
this.
Oh, we don't have much time to.
But actually
Di Digest everything that's
said.
20 minutes.
Yeah
But yes I think uh.
I'm, I'm fine with the grocery
receipts tax on legal fees. I
would just.
Like some dates on how many
years they can.
A person can
I mean, I, I, I don't, I know
they can't help.
The people that make less money
need more than one year they
don't have that great a tax
liability.
But I don't think it should. I
don't want it to hang around
forever.
That's all for me. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you, Mason
Representative Cullen.
Um
Oh, OK.
Uh, OK, great. So I think some
of the, the things that I've
heard come forward from the
committee is uh one addressing
that this applies to more than
just the two wildfires, all
federal, federally declared
wildfires. It seems that we'd
want to move in. I have a couple
of notes on where that could be
and also clarifying that this is
for the, the, the GRT costs on
legal services. Um, again, if we
want to have that even more
clear about just state um uh GRT
I believe that's, that's the
direction we're looking at in
here.
Um, so I believe those are the
two pieces. Again, I'm gonna say
it like we, we don't typically.
Oh, and I apologize. Go ahead,
Jimmy's fine, Madam Chair,
you know, I, I.
I follow you. I, I hate putting
these commit amendments on
bills.
In committee where we have 15
minutes.
Make these decisions.
I would feel better if
I don't know. I mean, I know
it's late in the session, but.
Not my responsibility, I guess
they didn't.
I mean
It's uh hard to get them heard I
know that.
I would feel better if I like, I
like to pass a clean bill.
And Representative Mason, I, I
appreciate that. I, I think the
goal here is to, it's not the
goal, I should not say that. Uh,
what I would like to do is have
a motion on the committee
substitute before us, whatever
that might be.
And should this committee
substitute move forward, it
moves forward with
The understanding that in the
next committee, the
representative will be making
these amendments that we're
talking about here, which is we
typically don't do, um, but
again, I, I understand that this
is late and I, I just want to be
very clear. I, you know, next
year we're here, you know, in
January, we're not gonna do this
again. We will, you know this,
we'll roll it. We, we've rolled
this bill, I believe 3 times
already because we wanted to get
things ready and I have bills
that have never even got a
committee here right.
And, and it holds the process
should we, you know, keep
holding. So, so what I would
recommend is that we have a
motion on this committee
substitute with those
understandings, I would, uh,
seeing no other comments from
the committee, I would, I would
like to also mention an
agreement with Representative
Mason, um, typically you see
sunsets for any tax credits um
available. So you will need to
be adding that, uh, for any
consideration in tax, having
been on that committee before.
So I would recommend that as
well. Um.
And I
One question, Madam Chair, how
do we know this happens?
Well, should it, should it come
forward, we would have to look
to see if these were in there,
right? That's.
Who watches that. I don't.
Huh
That
That's right.
OK. Sounds good. Thank you. I
think that's right, is as a
committee we would do that. Um,
so I appreciate the committee's
willingness to have this
conversation, and I'll say, what
is the will of the committee on
this bill
with the agreement that they'll
make all the amendments we just
discussed before uh going to the
next committee. So we have a, a
motion for a do not pass on
House Bill 568, but it do pass
on rural development, house
grant land grants and cultural
affairs, uh, committee
substitute for House Bill 568 is
there?
2.
0 2nd
I, I'm, I'm actually gonna hold
on that. I will say that. I,
I'm, I'm looking at the
committee, I believe the
committee would feel more
comfortable if we're passing
something that's clean out of
this committee. So uh let's talk
afterwards. I'm happy to, to
show you where these notes are,
um, and we can, we can uh have a
motion at the beginning of on
Thursday. Let's move, move
forward with a rolled bill. Does
that work, representative? That
would work, Madam Chair, and
we're happy to bring this bill
back with those changes. Thank
you very much. So we're gonna
roll this bill until Thursday.
I, I appreciate the
conversation. I know we went off
a script for a little
bit, thank you. Uh, we're gonna
move forward on Senate Joint
Memorial to, uh, the Frontiers
Area Task Force, uh, with
Senator Campos.
And we'll get back to our usual
schedule of, you know, going
through the chair and uh one at
a time, all the fun stuff.
Thank you.
OK.
No, no, no.
here.
I got a bill.
So maybe.
Senator Representative, we're
ready when you are. Thank you
very much, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. It's great to
go ahead and be here, uh, before
you said a memorial to request
the governor appoint a task
force to study the needs of
frontier areas. It's a lot more
information within the memorial
itself, but I defer to my
co-sponsor, Representative
Sanchez, and then if I may,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, also uh deferred to
uh our uh our expert's here with
us today. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Madam Chair.
We know how uh
Of it is for our rural areas to
uh get economic development. I
think this is a tool, uh, if we
can get a good study.
Do uh
I know our expert here is from
uh Ojosarco uh.
So everyone near to us I don't
know if in the mountains, uh,
beautiful area.
And I'll just hand it over to
our expert to uh talk a little
more.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair, and our expert today is
uh Carol Miller, and she'll go
ahead and proceed and we'll make
the comments as brief as
possible. Thank you.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, um, this joint
memorial has a history, uh
started actually in about 2017
and 2018.
Uh, we had the same number we
had Senate Joint Memorial to
which created a frontier working
group which has been working
since that time in 2021, uh, we
brought forward and had passed
the rural equity on bud Bill, so
there is a legislative history
of trying to get additional
resources out to the frontier
communities, um, a lot of
The communities, I'm pretty have
presented this to senators and
representatives is a really
grassroots effort that came out
of what I've called our 15
minutes of fame during the
pandemic, it was this big
realization that we she things
down and that whole large swaths
of the state had no
infrastructure, no providers,
no, um, way to get.
Sources in that emergency
situation for the first time,
the state partnered money with
private foundations and actually
got resources out, uh, what we
call the kitchen table.
Uh, not, sometimes the last mile
still leaves a lot of people
unserved, but we were able to
get things delivered to people,
all of a sudden our fire
departments, our water
associations, our community
centers or libraries, we all
were able to work together and
share resources, but we have are
on our way back to a more side
load distribution of state
funds, so
At the grassroots community
level, we started talking about
something that is nicknamed,
maybe it would be the name, but
something community operated
infrastructure networks to
create a legal entity among
ourselves that would help break
down some of the silos in
funding and administration and
let the state create a new way
for the state to get resources
for
me is someone who's worked in
our nonprofit communities and
government for over 50 years
here in New Mexico. We're often
competing against each other
because the funding stream is
siloed or it's categorical or
new funding comes and we're
actually competing against
partner entities for never
really quite enough money to
meet the need at the extreme, so
what we've
talked about is could we
incentivize the state if we
agree to create a new quango in
New Mexico and we have a number
of them.
We have statute already for
administrative quangos, quasi
non-governmental organizations.
If we work together, could we be
incentivized to have help with
administration grant writing,
um.
Financial reporting and have it
all done in one place, so I see
it in my village. We have about
7 entities all struggling
without enough money. The water
association, the, we have two
land grants there. We have a
community center, library,
volunteer fire department and
volunteer EMS and we each have a
silo that we're stuck in. So our
community and others have
And talking about creating
something and having at the
executive level.
Um
The administration, the
governor, and those cabinet
agencies to try and break
through some of the barriers we
face and figure out how to
actually let us work together
and get the resources we need.
So with that, I thank you and
I'm here to answer any
questions. Thank you, Madam
Chair, members of the committee
were available for questions.
Thank you. Is there anyone
online who opposes this bill,
Senate bill or Senate Joint
Memorial too. Please raise your
hand. Is there anyone in the
room that opposes Senate Joint
Memorial too, please raise your
hand.
Seeing none, is there anyone
online that uh supports Senate
Joint Memorial 2. Please raise
your hand. Is there anyone in
the room that supports Senate,
uh, Joint Memorial to please
raise your hand.
Seeing none, I turned to the,
uh, committee, Representative
Mason.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank,
thank you, Senator, uh.
Senator
Joseph left and.
Uh, in this committee,
I can't remember the we just
passed the bill that funded.
Money for
Yeah, believe it was one of
Sanchez.
Here he comes.
How does this, Joseph?
Well, a few weeks ago we passed
the bill through this committee
that gave money to the
executives land grant meeds.
Or set up a fund for them for
infrastructure.
Will they also be available to
tap into these funds also, Madam
Chair, this is a memorial, uh,
to the governor to set up a task
force to to investigate all the
options available, so our hope
is that uh they'll do a
Oral study with a recommendation
on, on how to help these areas,
including the land grants.
OK, it's uh
What, why?
Madam Chair, representing why
the governor of a committee, why
not the cogs?
Council of government or someone
like that that know our little
communities already to.
To weigh in on this.
study.
Uh, Madam Chair, uh,
Maybe, uh, if our expert wants
to answer, but the governor has
the ability to appoint anyone
from the executive to be on this
task force so she can take all
her resources, whether it's
economic development.
PFA, any of those, so.
Uh
That'd be pretty simple for her
to task them to do this, but uh
And, and Madam Chair and
representatives, there would be
community involvement, uh, in
the memorial where it's calling
for that we often don't have the
opportunity to sit with that
high a level of uh executive
authority, so, um.
Legislative council actually
suggested that language for this
memorial when it was being
considered.
Thank you, uh, Representative
Senator, Madam Chair, uh, Madam
Chair.
You know, also,
I know in our area, our call our
council of governments.
does a great job keeping all of
our small communities compliant
and
You know, if they're not
compliant.
They don't have all their stuff,
they can't get any money anyway.
They know all of the.
They know every each section of
the state has a different
council of government.
And they know us already, all of
the.
Small towns like yours and the
small ones in my district.
It, uh, you know, when we just
say appointed by the governor.
For me, it leaves a whole who is
she gonna appoint?
You know, it, uh,
Is it gonna be everybody from.
Western New Mexico, northern New
Mexico, banks are gonna be
Southeastern New Mexico we know
that but we probably get
somebody on there.
But, uh, you know, it's kind of
an open end deal.
It
When you leave
I guess I'm just not much on
leaving.
Given more power to the
executive department if I agreed
that we need this, we need all
these towns and with me and
Joseph thought before, Madam
Chair, Representative, you know,
all done incorporated little
towns in New Mexico.
All of them, no matter which
corner of the state they're in.
are struggling for funds.
But
And
uh
I just like to make sure they
all get a fair shake thank you
representative Madam Chair.
Representative Garcia.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative
and senators, uh, when I looked
at the.
The Senate
Joint Memorial.
In the area that I represent,
uh, we have different
Uh, different communities that
are uh.
Not incorporated, but
They're very different from one
another.
Some have groups where they're
able to uh make plans uh for.
For their area, we have a number
of
Uh, subdivision from where,
where I'm coming from. I know
what it's like one area is
nothing but ran ranchers in
rural area that much uh needs
the resources that we're talking
about.
Uh, and then we have, uh,
Uh, a couple of areas that I
know of that
Uh, refused to be incorporated
because um.
I guess they want to remain
hidden. These are areas that
started to have people start
moving in, uh, within the last
25 years.
And uh we have had uh some major
crime problems in the area.
But it was very hard to, to work
with the group asking them how
they can um
If they can come together to
address the problems, but
Uh
As a former commissioner,
we couldn't do very much because
uh we couldn't make the
resources available to uh the
area that's much needed.
Uh, a couple of the
subdevelopment has been
dependent upon uh the uh Raymond
Navajo community for their water
needs. Uh, we have a deep well
and uh they're able to come in
and get water from there, but if
If
This study can help.
Uh, the communities that would
be really, uh, that would.
They would benefit from it. But
how much cooperation they will
give, I don't know.
Uh, in some of these areas, but
it's much needed.
And
Uh, my question is, what's to
study has been done.
Uh, is it going to go forward to
make resources available from
whatever means.
So they can
Um
Uh, for example, water and other
part I know is the roads.
Uh, where, where, where we're
at, it gets very muddy, and
we're up on the high, uh,
elevation and
The rain and snow that we have
that, but it gets very, very
muddy and it
Creates problems for the
residents just trying to get out
as far as having a center like a
health center, uh, none of that
is available, so they depend on
the uh
Uh, the Ramonapo, uh.
Uh clinic that they have there
that's uh the resource, the
We don't have a library except
11, community that's in the
southern part.
Uh
depends on that. So I'm sure
that that's how the rest of the
state is looking and just what
would be something that would uh
if we do go forward with it,
and, uh, and
I don't know.
how effective these studies are.
Uh, sometimes you do studies and
they just end up on the shelf
and nobody picks it back up and
But this is something that would
um benefit a number of people in
the rural area. Thank you.
Ranking member Lord
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator. Thank you,
Representative experts. How many
people are on this committee? I
didn't, I was just trying to
scan through and how many will
she be appointing?
Madam Chair and Representative
that uh will be up to the
governor.
In terms of the task force, and
I will say a task force was
chosen instead of a committee.
Um
That they often have more
authority in getting back to the
governor.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Senator
Representative, um.
So she will be
The one who's gonna pick who and
how many. I, I think I see the
same problems. I like it. I
mean, I know we need more
reputation. I, I have a very
rural area, 5 land grants, and
My issue becomes, and, and I
don't even know how to fix this
or if there is a way, but I, I
have a problem where we have
very distinct areas like in your
area, you have very, very
different problems. I have very
different problems. I mean, I
have parts of Albuquerque, which
are very different from the East
Mountains, which is very
different from Torrance County,
which is very different from
mountain air to lange to land
grants. So they're all, so I
would hope, I guess I just have
to put good faith if I pass this
that.
She's gonna put the right people
and she's gonna put enough
people that address those
various areas, um.
Because the thing about New
Mexico is we have a very
distinct and rich culture, and
it varies just within a very
close distance. So
I guess they just have
commentary on it. That's the
only thing is that, that, that
becomes problematic for me that
is everybody going to get
representation of some sort, so
we don't end up with just
specific people who don't
understand the areas of your
area versus my area versus other
areas. I can't include you,
you're in Riar Rancho, so sorry.
But it can't include, you know,
Eddie County and we have, we
have all these counties that are
so incredibly diverse. I just
don't want anyone to get missed
out. That's all I have to say,
Madam Chair and Senator.
Madam chair, can I?
Yeah. Yeah, you want me to make
the egg, yes, would you like to
elaborate on my statement.
There we go again, this is a
memorial. It has no force. It's
not a law. It's not requiring
the governor to do this. It's
just asking her to make the
appointment. It's the
legislature.
As a body asking her to appoint
this task force.
I think uh if she did do it, she
would come to us and obviously
we're gonna see uh please look
at the entire state and uh look
at the differences, how can we
help everyone?
So that would be the, the goal
of this, this task force.
And again, if they do produce a
study, the, the hope is the
outcome of this study is that
they give recommendations for
potential
Legislation that could help
these areas in the future. So
this is just a step before we
even get to that point where we
can, uh,
As a lights to come up with
options to see what we can do to
help.
And thank you, ma'am Charon and
a senator and representative
expert, and I understand that. I
understand what the point of
this is, but it's still, I, I,
I, sorry, I've been here 5 years
in lost faith in humanity
sometimes because it's just just
sorry, I think some things go
through and it's like.
Yeah, I just wanna, it, it's
just hard for me. I just would
like to see have more
definitive, but I get it. You're
just trying to make a task
force, so I hope when she does,
if she does come to you, that
you guys will work with her and
tell her these, you know, these
are all the areas you need to
make sure we have people that
understand.
How to look at these.
With a different set of eyes,
and I'm gonna pick on
Representative Collin again,
because, sorry, just because
you're, she's in Rancho and she
wouldn't understand the needs of
land grants in Torrance County.
That's what I'm trying to get
at. So, thank you, Madam Chair.
That's all. No more questions.
Signal for their comments from
the committee. I have a couple
of questions. Um, so the
timeline you have here is about
4 months. Um, the study would be
concluded by November,
right? July, August, September,
October, yeah. So, um, is that
enough time for this to be
completed for the, for the
governor to appoint this task
force, all of those details.
And I'm sure I can defer to the
expert to go ahead and give her
opinion on that. She's very
familiar with this. Thank you.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, the governor's office
has been involved in this
process for about 2 years when
this first came forward as a
concept, um, the governor's
office most recently had the
secretary of CYFD talked to me,
um, we had a very long
conversation, um, are working
group, we've spoken to the state
auditor, uh, Joseph.
I asked us about some of the
audit rules if a new entity were
created, um, this actually
started out to be a bill.
Um, over the interim this year,
I mean, there was a draft bill,
it was quite complex and the
decision was made that it would
be better to come forward as a
memorial this year, so that
there could be more education
and one of the things we've
always stood for is the saying
that those of us in rural policy
if you've seen one rural
community, you've seen one rural
community because there are
differences.
And one reason to the land
grants and the asseos that when
they get capital or thesea in
particular, they are not allowed
to use those funds to pay staff,
so I worked very closely. I've
been in the commissioner. My
husband is the treasurer.
It's a lot of work, all the work
of infrastructure in rural New
Mexico is expected to be done by
volunteers, and that is the
bottom line of what is not
sustainable. How we get there,
what we call it.
Is really less important than
can we actually find a way to
pay people in communities doing
that work so that our smallest
communities in areas get some
benefit from programs that are
passed. So with that, thank you,
thank you, and similar, well,
there's 2, I have 2 other
questions as well. Um.
I believe and I could be wrong,
but I thought this, the governor
was updating the strategic
economic plan sometime in the
near future. It is, I'm just
gonna say this is a statement.
It is my hope that what comes
back from this task force would
be included in those
conversations as well, um, and I
think if that again could be uh
conveyed. I think that's really
uh important because again, a
lot of the, when we move forward
in legislation, a lot of things
we cite is the strategic
economic areas of investment
and, you know, again, having
that input from this would be
great. The last thing I'll say
is
that what's come up in a number
of the analyses that we've
received, um, is just that the
definition of a frontier is too
broad and too big. I believe
representative Mason brought
that up as well. Um, it seems
there's some opportunity within
the task force itself to, to
make that more clear. Um, I
don't know if you have any other
thoughts or concerns or previous
experience on this one on, on
that part. Thank you, Madam
Chair, and again, I'm going to
defer to our expert to uh
further elaborate. Thank you.
We're using the same language
that's been used in other bills,
New Mexico early on made a
decision not to use numbers of,
uh, for example, one of the
federal is uh how many people
live and how many square miles
and how much distance to get
there, that really locked in and
so programs like the Frontier
Main Street program, which I
think will open opportunities
through something like this.
Uh, entity that ends up coming
out of it, uh, has left it vague
intentionally to allow
communities to make the case of
why they would be eligible, so a
frontier area is defined in some
Department of Healthpolicies
here in New Mexico. It's also
the frontier Main Street program
is a very good example of that.
It's inclusive rather than
exclusive and so.
That was the whole moving
forward that we would keep it
that way and it could become
program or community specific.
That's my questions. Uh, what is
the will of the committee?
I move a Du pass.
We have a due pass motion on uh
Senate Joint Memorial too. Is
there a second? I can the, the.
The oh my gosh, the motion was
by ranking member Lord seconded
by Representative Garcia. Um, is
there any opposition to that
motion. Uh, let's go ahead and
do a roll call.
Representative Cullen.
With explanation.
Representative Garcia.
Uh, yes.
Representative Gonzalez, ranking
member Lord, yes.
Representative Mason.
Vier Sanchez.
Madame Cerrado
Madame Char Serato
before that, we're gonna, oh
wait, sorry, I thought you
passed. Uh, yes, apologies.
You have 4 too so we have an
explanation by Collin. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Um, so my, my
concern, well there's, I believe
that uh regional cogs should be
taking uh care of this, uh, to
get these recommendations. I've
also seen when we're doing
studies.
And uh we don't.
Whatever they recommend, we're
just not even go abiding by the
recommendation. Thank you.
Thank you with uh for 2, you
have a due pass.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
We are adjourned. Thank you,
everyone.
