Representative night perch here.
Representative Ortez here.
Representative Rehm.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Rehm.
Madam vice chair Johnson.
There.
Madam chair.
Madam chair representative
Morris here today.
My name was a call.
I apologize Representative
Zamora.
Here okay I'm here.
You will my apologies Here okay
madam chair with that we have
seven present.
Thank you so we do have a quorum
before we can again I just want
to take care of a couple of
housekeeping matters so we're
gonna start off with the agenda
with house bill two thirty four
with Representative excuse me
two fifty one with
Representative Allison and then
we'll go back to house bill
sixty seven and by the request
of the Sanchez house bill nine
has been rolled so we will not
be hearing house bill nine
today.
and with that we will get
Representative Allison over and
I think he has experts so
Representative Allison and if
you have expressed please raise
your hands and we'll get you
over to.
The panelists about.
Good morning Representative.
Yeah he looks like he's.
There.
Representative Allison.
Are you there.
You'll have to make yourself.
Okay got it great welcome good
morning good morning.
Please begin when you're ready
and is your expert Carl Slater.
One of the great I've got a few
individuals the only one that
raised his hand so if there are
others please raise your hand
and we'll get your moved over
okay great.
You I began and we can get your
experts.
Okay thanks very much madam
chair and members of the
committee a good happy white
morning to everyone.
It's a great day to be in Santa
Fe.
I bring before you this morning
house bill two fifty one and the
or just read the context and
then we'll go from there.
The main contacts of the bill is
of tribal sovereignty in the
Indian managed care entity
contracts right to self
determination.
The Human Services Department
shall not require a sovereign
Indian nation tribe or pueblo to
be a party to any Indian managed
care into to contract with the
state the Human Services
Department shall follow the
Indian tribe or nation or
pueblos sovereign will according
to the laws and processes of the
Indian nation tribe or pueblo.
The Human Services Department
shall respect the rights of
Indian nations tribes and
pueblos.
To self determination and to
controls their respective health
care decisions that is the main
context which we will be
discussing today.
As my expert witnesses and the
people that will be
administering this process are
going to be the speaker of the
Navajo Nation council Mr Seth
Daymon.
In addition to that will be the
chairman of the Navajo Nation
health committee Mr Daniel so.
We will also have Navajo Nation
COVID nineteen task force
chairman delegate Mr mark
Freeman.
And also vice chairman of the
Navajo Nation health committee.
Mr Carl Slater in addition to
that we have a very
distinguished speakers in the
former Navajo Nation presidents
Pearson's Law and doctor jokes
surely.
Robert so the executive director
of the not on a development
corporation who will be X. of
overseeing this process will
also be with us.
And also for any legal questions
we will have Troy a.
In my corner tonight or today I
have the
lend them until a who will be
assisting me with any technical
issues so
Just.
To bring everything into light.
For the fourth.
The Human Services Department
made their presentation before
the H. AFC.
I ask about an ex for in the LFC
volume to report and that LFC
report is this one you're
probably saying that.
When Dr Scrase he was making a
presentation I.
Highlighted an excerpt in the in
the text and that text reads
coverage initiative.
Human Services Department is
planning implementation of
managed care entity to serve
native Americans starting in the
northwest called quadrant of the
state this could result in
members shifting from less
costly Medicaid.
The Four service care to
potentially higher costs managed
care coverage however the goal
is to potentially improve health
outcomes for native Americans I
brought up to Dr Scrase C. I ask
him if you could clarify that in
the meeting and he did.
unfortunately we are unable to
get the video of his response
but his response was very
positive and that.
He said that he still supported
and he said he also knew that
Navajo have put a lot of effort
into this initiative already I
wish I could have used him as an
expert witness by the
unfortunately he's got more
pressing issues to address what
I believe that when you listen
to the testimony of my expert
panel you will agree with me
that this is something that's
very necessary sometimes that
so.
Something that's very overdue
you'll also note that I call
this process.
When I was in the mining
industry we also made of goals
and we were told to call them
processes and there was projects
I used to call my projects all
processes because a process does
not have an end date whereas if
you have a project there's a.
Since that date on so this is a
process that I wish to be a main
part of the Indian managed care
entity
It looks like in place of
We might have Dennis Isaac.
Instead so with that madam
chair.
We're open for questions.
Representative so we have moved
with a number of panelists over
I don't know if you would like
them to speak or have be
available for the questions.
I would like for them to speak
to further explain the intent of
this legislation okay if there
are other experts that are in
attendance please raise your
hand and we can move you over I
know you listed a number of them
Representative but
We only have a few over so who
would you like to begin first.
Let's start with the
The COVID nineteen tests for
spelling it mark Freeman.
Good morning.
Council.
Madam chair and members of the
committee as well as my
honorable che Representative
Allison good morning state.
Yes J. as well as my colleagues
speaker and and on will so in on
will Slater this morning real
quick introduction my name is
billion mark Friedlander
Representative eight communities
eight chapters in McKinley and
San Juan counties my chapters
are Crown Point Dalton pass
standing rock percent T..
Lake valley white rock her for
no and I use it I have chapters
all along with highway three
seventy one corridor from just
north of the route and Smith
lake all the way to south of
Farmington near the nappy area I
am the chair of the not yet fit
state task force we work
cohesively with states and we
work collaboratively with
legislators as as like
yourselves
this morning I I I want to
present some data as well as
just mention real quickly this
process look like she had
mentioned it's a direct result
from the two thousand nine R. a
the reach of American Rick
recovering reinvestment act that
was passed by the United States
government ended with some
languages that allow tribes to
read hat so read develop
economically and become
sovereign even more economically
so this product this process is
a direct result of that are a
process from two thousand and
nine now as far as a nation as
far we have unfortunately as of
yesterday we have had a lot one
thousand one hundred and twelve
casualties of that fifteen
thousand eight hundred and
ninety to have recovered of the
nation through the Navajo area
Indian health service which were
so happy and so proud of I has a
minister to two hundred and
forty thousand two hundred and
fifty tests on the nation
throughout the nation the three
states of that we have had
twenty nine thousand three
hundred eight positive cases of
COVID nineteen the breakdown on
the New Mexico side is as
follows crow point service unit
has had two thousand eight
hundred and thirty four positive
cases forty five minutes of
service unit which covers up
portions of McKinley in San Juan
on the New Mexico site has had
three thousand four hundred
forty cases positive cases and
the largest of courses Shiprock
Shiprock service unit has
identified four thousand nine
hundred and sixty four basis so
it kind of gives you.
Idea of the corridor as as to
what representative Allison was
mentioning all for myself I'm
very supportive of this project
I look forward to
more for the collaboration and
you know a more dialogue because
we do what this project to
become a reality on the nation
we are dealing of course our
numbers are kind of dwindling
right now but we are kind of
getting prepared right now for
the very it's a very it's our
our another another challenge
for us and you know our people
are resilient and our people are
determined to overcome this
pandemic so like other tribal
sovereigns we are looking to our
hats are tribal or economic
sovereignty as well so with your
support we ask for that we ask
for your support today in New
and representative of Allison's
bill says wonder wheel some up
with some data out for you to
consider as well with that madam
chair appreciate the time.
Thank you.
Madam chair.
I would like to just go our next
speaker to be the Navajo Nation
council speaker Mr set Daymon to
be followed by of Navajo Nation
health committee chair Daniel so
and followed by Carl Slater.
So I don't see the speaker
online or Mr so do you happen to
have the last two numbers of his
telephone number as far as the
speakers so that we can move
them over to panelists.
I don't see any numbers madam
chairs and okay I think I I
think I got it so Mr speaker we
are promoting you there we go.
Okay.
Good morning Mr speaker the
morning can you hear me yes we
can good morning and thank you
very much madam chair and thank
you very much to everybody on
the committee this morning good
morning to Arbel Representative
Allison this is speaker Damon
let me just introduce myself on
my next set the minimum
currently the speaker the twenty
fourth that would Nation council
and I appreciate the efforts and
collaboration that we have this
morning I think you the
committee members for a
listening to this bill and first
while taking into consideration
the aspects of tribal
sovereignty and really wanting
to press forward in some of the
big differences that we might
have on a daily basis but this
is something I think that's you
in that unilaterally composite
in moving forward especially.
As unique as of the great state
in New Mexico is says.
I am a proud member of the state
in New Mexico a a a I also serve
on the twenty fourth that would
Nation council the capacity to
really work together with my
colleagues and Representative
the Navajo Nation up and that
will be Nation council to not
only will
Try to enhance and Google mostly
protect tribal sovereignty for
the Navajo Nation and I think
this bill today talks about some
things that really will we were
looking to hope to not only
emphasize what on wheels
you'll hear from our renewable
Slater not chairman Daniel so
but what the the big pressing
for future was in honorable mark
Freeman's presentation.
This I am see is something that
we've been working together with
past administrations and pass a.
It is not only on the Navajo
side but also on the New Mexico
side for many years as he has
indicated on of those indicated
in this is something that we're
looking forward to and this is
something that we're really
trying to say that the the next
New Mexico's governorship in New
Mexico secretary department of
health is really wanting to help
engage in some of our issues
that we have in two to four take
here and I think the number one
thing that we can take away from
this is that we're just here to
represent a Navajo people and
Representative are right and
moving forward in recognition of
what the Navajo Nation has
passed in that something that
happened there on April
seventeenth twenty twenty and
that's how the Navajo Nation has
recognized who are not Katie
committee that the proud a law
of the land is that we are one
hundred percent wanting to move
forward with this I am C. but
unfortunately we're here ten ten
months later and we're still
waiting for to launch and we're
helping to look forward to this
recognition of the in this bill
to help assist to successfully
put the seed in to not only the
New Mexico departments what also
into recognition of tribal
sovereignty as I said the letter
over to the governor's office
last may first twenty twenty it
really had an open dialogue of
what we were going to do and how
the outcome of our obstacles
were in place in hell I thought
we took care of everything but
unfortunately here we are
getting to date still trying to
have the state of New Mexico
recognize what the Navajo
nation's because the position
is.
And I hope you know that this
continued effort in dialogue
that we have only with
yourselves committee members and
madam chair.
And Representative Nelson but to
encourage the rest of the nation
that this is something that New
Mexico leadership is willing to
work with and this is something
that is going to be precedent
across not only Indian country
but the first I am see that's
going to be run by tribal nation
so again thank you very much for
having us this morning and I we
look forward to further dialogue
and I really want to say thank
you again to the committee
members for allowing us within
your jurisdiction and with also
the recognition that you have
put in place for us to review of
state forecast and then who for
the recognition of our tribal
sovereignty and the rest of the
tribal sovereignty throughout
the state of New Mexico so madam
chair I will yield back to the
floor at this time thank you to
at.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Representative you want Mr so to
speak next is that correct I see
Mr Slater there let's uh go with
the the honorable delegate Carl
Slater thank you madam chair.
Good morning to hear me.
Yes.
Excellent.
Your phone's working.
Good morning how state are
reflections in fares Committee
and charging less investor one
Johnson.
Back.
Almost seems like years ago at
this point.
There was a great idea initiated
by the nomination government and
we found an excellent partner in
the state of New Mexico health
services to our.
And more recently many months
ago both of us agree that there
is tremendous need for the city
managed care entity to quickly
improve the nation's response in
the state of New Mexico's
response to the ongoing COVID
nineteen pandemic.
And this collaborative group the
knowledge that the I am see
where improve the quality of
care and provide greater access
for native Americans and Alaska
natives to quality health care
during the pandemic and even
after the COVID crisis has
passed.
The great thing about where
we're at right now is we're so
close to the finish line and all
parties have agreed to the
content of the Indian managed
care and teaching contract.
Yet in spite of the agreements
to the essentials for launching
the I. N. C. the education of
the I am see contract has been
prevented for many months
because of a disagreement or
lack of communication from the.
The executive branch of the
nation and integument with the
state of New Mexico.
Navajo Nation does not need to
waive its sovereignty in order
to contract with the state.
And that's why you're support
for H. two fifty one is some
court.
So rather than further delay the
implementation of the I. N. C.
we ask our distinguished
representatives and senators the
New Mexico legislature to end
this destructive impasse by
offering H. two five one
passing.
It's two five one legislative
step HSD show or the Indian
tribe nation or pueblos
sovereign will according to the
laws process use of the Indian
nation tribe or pueblo.
HSD is directed to respect the
rights of the Indian nations
tribes or pueblos to self
determination and to control
their respective health care
decisions.
It's two five one is consistent
with federal Indian law the
social security act which
authorizes the I am see preempt
the states from regulating its
implementation.
Recognition of Indian tribes in
exclusive federal function.
Navajo Nation is recognized by
the federal government as a
sovereign Indian tribes the
navigation calloused Council is
its governing body how the
Navajo Nation conducts its
government to government
business is it's our rocket.
The twenty seventeen secretary
of interior issue the federal
corporate charter application
for and you see that establish
and you see as an
instrumentality of the nation.
That charter was ratified by the
Navajo Nation council.
The council designated and you
estimations instrumentality for
all matters pertaining to the I
am see.
And the Navajo nation's choice
of and you see yes it's
instrumentality for the I am see
is not subject to review by the
state that is the decision of
the Navajo Nation so.
Yeah I am C. agreement is ready
for signatures and H. two five
one will end the impasse the
implementation of this much
needed health resource we begin
promptly thank you very much
venture.
Thank you.
Representative Allison do we
want to go.
We want to go to next thank you
madam chair let's go with the
daily and Daniel so and then we
will.
Follow him with the the two
distinguished gentleman
Peterson's are and so surely if
they're on the line thank you
madam chair.
Thank you.
So we have
Council delegate so on the line
you'll just have to press yes
there you go hearing it now.
Yes that the.
Chair Georgene Louis and madam
vice chair of Johnson and to the
committee.
thank you for providing this the
time of those two Representative
Allison.
Nine months my older brother
even though I'm a little bit you
have more with them tonight to
to introduce H. B. two fifty one
thank you for your doing that
hello I'd like to just highlight
the fact that the Navajo Nation.
Is.
One of the very few of the more
than five hundred and ninety
tribal sovereign nation.
In the United States.
It is one of the few that has.
A three branch government that
was established in nineteen
ninety two.
And that that mission that
continued the.
Matter that member nations
council is the governing body.
So in some of the actions.
Basically the health education
and Human Services Committee is
how would to oversee one of the
matters hello education and
Human Services on the Navajo
Nation.
Foremost is we come into this
pandemic you.
And.
Everybody of.
As her.
Water.
Water infrastructure power line
infrastructure we need internet.
Connectivity.
But mostly the fact that the
Indian health service has
historically been under funded.
We come into this area.
The biggest the largest hospital
service medical people Gallup
Indian Medical Center we find
that they only have six I see
you.
So the that aspect basically
highlight that there is an
equity in health care.
They've managed to secure
additional funding to bring in
fifteen.
I see you budget for a total of
fifteen I see you the.
But what we see.
Is the fact that.
The Gallup Indian Medical Center
as of yesterday has over.
Four thousand nine hundred and
thirty four.
Positive cases.
The
Hospital also has numbers over.
Four thousand nine hundred.
The Crown Point hospital has.
Positive cases in.
More than two thousand eight
hundred.
Mind you those are the three
hospitals that over seventy
thousand New Mexico medical
residents.
We have the satellite
clinics of elemental tool in the
and.
Rehm they are funded through the
Albuquerque area office HM.
So they have their own.
Basically have helped determine
themselves to be six thirty
eight hello.
Your facilities.
At the very eastern edge we the.
The three chapters that are part
of my district.
Better serve played Presbyterian
medical services
in they are satellite clinic.
In some cases one day a week.
In other cases.
Of the three times a week.
So in in that aspect the.
Or that.
Really.
Basically
Speaker in
unable Slater related to is
affected.
We've spoken to the governor and
asked her to let this I am CTE
go forward.
In.
Rather than listening to the
will of a sovereign nation
governing body wanted a letter
jointly signed by president.
And the speaker.
That have been presented what
really
I guess.
Alone in the room.
Hello paternalistic and colonial
lipstick the two of the governor
say in.
Before I accepted I want a joint
letter and not.
Accepting the fact that.
The will of the Navajo Nation
council has been expressed.
We have to self determined or so
to have not only development
corporation along with the
expert.
Molina healthcare to go proceeds
with the indeed it managed care
in.
So in that aspect that way we
approach or on renewable.
Representative.
Representative and Anthony soon
to help us.
And so we
From that.
The H. B. two fifty one.
And we certainly
Express or need.
To get the support of.
This so distinguished Committee.
Personal note.
The pandemic has really.
In my home chapter of store in.
Within the month.
January in one day.
We had for you.
We realize that our renewable
population has.
Many issues with having.
Compromise hello.
I would say BT's high rate of
high blood pressures C. O. P.
D..
And heart disease.
So
It.
This pandemic has really.
Hey can hello.
What.
I wanted to focus on is the
young folks.
To start.
Good health care and the focus
of I am C. E. is closed the
whole spectrum all the way to
geriatric care.
So those are some things that we
from the health education and
Human Services Committee.
Time and time again has
supported.
The.
Concept will be in the first
tribal nations.
To the.
The concept in the in managed
care in the what this bill.
The brother Ellison has
introduced then four.
The other twenty two tribal
nations within the state of New
Mexico also
need to.
This image by federal law.
Madam chair.
I share committee members the
representative Allison that
would be the extent.
Statement to the committee thank
you.
Thank you Mr so madam chair I
would like to next call on
the former leader Peterson's all
and he will explain to you that
this is not just an overnight
process it has been in the works
hearing there even during his
administration so with that
Mr Peterson's all.
Representative Allison we don't
have him on the line.
Okay have we got Dr Joe
certainly.
Now.
Okay what about Mr Robert Jones.
Now.
Okay
in their absence I would like to
call on all Mr Troy head to see
if he has any contribution to
the process that we are trying
to implement Mister ed.
Madam chair of vice chair
representative Allison members
of the committee I appreciate
your time very much my name is
Roy died I am the president of
our association I'm the former
United States Attorney for
Colorado under President Bush
and I was the chairman of the
national Indian Water commission
under president Obama.
Very quickly it's been said
budget there is no basis under
federal law and I had the NM op
program at the university of
Denver law school as well for
the state of New Mexico to tell
the Navajo Nation that despite
the Navajo nation's laws we're
just not going to implement in
agreements between United States
and the Navajo Nation nor is
there any kind of legal basis to
say the nation has to wave a
sovereign immunity for New
Mexico to enter into a contract
this recourse and really clear
about this since the case called
Williams versus Lee in nineteen
fifty nine in that case of the
tribes of the right to quote
make their own laws and the rule
by them.
Unquote and that's what we're
talking about here the this is
been explained the nation went
through its legal process they
decided to designate NDC as the
entity and under federal law
that's the end of it the really
is no basically.
Excuse me to to interfere with
that anyway so you know I
represent about seven hundred
Navajo Nation attorneys more
than two hundred of them are
members of the New Mexico bar
and so I just have to tell you
that it's this is not acceptable
to go down this path and so I
really appreciate Representative
also in the fact that you
stepped up on this you know I I
have to say this is been very
disappointing to be involved
with this to see a state do this
in twenty twenty one when tribes
are sovereign and we all know
that for the law of the land for
decades so I would hope that
there's some way to take a
better Path and I really
appreciate your listening to me
and I wish you well with the
work that you're doing a chef.
Mr I.
Madam chair I believe that
concludes our testimony for the
bills and we will be open for
questions.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative so before we go
to public comment we can open
the call up for those folks in
the audience that would like to
vote on house bill two fifty one
Provided just that great the
poll is now open and will keep
it open for another ten seconds.
Okay thank you we are closing
the pool now so we have thirty
four for the bill and to again.
So let's hear from
those that would like to speak
in favor of the bill.
If you please raise your hand.
Maria Garber your now and it.
Right you have to and then on
your end.
Okay let's go to David J..
You're now and it.
good morning can you hear me we
can't.
Okay good morning honorable of
madam chair no also
representative Allison my name
is David J. so she.
And I.
I'm closely affiliated with an
organization called the nest
Center research and evaluation
and we look at a lot of the
issues to our face thanks for
the Navajo Nation including that
helps and I really our.
I'm in favor of H. house bill
two fifty one one of the things
that we really don't take into
consideration especially with
the pandemic common among our
people is the fact that we have
our own traditional ceremonial
waste based on the teachings and
based on the fact that he's been
in existence for so long even
before the coming of the western
European any was a help system
that we use to create and bring
stability into the lights into
less of our people both
physically and mentally and so I
really believe that there's
there's an opportunity to reach
out to some of our medicine
people and I believe that this
bill would allow for that and
then it also gives us an
opportunity to continue to
foster cooperation and
coordination with states in the
implementation are up.
Thank you we are now going to
Maria Atencio your now and it.
Thank you madam chair you my
name is actually Mario what are
you sorry about that.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee.
Representative Allison I am the
vice president of the Korean
star Lee chapter house of a
local government the Navajo
Nation.
For the record Torreon Starley
chapter on Sunday February
fourteenth.
the past the supporting
resolution of HB two five one.
because a local leader at the
grassroots we are we operating
in real time and we're seeing
such a lag in in resources
getting getting the ground
level.
In our local communities and it
seems that we are we we are
trying to
Plan and coordinate for the
report are not only response
eradication and recovery from
COVID nineteen that we're aware
of these funds that may come
from a Lena will be most
impactful to our communities
strongly urge you to pass of
this of this bill and I do think
the collective of leaders to
speak for the people.
I guess a good fit our needs and
they are they not nation for
jade I issued on some.
Los.
Right now the a building senator
left to non dot shell you
secured on the.
Thank you David Roddy your now
and it.
You'll have to and then on your
end of it yes.
This is the committee I'm David
Roddy from New Mexico primary
care association we support the
sponsoring your efforts to move
this bill forward and
encouraging strong support for.
Thank you.
Thank you then we have Begay.
You are now and it.
Good morning.
Madam chair and members of the
committee my name is mainly
Begay junior I serve as chairman
of the not only development
corporation the entity that has
was does that doesn't quite a
Navajo Nation council to partner
with Molina health care to
establish the first ever Indian
managed care entity in the
country.
And we're here to to seek
justice through this committee
and the state legislature to
establish the Indian managed
care entity.
We've been working for over here
on this particular project.
And.
We're ready to move forward.
to contract has been negotiated
at and is ready to be sent to
the centers for Medicare
Medicare and and Medicaid.
and we need to overcome this
last hurdle to to set up and
establish this in managed care
it could be for not only the
Navajo Nation but.
For the state of New Mexico so
we urge the committee to move
to secure bill four we think
Representative R. as the Ellison
R. J..
In this particular initiative
thank you madam chair.
Thank you well now go to
opposition if you would like to
speak in opposition of the bill
please raise your hand.
Okay seeing now and we will go
okay excuse me I'm sorry we have
Mr Isaacs has a hand raised I
think he's in support.
You have to earn it yourself
Mister X..
Okay let's move along to the
committee Representative Nibert.
This R. thank you madam chair.
All right I'm going to expose my
ignorance in two areas number
one healthcare secondly and our.
India wall.
So I may have some some
questions that very same more.
Maybe not white fully
understanding of the process so
please be patient with me all.
Madam chair and.
Mr Slater your indicated there's
an impasse and my question is.
Yes.
It if I understand the process
of the Navajo Nation wants to
directly.
Contract with or or shoes you
Sir are managed health
care entity.
My question is why is the state
even involved.
Madam chair my name is
mentioned.
S. response.
I'm.
Representative Allison do you
want to defer to your witness Mr
Slater.
Thank you madam chair he just a
and then the indeed be we can
also refer to Mr I.
For the legal questions.
Thank you madam chair thank you.
Mr Slater or Mr X. Aid either
sorry.
I okay.
You you may answer the question.
Thank you madam chair committee
members of the the issue is this
there there was a federal pilot
program that was created by the
federal centers for Medicare and
Medicaid that allows for a
direct provisioning of meta K.
funding directly to a native
nation and there is a role for
the state an appropriate role to
determine that the eligibility
is Matt's I'm and and that has
been done at I will point out
that HSD has said repeatedly
that those criteria have been
met that are required by the
federal regulations the issue up
to the Representative question
the issue is I think as I
understand this question
why just the state of New Mexico
have a role in stopping this in
I think the response is that
it's really come down to a
political impasse the navigation
enacted through its laws the it
created an entity to receive the
funds call in DC and it's up
went through the legislative
process to make sure that that
was federally chartered and then
also that under Navajo law that
it could be stood up and it
could function and that would be
the entity that would
administer Medicaid in the New
Mexico portion of the
reservation and then you would
have.
You a direct transfer of funds
from the federal government to
NDC.
It's a wholly owned industries a
wholly owned Navajo Nation
entity and it's just like I said
it's valid under both Navajo on
federal law so at that point the
issue became you know a number
of months ago after that we
Nation finishes legislative
process and spoke through its
laws and they met the federal
requirements the governor and
others I took the position that
they wanted to make sure that
every Navajo leader in their
estimation would support this
politically there have been
opposition from the president
the Navajo Nation but also the
legislation that was referenced
in the Navajo system went
through that process the
president vetoed its and then
there was a veto override
international law and that was
the end of the under under to
have a lot of the day she took
its position and second one in
DC to receive these funds and so
that was the end of it so the
question became what could the
governor of New Mexico.
Basically require the navigation
do something else which which
was talked about by the by the
honorable let members navigation
Council on this call it in the
answer legally is no no one can
do that at this point the
navigation spoke through its
loss and at this point New
Mexico needs to follow the law
which is federal law which says
the tribe maintenance decision
and now the transfer funds needs
to go to the Navajo Nation
that's really the legal issue I
I can't speculate on the
politics I just say that there's
a whole history of of states in
the past most of the distant
past saying we don't think
tribes are are competent to do
things in our view and it's not
acceptable hasn't been
acceptable ever but it's not
been acceptable United States
since we split nineteen fifties
and I have in my career doing
this for thirty five years
teaching and practicing federal
Indian law I I have only a few
times in my career scene the
state take a position like this
against a sovereign tribe it's a
very opting for a state to do so
this legislation is is very
refreshing because it says we
want to follow federal law.
We're severance state New Mexico
risk respect the sovereignty the
Navajo Nation we're all going to
follow the law that's really all
this is and I hope it will
persuade the governor to
reassess the position which
which is unfortunate and I think
that it's it's a teaching and
learning enrollment as well so
thank thank you madam chair.
Madam chair and Representative
Mr I
we'll get back to the point you
just bite your of enrollment but
again I'm not fully
understanding why the state of
New Mexico is involved if there
is a federal program they have a
direct relationship with the
Navajo Nation to set up this
At age sure into the.
Why is the state even a party to
the process.
Madam chair.
Yeah response.
Mr.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representative Allison.
Really on two levels should the
state be involved in this part
of the process that is the
designation of of the NDC is the
proper entity
when they have always done that
the answer is no the state does
not have any role in terms of
the actual federal regulations
for the Medicaid program there
are there are criteria that HSD
is had to analyze to make sure
that that's that's the transfer
can occur and those are under
federal law but those have been
addressed is your question does
have already been match.
Representative they they've
they've been satisfied to as I
understand it for HSD is
respected so the the the the
details if you will of the
transfer that are required under
federal law about Medicaid and
how Medicaid works have been
resolved by this that by the
state and that is an appropriate
role for them the issue of the
state deciding is this the right
entity to receive the money our
New Mexico does not have a role
in that and and that's the
political world that that I just
described it's not an
appropriate role it's not for
the regulations it's it's not
something that that anyone as it
as an official state of New
Mexico has a right to do.
I hope that answers your so
Madam chair representative Mr
Reid.
The state is involved because it
has some oversight
responsibilities is that
accurate.
Madam chair for me yes the state
the state does have oversight
responsibilities but those
responsibilities have been
matched with respect to the
specifics of those of those
oversight requirements they they
have to do with the federal
Medicaid guidelines not with the
tribe's ability to see establish
an entity to receive the federal
transfer of funds.
That meant madam chair and.
Madam chair of if I may
communicate directly with Mr
Reid.
Is that
Where you allow that madam
chair.
Representative that's fine okay
my speed things up Mr Reid madam
chairman stride.
The the bill says that the state
is going to have a contract with
a managed care entity and
everything you said.
Indicates that that it's not
necessary for that contractor
exist but but the contract
really exist between the Navajo
and the managed care entity that
is has selected so is there a
contract that the state has to
enter into with bank managed
care entity to supply
of medical services on the
Navajo Nation.
That there is a contracts that
exist between the state.
And and that is set up and and
as I mentioned it's already it's
been through the process for
really almost two years now and
and and there's no there's no
questions in this hearing about
that contract is the contract is
required by the federal Medicaid
regulations so to answer
question there is a contract
that's not in dispute in this
hearing that that that what is
what is notice that that
contract has met the federal
requirements to New Mexico's
satisfactions I understand this
hearing is about something
that's different the transfer of
the actual federal funds
pursuant to that contract if the
contract is valid which you
should assume that it is does to
Mexico have an additional right
to say but the federal money can
flow directly to the Navajo
Nation and the answer is New
Mexico does not have that right
that second step I know it's
rather complicated you said at
the outset that you're not as an
expert in Medicaid I don't want
to.
Have you think that I'm an
expert in Medicaid but I have
scrutinized the contracts and I
am familiar with with the
process general.
Madam chairman Mr I'd be the.
You know and all of the
discussion leading up to this
was that the federal.
entities had approved and have
developed this program directly
with the
our nation and and then the
first sentence of this bill.
Says Representative procurement
services department shall not
require of sovereign Indian
nation tribe or pueblo to be a
party to any Indian managed care
into the contract with the
state.
Yes.
If I speak to that because it's
a little bit of a different
point so so what's emerged in
the politics of this discussion.
It is a little bit nuanced the
entity the Navajo Nation
selected to receive the funds
under Navajo law is called in
the state it's a tribally owned
and operated company that is
federally chartered.
The money that is to flow from
the federal government to and
you see that's how the transfer
essentially works.
The issue politically has been
really two fold one to spend the
executive branch's reluctance in
New Mexico to recognize in DC is
the entity to receive the funds
which as I mentioned there's no
legal basis for the executive
branch to do that that's a
federal issue the second thing
is that more recently the the
HSD director is taken the
secretary of state in the
position that the Navajo Nation
as a government should waive its
sovereign immunity its ability
to decide when it can be sued.
That that the nation should
waive its immunity in order for
this contract to take effect and
what I'm saying to you is that
the nation this itself is not a
party to the contract the nation
through its laws created an
entity which is allowed to do we
got a federal charter for that
entity and the money that will
flow from the federal government
to that end the C. that
troubling are operated federally
chartered corporation so it's a
little technical but there's a
second problem with what New
Mexico is doing for its
executive branch was which is to
tell the navigational by the way
definition governments you have
to wave your ability to be sued
in order for us to sign this
sign off on this contract with a
transfer going from the federal
government for funds that had
gone to New Mexico that will not
go directly from the federal
government and the state because
roof remember the nuance of this
with the Medicaid regulations
again I notice will complicated
Navajo people were living and
the Navajo Nation our system is
the Navajo Nation in eastern HSD
but they're also systems right
of the state of New Mexico so so
that's that's where this arises
with the issue arises the state
has an interest but they cannot
recommendation the transfer of
funds by forcing the Navajo
Nation governments where the
sovereign immunity you need to
understand Sir respectfully
there is a whole body of federal
law with the U. S. Supreme Court
has pursued most recently the
bay mills case in twenty
fourteen with US imports said
you cannot force to try to waive
its sovereign immunity.
As a condition for contracting
you have to follow what the
tribe's laws are if you are a
state and and that's workers.
Thank you Mr I and I just like
to remind you to go through the
chair.
And so we have a procedural
process to discover the care and
I'm gonna move to Representative
Allison I just add something.
Thank you madam chair I would
like to a representative or a
delegate Slater to of be part of
the answers.
Also madam chair okay.
Want to add something.
Yes thank you very briefly I
just want to help explain with
the vision of this processes and
kind of where the heck up start
so in order to Medicaid is a
joint federal and state program
and the reason that there isn't
a direct relationship right now
between the Navajo Nation and
see I mastered the feds is that
we don't really know Indian
tribe in the nation has the
capacity to service a state
Medicaid agency right so you
have HSD in the state of New
Mexico who is able to administer
these funds has the expertise
works into everything the
eligibility all of that and so
in order for the nation to move
to a point in the future we can
contract wrecked the with the
federal government we're using
this pilot project that was
created under our and so that's
why the state is part of this
this is a matter of capacity
building in nation building for
Navajo and the state of New
Mexico and especially up to five
one goes through the legislature
is going to be supporting nation
building within Navajo our goal
is to have a state Medicaid
agency and we can't do that
overnight but in order to get
there we need to develop some
expertise to internal capacities
so we've designated NDC to serve
as that sort of capacity
building and to teach they will
develop the expertise in
delivering these services in
partnership with their
contractor and so for the nation
this point we're getting I'm
hung up on the the language
saying that note no tribe should
be contracting or be forced to
contract with the state that
because we've designated someone
to take on the risk and I think
as as you're aware the state of
New Mexico doesn't really
operate corporations and and
directly provision the services
to people they hire contractors
you know all of you I'm sure
you're familiar with all the
managed care entities that
operator organizations that
operate with the.
The state and as a commercial
entity they take on the risk of
the provision of services
through that contract with the
state and that's no different
than what we have going on here
on Navajo and so in order for us
to effectively provision those
services we we can't be waving
our sovereign immunity and
that's where this dispute is
coming up so by the legislature
reaffirming that the state of
New Mexico can not insist on the
Navajo Nation waiving sovereign
immunity we're actually
enhancing our sovereignty doing
the capacity building and the
state is the partner to build
you know this this internal
capacity thank you.
So madam chair and
representative.
How does the state of New
Mexico.
Performance oversight
obligations.
With the contract with the
federal government and.
Yes something is awry.
Because.
That.
Well to be addressed yes
sovereign immunity is not way.
Representative Allison yes thank
you madam chair
just a reminder to my witnesses
that we always go through the
madam chair before we speak or
answer thank you madam chair and
thank you Representative and how
would you like to answer the
question.
Madam chair delegates later
raised his hand so we'll give
the floor thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative Mr
Slater.
Thank you very much madam chair
Representative thousand.
At the Navajo Nation is not
waiving sovereign immunity but
the reason we created not funny
development corporation is that
it is charter and in its powers
it is able to wait it's
sovereign immunity so since it's
fully owned by the tribe it
routines the sovereign immunity
in many respects of the Navajo
Nation by in order to contract
with the state and this is what
NEC is agree to dispute
resolution will be in New Mexico
courts so that's the whole
purpose of creating another
entity that will compromise the
integrity of the Navajo Nation
but instead will allow it to
enter into these ventures where
if unfortunately something does
need to be resolved through the
courts will be through New
Mexico courts and I think that
that's what the legislature
would work as well but it's not
forcing the nation to enter into
that that provision where would
be compromising our integrity
thank you.
Madam chair representative if
that's the case.
I thank god that issue should be
addressed in this legislation
because I think you go a long
way in addressing some of the
concerns of the Human Services
department that's been rates and
and I think yes yes that's the
the answer.
Them this legislation should be
should should address that the.
will tend to for the entity to
to.
Waves the sovereign immunity so
that New Mexico point would be
able to address any oversight
role and in the discrepancies
that result as a result of
performing its oversight role
and and so you know I I could be
somewhat sympathetic to HSD when
it sees the the.
There's a contract that so New
Mexico is going to be
responsible for overseeing.
We're going to to be required to
perform certain services as a
state.
But yes if the tribe does not
waive sovereign immunity there's
a recourse.
Of for the state to to.
Do the very job that it's
supposed to do so at all you
might want to look at that
issue.
Madam chair of the the.
Second sentence of this this
bill says.
The Human Services Department
shop all of the above tribe
nation or pueblos sabar will
worry to laws of processes of
the Indian nation tribe or
pueblo and I just suggest that.
Requiring the state to follow.
Tribal laws.
You you have the same argument
from the state are you got to
sovereigns that are.
Having a turf battle here and
and this provision basically
says the the state you don't
have a decision you're going to
follow up so.
I think of that sentence
probably out of state status
shall fall over you're probably
should say shop and Senator and
I would even take it a step
further I think this whole thing
could be boiled down to one
sentence and that's the last
sentence of this legislation.
The Human Services Department
shall respect the rights
etcetera
I I think if I if I hear the
concerns correctly that's really
the the.
The goal of everyone is that you
want.
The state agency to to respect
the.
Navajo Nation self determination
and control of.
Their respective health care
decision and so to me that we've
got so this is that last
sentence and I think that gets
you everything you need
but I am a little bit concerned
about the impasse because on two
levels number one the waiver
issue but number two.
How is how is the Human Services
Department.
So posted
yes that's the direction of the
they have a whole nation in this
instance or any tribal entity of
the future want to take if they
don't sign off on the contract
if they don't have some formal
recognition that yes this is.
We agree with with this
document and.
How is HSD to to know that that
is the will of.
The Navajo Nation MSN service
for other tribal entities of the
future Madam chair
representative.
Representative Allison.
Thank you madam chair on the
question of the sets and.
On the sentences I would like to
refer to my of technical with
this of miss Lenaya Montoya to
explain the sentences on the
first page thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Representative.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee I do have to
first start out saying that I do
work for Legislative Council
Service.
So I am here for the whole
purpose of providing technical
assistance on the matter before
this committee and I do not
appear in support of or
opposition to the matter before
you.
And so regarding those first I'm
sorry to.
Those first few sentences of
that legislation.
I.
Worked alongside a few of the
other expert witnesses so I
would kind of want to defer to
them just because
There's purpose behind using
those specific that specific
language so I'm not sure what
exactly what they were wanting
to state fair so I would
referred to one of the other
expert witnesses to help the
committee with any of the
purpose behind the that those
couple of sentences.
Representative Allison.
Which is that thank you madam
chair I would like to ask
delegates later to see if you
can expand on that of madam
chair.
Mr Slater.
Madam chair.
Thank you.
The representative member
I just want to clarify that the
the recourse is that and the
seat the entity that the nation
created to contract is going to
be treated like any other
managed care organization in the
state so the recourse will be
just like their stipulations in
the contract between HSD and the
different contractors who were
delivering this service.
NDC's gonna have the same the
same thing their contract so
that there's no provision where
they're not going to be subject
to New Mexico courts.
NDC is going to be subject to
New Mexico courts and so there
should be no fear that they're
somehow outside of the realm of
oversight or anything like that
and then for respecting the will
of the Navajo Nation as mystery
need identified we passed a
resolution of the Navajo Nation
council I think maybe there
would be more similar to like a
memorial or something like that
that comes out of the
Legislature New Mexico that
identified the position of the
Navajo Nation in that is that
one we want to move forward with
the managed care entity pilot
project in the state of New
Mexico to that the time
development corporation would be
the answer to that we desire the
state to contract with.
And.
That's that's what sets so.
Full stop that's it and all
we're asking for is that the
state respect the position of
the Navajo Nation as we've
provided that in our do we.
Design laws and legislative
process.
And.
Through that it's affirming our
self determination our ability
to make healthcare decisions but
requiring the nation to be a
party to the contract
compromises our sovereignty and
by doing so you know I think
there's the question well why
does the state need to pass
legislation to do something like
this you know there is an
unfortunate history.
In the United States and really
with the states around the
Navajo Nation in that entrance
the Navajo Nation of not.
Respecting the sovereignty of
Navajo Nation interfering
playing both sides all instead
to date in twenty twenty one we
have an incredibly sophisticated
political system with debate
with balanced view point with
strongly worded by and.
We would like to have the
respect from the state of our
political system this project
for thank you.
Madam chair representative
Allison.
Madam chair on that point.
There was testimony that
indicated that this issue.
On the Navajo Nation was rather
convoluted fact it required an
override of the veto I heard the
testimony correctly and and so.
What might my question would be.
How is Human Services Department
to know what the will of the
nation as of last year signs a
document for.
Reflects its approval of the
contract that the states that
are enough to
with the managed health care at
that the so that the state.
Is comfortable with the
expression of the will of the
Navajo Nation in that regard.
Representative Allison.
Thank you madam chair I would
like Mr I to respond to that.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Mr I.
Madam chair.
Very briefly Williams versus
what you just import nineteen
fifty nine New Mexico does not
get to decide what Navajo why
is.
The Navajo Nation duds the
nominations laws are all
published you have lawyers you
can certainly look at them and I
know you have but that's what
the U. S. report is set you have
to defer to the Navajo nation's
laws they're all published this
entire process is very easily
available all the materials are
online and in fact they've been
presented before.
In the discussions with HSD I
know I I have looked at them and
others have done legal opinions
on them Pearson's on others have
done opinions so you know if you
need help on that we can
certainly provide those
materials again but the short
answer is the US imports as you
don't get to do anything as a
state official other than follow
the federal law which is when
the tribe speaks according to
its laws you must defer Williams
versus Lee US import nineteen
fifty nine thank you madam chair
Mister are those of the address
the question of how does the
Human Services Department no
what the expression of the will
of the Navajo Nation is if they
don't have something that that's
a sign that can be relied All I
I mean.
You know the state of New Mexico
enters into contracts all the
time and and you want the
signature of the appropriate we
designated official on that
document so that you can rely on
it of.
And I don't think Human Services
Department.
Is any different when dealing
with with a base center tribal
with to do that it ought to have
something that reflects this is
the will of that nation or tribe
and and and.
Be able to rely upon that cause
you can't just say we have these
laws and we went through this
process at the end of the day
there has to be somebody who's
responsible for that entity that
can bind that entity and
reflecting that the oil was once
up properly express.
So I don't see that as being of.
No reasonable byrd  man and I
certainly don't the don't the
believe that anybody would
suggest that that that one
entity should be contracting for
the benefit of another at that
the lesser some expression that
the benefited entity is that a
brain but what that particularly
one that's the whole point of
this legislation.
Representative Allison thank you
madam chair
I would like to ask of delegates
later to talk about the.
I'm not donning development Corp
pays think that would answer the
question that Representative
Nibert is ask and so and and and
Representative Allison and an
experience I mean I I think the
concern that Representative
Nibert is expressing is is
really valid when we have bills
that come before the committee
are committee members are really
interested and and hearing the
positions of the tribes and and
really working with the tribes
to to make progress and whatever
issue or hearing and and so I I
really want that question to be
answered because that's a
concern of mine as well also if
it were not hearing from the
tribe how do we know that we're
not binding them to something
that they don't want if if we
were in in we're trying to
manage issues that are of most
importance to the tribes such as
health care we need to
understand that the tribe is on
board so I I really want this
question that Representative
Nibert has been asking to be
answered.
Thank you madam chair and I'll
refer the question to delegates
later.
Thank you.
Mr Slater.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative Nelson Senator.
So the question that's presented
is how does the state know what
the sovereign will of the Navajo
Nation is particularly with
health care and this process so
during the contracting process
there's been extensive
discussions between and you see
these are getting every the
contracts repaired everything
from I. T. to language in the
contract to prices all the
surgeons known monthly basis
between HSD and and see and also
selected leadership I service
vice chair of the health
education services community
council chair so is our chairman
health committee and then
delegate freeway Medicine Mexico
legislator has also participated
in these meetings.
We discuss.
Week after week month after
month.
All of these issues.
And that's just one directs
method of communication between
the state and the Navajo Nation
and so during that process the
state said well we believe that
the navigation should be a party
to this contract and.
What they did is they asked us
as legislators who are
participating in these initial
calls we said no we don't
believe that.
And it's not something that had
been passed legislatively like
the other bill that identified
that and you see would be a
contractor that one before this
process so and then also that we
wanted passive involvement for
seventy five thousand people
Mexico.
White.
The state then asked was an
opinion of the Navajo Nation
Attorney General.
And so that was the state
requesting from the Navajo
Nation a legal interpretation
from our chief legal officer of
what the navigations laws are
and whether they require us to
be party to the contract and the
attorney general's response was
unequivocally no the Navajo
Nation does not need to be a
party to the contract.
So.
I think you know those positions
are analogous within are we our
system of laws the state has a
New Mexico Attorney General we
have an application turn general
there functions are very similar
that's one way for the state to
interpret what the will is of
the nation taking the opinion
from the chief legal officer of
the Navajo Nation on the loss of
the Navajo Nation acid past and
so that was provided back to the
state and since then we've just
had radio silence effectively we
don't have any indication except
from the testimony the secretary
Scrase saying yes we want to
move forward in this process
whether something internal back
and well there's nothing
internal factor Navajo you the
state of New Mexico cantor state
because there was a need to
override within the Navajo
Nation that.
That that law is it appropriate
was it duly passed is it legal.
That's something that's handled
internal to the Navajo Nation
and.
There was a veto override.
Your that provision exists for a
reason it sounds.
And it really is I think
offensive when people are trying
to tell us who are not members
of the nation we're not invested
in our political system don't
have rights that our political
system how to operate our system
what our political system needs
we have a chief legal officer
talking to another chief legal
officer when I saw this this is
the Navajo Nation state of New
Mexico I think that is very
clear and concrete and that is
the Navajo Nation does not need
to be part of the contract and
that is why things instructions
thank you madam chair.
All.
Madam chair I'm not sure that
that gets us where we need to go
Because two lawyers talk to each
other doesn't necessarily
reflect.
But they have a forty two at our
and to to an agreement at and
madam chair all harken back to
maybe my younger years when I
used to put together some of the
Indian mineral development
agreements and
have dealt with some of.
Pueblo's and subtribes all those
agreements and in every one of
those development agreements.
There were several things that
that the had to be accomplished
in order for a.
Mineral development company to
I feel.
Satisfied that it should enter
into that agreement and there
were certain requirements of.
I went to have to be addressed
to enter into those are great at
and one of them is.
You have to deal up front with
the ability to see judicial
redress yeah and and potential
waivers of sovereign immunity
that was always want one issue.
Second issue.
The company had to had to
Show to the tribal entity that
the person executing the
agreement for the company was
duly authorized include buying
the the corporate entity white
white was the corporate entity
needed some assurance that the
people who work signing off on
behalf of the tribal and to do
have the authority to
enter into that contract and
then you had supporting opinions
of the council the lawyers that
basically ratified said yes good
we've reviewed these documents
and yes these are the people who
care of by the corporation and
and have you have the same thing
on the on the tribal side and
that was to provide a a
independent mechanism if if
things fell apart you know you
can sue the lawyers Mr Mr he
live or die Representative Eli
good good the you know maybe
have a case so I miss
Representative who had authority
to be malpractice on my part so
so you know but the bottom line
is.
I think it's reasonable for the
Human Services Department to to
be able to have some document
whether it's joining of the
contract or something else.
That is an expression that that
is the will of the Navajo Nation
in this case and because
German Services Department isn't
going to.
Reserves the the staff stories
history of of how this issue was
brought through the Navajo I
just need to know that this
person has a forty to by the by
the nation and that the nation
is comfortable with and is in
agreement with this health
managed health care entity.
Coming on to its nation and
performing the services under
the contract that's apparently
between the state of New Mexico.
That the health care in.
You know my my first want to
question why that contract
between the nation and the
health care at that currently
asked be between the state the
health care so again
I think Human Services
Department the has raised some
concerns in that regard I
understand and again I think the
last sentence of this
legislation.
It's a nail on the head with and
who's really what everybody
wants
there's a problem members shall
follow language online twenty
one
I think there's probably some
concern on line eighteen the HSD
shall not require.
Entering into the contract but
HSD has got to receive
something.
Has got to be able to rely on
something.
That this is the will of the
nation in terms of how this
managed care entity is going to
come on the to to to their
nation and perform the service
and I'm I'm a little concerned
as to whether this act get
service where where we really
need to go are you and I would
take it down to the last
sentence maybe put something in
regarding
That that that the Navajo Nation
has to confirm that they're
comfortable with the contract
whatever word you want to use
but maybe not be part of the
contract but at least that they
acknowledge that this is a
contract they want entered into
for their benefit and on their
behalf and all leave it at that
madam chair and listen to the
rest of the debate but the
I I'm.
I'm a little concerned with that
thank you.
Your muted thank you
Representative thank you
Representative Nibert ten
Representative Chasey.
Thank you madam chair and and
thank you representative
Allison.
This is really an interesting
discussion to make.
Serve long enough that I was
around when we started the
Medicaid managed care contracts
in New Mexico.
And.
I recall.
A real barrier to enrolling
tribal members.
Into their Medicaid managed care
and I honestly for this.
Thank you.
I cannot remember which was
causing the most problems
because initially the state
contracted with in the state
typically now I think still
contract with more than one
managed care provider.
There was initially either opt
in or opt out for native numbers
and so.
They didn't know.
It creates a barrier because if
they were automatically opted
into a certain one and that was
their provider and they didn't
have a way to get out if they
had to if they had to make the
choice and affirmatively during.
With that provided because there
were several providers
There were there were issues of
making sure that people actually
opted in when they needed to do
so so I'm just.
Thank you it's bringing back
memories of Medicaid managed
care and my concern at the time
that what we were doing is
creating so many bureaucratic
lay all years in the system that
people were getting.
Last quality healthcare so that
was that was an issue.
I really here
you representative Allison madam
chair and I both have a late.
Wonderful friend who actually
argued Santa Clara B. Martinez
in front of the Supreme Court.
And Thurgood Marshall wrote that
opinion and I think we're
Strong conviction that the
tribes are in charge of the
cells with these matters.
The understanding now that this
date wishes.
True.
Some were firm.
That the legislative the state
the private providers the state
has package will be satisfactory
to the tribe's.
I just tried nation and
problems.
Is that what the state is asking
madam chair.
Representative.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative Nibert raised and
then the president present
question from Representative
Chasey I'd like to refer to one
of my expert witnesses that
wasn't on earlier but I'd like
to bring him on board I think
you can explain a lot of what
Representative Nibert is asking
and the individual that I wish
to call is Robert Joe he is the
executive director of the not
only development corporation so
thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative Mr Joe.
Yes good morning thank you for
recognizing me really
appreciated Representative
Nibert let me try and clear up
us some of your questions in the
confusion that you have the
Navajo Nation has actually
provided documentation numerous
times in written statements
through official legislative
action stadium there solver will
of the Navajo Nation to the
state of New Mexico through the
governor's office and to
secretary Dr Scrase.
so that's that's one hopefully
that clears up your question
about the having a document
officially from the Navajo
Nation stating that and the
nomination Council is the
officially the governing body of
the Navajo Nation they exercise
their right to state their
position through this
legislative action and on
numerous occasions they've wrote
several letters to the state
stayed in that position for it
was for
To answer your question
regarding that the other is
holding the Navajo Nation
accountable and for any issues
that may come up in a rise of
how the how this is all set up
is similar to how the oil
company could be set up where
there is a corporation with
subsidiary companies and the
subsidiary companies like a
drilling unit of the oil company
would be responsible accountable
liable for any of their actions
in the field.
How the nominations Hamel anally
this is similar to have any
corporate entity having a
subsidiary the city the
subsidiary being this is not
funny development corporation in
DC being accountable reliable
responsible for any liabilities
that may occur in the future for
any just just just a
jurisdictional if she's that
maker in the courts so that's
how this is set up so it's very
similar but in the government
for a structure so I hope that
answers your questions as far as
the enrollment
we are taking the pass of
enrollment approach to this
we're not forcing people to sign
up we're giving people a choice
it's the freedom of choice to
participate and so we're leaving
it up to the people but however
where we will be educating the
people about the benefits of
signing up with this.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative say I don't know
your answer was your question is
answered.
You still there okay Madam chair
representative Allison.
I I think that that was mostly
Representative night hurts.
And I was just clarifying that
It sounds to me.
That.
The concern is how does the
state know the will of the
nation tribe or pueblo it sounds
to me that that we just got an
answer that is been provided
with the proper documentation.
From that the Navajo Nation
council.
So I guess what I'm wondering
I'm I'm going back Madam chair
representative I'm just first
question is given the principle
of sovereign immunity why is the
state even involved and I think
it's because the state has
started out procuring the
Medicaid managed care.
Provider is is that right.
Representative Allison.
I just want to the expert
witnesses to answer that please.
Leave it open to things they can
answer the best delegates later
or Mr Reid.
For Mister Jones.
Could you restate your question
please sure Madam chair
representative Allison.
I guess that.
What.
Historically the state has
chosen.
Medicaid managed care providers
and that's why the states even
involved in this and that's why
the nation isn't just finding
its own Medicaid managed care
provider.
Yes.
Okay okay so
Madam chair and representative
Allison.
I.
I think this.
I really do think sovereignty
is.
Is the issue and I I understand
madam chairs and Representative
nine point concerns but
It's it's almost it's a little
paternalistic I think to
How the state.
It's already.
Is this contract.
Use though about what section of
law is being amended where is
this going into our statutes.
This I don't know if this mentor
is still on.
Madam chair.
Representative Garratt.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Chasey I just had
a note from of my legal
assistant agency Montoya she had
to go to a doctor's appointment
so.
Thank you madam chair.
It was madam chair perhaps
With the delegates later.
Representative.
Yeah Mr Slater.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Chasey
is is the question.
What part of New Mexico laws
being
amended.
Because as I read it I see in
the brackets assess new material
so.
Right some expert and.
It's just usually new materials
going into a certain section.
So.
I just wondered if this.
What is going to be.
I'm sure more response the point
on yes summer to.
Thank you.
You know I think that.
The fact that we're in this
situation is unfortunate.
Right we can use the term
fortune now.
It's it's it's really offensive.
And it's only gonna get worse if
if we proceed down this path
with the state interfering in
the internal legislative process
of the Navajo Nation using
picking choose winners
suspension on the state.
So you know I think that staff
is just plainly stated that's
going on here anyone who is.
Not looking at what the duly
passed laws or of the Navajo
Nation as passed by the
nomination Council is ignoring
the stopper will of the Navajo
Nation and so for anyone to say
that there is some sort of
dispute on what that will is is
a fiction.
And that fiction I don't know
where it's sourced from or where
it's coming from.
But the laws are clear in the
protocols cleared because you've
heard for Mr need and whether
the nation should be a party to
the contract.
You know you this is the same
sort of conversation I think is
taking place for hundreds
hundreds of years in
relationships between tribes and
states and maybe the rhetoric is
a little less expensive these
days but the same sort of
paternalistic attitude where the
state is picking and choosing
winners dividing and conquering
within our own legislative
process is what I as an agent of
Navajo Nation selected we do
have the navigation I
remarkable.
And so that's why we're asking
in the spirit of partnership and
respect for our sovereignty that
the state reaffirmed that it's
not going to do that but it's
going to respect the laws of the
Navajo Nation asks the past five
Navajo Nation council and that
they are not going to close
requirements that will rotor
stopper to.
By making us aware of our
sovereign immunity as a try as
an Indian nation and this is
precedent setting not just for
the tribes within the states of
New Mexico problems with in the
state of New Mexico but it's
going to be for all of Indian
country.
This is the first in the nation
opportunity and I think we're
moving forward very cautiously
and I really appreciate the
state for doing that so that we
don't do things wrong the first
one.
If we continue down this path is
going to be no arms it's not
going to be because the Navajo
Nation didn't try to be because
the state impose all of these
measures that you wrote the
ability of the nation to
exercise.
Thank you chair.
Representative sorry.
So I I was just looking at one
of the analysis that we have
that that the Human Services
Department.
Notes the importance of the
The contract to the
Communities.
And they think that the
contract with the status of
primary importance but I I agree
that seems paternalistic
Committee.
And their concern also expressed
in their analysis is that there
could be.
I don't know the way I read
between the lines as they are
afraid that they might be taking
advantage.
And I think that's paternalistic
I don't quite see you.
Where we're going that I don't
know that we have to
Although certainly the state and
the tribes.
The nation the tribes and
pueblos we're all partners in
trying to mitigate the
devastating effects of the
pandemic so I certainly see us
working together in that regard
but as far as.
Of these reports as.
Requirements James
Not in keeping with current law.
Regarding tribal sovereignty
but.
What we answer is thank you very
much I really appreciated the
discussion this morning I will
and my.
Way and right here thank you.
Thank you Representative
Representative the line.
Thank you madam chair
Representative so let me ask you
because I'm still confused how
many on in American managed care
entities are there in the state
and where are.
Representative Allison you can
have you can defer to your
expertise.
Thank you madam chair I would
like to refer to my experts and
I think of always start with
the.
The in the C. executive director
Robert joke.
Thank you madam chair and
representative of Allison and
thank you for the question of
this will be the very first
Indian managed care entity in
the country there's no other one
that exist.
Okay
Madam chair representative so
this is going to affect
other Pueblo Sir tribes in the
state as we do this
I'm just concerned that we're
making decisions for other
communities without consulting
with them is what it sounds like
to me and that would concern me
greatly.
Mr Jones madam chair.
Madam chair in the
representatives so so the way
the bill is written.
Is for states to recognize
respect the will of trough the
US Auburn tribal entities
sovereign tribal nations and
that's all those we're
essentially asking for that's
all the bills essentially asking
for this for the state to honor
respect the will of tribal
tribal sovereign nations.
So Madam chair representative so
then in that case it would seem
to me to be relatively easy to
be talking to organizations like
the all and you public counsel
for the council chairs to find
out their position on and that's
what I think it's got me
concern is it doesn't look like
they've been included in this
process but maybe I'll miss.
Representative Allison.
I would like to call on our
legal expert Mr I'd see see if
you can feel this question.
Madam chair.
Yes please.
Thank you Representative Ely if
I might just addressed briefly I
think the issue again is.
One of the basic understanding
of what the relationship is
between tribes and the United
States governments Wister versus
Georgia at eighteen thirty two
was the case that we still rely
on page says the state law shall
have no force when it comes to
tribes unless Congress's said
that it does in this case
Congress created a public
program Congress said that the
tribe could meet these criteria
and if it did then Medicaid
would be transferred in this
manner it it does not.
Comport with federal law to
suggest that.
And somehow scrutinize that
principle in twenty twenty one
what has really been settled law
in the United States since
eighteen thirty two so I don't
know all calls to answer it
except to say that that's when
you don't get Slater says that
this is deeply offensive I I'm
I'm I'm disappointed I
understand the need to ask
questions but disappointed that
the idea that the state can
somehow scrutinize what the what
the navigation is what it's
published it's been provided to
you when during the call the
Attorney General and
nomination is already answered
your questions about how this is
supposed to work and said that
this contract can be entered
into within the city doesn't
have a nation owned and operated
entity and that no sovereign
immunity needs to be waived.
The state asked we respond we
didn't have to do that but we
did and that was the end of it
and with all due respect I don't
know under federal law how we
can persistent at one of our.
Thank you madam.
Madam chair representative but
let's be clear about this I mean
I just I one of the reasons that
I I have missed some of the
discussion it in this is because
of the taxation committee and
representing exemption.
And no the first time we
presented that bill they rightly
said well did you get all the
stakeholders involved so we
didn't and I said you know I we
still working on the Civil let's
roll over so we rolled over and
we got all the stakeholders
involved in that bill just
passed out of committee twelve
zero.
So I don't think I'm asking for
anything with all due respect
Representative into your expert
of anything that would be in any
way considered offensive I want
to be very clear about that you
get people involved that's what
legislative process yes you talk
to people you treat them with
that respect and you talk to the
other tribes the other problems
I'm not talking about one now
I'm talking about it basic
process of getting people
involved in making sure that
they're okay with what you are
doing so we're not talking about
federal law or anything else and
frankly I'm concerned that you
would find the very process of
being collaborative to be
offensive I don't get that and
no do no miss respect
Representative but to your
expert I don't think he's
understand my question on us
what she will this over come
back and tell us that
everybody's okay with this
that's all we're asking for at
least that's all I'm asking for
but I don't find that in any way
offensive that's what we call
the legislative process and I'm
sorry come on so strong but if
somebody is going to say to me
G. that's offensive if you're
trying to get other people
involved you're going to get a
strong reaction for me so
madam chair representative this
is really directed your expert
on like to hear from him thank
you madam chair.
Thank you Representative bye bye
I would like to referred to my
another expert Mr Robert Joe.
Miss so I'm gonna I'm gonna step
in right now Representative
Allison we've been at this for
two hours your I don't think
you're going to have the votes
by the way this conversation is
going so I do want to go to
Representative Johnson and and
get some information from her
but I I think you really have to
work on this bill otherwise it's
not gonna pass we've been
hearing concerns from both in
the aisles that quite frankly we
need better answers to the
questions that are being posed
and and I I just want to
recognize you know this
committee and are committee
members are really strong
advocates for tribes and and
when we have built become before
this committee we have our
members really interested in the
responses from the tribes and I
think you've you've seen other
committee meetings you know we
passed.
Unanimously you know the state
equity even though there were
concerns from representative
Nibert about some of the
language right now you're not
going to have the votes so I do
want to go back to
Representative Representative
Johnson and hear from her and
then Representative Allison I'm
going to ask that you roll the
bill and and please work on and
and and talk to other
individuals and and talk to
other representatives that have
expressed concern about this
bill and and we're gonna move on
Representative Johnson.
Thank you thank you madam chair
and thank you committee members
and adult should not
Representative Allison and then
she not on the on the floor here
on zoom in listening and
participating.
With your comments and I'm going
to give that diplomatic of you
of this bill in this
conversation and I'd like to
thank my colleagues for their
questions and concerns I to have
the same questions and concerns
and my hope is that you continue
to take your time two nine in
working this process to provide
the information and at the end
of the day I think our hope is
that this well this this
opportunity of managed care
services well provide a cadre
of specialty services within our
rural areas right now as it is
we know that we have to travel
from Gallup to Albuquerque
Gallup to Farmington Gallup to
Phoenix to receive health care
specialty area health care
however we also know that
currently within J. I. M. C. I.
H. S. referral from contract
health
there is open HMA so that is
working and then it's also
working for our veterans clinic
our satellite clinic so I think
we should not be
defensive.
Questioning by and not the few
John uncle if not the whole
building.
And come back to the table and
they can again I think you know
all we're asking for is a
government to government
conversation and we just have
more questions and with that I
want to thank you my brother
should not Representative
Allison.
And madam chair and committee
members and should not ani I say
this with all due respect I want
the best health care for my
people on the Navajo Nation I
live within my own community and
among my community
I Representative large Navajo
Nation land base I have nineteen
chapters along.
Four ninety one parallel to
three seventy one south them and
I'm sorry north of Gallup so
this is very important issue to
me so with that thank you madam
chair.
Thank you representative
Representative Zamora.
Thank you madam chair.
Just a quick question
representative Allison is this
comment related is this goes
back further than that.
Madam chair.
The representative was Arora
this goes beyond COVID it as we
said in the introduction echoes
back of several leadership and
the Navajo Nation.
Madam chair representative
Allison thank you for that I
know COVID was brought up a few
times and and I didn't know if
this had a faster a need for
response than what we're asking
for but that that takes care of
that and thank you for bringing
this bill up for thank you madam
chair and thank you
Representative battles thank you
Representative so Representative
Alison I recommend that we roll
this bill it's up to you
otherwise we can take a motion
from the committee but like I
said more work is going to have
to go into the bill in order to
gain support of everyone
so so I I really recommend that
we roll the building and you
work on it more.
Thank you madam chair just
before we take any action I
would like to ask for a comment
from delegates later.
We'll take a brief comment from
delegates later.
Thank you very much
Chair I'm nothing further at
this time other than we
appreciate the committee's
review of H. two five one and
that the bill.
If I guess the last thing I'd
say is just if the committee or
any individual legislators I'm
happy to communicate with them
as far as chair of the health
committee for our chair or
Representative Allison on what
sort of documentation is needed
from the nation to satisfy what
the position is of the nation
and then to coordinate any
further meetings with other
tribes nations pueblos with in
perspective number districts to
understand how they may be
impacted by this bill but right
now no other tribal nation
pueblo is entering into and I am
CTE contract with the state of
New Mexico so this actually will
defected one else and tell they
lacked into it if they to elect
to into it then it will be
protecting their sovereign will
reaffirm their sophomore so
thank you very much and chair.
Thank you thank you
representative Allison.
Thank you madam chair
I respect the decision of your
committee so
It is with kind of a regret that
I agree that we should roll it.
And I will work with you I will
talk with all of your members I
thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative so we
are going to move along to house
bill sixty seven now
Representative Armstrong is
chairing the health committee
but we do have her expert Dr
Scrase who will be available and
I am going to pass along the
gavel to vice chair Johnson and
I will present on behalf of.
Chair Armstrong so I am looking
for a Dr Scrase if you would
please raise your hand and we'll
move you over to a panelist.
Dr Scrase.
I it looks like and then mute
great unmuted.
You we can hear you and we can.
Yes so we'll go ahead and
proceed with.
House bill sixty seven and I
will defer to you as I am
stepping and Representative
Armstrong.
Sorry I think can you hear me
now.
Okay perfect I appreciate the
opportunity to speak to this
committee today Representative
Armstrong is in the middle of
the Q. and a on another Bellerin
Committee and asked me to kick
this off the discussion of house
bill sixty seven and just
briefly up.
I'm here because of that and
actually an effort that started
in the house of representatives
and twenty nineteen with house
bill four eighty that establish
graduate medical education
council in that council's been
at work and has done a lot of
great work to create spots for
primary care physicians and
psychiatrists.
In the state and our plan is
it's originally as as it's set
up now and has been funded by
the legislature will actually
turn out of forty six new
primary care physicians in not
per year starting in twenty
twenty five which is enough to
take care of a hundred thousand
New Mexicans if we can convince
some of the all state in the
primarily rural communities for
training in as a result of this
work it became apparent to
representative Armstrong and
others there was a lot more
potential to do more good in the
state to expand primary care
services not just for physicians
but practitioners and
physicians' assistants and other
kind of practitioners and so
that
That effort in that realization
resulted in this bill which
creates another council in HSD
to to look at the broader issues
of primary care interstate now
why HSD.
New Mexico Medicaid program
currently enrolls forty three
percent of New Mexicans in one
or more of its up health care
coverage programs and so we
actually are the largest
purchaser of health care in the
state of New Mexico and I think
ages state has a newfound
appreciation of our role to
improve health care statewide
and be a leader in improving
health care statewide and so I
think Representative Armstrong
in our our our conversations
with her help that establishing
this council would give us the
ability to pull together other
agencies and professional groups
across the entire state to work
to expand health care services
access to Medicaid services is
the number one priority for the
Medicaid program actually ex
sorry access to health care
services is the number one
priority we need practitioners
of every type so this is not any
kind of focus on primary care to
the.
Exclusion of another specially
it is just the best place we
have to start this work and so
because the success of the
legislature and and their
support for the GME Act for well
we think that this model can be
extended and expanded and come
up with a statewide effort and
planned to directly address our
primary care supply issues in
other ways other than just
training new doctors and so with
that I think I am done I was to
have some experts today to
testify and I'm not sure if they
are online right now or not but
The.
If we do then maybe our.
I we we can have them speak I
know their positions and so
they're seeing patients and or
maybe a complex there otherwise
we can not just turned over to
additional comment thank you
madam chair and I'm sorry I
forgot to say madam chair at the
beginning was filling with my HB
but it is my intention to go
through for our all comments and
questions.
Madam this is doctor Rick Madden
I'm available.
Sorry I was muted.
Your.
But if if if if if doctor made
an would be allowed to.
Yes permanent.
Yes thank you madam chair please
Dr Megan.
I thank you very much for having
me I really very X. interested
excited about this I've been
part of a group that has been
working on this bill for over a
year.
And the idea is really to make
primary care better reserves
secretary Scrase is saying thank
you madam chair and members of
the committee for having me.
So what I wanna say is pretty
straight forward I.
Representing this committee I've
been seeing patients as a
primary care physician family
physician for over three decades
and I've seen how primary care
helps people.
It helps people with prevention
not just vaccines the talking
about healthy lifestyles and
appropriate investigation into
symptoms to see if anything
biggest coming.
we help people with COVID
nineteen people call us all the
time for symptoms they want to
know once they have a positive
if they can stay home do they
need higher level of care and
what they do afterwards about
vaccination and get those
questions every single day but
we also take care of people that
utilises always have chronic
diseases and will continue to do
that alongside their COVID
nineteen needs but what this
bill is designed to do is
checked R. Scrase was saying
it's really to try and help us
look more closely at what we are
doing with what we stand for
primary care.
So we have need to know how we
spend it and the primary care
cancel study that make
recommendations we know from
worldwide data that primary care
improves the health of
populations improves the health
of people it helps with all
kinds of things that we cute
chronic illnesses.
And reduces emergency room
visits and appropriate use of
hospitalizations and procedures
but it also makes appropriate
use of hospitals the resources
and specialists in their
resources making referrals
better so I just wanted to say
on behalf for committee and for
primary care in general I think
this bill will greatly help that
effort sh.
my remarks.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you at Dr
madam chair are you ready to
take the poll.
Thank you madam chair yes we
stand for questions okay so at
this time we will take a poll.
And let's go ahead and have the
staff.
Get the pole going and
We have ten seconds left for the
whole.
The poll indicates and twenty
three in favor and one against
and so at this time we will take
care of public comment.
And we will begin with
Supporting comments please raise
your hand and I will call on
individuals as they appear.
And there are already twelve
hands raised.
Let's begin with the hello
Renzo.
The bill SCS please forgive me
if I am not saying your name
right.
Can you hear me.
I'm sorry madam chairman.
This is not the bill that I was
waiting for okay all right let's
move along to Linda Siegel.
Thank you madam chair Linda
Siegel I'm representing the New
Mexico nurse practitioner
council and we have been
involved in these meetings and
stand in strong support of this
bill we have about a thousand
nurse practitioners who actually
live and practice in New Mexico
and about half of those are in
primary care of some sort a
either on their own clinics are
quite a few in small communities
throughout the state or they may
be working in federally
qualified health clinics and
certainly they are they're all
over the state and in various
capacities so it is so important
that we look at ways that we can
best expand primary care because
this is where this is where
people start in the health care
system and where we have the
potential to do a lot of percent
we stand strong.
Thank you next we have that
Health Action New Mexico listed.
Yes thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Barbara Webber executive
director of Health Action New
Mexico where a health consumer
advocacy organization is one of
the state statewide for twenty
five years we stand in strong
support this bill with the
affordable Care was set up the
idea was to move more and more
to primary care and preventive
care of there's been small steps
made but nothing that would put
us in the direction of other
developed nations where thirty
percent of their workforce is in
specialty care and seventy
percent is in primary care.
Of for rural New Mexico
particularly for tribal New
Mexico
the access to the.
Primary care early would prevent
a lot of the health care costs
that we have in would certainly
improve the status of
the status of the the health
care in New Mexico which
unfortunately is not good so we
stand in strong support of this
bill and look forward to the
results to come from it.
Thank thank you next we have
Matthew probes.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name's Matthew
probe some of physician
assistant and a practice primary
care provider in rural northeast
New Mexico for at central family
health a federally qualified
health center we're also serve
as medical director and
responsible for recruiting other
primary care providers and
clinicians to serve great needs
of our underserved communities I
support this bill absolutely as
a member of the committee and as
a primary care provider in rural
having to go devoted my life to
this mission and I think you and
more importantly to ensure that
for us as primary care providers
who have done so that we do not
become the dinosaurs that become
extinct with that we work to
grow the next generation of
future health professionals
program I founded simi as the
subgroup growing our own future
health professionals in primary
care providers augmenting that
program.
This bill this legislation will
support that to ensure we can
continue to have primary care
providers to take care of our
own in our rural communities
thank you very much.
Thank you and thank you ladies
and gentlemen for here public
comments however if you could be
concise and not be repetitive
next we have David Roddy.
Madam chair members of the
committee I'm David Wright is
the Mexico primary care
association first I have to
apologize I I like Lorenzo rang
in on house bill two fifty one
and while we support tribal
community I mean not serenity we
don't have the expertise our
position on house bill two fifty
one regarding this bill I've
been working in rural primary
care for forty five years and in
the early days real identities a
Scrooge and that we would
working with paper ledges and
pencils now we have
extraordinary data to help us
treat our primary care patients
this this much more potential in
the state I and this council
will be able to analyze it and
utilize it to improve our
systems and says to help both
care as as well as the cost of
care.
Is some of the states of have
you know exercise of these type
of initiatives with great
results and we strongly support
this bill and just put as well
thank you.
Thank you next we have C. Quinn
Lopez.
Madam chair members the
committee thank you and I
support stand in strong support
of Senate bill sixty seven I'm a
vice president western sky
community care.
And I just believe that it just
simply essential to identify the
right innovative cost effective
value based patient patient
centric solutions for New Mexico
communities and residents by
taking a hard look in refreshing
our primary care system and
resources so we stand in full
support will offer any
assistance that we can thank
you.
Thank you next we have sherry
dot St.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is sherry dots
and and I and I I and volunteer
advocate for a a RP and we stand
in support of this bill I did
speak as a as a retired nurse I
spoke to my own primary care
provider and she asked me to
relate her support and her
concerns about the low
reimbursement rates for primary
care providers in New Mexico
which makes it difficult to have
a private practice which again
disproportionately affects our
rural areas who may have only
one provider in their area so I
encourage you to to pass this
bill thank you.
Thank you next we have Nicholas
Cordova.
Thank you madam chair can you
hear me.
Yes.
Thank you so I'm gonna turn it
the New Mexico Center on Law and
Poverty we at the center stand
in strong support excuse me of
HB sixty seven.
There isn't a critical component
of our health care system and
through the relationships built
on the preventive care provided
primary care helps our community
stay healthy is particularly
cost effective in doing so.
Especially during this pandemic
New Mexico needs leaders were
laser focused on making sure
primary care in our state most
effectively search the patients
who need it most.
By studying whether and to what
degree New Mexico patients
access primary care this council
would be able to craft
recommendations thank you prove
the delivery of one of our most
important cost effective systems
of health care which has the
potential to provide relief.
For in patient care
practitioners who now more than
ever are strapped for space and
time thank you and I hope you
support HBs sixty seven.
Thank you next we have P. T. R.
P. Andrews.
Who.
Yes we hear you can drive run
Andrews I represent the
professional physical therapy M.
D. B. T. education program of
which I was the director for
twelve years I'm in support of
the H. B. sixty seven and also
with my purpose here is to
advocate for consideration for
physical therapists to play a
role in primary care we are
properly trained to service
primary care entry points into
patient care graduates are
trained in screening for disease
and differential diagnosis as
part of their comprehensive
neuro musculoskeletal
examination these skills
position physical therapists to
make appropriate and timely
referrals to other providers is
indicated.
Senator studies have
demonstrated significant cost
effectiveness to decreased
imaging and medical
interventions as a therapies
employed early in the care of
spinal pain.
The military and Kaiser
Permanente health systems
currently utilize physical
therapist as entry points to
primary care with great success
physical therapists have direct
access to New Mexico which
allows them to evaluate initiate
treatment of patients without
medical referral therefore the
pathway to provide primary care
access is already in place we
are well distributed across the
state it would provide another
resource for inter inter into
the medical system so I'm
advocating for that
consideration and would be glad
to answer any other questions
going forward thank you very
much madam chairman thank you
next we have Lawrence Chandler.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members I'm Larry
Shaler of a pediatrician in
Santa Fe and been involved in
the teaching the younger family
medicine residents in northern
New Mexico for over twenty years
and found that a majority of
those residents remain in
northern New Mexico I'm also
speaking on behalf of the New
Mexico pediatric society the
state chapter of the American
academy of pediatrics
representing pediatricians
pediatric practitioners
throughout New Mexico we
strongly support H. B. sixty
seven thank you.
Thank you next we have state was
Serra.
Thank you madam chair of the
committee Steven sat on a
lobbyist for the New Mexico
Academy of Family positions the
academy represents over a five
hundred fifty practicing family
physicians.
In the state in New Mexico we
want to thank the sponsor we
want to thank secretary Scrase
for being a champion and we urge
you to vote yes on this bill
thank you.
Thank you next we have Sharon
Berman.
My apologies looks like I
skipped Susan Wilson.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee for the
opportunity to speak in support
of house bill sixty seven my
name's Wilson I'm the executive
director of the New Mexico
coalition for health care value
the coalition is an employer led
multi stakeholder nonprofit
focused on improving the value
of health care in New Mexico our
coalition represents the
interests of employer health
care purchasers and their
employees and advocates for high
quality health care system it's
transparent in pricing quality.
Efforts in other states and by
large national employers of
shown employer purchasers that
improve primary care provides
increased value for their
employees and their dependents
as well as for the company's
overall employee health care
program.
Lawyers know that quality
primary care reduces
inappropriate referrals reduces
waste in health care spending
increases help your employees
independent.
High quality primary care also
provides better screening for
behavioral health needs which is
your improving employee
wellbeing.
Mediation of a primary care
council as outlined in house
bill sixty seven will help New
Mexico address issues that exist
in the current primary care
system today as well as address
challenges as they emerge we
believe this bill puts in place
foundational measures to improve
the quality and access to
primary care in New Mexico New
Mexico coalition for health care
value stands in support of house
bill sixty seven thank you madam
chair thank you next we have
shared Berman.
Good morning and thank you madam
chair and committee members my
name is Sharon Berman I'm a
civic engagement and policy
manager at New Mexico First and
I'm a registered lobbyist for
New Mexico first thank you for
this opportunity to speak in
favor of house bill sixty seven.
Over seven hundred fifty people
from around the state were
involved in our health care town
hall last year through a
consensus project process they
crafted almost twenty
recommendations to improve the
health of New Mexicans house
bill sixty seven addresses many
of the concerns behind those
recommendations the clear
commitment in house bill sixty
seven to attend to access and
quality of care is significant
and essential to the health of
the people of our state.
One of the recommendations
crafted by the participants was
to hold health care health
systems accountable and commit
to involve those most affected
by inequities in the continuum
of care at every level of
planning and decision making
about health policy to that end
we would like to know if there
is or if there could be more
specificity in the bill around
the council members such as
ensuring there is diversity
among the voting and nonvoting
members that would prioritize
making the council reflective of
the diverse and rich communities
of New Mexico.
Thanks to representative
Armstrong for introducing this
visionary and important bill
please vote in favor of house
bill sixty seven madam chair and
committee members thank you
thank you next we have a million
vesper.
Thank you madam chair and
committee for allowing me the
opportunity to speak with you
today in support of house bill
sixty seven I'm doctor best
payment there dear family
medicine resident here in Los
crucis as part of the US of the
New Mexico family medicine
residency program and I want to
thank our program for allowing
me as a property to becoming and
trained as a family physician.
This past year I worked with a
diverse group.
Leisure
and collaborating to address
some of our health care needs of
our state and our efforts to
drafting the spell.
And I just wanted to say how New
Mexico is my home this is where
I want to live in practice as a
primary care provider.
COVID nineteen has shed
healthcare disparities a light
on the health care disparities
in the devastating effects it's
had on Mexicans in our nation
and I did have the opportunity
to work with the New Mexico
accounted need them physicians
and review a survey of our
members on how Covid nineteen
affected them.
It was heartbreaking to see many
primary care providers
struggling to keep their doors
open US I'm not giving
themselves a salary so they
could pay their staff and have
to close our doors to patients
and unfortunately respond there
really ox and if you did a
closing their doors.
New Mexico can't afford to lose
a single primary care provider
since for some underserved.
I know the value primary care
you know what it does for many
patients in our communities
across the state.
This is adaptable Nick Jonas ten
ten again.
When there's a demand in our
community we rise to meet them
when S. and secrecy came.
Into our community we volunteer
to assist in medical needs
keeping countless people out of
the hospital by addressing and
treating their dehydration and
listening to their stories again
with COVID one.
Thank you next we have Maria
Garber.
You hear us.
Let's move at will come back to
Maria how about heather Breslin.
Can you hear me.
Yes thank you I thank you madam
chair members of the committee
my name is heather press one I'm
a primary care doctor
Albuquerque I'm also The New
Mexico governor for the American
college of physicians which is
the professional society that
represents in our internal
medicine providers across the
country and around the world.
ACP has reams of policy calling
for improved recognition of and
support for primary care many of
these policies are in Jackley in
line with HB sixty seven.
Calling press to support primary
care is the foundation of a high
functioning health care system.
Even just as a proud New Mexican
myself I feel are status
position to make huge gains and
really set a national example in
this arena.
Personally I'm boarded in both
internal medicine and also
clinical informatics which is a
specialty related to using
health data to improve health
systems and healthcare delivery
and from that vantage point I'm
just so excited about the
potential for the primary care
council to help lead the way I
urge support thank you.
Thank you and we'll go back to
Maria occur per one more time.
Yeah do you hear us.
She may be having technical
difficulties so we will now move
to comments in opposition.
And I don't see any hands so we
will grow to committee.
Nine Byrd.
Thank you madam chair of.
I support this bill I'm just
pleased to see that we have a.
Committee where people are
willing to volunteer their time
and effort to engage in this and
and just please somebody from
from our the Human Services
Department the department of
health and.
Offices superintendent of
insurance are willing to take
their own time the up
participating in the soft.
Meetings and and trying to
advance the interests of the
State slide Representative those
are unselfish measures of of
those state employees to do
that.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you and what is the
pleasure of the committee I
don't see any other hands raised
for comment.
Madam chair all moved to pass on
house sixty seven.
I.
I second the motion madam chair.
We have to pass a motion by
Representative Nibert and a
second by Representative well
just it is to will house bill
sixty seven to take role for
the.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Chasey is excuse
chase taking care of an
different issue thank you madam
chair.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Gallegos yes.
Representative night Burt yes.
Representative Ortez.
Representative Ortez is probably
are presenting in another
committee.
Thank you Representative Rehm
yes.
Representative Zamora.
Yes.
Madam vice chair yes.
Madam chair yes.
Madam vice chair with that we
have
to excused and seven in the
affirmative.
Thank you and the motion passes
with seven in the affirmative
and zero in the negative to
excuse Representative Lewis you
have a do pass on house bill
sixty seven.
Thank you madam chair and thanks
to the experts thank you thank
you madam chair.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you
so we will continue on with our
agenda
again for members that may have
joint late the sponsors of house
bill nine have asked us to roll
that bills so it will not be
hearing it today also the
sponsor of house bill two thirty
four has asked that we roll that
bill as well so we will not be
hearing house bill's line or two
thirty four we will still
continue with house bills one
twenty five one twelve and one
fifty two so I am gettin
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Representative we are ready for
your bill.
Thank you madam chair I am
toggling between two different
committees right now I'm on my
phone can you hear me.
Yes we agree.
Just pull over madam secretary
at Linda Trujillo who's my
experts.
Great go ahead and begin your
bill and then we can
Get Linda on if she would just
raise your hand please.
Thanks madam chair members of
the committee it's nice to see
all of you my former committee I
miss all of you a lot
one of the funds committees ever
and we're doing house bill one
twenty five state which is
related to changes in behavioral
health provider licensing I'm a
little bit of background madam
chair ever since I was elected
to the legislature in twenty
eighteen mental behavior health
issues have been very near and
dear to my heart and I spent a
lot of time studying the.
The status of the mental
behavioral health system and
delivery system in New Mexico
especially after we have the
right to twenty thirteen I won't
revisit that history but it was
a difficult period for mental
behavioral health provision in
our state and I've been working
ever since to try and make
legislative changes and and
policy that will help bring back
our mental behavior health
provider network so that every
New Mexicans need access to get
them so one of the I went on the
ground madam chair members the
committee and I spoke to
basically anybody who would talk
to be exposed to the governor's
office our secretary Scrase HST
Department of Health of mental
the right behavior health
providers association I know
when as far as to speak with the
director producer of a movie
called a doctor's office urged
which kind of outline the status
of mental behavior health in New
Mexico and I identified on
several areas that needed work
I'm a policy perspective and
licensing permit for behavioral
health providers one of those
areas of the problem madam chair
members of the committee is that
New Mexico's licensing are
statutes are out of date they
have specific components of them
discretionary components that
can make it very hard for the at
the folks that are making these
evaluations to license and
credential be at behavioral
health providers want to come to
Mexico it has too much of the
discretionary our function in
language in there so they have
trouble kind of evaluating they
should let and and and.
Out and as a result of bottle
necking affected taken place and
so we are not able to licensed
providers you want to come to
New Mexico and provide services
for New Mexicans and so I it was
incumbent upon us to take a hard
look at the statute figure out
how we can clean them up and
make it so we can find these
types of licenses and and
expeditious manner so that we
can no deliver healthcare so why
H. B. one twenty five does is
the demands The professional
psychologist Act the counting
Act and the thirty practice act
in several different ways and
then let secretary after the
talk to you about that
specifically it's been a
pleasure to work with our our
way this bill also allows for
the utilization of technology I
E. R. no telemedicine
and sky and the means to allow
for us to provision of people
that are looking to be license
in the bureau of provision and
also tweaks the composition of
the counseling and therapy
boards to change present
requirements the makeup of the
board in terms of its membership
our and then also visit their
active board and the board of
social workers as well and so
with that madam chair I will
turn it over to Linda Trujillo
to make any other statement that
she.
Thank you Representative and we
missed you on the committee as
well we can't find Linda so.
She is going to sign in again
okay so you have your text
editor he knows you need to be
here yes I'm texting her and
she's going to try to re sign
and do you want us to
go ahead and take public comment
and have her get on afterwards.
Okay great so we will but the
audience before going to public
comment and if you are in favor
or opposition of house bill one
twenty five the police open and
we'll keep it open for another
ten seconds.
Okay great we have.
Most of all we have I in favor
and zero against.
Okay so
If you would like to speak in
favor please raise your hand.
We have.
When Lopez.
You're now and it.
Thank you madam chair and
committee member.
Mister Lopez I believe you
unmuted you did it yourself
sorry I think I did I am sorry
good morning again a Quinn Lopez
vice president western sky
community care stand in full
support of house bill one twenty
five unitarians comment pandemic
we have seen an increase in
claims for both behavioral
health any particular behavioral
health telehealth services so
this is just the right bill at
the right time to address the
behavioral health needs of
residents and communities New
Mexico we stand in full support
thank you.
Thank you Alvin solely you are
now and it.
Mr Salil have to admit yourself.
Thank you madam chair committee
members.
My name is Alvin soleil I'm a
professor emeritus of New Mexico
State University school of
social work and former chair of
the social work board of social
work examiners I'm appearing
before you today on behalf of
the national association of
social workers New Mexico
chapter we strongly support
house bill one twenty five I.
Social work is the largest
profession in the behavioral
health field and therefore we
want to ensure as many qualified
social workers as possible are
available to protect the public
New Mexico's national
association of social workers as
long supported reciprocity in
this manner and so therefore we
stand in strong support of in
house bill one twenty five thank
you for your time.
Thank you Jason Weaks here now
and it.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Houston weeks
registered lobbyists from
Bernalillo county Bernalillo
county stands a strong support
of this legislation being able
to attract quality behavioral
health providers the state's
absolutely critical we have a
huge gap in huge need you know I
mean I know it's a huge issue in
rural areas we also have gaps in
behavioral health care and
Bernalillo county which is the
most urbanized county in the
state so this is a great step
towards being able to more
easily a tractor team behavioral
health providers enquiring the
need is just so significant
we've got to do something for
structural standpoint to address
some of the issues with respect
to attracting those behavioral
providers and this bill does
does a great thing in terms of
making some changes that will
make that easier so we stand
strong support thank you.
Thank you.
Nicole Comeaux your now and made
it.
Thank you madam chair and
members the committee and
Michael come on the Medicaid
director and here on behalf of
the Human Services Department
today in support of this bill I
changes to licensing boards
across the seas have proved very
effective tools in recruitment
of out of state providers
specifically psychologists
social workers and counselors
and we think that this would
greatly improve workforce
expansion efforts I'm expansion
in the ability to supervise
in telehealth likewise would
help in ensuring expansion of
the work force the automatic
extension of licenses that need
board action during the public
health emergency will also avoid
disruption of workforce during
this ongoing emergency and as
the largest payer in the state
we certainly feel a
responsibility to ensure that
there is an adequate provider
networks to take care of me nine
nine hundred one thousand
individuals on Medicaid I
believe that this bill helps us
to achieve those goals.
Thank you Sherrin Berman here
now omitted.
Good morning and thank you madam
chair and committee members my
name is Sharon Berman I'm a
civic engagement a policy
manager at New Mexico First and
I'm a lot registered lobbyist
for New Mexico First.
We strongly support bill one
twenty five anything we can do
to expand and retain behavioral
health providers throughout the
state is essential and we're so
happy this bill was and
introduced.
One of our counties has the
highest youth suicide rate in
the nation this speaks to the
great need interest of
practitioners and behavioral
health throughout our state we
need more behavioral health
experts in our rural and urban
areas please approve house bill
one twenty five thank you very
much for the opportunity to
speak.
Thank you Linda Siegel you are
now and made it.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Linda Siegel on
behalf of the New Mexico
psychological association we
stand in support of this bill
and really appreciate the
changes to the statutes to
enable
Licensing easier reciprocity
with licensing and and to
address when there are public
health emergencies that we can
expand licensure so we support
this bill thank you.
Thank you.
Is there anyone that would like
to speak in opposition of the
bill.
Okay we will move on to the
committee.
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair of.
What my question madam chair is.
Can a public health emergency we
declared that is very limited in
scope say maybe Senator block
radius one of the town or maybe
to one town and not affect the
whole state.
Madam chair representative
Nibert I I'm not sure I I
understand your question and how
this pertains to the purview of
this bill.
Madam chair Representative
you'll find out secretary.
Okay Madam chair representative
line right I'm I'm not sure I
think that's a better question
for the governor's office too
you know the ones that proclaim
and signed the public health
emergency orders.
Madam chair of Representative
well well allow me to answer the
question I'll be happy to do so.
Madam chair representative I'm
very go for it.
Madam chair representative.
The the secretary of health does
have the ability to declare a
public health emergency that is
a pretty restricted in scope and
and by the very specific as to.
Address United particular
situation so what my concern
madam chair representative is
that language on page four page
five of page twenty seven
basically says that if there is
a public health emergency
declared.
Ma'am the application lies the
applicant's license gets
extended M. what my suggestion
is that while that.
Make sense when we have a
statewide emergency I would
submit to you that if the margin
C. is very limited in scope.
That.
It should.
It shouldn't matter whether the
emergency is been declared or
not that's the only condition
that sent him the language so my
suggestion would be that online
page four line fourteen.
H. five line seven and page
twenty seven one fifteen that we
have the words.
And directly affects the
application after the word act
on each of those lines so we're
basically re unless state
federal or state public health
emergency is declared pursuant
to the public health emergency
response act and directly
affects the applica semi colon
in which case an applicant's
temporary license shall be
automatically extend it so we
have yeah I.
One of these applicants that has
a temporary license and and say
I live in Albuquerque but the
public health order that's
declared only a fax ROZ will my
community the bad applicant's
license does not get the benefit
of the extension because life is
normal in Albuquerque it's only
the applicants and Raul that
would get the benefit of an
extension because technically
they're under some public
health.
Our emergency so are you know
you're you're three
Representative would say that is
friendly I would certainly make
that amendment to to
specifically address that I know
we're all thinking about this
statewide health emergency right
now with the I think there's
other emergencies declared that
the are much more limited in
scope for could be very limited
scope.
Thank you very much madam chair
representative Nibert that's a
good catch and thank you we will
gladly accept that amendment.
Madam chair if you'd like me to
make the amendment at this point
I might be happy to do so.
I I really don't have any
further discussion thank you
representative Nibert yes we you
please repeat that and out of do
it madam chair all do it and on
each page so on page four.
Wind fourteen.
After the word act which is a
last word on that line and
before the some might call it.
Insert the words.
And.
Directly.
Affects.
The outlook at.
And then you have the semi
colon.
On page five.
Wind seven.
Thank you after the word act in
before the semi colon cancer at
the exact same words.
The only other place I found it
was on page twenty seven.
Winds fifteen.
After the word act which is the
last
word on that line and before the
cell cycle of cancer the exact
same words.
Great thank you Representative
so we have a motion to that
amendment and it differently.
The friendly amendment do we
have a second.
Also.
Thank you Representative
Gallegos is there further
discussion on the amendment.
Is there any.
Okay.
Did I hear someone
Representative Eli no okay I'm
seeing no further discussion is
there any objection to adopting
the amendment.
Okay seeing and hearing none we
have adopted.
Those amendments.
And I you madam chair great
thank you Representative Eli.
Thank you madam chair
representative so
Representative if I can direct
your attention to page three.
because I'm thinking about
lawyers now and and what they
are doing with respect to out of
state professionals I'm looking
at line twenty four
can you tell me what's the
thinking behind I know this is
an existing law but what's the
thinking behind the five years
requirement.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative the land thank
you asked that question so I'm
the point here are correct it is
your five year requirement in
law New Mexico was is actually
one of the states of the longest
requirement to prove
practice for that amount of time
five years is a long amount of
is is really long actually and
I'm in my conversations with our
with secretary Trujillo who
unfortunately has is unable to
get on those in like I don't
know what's going on but she and
I are in contact on she and I
actually have been talking about
reducing that
Because of the number well
there's a number of number of
reasons why we need desperately
more psychologists in the state
and if you were to reduce that
requirement obviously it would
be easier for others to seek
reciprocity in New Mexico so you
know how we we would like to
reduce that actually if if thank
you the committee would
entertainment.
So let me let me suggest this so
we we visit about the full that
let me suggest an amendment that
we strive on page three line
twenty four their number is a
five it's actually written out
and put into.
would that be a friendly
amendment.
Madam chair representative Ely
yes that would be thank you
madam chair at this point I
would adopt that amendment and
that would be again Page three
line twenty four strike to work
I and substitute to work to
second.
Madam chair your muted.
I was testing everyone.
Have a motion to adopt the
amendment made by Representative
Eli and a second by
Representative night perfect is
there a discussion on the
adoption of is there a
discussion on the amendment.
Okay is there any objection to
adopting the amendment.
Seeing none we've adopted that
amendment.
And representative Ely still
have the floor.
madam chair since I had the
discussion I don't think I can
make the motion so I will wait
on finished asking
Representative questions thank
you madam chair great thank you.
Committee members.
Madam chair all make the motion
to.
The new paths on house bill one
twenty five House twice the
mended.
We have a motion and a second to
passed house bill one twenty
five best price amended.
Is there further discussion.
Is there any objection to the do
passed motion.
Seeing none you have a do pass
showing all members present
voting in the affirmative thank
you Representative thank you
madam chair thank you members of
the committee.
Great thank you we will now move
on to house bill one twelve and
for the information for a for
the public's information we do
have an interpreter so there is
a zoom glow but that if you want
to log on and hear the
interpreter which you will be
interpreting in Spanish that's
available for this committee
hearing and this bill right now
so.
We will yes Representative
Martinez.
I know he's also in between with
the tax committee I believe.
Still chairman arms.
Yes this is doctor mortar the
interpreter I have not being let
in to translate some okay we're
doing that right now thank you
thank you ma'am I apologize no
problem.
Okay so we have the interpreter
situated right now and we're
just I'm getting Representative
Martinez on and he says he is.
Okay we're ready on
Representative Martinez if we
don't get him stand I think
we'll move on to Representative
but but as I see that she's in
the audience.
Okay great we now have
Representative Martinez.
Welcome Representative.
Hi how are you madam chair thank
you for flexibility general
committees year.
And I can see you and you can
see and I think we're good.
Great let me receive madam chair
yes please.
Okay thank you members of the
committee and that chair
it's a pleasure to be here with
you first time this year
in front of you is house bill
one twelve.
House bill one twelve prohibits
state and local funded health
benefits from discriminating on
the basis of immigration status.
These benefits are health
programs are funded by local
governments and state
governments such as county
indigent care programs for low
income and uninsured county
residents.
Let me be clear that most
hospitals in counties to not
discriminate on the basis of
immigration status some however
still do.
In part of the reason they do is
because of an interpretation of
a federal law the
A personal responsibility and
work opportunity act of nineteen
ninety six.
Some of these governments have
taken a pretty narrow view and
so therefore they discriminated
against people who don't have or
rather against people who are
non citizens in many cases of
discriminate against people who
have lawful permanent residents
daca or other immigration status
and.
Thankfully thankfully the
federal law allows for these
local governments to provide
access to these programs to
these people so long as there is
an affirmative state law in the
books that's what this is.
Let me be also very clear this
bill does not impose
you know additional programming
for these County jail programs
it doesn't require more money
for these programs all it does
is it gives these counties the
opportunity to open up their
existing programs to their
residents without
having to discriminate on the
basis of immigration status
before I go to committee member
sorry I go to my experts madam
chair I also will be very clear
that again most counties in the
state are doing the right thing
but there are few who have taken
up much more narrow view and
therefore have.
Requests that if we want them to
be able to provide access to
people with who are not citizens
of the services that an
affirmative state law allows me
to do so with that manager I'd
like to choose my experts I've
got the New Mexico last comment
about.
Who is a staff attorney at the
center online poverty and
starvation Monday who is
executive director of the New
Mexico Center on Law and
Poverty.
Madam chair this is our mission
my name Mexico Center on Law and
Poverty and looks like Nicholas
is having some difficulty with
getting on the zoom summit go
ahead and speak a little bit
about this bill.
one twelve is it really
necessary bill to help stop this
communication our health care
systems the centre line poverty
for many years has been working
with low income clients to try
to get financial assistance and
try to get treatment through the
hospital programs and we've seen
first hand.
Some issues that arise when
folks cannot get that service in
particular we've had some issues
you know with our public
hospital in Bernalillo county
with UNM hospital having some
rules that prevent immigrants
from accessing financial
assistance programs in the same
way as others this includes
lawfully residing immigrants
folks are workers includes
deferred action use daca youth
and other immigrants and so
we've had situations for example
where a worker at needed need
certain needed the surgery and
was chart seventeen thousand
dollars up front and able to get
in for surgery that was
necessary for work because of
those rules in another situation
in a different hospital in a
different part of the state we
had a situation where a
youngster wasn't able to get in
for surgery because of charges
up fronts you know again because
of because of those rules and
down self a situation where a
woman was in need to get a C.
section without the help of
advocacy because of these rules
and again these are not rules
that most counties have these
are you know rules and very
specific places and what ends up
happening is that hospitals
actually have a lot of funding
sources and the ability to be
able to provide treatment to
everybody without discrimination
but because of this federal law
and because of this imposition
of they're not able to meet
their obligations to treat all
patients and so this bill was
but essentially remove that
restriction it would allow for
hospitals to meet our
obligations and we you know
believe it will create some
consistency and some standards
and uniformity across the state
thank you.
Great thank you and we have
Nicholas on right now so you
came and had a good time and if
you want to add your vote to at.
Thank you madam chair and not to
Sri hash would agree she just
went over but I'd like to really
talk about kind of the
uniformity that this H. B. one
twelve would create in these
he's county indigent care
programs H. B. one twelve would
make it such that health care
programs could be significantly
easier to administer and
although hospitals have an
obligation to treat all patients
hospital administrators and
providers have great difficulty
figuring out federal rules
around immigration status we
should not be put in this in
these impossible decisions about
who gets care and who doesn't.
Uniformity in our county
indigent care programs so they
no longer discriminate on the
basis of immigration status
ensures that patients can get
the care they need when they
need it.
Finally I really want to
highlight the V. twelve would
not would not increase costs for
the state or the counties is
mentioned most hospitals in
counties are already providing
care to engine patients without
regard to immigration status.
So all hospitals are obligated
to treat patients and they are
already using state or local
funds to do so.
Programs are funded through
property in gross receipts taxes
so that means that many New
Mexicans who paid into the
program for being from accessing
it.
These taxes are equitably
imposed without regard to
someone's immigration status and
it's critical and right.
The programs the finance are
equitably provided.
Emily allowing every Mexican to
access these programs is
absolutely the right thing to do
so New Mexico should do
everything we can to ensure
every Mexican has access to
critical health care programs.
H. B. one twelve Smith.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Madam chair we're we're up we're
open for questions although I I
should add I believe there is an
amendment you committee it's a
technical six others a comma
that was
either dropped or or extra
combine at Nicholas could stick
to it but that should be part of
the committee.
Okay thank you I'm before we go
to that let's go ahead and go to
the audience so we can open the
call for attendees that would
like to vote on house bill one
twelve.
The pool is open I will keep it
open for about twelve more
seconds.
Okay we're going to close the
pull so we have a twenty five
that voted for the bill and one
against so if you would like to
speak in favor bill please raise
your hand.
Okay and Lorenzo.
Less because you are now and
made it.
Thank you thank you madam
chairman members of the
committee my name is Lawrence we
ask us and I live in Senate part
and I strongly support house
Bill one one two Corona virus
does not discriminate and
neither should go or healthcare
system thank you for your time.
Thank you doctor Jesse Barnes
you are now and made it.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Jesse
Barnes I'm family medicine
doctor and spent the last ten
years working in Albuquerque's
south valley many of my patients
are immigrants of varying
immigration statuses and
unfortunately that all too often
determines whether we are able
to get them the care that they
need especially when I need to
send them to specialists or to
the hospital I was very
encouraging earlier to see the
committee strong support for the
primary care council however I
can jump ahead a little bit and
let them know that one of the
major causes of burnout among
primary care physicians is the
fact that we are often unable to
get our patients equitable care
and the care that we know the
need as Nicholas since we should
have mentioned our patients
already contribute through
property taxes and other forms
and over the past ten years I've
learned that many of my patients
are wonderful people incredibly
hard working and exemplary
members of our society I think
it is time for us to end this
form of legalized discrimination
and passing from of state law so
all of our patients have equal
access to our safety net care
programs thank you for support
of this bill.
Thank you bill Hicks your now
and muted.
Hi everybody my name is still
hits on the intensive case
manager the City of Albuquerque
in classes and clinic and I'm
here to speak in support of H.
B. one twelve
everything we can our office we
see people are seeking services
and guidance because there tens
of thousands hundreds of
thousands of dollars in debt
prudential procedures because of
being uninsured and they're
avoiding avoiding these higher
levels of care that they need
because they're terrified by the
costs that impact on their
financial futures there are so
many folks we see with their
credit being destroyed we just
health care workers need to be
able to refer our patients out
giving them peace of mind that
they won't get turned away
because of their immigration
status or their ability to pay
up front and and these these
folks these are essential
workers are paying into these
funds for uninsured patients
systems not to mention during
this pandemic these folks have
had access to unemployment
benefits are federal stimulus
other types of public benefits
so the very least we can do to
care for uninsured immigrant
community members
is provide them access to
quality care and more than ever
especially right now we need our
patients to engage in their care
to earn higher community safer
the policy as it stands
contributes to the systemic
discrimination that immigrants
people of color are the face
it's important that we passed SB
one twelve to keep New Mexico
state thank you very much.
Thank you but more in here now
and made it.
good morning madam chair and
members of the committee thank
you miss more and and and and
then include command which and
Navajo mechanical bull co
founder for indigenous women
rising and for together action
there I have.
Been very fortunate to
come across different community
members who are.
We don't have a legal US citizen
status and I feel as an
indigenous person it goes
against core values
to the north.
Basic humanity to other
community members so I ask the
community members and
We support H. B. one twelve.
Has been to for.
Our.
It is deserve access to quality
health care.
Thank you.
Thank you Phoenix Haley your now
and it.
Hello my name is Phoenix Haley
I'm a health care worker at cost
of this a little bit and I'll
also be starting medical school
at the university of New Mexico
this summer the clinic that I
work at service that many
uninsured patients most of which
are immigrants as health care
workers we want to ensure the
highest quality of care to every
patient that we treat regardless
of their immigration immigration
status or ability to pay in
order to be able to do this we
need to support from our local
hospitals our community and our
legislators and this does not
discriminate against immigration
status and neither can we in
order to keep all New Mexicans
safe and healthy we need to take
care of all members in our
community I hope that you will
passed H. B. one twelve so that
patients can focus on their well
being and health care providers
can focus on providing the best
care possible.
Thank you Valerie Wilson you're
now unmuted.
Good morning my name is Valerie
Voss from SUNY Pueblo residing
in McKinley county I stand in
support of H. B. one twelve
because it's time to stop the
discrimination are at the level
of health care we all deserve
equitable health care we all
deserve to be respected as human
beings and I just hope that
our leaders you are leaders will
support this bill as well thank
you.
Thank you let's Lopez your now
admitted.
Thank you good morning madam
chair and committee thank you
for allowing me to share my
statement with you today
when Liz Lopez and I'm also case
managers from Catholic fellow
Health valley and I would just
like to point out that on a
regular basis I do see the
struggle of American from a lot
of our client patient in the
clinic
who do not have medical
insurance due to their immigrant
status
sometimes they're scared in our
team and do a procedure because
the cost thousands of dollars
and they have no way to.
Or you know a lot along with
COVID many have lost their jobs
they're not able to pay their
utility bills.
So right now it's just a very
difficult time and that is a
fact on their status.
just so that you know all the
trying to pay into their medical
debt which can be thousands of
dollars.
I'm so.
As a case manager enough to see
this every day.
I'm asking that you support H.
B. one.
one twenty can thank you.
Thank you Maria retentive you
are now and it.
One of the S..
Members of the committee the
number of not ever fun you
Senator but I would think that
car and economy and no and.
You have the four together at.
What three forces I wouldn't
that in Camilla someone on that
list to the left for you put it
simple.
Madam addresses and the program
up but it's just you.
I'm gonna be honest no sequel
planned let us.
The whole hello thank you Mr if
we open up a look agency of this
with.
Mr little medical the but I
also in the medical
field here.
Thank you all funds.
What is the program you know you
look at the others when we look
at it but I'm.
You know so you don't have on
the court.
Hey don't know yet opening up
thank
you no public comment just
dealing.
Thank the program you open up
for you as the program must
muscle up almost in the program
with them and so on because this
isn't this is something that I'm
not gonna vote for this but
I think that maybe go.
The more they could for them
with the minimal level.
What I'm gonna tell you and I
both not normal I must admit
I'm.
Thank.
Be there for you but I'm not
sure that those.
Amending.
Okay let's move on I didn't hear
back from the interpreter to get
an interpretation for for some
of us Kurt rigor you are now in
need.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is Kurt
rigor on the director of
Lutheran advocacy administrative
New Mexico through advocacy
ministry also speaks on behalf
of the New Mexico conference of
churches and ecumenical
organization made up both
economic tional bodies that
include Methodist Lutheran
Presbyterian Episcopalian
disciples of Christ United
church of Christ Mennonite.
Yes archdiocese of Santa Fe that
ISIS was crucis of the prices of
Gallup I'm here today to offer
support for H. B. one twelve we
to advocate for eight equitable
access to basic health care for
all in our communities we want
to see equal access and care
throughout our state madam chair
members the committee I urge
your support for H. B. one
twelve thank.
Thank you and I apologize for
the confusion I think when
someone speaks in Spanish of the
committee members click on the
globe then we can have that
interpret it for us so I
apologize for that I thought
something different so what
we'll move on to Diana.
Adam you're now and it.
She we went LCS.
My lowincome estados Unidos of
COVID day so again I do promote
the other side was fifty feet
god that neither the for what
together actually the one and
done you know Mexico yes so yeah
I keep but apple yes let them in
the late activate the OC decadal
medicine most work with they
said look hello hope will still
which is the best yes.
The Campos you're now and it.
Good morning members of the
committee my name was listed in
the compass I'm a policy
associate with gold futures and
local nonprofit formally known
as young women United.
As a member commended women semi
protected by daca of I've had my
own basic health care need some
rights to might before I see my
grandmother and my mother pro
having their health care
prolonged because of the money
Aegyptus for security member.
And I think that it's time that
we and the whole discrimination
on the basis of a social
security number and that we keep
all New Mexicans safe and
healthy regardless of their
immigration status we strongly
support H. B. one twelve and we
urge you to vote yes on H. B.
one call thank you.
Thank you Gaby Hernandez here
now and made it.
One is yes madam chair and
committee members my name is
Debbie at Mendez and I'm a
community organizer classes of
loot I'm here in support of H.
B. one twelve I'm a daca
recipient like many immigrant
families my mother did not have
access to any type of financial
support and we had to see care
it was up to us to figure out
how we would pay thousands of
dollars for one ER visit many
times Montgomery had to choose
between paying medical bills of
pain our utilities this has
happened before this continue to
happen during this pandemic
please support H. B. one twelve
because no one should have to
face discrimination when
accessing health care thank you.
Thank you.
Okay you are now and made it.
Madam chair members of the
committee.
The laws in the county.
The action was a member of the
New Mexico to get.
Well you know.
Mexico families I am support for
a while the COVID virus that in
many why should be with our
health care everyone deserves
affordable health care thank
you.
Thank you St Kilbride you are
now and muted.
You're just have ten million
you're an.
I apologize sorry about that
thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Samantha bride and I own a
small family business in New
Mexico called salute recruiting
services I'm here in support of
the house bill one twelve
because of the implications are
not just for our patients but
for health care providers to in
my business we recruit health
care professionals to work here
in New Mexico we also try to
keep them here because we have a
major shortage of nurses and
doctors in the state.
A lot of our recruitment is done
in Canada since there is such a
shortage all over the US and I
can tell you we get a lot of
questions about what what's the
weather like what's the crime
line what's the racism like and
then how do you treat your
patients it's a critical
question for health care
providers.
We are not going to be able to
recruit and keep health care
professionals here if we then
turn around and tell them that
they have to discriminate
against their patients based on
their immigration status also
given the fact that we do
recruit so many health care
professionals from other
countries it's a horrible
message to get them that oh we
don't treat all of our people
equally especially when they're
from another country.
Good doctors and nurses I can
tell you want to focus on their
patients they don't want to
worry about which patient has
what insurance if any especially
in a pandemic.
Thank you for your support of
this bill.
Thank you have Mr Rocco you are
now and made it.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is have yet Rolf on number
research and policy analyst with
New Mexico voices for children
and we endorse this bill not
only because we think it's the
right thing to do but also
because it is sound public
policy we're in the middle of a
pandemic none of us is safe and
healthy with some which are not
safe and healthy and each of us
is healthier when all of us are
healthier it is critically
important The New Mexico take
every action possible to
maximize health care coverage if
we want to open up our schools
if you want to get this pandemic
under control if you want our
kids and our families to be
healthy passing this legislation
is another essential part of
this public health effort.
We urge the members of the
committee to support this bill
thank you.
Thank you.
Margaret Christiansen your now
emitted.
Good morning madam chair and
committee members my name is
Margaret Christensen I'm a
family nurse practitioner at
casa de Saluda medical clinic in
Albuquerque Albuquerque's south
valley I'm here today in support
of H. B. one twelve of my
practice proximity seventy
percent of my patients are
undocumented and uninsured
there's been so many instances
in my time as a provider where
it had serious concerns about a
patient's health and they
refused to go to the emergency
room or to see a specialist for
a higher level of care because
of their fear of medical costs
many of these patients have gone
to the emergency room sometime
in the past and now years later
are still paying off that
medical debt and moving portions
of each paycheck towards
eliminating the debt these are
often New Mexicans are essential
workers working full time paying
taxes but not getting access to
all the financial and health
benefits available only because
of their immigration status we
should be looking out for the
health of all New Mexicans when
we did I budget and financial
assistance to search members of
our community they left having
to choose between their health
and their fear of medical debt
thank you for your consideration
of this bill.
Thank you Erin bolt your now and
it.
I thank you yes I'm I'm a
registered nurse I'm strongly in
favor of house bill one twenty
two to reduce the cost of health
care for those most in need.
As a nurse and in my previous
role as a community support
worker I've worked with many
uninsured and low income
patients to avoid getting health
care due to fear of incurring
insurmountable costs and only
seek treatment once a
recommendation is a medical
emergency I've also worked with
uninsured and low income
patients after they've already
incurred this crippling life
altering medical debt simply for
attempting to meet the
healthcare needs an accessible
medical care makes our patients
sicker and overburdened health
care workers like myself for
already struggling in the COVID
environment now is the time to
reinstate the pathway to federal
funds thank you for supporting
house bill one twenty two.
Thank you the gem aims
McLaughlin you are now and it.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Liam McLaughlin.
I live in twin lakes New Mexico
I am also a leader with forward
together action I support house
bill one twelve the COVID virus
does not discriminate neither
should our health care systems
thank you for listening to me
thank you.
Thank you Angelita Hey you are
now and it.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Anjali Taneja I am a family
physician and the executive
director of because of this
salute in the south valley of
Albuquerque where upwards of
seventy percent of our patients
are uninsured and we're taking
care of lots of essential
workers and their families right
now during this pandemic this
bill is a bill that I stand
strongly in favor of
it's a win win the New Mexico
legislature has a system for
counties in hospitals to use
local taxes to cover some of
costs for health care for
uninsured residents and we need
to lift off the burden from our
public hospitals and nonprofit
hospitals and make the cost of
care more equally distributed
for patients who need care the
most we can follow the examples
of Texas and California we've
done this before us to help
cover the costs of immigrants
without discrimination and so
that our public hospitals like
you and can support giving the
same kinds of discounts and
cared to immigrants as they are
able to to other low income
residents
so I stand strongly in favor of
this bill and feel like it's a
win win for everyone involved
thank you so much.
Thank you Ramona Reiner you are
now in need it.
You have to admit yourself.
Thank you.
We're ready.
When.
When isn't members meet them yes
minimalism on our building now
so but I'm with us hello so if
you go then as well and will
make you go even when I'm done
in all Mexico also noticing
going for let's be also clear
but alas chairman is the end
goal state thing one needs Brody
athlete these days I don't mind
going but I don't Madam some of
my listen to my body many here
don't have been Yankee but still
innocent the implement them
yelling this problem and I knew
so little medical medical been
literal bedroom member loan and
then having the chance to get
maison as the rest of COVID
those M. as leader levy them
this bill for a full year but
last year with him also
saying the campus is so very
much.
Yes.
Health care and I please urge
urgent support which will
involve thank you very much.
Thank you.
So where Landon you're now
emitted.
Good afternoon my name is local
committee members and chair just
one of the state that I'm pretty
much in favor H. B. one twelve
our system healthcare keep us so
healthy the COVID nineteen
crisis has shown that when
members of our community are
sick and untreated we all also
so pretty much I am support of
H. B. one twelve thank you.
Thank you Josi Mendoza your now
and made it.
You have ten million on your
and.
Okay we are going to move on to
the next Haley you're now and
made it.
Thank you.
Hi.
I'm so sorry my name's actually
did you see us hello madam chair
and members of the committee my
name is the Senate as Miami
clinic for coordinator Senator
look I am in support for bill H.
B. one twelve because as a
second generation immigrant at
the mass I have first hand
handedly experienced difference
and inaccessibility of care with
my and my grandmother
acknowledging racism exists in
healthcare is the first step but
I ask that you help me work
towards a more inclusive health
care system that works towards
bettering the social and racial
disparities in my community we
can defeat a pandemic in a
system where health is a
privilege so I strongly support
H. B. one twelve thank you very
time.
Thank you Jerry Billson your now
emitted.
Unlock it again now I'm sure
that also in from the pueblo of
Zuni and I ask for your support
of H. B. one twelve with this in
mind I think about some teachers
in my area and without them are
support our community would not
be supported in terms of
education education creates
happy communities and again
please support H. B. one twelve
because all people need
affordable health care thank
you.
Thank you.
We have Joe Seeman dense I
believe we heard from you but if
you have someone else I would
like to speak.
Thank you sure what madam and
members of the committee my name
is does the Mandall flat if you
to form for which is gather
action in the community health
workers if a what I learn and
the county what are coming with
because people are very real
thank you for medical attention
but are afraid to go into a
hospital for medical assistance
because they do not have medical
insurance specially today with
our thank you for calling ninety
some of these people even if
they survive the virus are still
experiencing more severe side
effects that are affecting their
overall health I ask you to
please support H. used one for
the two thank you.
Thank you and is there anyone
that would like to speak in
opposition.
Okay seeing then we're moving to
the committee.
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair just one
slight comment on this.
You know as a child former
county commissioner we dealt
with the our indigent program
and.
To my knowledge we did not worry
about immigration status of this
but I was surprised that are we
would be best but.
That being said if we need it we
need to but I would suggest and
I'm looking at the amendment and
contacts our version.
And so I don't have wind numbers
on the page but.
So deals with section two.
On page three of
this particular.
Mentzer context you.
All.
There's some a mandatory
language that says such care
shall be provided to all
citizens regardless of
immigration status if they meet
all.
Other qualifying criteria for
such care.
I am reading the sentence about
it with that sentence when I
first read it I go.
Could that be relatives as only
applying to noncitizens ram I
came I came around on that issue
and and I'm convinced it doesn't
mean what I initially thought it
map but that the gave me.
Some deposit maybe we can
better.
Craft this sentence so it
doesn't raise that the potential
issue so I would suggest to the
sponsor R. Representative
Martinez at.
After the word.
Persons so where it says.
The the first sentence so that
after the word persons put a
calm hour where the period goes
is presently.
I'm sorry.
Com including non citizens if
they meet all other qualifying
criteria for such care comma
regardless of immigration status
period.
And then delete the.
The
amended language from the health
committee
I I think that gets to the point
it doesn't raise any and they
are.
Issues of whether or not the
second sentence brand modifies
the first sentence and I think
it that the it may read real
better but it's I'm not going to
make the amendment less
representative wants to but I
just suggest you look at that
way which by the our clarified a
little bit.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you madam chair and and
Representative Nibert to I
appreciate.
The the words missing and I I
was looking through your email a
little bit earlier I would be.
honor to work with you should
this move billable forward
before we hit the floor to
towards with it a little bit
better I I I tend to agree with
you I'm I'm working with my
experts here and we're we're
trying to
reconciling but we I would love
to work with you before we hit
the floor and by the way your
county is one of the ones that
does not discriminate on the
basis of immigration so.
You know you all have to do the
right thing for a long time this
is needed to ensure the other
folks can can also do the same
thing.
R. thank you Madam chair
representative on and all across
the board if they saluted number
people are testified are on
their behalf they do a really
great job for for our community
for for all people in the
community and and I make it real
easy on our county commissioners
to our our deal with the
indigent program that we have
there and like I said I did
this this was not an issue that
I was surprised to see the
legislation that baby it was
dealt with differently and you
have some other counties with
the thank you for that but I too
will be happy to work.
The maybe clean up that language
little bit the representative
thank you madam chair.
Great thank you Representative
and and Representative Ely
you're next and then we have a
we have an amendment that always
do want to wait I was gonna make
the motion but I will wait do
you want move the amendment.
Representative Eli it's a
Representative to explain the
amendment and I will go ahead
and move its adoption okay I'm
sure yes thank you madam
madam chair and Representative
Eli
so the amendment those couple
things and if you give me one
second I will put up the
amendment
Hot it an extra period
And also.
AECOM give me a sec.
Madam chair representative is
this two one nine nine three
zero point one.
I'm sure yes Sir yes Sir and and
the the drafter also rewarded
section for a little bit didn't
change any of the meeting just I
think maybe the language a
little bit tighter than what
they had originally drafted up
I'll have Nicole last I think
walk us through it so that you
all understand it better.
Thank you madam chair
representative Ely so with
regard to the the period issue
in section three you can really
see the minutes in context
version in section three there
was it is Representative
Martinez said there were two
extra periods and so it was just
kind of clearing capability one
here and we're not going for
let's is here and then in
section four there was a missing
comma after the term financial
assistance and really though
that was necessary to make sure
that
The the entire sentence just
made sense in that financial
assistance wasn't connected to
everything else beyond that and
then as Representative Martinez
said this was also tightening up
the language in section four.
Okay.
Up Madam chair representative
thank you for that all move
adoption of yes up to one nine
nine three zero point one
although the caption of the
amendment.
Thank.
Great okay thank you we have a
motion to adopt the amendment
and I will second that is there
further discussion on the
amendment.
Is there any objection to
adopting the amendment.
Seeing and hearing none we have
adopted that amendment.
Make sure Representative Bob let
me move house bill one twelve as
amended do now pass for new
path.
Thank you and I will second that
we have a motion to adopt House
Bill one twelve as amended.
Is there any objection to the
day passed motion.
Seeing none are you have a do
past Representative showing all
members present voting in the
affirmative.
Thank you madam chair I
appreciate the committee and
Representative Nibert del I'll
be reaching out to see if we can
work on that before with the
floor thank you.
Great thank you.
So now we are moving on to our
last bill for today it is house
bill one fifty two.
And Representative right at us
You are now promoted to a
panelist.
And do you have any experts that
will be doing in.
Yes madam chair hello my expert
is our doctor Roger justice and
I believe he's in the the
attendees thank you okay great
we have them on so please begin
when you're ready.
Thank you madam chair and
members of this find committee.
This bill house bill one fifty
two has been introduced to
update outdated provisions of
the New Mexico chiropractic
physicians act.
And to provide greater
flexibility for doctors of
chiropractic to travel between
states and care for patients.
This is accomplished by allowing
temporary licensure of.
So doctors of chiropractic who
for reasons beyond their control
are temporarily unable to
practice in their home state and
wish to temporarily provide
services in New Mexico and vice
versa.
It also allows those out of
state doctors of chiropractic to
come to New Mexico and
temporarily care for the
patients of a native
chiropractic physician who is
ill or injured and unable to
care for his or her existing
patients the bill also
modernizes some statutory
provisions related to the New
Mexico board of chiropractic
examiners.
This time madam chair I would
like to introduce my my expert
who has wicked cool name Dr
brought justice to just kind of
talk a little bit more about the
the bill thank you.
Welcome.
Madam chair of members of the
committee
we put house bill one fifty two
up for consideration or to
correct some long term standing
longstanding issues that have
been going on and and are
statute our legislative chair
was a member of the New Mexico
carburetted licensing board from
two thousand twelve to two
thousand nineteen the last three
years wish to serve as board
chair much of what we're
addressing this bill our issue
she became aware of all on the
board we have consulted the
board on our bill and the
amendments we'd like to make and
as well as the other state
association in New Mexico.
There's two of us so.
I'd be happy to answer any
questions you have thank you.
Great thank you Representative
Are you ready for comments or do
you have more folks that you
like to speak.
I think I'm sorry thank you
madam chair I believe that that
that that's everybody I do have
an amendment and I don't know if
this is the appropriate time to
want to bring about a.
Is it going to affect public
comment.
No madam chair I don't believe
so okay let's go ahead and
proceed with the pole and then
we'll go to public comment and
then we'll deal with the
amendment.
Thank you.
So if you are in attendance and
you would like to vote to the
poll is open and will keep it
open for another ten seconds.
Okay we are closing the pool and
we have three that voted in
favor and zero against so let's
if you'd like to speak please
raise your hand and.
We will call on you.
Maria Gerber.
You are now and made it.
Right you have to and then on
your end.
And I believe Maria might be the
one that's experiencing
technical difficulties.
So terrorising your now I
needed.
R. this is to register lobbyist
for the alliance of the New
Mexico chiropractors we
appreciate the sponsor for
caring this bill and we would
greatly appreciate the committee
support in moving this bill
forward thank you very much.
Thank you.
Is there anyone that would like
to speak in opposition.
Okay we will move along to the
committee and let's move your
amendment for discussion
purposes representative will you
explain the amendment.
Yes madam chair the the
amendment number two to number
is two one nine seven eight one
point one and I would like to
turn it over to Dr rod justice
to explain the amendment to the
to the committee.
You madam chair members the
committee I'm gonna go down the
that I've got I changes that we
wanted to make to the bill
they're all basically
clarifying language just making
sure that the intent was clear
on page two line nine we would
like to strike the words or
less.
On page two line sixteen after
the period we want to insert
board member shall be limited to
two full consecutive terms with
one full term after a three year
hiatus.
On page seven line eighteen
after license we want to insert
to practice in the state.
On page seven line twenty one
after declared would like to
answer or in this state if the
governor has declared a natural
or man made disaster.
On page twelve line twelve after
a insert stayed for.
Thank you Representative Eli on
the.
Yeah madam chair although that
option the amendment.
Okay we have a motion to adopt
the amendments I was second is
there a discussion on the
amendment Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair
couple points.
The.
Site
amendment why don't thanks to a
lot of sixteen there are.
The expert maybe explain.
That.
Asian that a little more detail.
Two terms but then you have a.
Three year hiatus.
License verification all.
Mr justice Madam chair
representative Nibert yes
are thought behind that process
was
it we didn't want people to be
analyzed for having served a
partial term.
we've had members of the board
on the board
some of them fifteen twenty
years and I wanted to break that
up a little bit but we also
didn't want to lose that that
expertise over a period of time
so if they needed the tape we
wanted if they need to take a
break we wanted to have be able
to serve a full term
after a three year break.
And you're comfortable that that
does what you.
Thank you does.
Yes.
Four to four consecutive terms
with one full term after a three
year high.
All right I don't.
That's why which I'm not
generally familiar with but.
I guess if you're happy with the
I'm
sure there are and then they
are.
Thanks seven line twenty one.
This seems to be a constant
state because we're in this
pandemic.
Where did I would just about
the.
This languages brought sometimes
after work then maybe disasters
are very limited in scope and
they occur every year.
And.
I'm not sure you officer results
so what you're trying.
But to get to see if we have a
very limited.
Natural disaster
You know you.
If the governor or the president
declares a disaster and it only
affects.
A small portion of New Mexico.
Again we we have that same issue
pop about because we put this
language at.
This presupposes a statewide
order and most disasters are
very very limited in scope and
yeah
you're basically saying
percent of the rules a temporary
license without examination
shall be granted our.
You know if if you are have that
disaster.
I just encourage you to look at
that and and see if you need to
limit the scope we've got a that
and other legislation even this
morning
and I just suggested to look at
it and if you have a limited
disaster should you limit the
scope of what you're trying to
do here that's Pilar Thomas
madam chair thank you.
Thank you Representative is
there further discussion on the
amendment.
Is there any objection to
adopting the amendments.
Okay let's go ahead and take
over the role on that.
Representative Chasey.
Yes to adopting the amendment.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Gallegos yes.
Representative my part at no to
the event.
Representative Ortez yes.
Representative Rehm now.
Representative some Ana no.
Madam vice chair Johnson.
Yes.
Madam chair yes.
Madam chair with that we have
six in the affirmative and three
in the negative thank you so we
have adopted those amendments
Representative Eli.
Madam chair I actually you know
Representative I had a question
for the experts is she in any
way related to Anthony most
Justice which is how he
advertised himself I was just
curious I'm just kidding madam
chair I will make the motion for
do pass on house bill one fifty
two is amended.
Thank have a motion for a do
pass by Representative Eli and a
second by Representative guy
Ecosse
Should we call the roll is there
going to be a objection.
Okay so if there is no objection
we will.
Have those members that are
present voting in the
affirmative and representative
but as you have a do pass.
Thank you so much madam chair
members of the committee this
was my my second committee so
this this bad boy is going to
the floor.
Thank you for.
may I make a comment.
Yes Representative Nibert madam
chair I I would encourage the
Representative to
Look at the language and and see
if they need to tweak that a
little bit as goes the for like
this so.
All all have some questions
there I'm sure and the you may
wanna
consider some some more tweaking
of the language to to address
those two concerns thank you.
And madam chair one thing great
thank you Representative Eli
yeah she might want to get her
singing voice ready to go.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representative Ely so again you
you'll have maybe second
thoughts about getting it moving
again.
Well let's go back let's go.
Representative Nibert I just
want to say that I really
appreciate that feedback the the
heads up on that and I will
definitely be looking into that
for they're not appreciate it
thank you.
Great thank you thank you
committee members and thanks to
the public for it joining us
today with that we will adjourn.
