Transparency in the use of
artificial intelligence and this
topic obviously relates very
much to the topic we had
mid-morning from some of the
state legislators who have been
working on this. We know one of
them said 5 years, which is
amazing. Um, so we're, we're,
there's a catch up we're
involved in here. So, um, I'll
turn the floor over to our two
presenters if you'd introduce
yourselves, I'd really
appreciate it.
Madam Chair, members, I'm Alisa
Lauer. I'm chief of staff for
House Majority Leader Gail
Chasey, who's also a member of
this committee. Thank you.
Madam Chair, my name is Chris
Moore. I'm a professor at the
Santa Fe Institute speaking here
as a computer scientist.
The floor is yours and whichever
way you wanna go first, that'd
be great.
Well, Madam Chair,
Representatives, senators, thank
you very much for this
opportunity, as Speaker Martinez
said this morning, this is a
very hardworking committee, and
I appreciate it. Um, some of you
have seen parts of this before,
for instance, in the last
session, uh, I promise there's
some new material.
So, uh, my slides are identical
to the handouts, so whichever is
more convenient for you. Here
are some of my colleagues.
In this thing called the
Interdisciplinary Working Group
on Algorithmic Justice. These
are not just computer
scientists, but a political
scientists, legal scholars, even
psychologists.
At the Santa Fe Institute, the
University of New Mexico and
other institutions around the
country.
So I think we're here because AI
is being used all over the
economy and by by government, by
private corporations to make
decisions that have long-term
effects on people's lives, their
opportunities, their
livelihoods, uh, in a lot of the
bills that got discussed this
morning. These go by the name of
consequential decisions, and
this includes employment through
automated hiring, health care,
education, giving you access to
social services.
Doing fraud detection in
housing, we have, you know,
credit lending, tenant screening
was mentioned this morning.
Where you, where you end up on a
public housing waiting list, and
of course in criminal justice,
not just pre-trial supervision
but also sentencing and parole
and predictive policing. So in
all of these cases, uh, AI does
have potential, I think, to make
our decisions better and even
fairer and even more transparent
and it's
Its proponents say, hey, it's
evidence based, it's objective,
uh, it avoids stereotypes.
Psychologists tell us we have
all sorts of biases. It can
hopefully help us overcome
those.
Um, on the other hand, it's a
lot of people express concerns.
It's based on historical data.
Uh, I think it was mentioned
this morning that for instance
Amazon looked at the fact that
most of their successful
employees are men. The AI ran
with that and said, oh well,
presumably you want to not hire
women so much. That's the kind
of thing that AI will do, not
with any ill intent, but simply
because it looks at the data and
assumes that future patterns
will be continued.
Sorry, past patterns will be
continued into the future. Um,
of course, I treats people as
statistics in some sense. They
don't look at the individual
facts about a person, the way
that a human decision maker
might. And uh what I'm focusing
on today also is that many AI
systems are what we call black
boxes. In other words, you don't
get to see how or why they
produce the output they do. They
just say something like this
person is low risk or this
person is high risk.
Or whatever, and it's not clear
how they came up with that.
So, I think the question for us
as this gets rolled out very
aggressively across the country
is what do we as citizens, what
do you as policymakers need to
know about these systems, um,
you know, my perspective is AI
is a great tool, but like any
other tool, we need to figure
out when and where it's the
right tool for the job.
So some of the questions that I
would have, like, suppose you
asked me to evaluate an AI
system or suppose a cabinet
secretary asked me to evaluate
an AI system to see whether it
should be used or not. I would
want to know what data does it
use about an applicant or a
defendant? Where does this data
come from? And this also
overlaps with the privacy issues
that we heard about this
morning. What does the AI do
with this data to come up with a
score or recommendation? Do the
people
affected by it and the decision
makers advised by it, the
caseworker or the judge, do they
understand some of the logic
behind it? Do they know what
kinds of errors it can make and
can somebody like me or somebody
in government or somebody
anywhere, make an independent
assessment of its accuracy and
its fairness, or do we just have
to take the vendor's word for it
that yeah, it works great, you
should, you should pay for it.
So I'm going to go through a
couple of examples, most from
government uses of AI, but
these, there's also private
sector uses, and I know some of
you have seen these before. Some
of them are hot button issues. I
want to make it absolutely clear
I am not advocating for or
against the use of these
systems. What matters to me is
that they be above board and
open so that we can all have a
good discussion and figure out
whether they should be used or
not.
So the first one, and this is in
your, again, this is in your uh
the handout pretrial
supervision. So I know a lot of
you have looked at this a lot in
the legislative sessions. This
is the so-called public safety
assessment. It is no longer
being used for the basic
decision to detain or release uh
a defendant, but it is being
used to recommend levels of
supervision. It is a well
studied system. It has been
validated on the national level,
and it's been, as we say,
Validated here in New Mexico
several times uh using our, our
on our local population.
And you might think, hey, this
isn't an AI. I mean, it's right
there. The whole thing is there
up on the screen or on the page.
It's just a simple point system.
You get a certain number of
points for each prior conviction
or each prior conviction for a
violent offense and so on. And
then those points are added up
and that gives you some kind of
risk score.
So again, you might not think of
this as an AI, but it was
generated. It was constructed
with AI techniques that look at
a big data set, what we call the
training data of defendants from
the past, or from jurisdictions
all over the country and based
on that, it tries to figure out,
well which things should it care
about and how many points should
it give you for each of those
things? How much points toward
your risk score should each
prior conviction give, for
instance.
Um,
But
I'm not saying you should use it
or not use it. I'm saying it's
transparent so you can look at
it, you can see exactly how your
score is created if you're a
defendant or if you're a defense
attorney or a prosecutor.
And because it's there, you can
have conversations about it. You
can have an informed discussion.
For instance, it uses past
convictions, but it doesn't use
past rests.
And you can argue with that, you
know, you could, you could say,
hey, why doesn't use past
arrests? because we know that
not all arrests lead to
convictions. Well, that's a
defensible point of view, then
you could look at the statistics
and figure out whether using a
rest would make it more accurate
or not.
All right, 2, prison
classification. You heard a
little bit from the LFC
yesterday about how the
corrections department.
Has been trying to use a
validated classification tool.
So this is after your conviction
and you're going to level 123 or
4 of supervision in the state
prison system.
And as the LFC said yesterday,
there seems to be kind of a
disconnect between the system
that was originally built in
2003 and the corrections
department. So in particular,
the corrections department has
been overriding about half, 40%,
47% of the initial
recommendations from that system
of which level an inmate should
go to. So, um, at their request
they asked my colleagues at UNM
and I helped out.
To validate this 2003 system.
It is also a simple point system
and we found some interesting
things. We found, for instance,
that recent misconduct, for
instance, recent infractions
against guards for fellow
inmates are much, much more
predictive of your future
behavior than infractions that
took place years ago, as I
understand it, people do tend to
calm down. They do tend to age
out of some of those behaviors
and so we were able to help them
update this tool, change some
of.
The the weights and also reduce
the look back history for
relevant infractions to uh in
this case 5 years, and they
adopted our recommendations. So
again,
I'm not saying this is great.
I'm not saying it's awful. What
I'm saying is it's transparent.
We were able to do an
independent study of how well it
works. We were able to suggest
improvements which the
department found useful.
Next is predictive policing. I
think this has not been such a
big issue in New Mexico, but
it's certainly been something
used all across the country. Um,
I'm not an expert on whether APD
is considering using these
tools. Um, there are two basic
kinds of predictive policing.
One is something that human
criminologists have been doing
for decades long before
computers came along, which is
to try to find hot spots, places
and times where crime is more
likely, and then maybe you can
deploy your officers there in
the hopes that you might.
Prevent some of those crimes. A
more controversial method of
predictive policing is to use
people's social networks, who
they hang out with, known gang
affiliations, who they've been
arrested with, and so on and to
try to guess that certain people
are likely to either commit or
be a victim of a crime.
As you can imagine, that's more
controversial. Civil
libertarians are very concerned
about it. It's something that
Chicago has tried and then
backed off on a couple of times,
um, now I want to be clear here,
when I say I'd like this sort of
thing to be transparent, I don't
mean have a website that tells
criminals where the patrol cars
are, right? That's not what I
mean. What I do mean though is I
think it would be good for a
police chief considering
spending some of their budget on
these systems to understand the
logic behind them and
to have some independent advice
about how well they work.
Number 4, another hot button
issue. Child welfare and
protective services.
So in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania,
uh, they have a hotline where
people can call in concerns
about abuse or neglect.
And like a lot of places, their
child protective services
department, you know, has
limited resources. So if
somebody calls in alleging
abuse, they automatically
initiated an investigation. If
it's a lesser call about
neglect, well, they use an AI
system, an algorithm which they
developed in house with the help
of the local university that
tries to figure out whether
that's a high priority call or a
low priority call. And this
information is given to the
person.
Receives that call who then
makes a final decision to start
an investigation or not.
Um, this is a fascinating
system. Uh, I actually know some
of the people who developed it.
Again, they have the best of
intentions.
Um, it uses prior allegations
from that address. It uses
questions like, has anyone at
that address used the county
funded uh drug or alcohol
treatment services or mental or
mental health services.
Um, have there been jail
bookings from people at that
address? So again, very
controversial, um, one point
about this, you should realize
right away is that, you know, I,
for instance, am lucky enough to
be able to afford if I need them
private mental health.
Services. So then Santa Fe
County or whoever wouldn't even
know that I'd availed myself of
that. So this is a kind of
information that is more likely
to be known of low income
families and upper income
families.
Nevertheless, in Pittsburgh,
they really feel this helps them
focus their limited resources on
the children and families who
need it most. On the other hand,
the state of Oregon considered
this and rejected it. Both
points of view are legitimate,
but the good thing is it's
transparent. We know what
factors it uses about the family
and so you can have a democratic
discussion about them.
All right, 2 more examples, then
I'll wrap up. Fraud detection.
So in the midst of COVID, of
course, tons of people were
filing unemployment claims, and
in the state of Michigan, they
used an AI to try to tell when
people were filing fraudulent
claims.
This AI apparently was first of
all a black box, so they didn't
know how it worked. And second
of all, it was pretty bad. So it
turns out that it falsely
charged tens of thousands of
people across the state, um,
with fraud requiring, you know,
repayment and fines, as you can
imagine, if you're desperately
looking for a job and trying to
provide for your family, even
just navigating how you would
contest these fines is extremely
difficult.
And so it turned out that 90% of
its fraud charges had been
erroneous. Um, and this is still
being worked out, so this is a
great example of a government
that adopted and rolled out uh
an AI system clearly without
enough scrutiny. Finally, and
this was mentioned briefly today
as well, um, tenant screening,
it's really hard for uh young
people and lots of families to
find rental housing, including
in my town, Santa Fe, and so,
you know.
Landlords will often use an AI.
I think we heard this morning,
6, 60 to 80% of landlords
contract with some service which
will do a background check and
tell them, are you going to be a
good tenant or not?
So if this system says no, and
there are 6 other applicants for
the same apartment, you're out
of luck.
And now the landlord might not
know why the system says no.
And the landlord isn't intending
to discriminate against you or
anything like that. So, but you
could, this could still have a
discriminatory effect. And
there's a lot of data floating
out there, including not very
accurate data, such as eviction
records that might not actually
be you, it might be somebody
with a similar name. There could
be criminal charges that were
dropped and so on. And yet these
databases get passed from data
broker to data broker sold from
by one person to another.
Then used in ways that you might
not even know are being used
against you.
So, um, I'm not here to trash
talk AI. I think that it is a
useful tool. I just want us to
keep it in its place as a tool
and to understand it and so that
we can make informed decisions
about when it is appropriate and
when it is not, when it should
be overridden and when it should
be followed and so on.
So I want the people affected by
them and the decision makers
advised by them to understand
something about how they work
and understand their strengths
and weaknesses. I would like
them to be regularly and
independently assessed for
accuracy and fairness, and to do
this we need transparency. So,
finishing up last.
Last page.
So um recently a uh an academic
and industry group called the
Computing Community Consortium
came out with a uh in response
to the National Institute of
Justice this nice phrase where
constitutional rights are
involved, transparency is
paramount. So what are some of
the types of transparency that
you might pursue in a bill.
These are the so-called Lego
blocks that you might build a
bit you might build a bill out
of.
Maybe the least is simple
notice, just alerting people
that an AI is being used to make
a decision about them. That
seems like the least you could
ask. Another level is letting
people challenge the information
that is being used about them.
So as one of the, one of your
fellow state legislators of the
gentleman from Minnesota said
this morning, this is a little
bit like the Federal Fair Credit
Reporting Act.
So if you notice your credit
rating went down, you can
download for free the
information that went into
calculating your credit rating.
It's actually not that hard,
surprisingly, to get this. Now,
you don't get to find out how
the credit agency calculated
your score. That's proprietary.
But you do get to see if they
say, hey, you missed a payment
or something. And then if you
didn't, you can contest that and
get it fixed. So it's a partial
transparency. You know what data
is going in, even though it's
what it's going into is still a
black box.
Another level um is
self-assessment. So require the
developers of AI, the people
designing it, the companies that
are making it to assess their
own products for bias and to
perform due diligence to to
avoid it. This is kind of like
asking a manufacturer to do an
impact statement of their
product.
Um, so it's, it's
self-assessment, uh, and you
know.
Well, I'll move on.
There's also local studies, so
you know, New Mexico has unique
demographics when I was working
with my colleagues at UNM, uh,
our study of the PSA was the
first one that involved a
significant Native American and
Hispanic population, for
instance, and an AI which was
developed using data from other
times and places might not work
very well here. So it's
important to do these local
studies and to do them
periodically. What I would like
most
As you can tell, is independent
assessments, not taking the
vendor's word for it, but really
having independent third
parties, whether they're
academics, people, you know,
contractors, whatever, who are
not beholden to the vendor and
can look at the AI and give you
objective advice about whether
it's accurate and fair. Um, and
finally, where government uses
are concerned, if you're going
to make a decision about me,
which is going to affect my
life.
my constitutional rights, I
would really like to know.
How that decision is being made.
I think that's a basic
foundation of government in a
democratic society. How did you
come up with that decision? What
information about me did you use
and what did you do with that
information to produce an
output.
That affected me.
Thank you very much.
Is your mic on?
And you speak softly generally,
at least, so.
OK, Madam Chair, members, I'm
going to give you an overview of
a couple pieces of legislation
that deal with artificial
intelligence in different ways
and have generally different
goals, um, the first is HB 184.
The government use of artificial
intelligence Act, which was
sponsored by Madam Chair, Madam
Leader, and Representative
Sarana and Serato in the last
session, um, you likely heard,
um, this bill and
Previous hearings so it's just
this is kind of a refresher. Um,
the concept for this legislation
grew out of this committee's
hearings last year when the
committee was interested in, um,
how the state was using AI,
whether it was using AI to what
extent, um, and, uh, so this is
just a basic bare bones piece of
legislation to just try to, um,
Find out how the state's using
artificial intelligence. So HB
184 would create the government
use of artificial intelligence,
Transparency Act, which does
basically 3 things. Um, the
first is to, uh, require each
state agency to um create
inventories of how of the uh
agencies' use of artificial
intelligence tools and report
that to the Department of
Information Technology or do it.
The second is to require do it
to create an annual inventory of
those uses and report that
annually to all of you and to
the governor, um, um, and the,
uh, interim committee on science
and technology.
Um,
and the 3rd.
Um, is to actually, this is,
yeah, the 3rd is to require do
it to annually assess artificial
intelligence for sources and
types of data used, used, so
that's kind of what professor
Moore was talking about like
where is this data coming from?
Is it, um, data that could
possibly be historically biased,
um, also to assess the accuracy
of the data? Is it, is it
correct? Is it, um, including
data about people that's
Wrong, um, and then bias, which
is defined later in the present.
And actually does 4 things. The
fourth is to change the
procurement code so that, excuse
me,
so that vendors who contract
with the state to sell services
or, um, tools that use
artificial intelligence have to
disclose enough information so
that Dot can assess that
information for the, for the 3,
areas.
So
HP 184 is just a transparency
bill for use in government or
used by government agencies.
Colorado's SP 24, 205 is the
Colorado, um, artificial
intelligence Act that was passed
in the last session but doesn't
go into effect until, uh, 2026.
And it's been recognized as the
first comprehensive artificial
intelligence legislation in the
United States.
Um, it creates duties for
developers and deployers. So
whether they're in the private
sector or the public sector, um,
they're to assess for known and
uh or reasonably foreseeable
risks of algorithmic
discrimination arising from the
intended and contracted uses of
artificial intelligence.
And it's considered
comprehensive because it
incorporates both, um, private,
the private and public sector.
Um, that bill, uh no.
Um, statute defines developer as
anyone who, um,
Develops or intentionally and
substantially modifies an
artificial intelligence system.
Um, the deployer means anyone
that uses it or puts it out into
the public.
Um, developers have to disclose
known or reasonably foreseeable
risks of algorithmic
discrimination arising from the
intended uses, um, to the
Colorado attorney General and to
all known deployers of the, um,
system.
If the developer discovers that
the system has been deployed.
Um, and it's caused or is
reasonably likely to cause
algorithmic discrimination or
the developer receives
information from a deployer that
the system has caused
algorithmic discrimination.
Uh, do players have to conduct
annual assessment, uh, impact
assessments, which is what Dr.
Moore was talking about and
notified the Attorney general,
um, uh, for any high risk AI
system deployed that's caused
algorithmic discrimination. Both
of those duties, they have to
meet within 90 days.
Uh, the the attorney General has
the only enforcement power, um,
to address violations of the
Act.
They're violations are
considered um violations of
Colorado's unfair Practices Act,
Trade Practices Act, um, and
penalties are limited to fines
and injunctive relief.
As the legislators were talking
about this morning, there's no
private right of action, and
that's for.
The political realities of
getting this legislation passed.
Um, there's a regrettable
presumption if a developer
deployer deployer has complied
with all of the, um, acts
substantive obligations, um, and
that rebuttable presumption is
that they took reasonable care
to avoid discriminate
discriminatory decisions, um,
via a high risk AI system.
Um, Colorado's legislation has
been criticized, um, for the
loopholes that um companies may
be able to avoid its
requirements, um, which is
something we need to look at
with every piece of legislation,
um, they've also been criticized
for enforce the enforcement
provisions not being strong
enough, um, and that the, uh,
law relies too heavily on
self-ass assessment or
self-reporting.
By the entities that um don't
necessarily, uh, have incentive
to do that work. Um, but again,
the rebuttable presumption
incentivizes, um.
Doing the self-assessment, um,
and disclosures. So these
companies likely don't have any
intent to create any
discriminatory actions or
biases, um, but they may not,
um, on their own have the
incentive to do the assessments
that would avoid the
discrimination. So what the act
does is creates those
incentives.
And the legislation, despite
those critiques has generally
been endorsed and, um, applauded
by um, advocate groups like
Consumer Reports.
Um, there, although the bills do
different things, there's, um,
shared concepts, although they
might be defined differently in
New Mexico, um, bill
has a more detailed technical
definition of artificial
intelligence, um, Colorado
incorporates its definition of
all artificial intelligence into
its definition of artificial
intelligence systems.
Um, you can see the.
Different technical um
definitions, um, Colorado's is.
Um, succinct and that it looks
at systems that generate outputs
based on data that was um input
and uh,
Makes determinations based on
inferences. Colorado's
regulation is primarily focused
on high risk artificial
intelligence systems, um, and
that focuses on consequential
decision making, which is what
Doctor Moore and the legislators
this morning were talking about,
um, so those decisions that
affect people's lives.
And it excludes it specifically
excludes um things like
Um,
spreadsheets and common uses of
um technology that might
incorporate some degree of
artificial intelligence.
Yeah, drafting emails is Dr.
Moore pointed out, um.
The two states define
consequential decisions
differently, um, New Mexico is a
more general definition of
consequential decisions. So the
denial eligibility provision
withholding or of or access to
government benefits, Colorado
delineates expressly the
different, um, areas that, uh,
it, uh, incorporates in the
definition of consequential
decision.
New Mexico's bill looks at bias,
um, and so, uh, our bill
references and refers to the
Human Rights Act, so, um,
It's, it parallels that and
doesn't try to create new
definitions.
Colorado looks at algorithmic
discrimination and um looks at
specific areas of life, um,
that.
are incorporated into that
decision.
Um, so basically the difference
is our HB 184 is just a simple
transparency in government use
bills. It has no enforcement
mechanism, um, specific to the
act, although other state laws
could be used arguably to um
Use the information. And
Colorado's, um, bill is a
comprehensive, um, piece of
legislation that creates a legal
framework to avoid, um, or
address discrimination, um, and
the uses of artificial
intelligence.
By both private and government
actors.
Thank you.
Uh
Thank you. Does that conclude
your presentation? my
presentation. Very cool.
Anything else you wanna add
before we move to questions?
OK.
Questions, comments, members.
Um, Representative Chasey,
Senator Ceda Lopez, um, Luhan,
OK. Anyone else?
OK, um, send, uh, Representative
Chasey.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you very much, um, I, I just
want to thank Alisa for all of
her work and, and for those of
you who aren't quite sure how
you would use your staff, um let
me just say.
You know,
I'm very part-time, but Elisa
has a full-time job. And so she
went and joined that interstate
working group of other
legislators that I didn't have
time to do. And that's where we
got this.
Beginning here and I really
appreciate it and I, I sort of
feel like I know something more
than I did, but certainly not as
much as she does now. And Chris,
um, all of the folks who from
the Santa Fe Institute who have
presented to this committee and
Health and Human Services. We
really appreciate it.
Um, I learned a lot this morning
from listening to the other
states and it, it seems like,
um,
We got some good tips. I don't
know, you know, where, where we
go from here. Um, Representative
Saana used to serve on this
committee, but now she's on the
LSC and, um, so she misses this
committee, but nonetheless, she,
they've got her busy doing that.
So, um, as chair of the Science
and Technology interim
committee. I know she's very
interested in continuing her
work here representing um
An Nou was on one of the bills
and then, uh, Senator Dewing.
We were on the AI election bill,
which we did get passed.
And um it was just the very
first uh foray there and we
didn't have to worry about
whether we were violating well,
clearly we were not violating
the First Amendment because all
we were asking people to do is
if you use AI disclose it.
If you're using it in a
political advertising. So, um,
this is a good start, but I was
really, um.
Intrigued with some of the um
techniques that I can't remember
if it was a senator or a
representative from Minnesota
did where he included that
section that
Made it unnecessary to pass an
entire bill.
He just included one paragraph,
and what can you, um, can we,
can we do that here or is, is
this the right vehicle?
Madam Chair, Leader Chasey,
members, um, I think, um, Doctor
Moore will have a, a view of
that, that both are necessary,
both could be incorporated and
combined into one. in some ways,
there's overlap and um
be combined to serve a similar
purpose in some ways, um, a
separate, at least a separate
section would be, um,
Recommended in my humble
opinion, um, to address the
transparency in government, um,
and I'll let Doctor Moore.
Adress the rest of that.
Madam Leader Shey the as I
understood it, the gentleman
from Minnesota was talking about
that and he mentioned the FCRA,
the Fair Credit Reporting Act.
So I, I think that is a good
Lego brick again, make sure that
if information about you is
being put into an AI like in in
your analogous to the federal
law about the credit score, you
should make sure that that
information about you is true.
Um, for instance, was it really
you who was evicted, um, and by
the way, was
Is it your fault.
Um,
but the, uh, I think there are
some other aspects that I would
some other Lego bricks that I
would certainly like to see
included as well, especially for
government uses of AI, I think
that we in the society should be
in the driver's seat and should
really understand something
about how the, how the AI works.
In other words, it shouldn't be
a black box. So not only do we
need to make sure that the data
going into it is good, we need
some understanding of what it's
doing with that data.
And the logic behind its
results, its recommendations,
its decisions.
Uh, thank you very much. Um,
there was actually a gentleman
here this morning and he did
leave at lunchtime. And, um,
He works for Microsoft. So he's
kind of keeping his um eyes and
ears on what we're doing here.
And uh he knows very well one of
our House Judiciary analysts,
um, Victoria.
Um,
Garcia and uh because he, he, he
has worked with her and she's a,
she's a technology wizard, but,
um, I, I thought it was really
um smart to get the industry
buy-in.
And take your time and get that
so that you don't end up with um
that kind of a barrier to
passage. That's all, Madam Char.
Thank you very much. I really
appreciate all the work of you
and your colleagues, Chris, and,
and thank you, Elisa.
Thank you, Representative
Senator Cedilia Lopez.
Thank you. um, thank you for the
presentation. It was really
helpful. Um,
I looking at the bills this
morning and looking at the
transparency bill, I mean, the
transparency bill I think was a
really good start.
It's it's limited to government
and just what government does
with it, but government also
many, many times has contracts
with private industry. Does the
bill address that, um, because
You know, I think that's really
important.
Madam Chair, Senator Sio Lopez,
uh, it does through the
procurement process, uh, as far
as, uh, companies that are
contracting the state with the
state or want to contract with
the state have to make certain
disclosures about the product,
uh, sufficient to allow it to
evaluate the product and, uh,
for bias and accuracy and um
Uh,
Effectiveness. So then, uh,
Madam Chair, what is the
consequence if they don't? That,
that always concerns me. How do
you enforce these things?
Madam Chair, Senator, uh, this
was just an opening, um, kind of
baseline piece of legislation.
It was a 30 day session and so
just given the realities of that
and trying to um get some kind
of um start with artificial
intelligence was just our
intent. So there is no
enforcement mechanism in the in
the Transparency Act, because,
for example, if you have um and
the reason I ask is.
Was there a provision that a
company that doesn't do it is
not going to be eligible for the
contract, or was it just another
sort of suggestion we suggest
you disclose this, but we might
pick you anyway.
Madam Chair, Senator, it would
be a requirement in order to,
um, qualify for the uh for the
contract for the procurement
process. I, um, I think that
that was a really good start,
but my hope would be that you
pick up some of the Lego pieces
from this morning and also
consider applying it to private
um
To private businesses like those
businesses, employment
businesses, um, or people,
businesses are going to employ
people, um, rental housing, um,
all of those background checks
that people do because it can be
devastating, and that provision
that you described, or that was
described by a representative
Steve Elkins about making sure
that you, that everybody has the
opportunity to to correct the
information that goes into it.
At any stage, because that I
think is the crucial problem
with AI is, as I said, garbage
in garbage out.
And so you need to, I, I would
like to see that in the future
version of the bill, that
provision that that he had in
his bill. I thought that was
probably one of the stronger
things, and I would love to see
it expand to all of all of us
who are going to be affected,
especially the disclosure thing.
Um, and then I really liked what
you said about, um, you know,
making the analogy to other
decision making tools that are
used in the system whether it's
a human using the tool or
whether it's a
using an algorithm. Transparency
is really important, so people
know what they, what they're
being evaluated on. Um, but I, I
liked this. I really liked this
presentation and I'm glad that
we're moving forward on it
because we do need to protect
the public from this. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator.
Representative Lujan.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair.
Great conversation. I'm glad
we're having it in this
committee too, um, just on the
legal basis of of what we're
gonna, how we're going to meet
the challenges of AI, um, and it
just, it reminds me, Madam
Chair, back in under the the
previous um um executive
administration when we were, uh,
giving school grades and we
were, we were, um, grading our
teachers and all this stuff and
there was an algorithm that they
created. It was all human input.
So it's all about the variables
and dependent upon
And this variables or the
outcomes you've got and the
measures you created. It's the
same thing with this.
So it's that human input that
then creates
The, the bias that that comes
out, the output, right? So I'm,
I need us to, you know, just to
simplify it a little bit that
we've been doing this for quite
a long time with just
but not at this level and this
amount of data and information.
That's, that's really where the,
the crux of this is for us to,
to comprehend that amount of
data we can't, but there's still
a human element to it, and I, as
I mentioned in the previous
conversation on the AI that we
need to have that human, um, um.
Involved that human aspect of
this uh overseeing and oversight
and input there all the time.
That's just one of the
challenges, um.
The other one is, you know, like
I said, the, the algorithms that
are based on, on all that, how
we, how we figure that out is
going to be a challenge. So I
would, I would then go back to
like what Representative Chasey
said and looking at the
engagement part of this. Does
this bill include creating any
kind of task force that would
work with um stakeholders to
continue the work because this
is going to be ever changing,
Madam Chair.
And chair Representative Lujan,
I was just at a, um, I attended
an all day task force meeting
prior to NCSL in Louisville and,
um, the general consensus there
and what you heard from a lot of
um legislative members from all
over the country was that we are
past the task force stage. Um,
we're past the studying stage,
um, we're past the bare bones
transparency stage that
A
I would say it's a speeding
bullet, but it's a lot of
speeding bullets, um, and the
concern is the amount of data
and the sources of data that are
being dumped into these systems.
It's the entire internet and
some um
situations. So a lot of the data
may include the and likely does
include things that we would not
generally include in decision
making and that we don't want to
include in decision making, so
they have to have the human um
oversight is necessary to any
system.
And legislation, um, and so I
think we need to, uh, we will
never catch up. Um, we need to
devise legislation that's
malleable enough to evolve with
the rapidly evolving technology.
Thank you. I'm glad, I'm glad I
got that out of you because
it's.
It's, it's already beyond us,
um, that's consensus. But we do
have to put some, some, um,
guardrails out there. And one of
the guardrails I'm concerned
about is.
As government employees or
government officials ourselves
using AI and when we're, we have
um sensitive information.
Um, how that could be leaked
out. Are there any provisions or
any protections in this piece of
legislation or through the
discussions I know you're you're
more heavily involved in the
discussions.
I'm sure the legislation, uh,
Madam Chair, uh, Representative
Lujan, um.
I'm not sure if this, these
pieces of legislation direct
address that directly, um, but
it's, you know, other, other
laws would, um, address that and
you could look at uh creating
some express provision and any
legislation that you devise to
address that. But you remind me
of something that I learned um
in Louisville, and that is never
put in any personal information
into an AI.
System because it goes out into
that entire tool and so it's not
protected, um, it's part of that
AI tool for everyone to see and
use. Um, so that is, uh, and
another thing that reminds me of
is for um it's recommended for
state agencies and governmental
bodies like the legislature to
develop regulations and policies
for using AI like that, um, you
know, to warm or to uh create.
Prohibitions on putting certain
kinds of information into
systems and to delineate how to
use these systems properly, what
they can be used for, um, for
say legislative purposes.
Um, so those are
Things to to look at in any kind
of legislation and also policy
development for the operation of
the body itself. Yeah sure, I
think we need to get on this
like as quickly as possible
because one of the AI
conversations I had at CSG
conference was that our
government uh body uh officials
and and workforce are already
using the these tools.
So all that information is
already is already out there.
We're again we're behind the.
The the game here, the last
thing I wanted to to talk about
is in your definition, is that
aligned with the the definition
of the um HP.
182 the the election changes,
Madam Chair. Madam Chair
Representative Lujan, uh,
they're different definitions
because they're different kinds
of technology and um address
different concerns. So the um
election bill, the deep fake
disclosure bill, um, uses a
different kind of technology,
whereas this is um this bill
184, um, and the, the, um,
Colorado bill address, um,
Different kind of data, um, and
decision making, whereas the
deep fake bill is, you know,
synthetic images, addressing
synthetic images.
So there, it's hard to align
those definitions, but the
definition that we used in 184
was lifted directly from Senator
Moroney's, um, draft bill.
Draft legislation. Madam Chair,
I just see a problem with that.
I think we need to work to to
really kind of bring those in
alignment. I don't know how, and
I'm hearing that there's some
difficulty there, but without
doing that, then it's gonna be
even more challenging as for
other uh pieces of legislation
and for like enforcement and
other things that we're the AI
in this components. And that's
what I got from NCSL that there
needs to be an alignment in
definitions with different types
of, of, of AI policies or else
we're going to run into those
problems.
or those challenges. So I just
think if we can weigh in a
little bit there and see if
there there is a way that we can
work through that, then that's,
that's really all I have. Thank
you, ma'am. Thank you. Anyone
else before we conclude? Well,
thanks again and I, I also want
to note that we often invite our
Oh, OK, sorry, sorry. Well, OK,
if.
We're beyond our time. Thank
you, madam. I'll try to keep it
short, um, first of all, I
appreciate the sponsors for
bringing this forward, um,
because I think that, you know,
it sort of
Brings to mind when, when we
went from smart from regular
phones to smartphones to
computers to and and to me this
is a really fast industry.
Um, and one of the things that I
think about,
Is our population in New Mexico
not keeping up, and if they are
involved with government at some
level, whatever level that is,
and they don't even understand
what AI means.
And I see that with my mom who's
96, and she was like.
My smartphone, she's like, I
want one, but I wouldn't know
how to use it, you know, so my
question is, I guess with regard
to
Discriminate discrimination for
our um
Our populations that are
Minorities or seniors who feel
like they're getting left behind
if they fall into a situation
where they're dealing with a
government service and they
don't even know what AI means,
and yes, we have a section that
deals with discriminatory
practice and you have an avenue
for, you know, addressing that
discrimination, but if you don't
even know what that means, how
do you all see that?
As we move forward, I'm just
questioning, let's say there's a
service that the government
provides to these individuals,
which is our responsibility.
How do you see?
I mean, there's, there's people
that are gonna be left
populations that are going to be
left behind, and there are
already are.
Madam Chair, Senator, I think
I, I totally agree with this
concern and in many ways, I
think the reason I'm pushing so
hard for transparency is to make
sure that everyone as as broadly
as we can in society does have
some understanding and some
control over these technologies.
I think what we're really trying
to avoid, I mean, of course, you
know, the government might have
to say no sometimes because the
service is unavailable or
whatever.
What we're really trying to
avoid is having the person on
the other end of the phone say,
uh, sorry, the computer says no.
Right? That's a black box.
You know, I think it's important
for them to say, I'm sorry, it
says no because your income
isn't sufficient or because
whatever that there's some
reasons, some logic to it.
There, you know, that doesn't
make the decision perfect,
doesn't make everybody happy,
but I think the one thing we
don't want is black boxes just
saying no, and I'm not going to
tell you why.
Madam Chair, uh, Representative
Barrego, if I could just add to
that.
Artificial intelligence is going
to require us to rethink a lot
of policies and to determine
what to, to do about different
issues and so you raise a good
issue as far as people, older
people that might be adversely
affected by it. How are they
going to know? What are they
going to do to address it? What
are, what's the legislative body
going to do about trying to
protect them? Are they, do you
want to create advisors for
People, um, or, uh, an automatic
review, human review of a
decision, those things are all
things that are uh going to have
to be addressed in the new era
of artificial intelligence.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I
just want one comment, um, and I
think that you brought up the
whole issue of the procurement
code and when you select vendors
and so on, and that's gonna be a
really difficult thing to sort
of enforce because this is
already there as somebody, one
of our other representatives
mentioned, this is already
happening, but when we're
looking for applications that
affect services for populations.
I think that it's, it's
imperative that we
We have a um.
A population of employees that
also understand what AI means.
So I just wanted to make that
comment, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative.
Perfect timing, um, well, I want
to thank you both,
always appreciate the work
you've been doing and, uh, Lisa,
thanks for all the research
you've been doing for all of us
and me in particular helping
organize some of these AI um
meetings very much and thank you
very much, Dr. Moore. OK, sure.
OK, um, before we go to our next
panel, we have minutes and I've
been reminded we better approve
the minutes before people start,
um, disappearing on me. So, um,
we have the July 16th, 17th
meeting, um, Representative
Chasey.
Who
OK, motion to adopt the
amendments, approve the
amendments. Is there any
opposition?
I see no opposition, so the
minutes are approved. OK, we're
ready for our next panel.
What?
Senator Cedillo.
OK.
Welcome, good to see all of you,
um, the next item on our agenda
is Children's code reform Task
Force recommendation and propose
legislation, um, I, I've not met
any of you, so um I'm looking
forward to learning more about
you and the work that you're
doing if you could introduce
yourselves and feel free to move
forward on your presentation as
you see appropriate.
Thank you so much, Chair
Chandler. I'm Kristen Connolly,
and I'm sorry, and members of
the committee as well. I'm
Kristen Connelly. I'm the
director of the Corinne Wolf
Center for Child and Family
Justice at the law school. I'm
an attorney. I'm also a
nationally certified child
welfare law specialist for 18
years now, uh, both certified,
well supported by the ABA but
originally through the National
Association of Council for
Children,
uh,
Represented parents or children
in foster when the kids were in
foster care for well over 20
years here in New Mexico before
I came to the Karen Wolf Center.
Also with me, I have Kathleen
Sabo, who is a, an attorney, uh,
and she is our task force
coordinator and our writer and
researcher, she helps keep us on
track in our meetings and make
sure everybody gets to the
meetings that needs to.
Judge John J. Romero, who is a
retired district court judge
here in the 2nd judicial
district and also a past past or
present present past president
of the NCJFCJ National Council
of Family.
Juvenile and family court
judges. Thank you. I knew I was
going to leave at least one of
those out, uh, because, uh, Miss
Sabo has really been involved
with this task force for longer
than I have. I am going to uh
turn the presentation over to
her at this point. Thank you so
much, Chris.
Sup once. I want people to know
that there's a task force report
and it was sent out to you by
email from Nancy, so just FYI
so.
Thank you, Kristen. Thank you,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, and some of you I
know through having worked at
the legislature for many years
in the Senate Judiciary
Committee and then as head of
the uh pool of majority
analysts. I was the head
analyst there, and others I know
through my work as executive
director of New Mexico Ethics
Watch. So nice to see, uh, many
of you here as Kristen
mentioned, I've been with the
task force since its inception,
so it falls on me to give you a
little bit of background and,
and
History here, uh, which may be
news to many of you, certainly
not to Senator Lopez, who is a
task force member. She's been
with the task force since the
beginning and has been chiefly
responsible for making sure that
the task force work has been
funded, so thank you so much,
Senator Lopez. We are so happy
to be here today to talk about
an experience that has been both
rewarding and incredibly
productive. In 2022, the
legislature appropriated
$50,000.
to the administrative office of
the court, the AOC for the task
force to assess and recommend
changes and at that time it was
envisioned to be a multi-year
effort. And during that time,
the sort of composition and
operational plan for the task
force were determined. At that
point, myself and Tony Ortiz
were hired to staff the task
force and I assume many of you
are familiar with Tony's name.
He worked with legislative
councils.
Service for many years. He was
the director of the Sentencing
commission and in the report,
there's, um, a lot of draft
legislation and Tony was the
chief expert drafter for that
legislation.
In January of 2023, the task
force began meeting.
And during initial meetings and
discussions, it was decided that
the task force would work
basically within two separate
subcommittees. And the first one
was crossover youth, and I don't
know if that's a new term for
some of you, but in short, it
means a child who is
simultaneously involved in both
the child welfare and juvenile
justice systems, whether or not
they've been adjudicated in
those systems. And then the
second subcommittee was
improving responses to poverty
and sub.
Since misuse.
And while the task force was
initially meeting a second
appropriation was made by the
legislature for $75,000 for
continuing the work in fiscal
year 24. So from May through
December of that year. So the,
the task force operated from
January through May, and in May
through December of 23. It was
on hiatus and during that time
staff, myself and Tony Ortiz, we
produced two reports. The first
was called Permanency Timelines
in judicial.
Review and the second report was
called Disentangling poverty and
neglect in the child welfare
system in New Mexico and beyond,
and you don't have those reports
in front of you, but they can be
found on the task force page on
the Corinne Wolf Center, uh,
web website that's child law.
Um, UNM.edu.
Thanks, Kristen.
So, so the hiatus ended and the
task force began meeting again
in January of 2024, with almost
all of its original members.
Some had to drop out because
they became judges. Others had
to drop out because they took on
more responsibilities and
couldn't, didn't feel they had
the time. But almost all the
original members and, and at
that point the task force began
operating under a memorandum of
understanding between the AOC
and the University of New
Mexico.
uh, and operating under the
direction of the Corinne Wolf
Center with its director,
Kristen Connolly as the chair
and the chief task of the task
force was to present a report by
the end of June 2024. So you
see, not, not much time, a lot
to do in that time period. You
can find a listing of all the
members and their affiliations
on page 50 of the report. If you
want to look for that. And
Kristen has been wonderful in
recognizing and
need when we need someone with a
particular expertise from a
certain department or a certain
discipline and it's been a
little bit fluid in terms of
membership. We've brought people
on and that's been really
wonderful.
So from January through June of
2024. The task force task force
met as a whole and in
subcommittees and in further
defined subgroups to begin
drafting legislation in discrete
areas and to formulate
recommendations on a path
forward and the report is before
you. I'll, I'll just give you a
couple of page numbers. I, I
don't imagine you'll look right
now, but the proposed
legislation can be found on
pages 7 through 41.
Recommendations on pages 41
through 49, including specific
recommendations, um, for the
legislature.
Those are on page 42 through 45.
And then a list of future
activities that would allow for
assessment and recommendation of
changes to the Children's code
that's on page 49, and that
includes the task force
receiving continuing funding.
So currently there is no funding
for the task force to continue
its work. However, through the
efforts of Senator Lopez and
then through Kristen Conley, it
looks like the group will be
able to continue its work in
short order for a few months
under a grant from the Nie E.
Casey Foundation.
We're not counting our chickens
yet. We, we know that council,
but we're hoping they will hatch
shortly and we can gather once
again.
The recommendations and the and
other developments outside of
the task force will assist the
group in finding its way forward
with regard to areas and issues
to continue to work on. We
anticipate that all current
members will remain engaged in
the work, and again, we'll add
people from particular
expertise, uh, areas of
expertise or departments as
necessary.
Before I turn this over to the
deep subject matter experts. I
do want to highlight the
collaborative nature of the task
force.
Throughout all branches of
government and just note that it
is, it's been so good and
productive to work with all
three branches rather than to
work in silos. And additionally,
when the task force is up to
speed, we look forward to
collaborating with the SM5 task
force. That's the task force
that is looking at restructuring
CYFD. We've already had initial
discussions with them to talk
about our work and to talk
about.
Overlap and how we can be of
assistance to each other.
So
when you look at the names and
the affiliations of the people
who've been on this task force.
I know you will be able to see
the breath and depth of
experience and skill and
capabilities, but what the list
doesn't show is how incredibly
committed and compassionate
these people are towards helping
the families and children of our
state.
And the experience of working on
these issues with these people
has been remarkable. And we do
hope that it continues. And with
that, I'll turn it over to
Kristen and you can take it from
there. Thank you so much, Judge
Romero.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you for the
opportunity to appear before you
today and to present some very
important information to you and
um I'd like to simply add a
little bit to what has already
been described about my
experience in this work,
uh, for 17 years or so I
practiced in family law, mostly
in the divorce court, but much
of it in Children's Court as
well. Um, I served on what is
now an 87 year old
national organization, the
National Council of Juvenile and
Family Court judges whose
primary function is to educate
judges and court professionals
in the area of child welfare and
juvenile justice. I was also,
uh, although I didn't renew my
membership, uh, in the, uh, as
being a child welfare law
specialist, uh, because the AOC
wouldn't pay for it and I didn't
see any need to go forward with
that, but like Kristen, I am.
One of several in New Mexico
that is that was deemed a
certified child welfare law
specialist.
Uh, for 17 years and about 9
months, but who's counting? and
I spent on the Children's Court
division of the 2nd Judicial
District court. We were spoiled
there. The three judges who
served at the time that I
served, uh, in being exclusively
connected to dealing with child
welfare and juvenile justice
cases. So I don't like the label
of being an expert, but we had
the opportunity to gain
expertise presiding over these
cases and most importantly,
recognizing
The humanity of the children,
their parents, and yes, everyone
else involved in the system. So
before I move on to kind of uh a
final comment before we get into
the the meat of what we're
presenting to you as
recommendations.
there is this fallacy in the
whole state of New Mexico, I
think fueled by a lot of uh uh
entities, namely the media, that
the children youth and Families
department is the child welfare
system.
Not so as a judge, as attorneys,
as community providers were all
part of the child welfare law
system and part of the juvenile
justice system. So while CYFD
may be the brunt of the attacks
that we see in the media.
To the extent that they are
alleged to be failing our whole
system can be indicted by that.
So I, I, I know I'm, I don't
gain a whole lot of applause
from judges when I preached the
subject of we are the
gatekeepers of the system, not
because I say so and not because
it's an ego trip, because in
1980, the US Congress passed a
law that says the state judges,
the state district court is
It is saddled with in in
empowered with and it has the
duty of overseeing the child
welfare system, something that I
would be exaggerating if I said
that I did that every time that
I heard a case, even though that
was my aspirational goal, but
when I charge my fellow judges,
those who sit now that we all
have to take a more active role.
We're not here just to sit by
and listen to what people tell
us, but we're to ask questions.
And as is noted in the report,
judging and presiding and
participating in child welfare
law and juvenile justice cases
requires special expertise.
Children are not little adults
and they're uh developmental
stages of the research that has
been conducted on adverse
childhood experiences, trauma,
and yes, even on what it takes
to assist families and children
to overcome substance misuse
issues instead of criminalizing
their behavior, looking at their
behaviors, not their conditions
of life, not their habits and
evil way of.
but their behaviors has taken a
different turn. I didn't know
about when I sat on the bench,
probably through my own
ignorance, but that there's no
need to not look at that now and
be advised by, by what the, the
research tells us. So the task
force.
As has already been noted and
you can see the list of
participants, uh, includes
members who have been through
the system, those with lived
experience, or as I prefer to
say lived expertise they, I
don't know how they felt going
through the system. Only they
know, only they know what they
needed that wasn't offered. Only
they know how we as legal
professionals, including judges
may especially judges, didn't
respond to their needs, didn't
treat them in a humane and
Compassionate manner. It is the
goal of this task force to
In an overarching way.
Consider how we can
improve the circumstances of
those families and children
involved in our system.
Those who make New Mexico their
home and even some of whom
happened to have been in New
Mexico when they were um.
When they came to the attention
of CYFD and law enforcement and
may live in another state,
particularly our Native American
community which contrary to some
misconceptions, um, they're as
mobile as any of us are, and
they may be from, uh, South
Carolina, North Carolina, uh,
and have children here in New
Mexico that are involved in our
system, so the need for us to
know about uh federal laws like
the Indian Child Welfare Act and
the In Family Protection Act
does not apply just
To those who are residents of
our state. So the North Star of
our work as noted in the
beginning part of the report, is
While safety of children is of
the utmost importance.
We know through research and our
own lived experience and the
lived experience of those who've
been through the system. The
children do much better when
they live and enjoy the love and
support of their families. We
know that when children are
removed, even when it's
necessary, uh, go through
extreme trauma to be separated
from their brothers and sisters,
from their parents, from their
relatives, and yes, even their
pets because most of us have
pets and consider them members
of our family. And yet
Our system doesn't really take
that into account for the most
part. Although I understand that
CYFD has received some funding
to assist.
Uh
Victims of domestic violence to
be able to have their pets
placed with them in shelters,
for example, or in other
settings. Uh, very important
when it comes to children and
our child welfare system who are
removed from their families in
the closest, most comforting
entity that they have is a
little furry critter with 4 ft.
So with that, I, uh I mean I can
go on forever, but my colleagues
have much to add that I don't
want to take up more time than
than is necessary. Kristen.
Thank you, Judge Romero. Um, I,
I would like to spend just a
little more time talking about
how the task force, um, was
built after I agreed to take it
on. Um, it's extremely important
to us that we make sure that we
have individuals with expertise
in the various areas that we're
talking about. So for example,
when we talked about crossover
youth, which are youth that
start in foster care but then
later on pick up a juvenile
charge. Um, we wanted to make
Sure that we had someone from
the law office of the Public
Defender who represents
juveniles. It was also extremely
important to me to make to make
sure that we had people from
various parts of the state, and
I have folks from cruises. I
have folks from Farmington, um,
uh, uh, frankly, there are a lot
here in the center of the state,
I inherited that and I wasn't
going to boot anyone off the
task force, but as we had
openings.
Come up or an apparent need for
additional expertise, I made
sure to reach out outside of the
center of the state. It's too
common that those of us that are
Bernicentric think that the
entire state circles around this
part and we know that that is
not true.
Um, the other thing I think
that's very important is that we
worked hard to have as much, um,
openness in our process as
possible because we are a task
force of the legislature. We're
not technically subject to the
open meetings at, but we also
felt it was extremely important
that members of the public be
able to access the work that we
were doing to be able to come
and let their concerns be known
as well and in fact the end of
our
is about additional things that
were brought to our attention by
various community members or
other professionals that work in
the field. To that end, we
drafted and passed a resolution
where we would post our agenda,
uh, on, uh, my website again
that's at the Corn Wolf Law
Center at the UNM School of Law
and the email or sorry the
website is Chilaw.m.
Dot EDU that appears, I think,
in the very first note in our
report, uh, that you would be
able to find and unfortunately,
in a classic move, I think I
brought one business card with
me, so somebody can have my one
business card when we're done
here today, um, as I said, we
posted, we tried to get
recordings of the meetings up
and just could not make that
happen. Uh, UNM has sort of a
clunky bureau.
democratic process to make sure
that things are safe, um, and so
we, we just had some challenge
there, but we did post notes.
Uh, we made sure that we had
people register to attend
meetings. These were all online,
uh, and then the day of the
meeting we would send out the
invitation with a Zoom link, uh,
that's also because we wanted to
make sure that we had
appropriate security in place,
uh, and that we didn't have
someone zoom bombing a meeting,
for example.
Um,
Let's see, and then we posted
the meeting notes after every
meeting as well. So, um, and,
and certainly any of you would
be willing,
sorry, would be welcome to drop
in to any of our meetings, uh,
fingers crossed once we get
started now, uh, we're not
counting our chickens before
they're hatched, but we have a
couple of nests that have eggs
in them right now and they're
being kept warm, but we're
Got some bureaucratic process
both through UNM and through the
Annie E. Casey Foundation and
those all have to talk with each
other and so we're in the midst
of that happening, but all the
paperwork that needed to be
submitted has happened, so we
think we will have some funding
that will get us through, uh,
December, uh, possibly into
January, but my preference would
be for a new report to come out
in December, as you know,
January would be a little late,
um.
So, um, we started, uh, as, as
the judge reported we had the
two different groups, uh, or
maybe that was you, Kathleen.
I'm sorry, we had the two
primary groups. One of the
things that we know that happens
sometimes, well, not sometimes
frequently people of color are
targeted by child and family
welfare proceedings in a way
that Anglos are not, and so we
wanted to make sure that we
uh, mechanisms in place and look
at laws that do not promote
that. We also don't want people
who are poor just because they
are poor to be more likely to be
subjected to an investigation by
CYFD people that need food
stamps, people that need WI,
people that need housing, people
that need utility support, all
of these people are required to
show up for multiple meetings
with providers.
etc. over and over and over
again, they are subjected to the
eyes of government bodies in a
way that people that are
fortunate enough to have enough
funds to pay for these things
themselves are not subjected to.
So it was very important for us
to look at issues and ways to
separate poverty from a decision
as to whether or not child or
family, uh sorry, whether or not
abuse or neglect had happened in
a family.
I personally prefer the term
child and family welfare, and
you will hear me say that over
and over again. Please note I am
saying child first.
But the child is within the
context of the family in the 20
years I represented kids, I had
two possibly evil parents who
deserved what they got, which
means they lost their kids. The
kids never deserved it. All the
rest of them were grown up,
abused, and neglected kids with
developmental delay with
domestic violence with their own
childhood sexual abuse, etc.
Um, and so it's important that
we keep that in mind that we are
talking about people that have
come up through some of the most
traumatic circumstances.
If you are wealthy and you have
a substance misuse disorder and
you're wealthy either with cash
or you're wealthy in your family
connections, you have somebody
to watch the kids when you go
off on a toot.
If you are not wealthy or are
not wealthy in family
connections if you have come to
a place in your life that you,
uh, have a substance use
disorder, you don't necessarily
have someone to place children
with, um, and so we know that
there's a great imbalance there.
So as we looked at uh
definitions, we started to
figure out how do we make
Sure that poverty is stripped
out of this and poverty can look
different, um, it, it, it, it
can be confusing for a police
officer who is called to a home,
um, the child has scabies. Well,
that sounds horrible. That
sounds like a clear case of
medical neglect. The scabies may
have been caused by
uncleanliness. Well, that sounds
horrible. That sounds like a
terrible case of neglect.
The uncleanliness may have been
caused by we don't have money to
buy more than one set of clothes
for each school child. We don't
have money to have the water
turned on in our home. We don't
have money to go to the
laundromat.
And it becomes this cascade that
ends with a child at school with
a medical condition, but may
have started with needing better
financial support for the
family.
So one of the things that we
want to look at is to make sure
that when the department starts
to investigate a family that
they are being careful to to
determine
is there an underlying lack of
resources that is causing the
problem. Now that doesn't
include the kid, but, and, and
here's the other thing you need
to know, uh, I, I'm just going
to be shooting from the hip
here, but I've been doing this
for 20 something years.
About 80% of our cases are
neglect in New Mexico, a very
small percentage of our cases
are sex abuse, a slightly larger
but still small percentage of
our cases are physical abuse,
far and away what we are looking
at is neglect. Parents that have
left their kids alone when they
go to work, um, parents that,
uh, don't have somebody to be at
home when the seven year old
gets off the bus.
Parents that are stressed and
exhausted and maybe have not
replied to the school in the
best way possible when they
contact them and say, you know,
little, little Janie is having
an issue.
Um, so we wanna make sure,
please,
um, I, I wanna kind of put some
boundaries here. So thank you
um,
the title of your report is
Recommendations and proposed
legislation which, um, so I
wanna see if we can get to that
place because you know we're on,
on a schedule and your
information is helpful, but if
we could start talking about
recommendations and, and
legislation. I think that would
help so that we have a folk.
And page numbers in the report,
although I've noticed there are
around 40 that there's
recommended page 40-ish their
recommendations and so forth, so
we start, thank you very much,
Madam Chair. I appreciate that.
Uh, so the proposed legislation
is already drafted and is the
beginning of the report. We
start with changes to the
definitions. Most of that stays
the same, but we want to include
language for a neglected child
that modifies how we talk.
about a child being neglected
and get rid of words like
subsistence, because who the
heck knows what that means,
whereas if we say that the kid
doesn't have food, shelter,
clothing, education, medical or
mental health treatment,
supervision or other care or
support necessary. Uh, we also
want to make sure again that the
issue was not inadequate
financial resources, uh.
Working off of the Benny
Hargrove Act. We also were
concerned about a child having
negligent unsupervised access to
a weapon,
um, and so we included a
definition that includes that. I
grew up in Amarillo, Texas. I
was out with friends of mine who
were out shooting rattlesnakes
or other predators that we're
going to take out the baby
animals. I am not saying that a
15 year old with a
Rifle in the field taking care
of, uh, livestock that is not
negligence, and that is not
unsupervised if we've got a kid
that's gone through his Eddie
Eagle training, all of that. Um,
we want to, uh, we're proposing
that, uh, the department makes
sure that they immediately
provide financial support for
families when that is
appropriate, uh, we want to make
sure.
That, um, that when caseworkers
write up the affidavit for why a
child has been brought in, that
they are able to distinguish uh
inappropriate behaviors from
simply not having the money to
pay for services that their
child needs. Um, we also
included, uh, that we want uh
able account set up for children
that have been brought into
custody, so kids that may be
eligible.
Or say disability payments, um,
or for, uh, payments because
their parents have passed on,
uh, are not having to pay for
their care in a way that
children who are not eligible
for disability, uh, are having,
uh, to pay, um, we are also uh.
I want to make sure that we have
a timing, oh, and I'm sorry, you
were asking for page numbers in
the report. So the definitions,
uh, starts on page 8.
Uh
Where the section where we're
asking the department to make
sure that they've done an
analysis of what are the needs
of the family and offered
services if or financial
supports, um, and that might
even be just a referral to food
stamps, that sort of thing, uh,
that's on page 11, uh, on page
13, we also talk about that
modification.
And then, um.
Let's see page 16 also addresses
that the stable accounts or in
New Mexico, it's generally
nationally it's called an A
account New Mexico calls them
stable accounts, uh, page 17,
um, and then, um.
Also to make sure that uh and
and oh sorry that goes on to
page 18. Now we want to get rid
of a presumption of abandonment.
We want to make sure that that
doesn't remove the fact that a
parental rights could be
terminated because a child has
been abandoned, but we want to
get rid of the idea that a child
who is in foster care, where the
parent has not necessarily been
able to uphold the level of
contact with the.
Child that you want, uh, you
might desire. We want to make
sure that there's not a
presumption that that parent has
abandoned the child when it's by
state action that the child and
the parent are not together,
that is page 19, uh, page 21,
uh, we, this is a very important
piece to us because one of the
things that I heard in the LHHS
meeting,
oh, I don't remember when that
was, it was.
Probably June, uh, at the
rainforest innovation Center,
but there was a concern that
CYFD was not utilizing all the
federal money that was available
to us. It was not taking
advantage of federal
reimbursement. One of the ways
to make sure that we get full
federal reimbursement and as a
taxpayer, this is important to
me is that we make sure that
every child that is eligible for
4E funds receives those funds to
reimburse.
The state for those expenses and
that means timelines. That means
that the, the adoption and safe
Family Act timelines are
completely honored here in the
state of New Mexico. We have
already codified many of those
timelines where an adjudication
has to happen within a certain
amount of time where a
permanency hearing to, I call it
the Fisher cut bait hearing, uh,
happens at the appropriate time
that particular findings or need
to.
To be made at particular times.
That's on page 21 and um
we want to make sure that that
is brought forward, um.
We also are proposing that we
front load these cases with
additional hearings early in the
proceeding to let the parent
know that the that we have
robust judicial oversight, Judge
Romero, may I add something very
quickly, Madam Chair and members
of the committee with regard to
the items contained on page 21
of the report, timelines, one of
the very important additions is
that the adjudicatory hearing,
the jurisdictional hearing, the
one that ultimately
Determines whether the court has
jurisdiction over this case or
not, be commenced within the
timelines, but that it be
concluded within 90 days from
the date it was commenced.
Unfortunately for a whole array
of reasons, namely continuances,
adjudications could have been
commenced on time, they may have
taken 30 minutes of a hearing
that was set for all day and
then that hearing was not
recommenced for 9 months, even a
year.
And, and still dragged on
forever because of time, because
of time constraints for for
attorneys and judges. So that's
a very important addition to the
timelines requirement.
Thank you, Judge. And one of the
things we're thinking is that if
we front load these hearings,
um, is that we will spend less
time with children in foster
care, which then cuts the cost
of foster care provision cuts
the cost of paying the
caseworker for CYFD that handles
this, uh, and cuts the cost of
judicial effort on down the
line.
Um, and also reduces the ongoing
trauma the kids are experiencing
and their families from being
separated
Now
all of those were modifications
to existing state law. We also
propose a new act, the crossover
Youth Act to be able to better
track these kids that are both
in foster care and then later
pick up juvenile justice claims,
um, one of the successes that
CYFD has had is the fostering
connections or um uh program
which allows young people to
receive financial support.
From CYFD after they age out of
foster care. I may have thought
I was mature enough to handle
everything when I was 18, but I
was not. I was still washing
clothes at my parents' home at
age 20.
Kid and yeah, I know kids that
age out of foster care don't
have anybody to go wash their,
you know, to go wash their
clothes with, to go fight with
at Thanksgiving and the
fostering, uh, connections
program has been wildly
successful. We want the
crossover youth piece to
continue that for young people
who have sadly picked up a
criminal case, um, and so we are
asking to put an office in CYFD,
a single person.
That will keep eyes on who has
have these dual involvements,
Judge, my experience with Madam
Chair and members of the
committee. My experience with
crossover youth in our court was
an experience to behold. I was
one of those mean nasty, ugly
judges and my colleagues joined
in when we had crossover kids
that those two cases were
assigned to the same judge, one
family, one judge philosophy.
We were the ones who started
saying when we have a juvenile
justice hearing involving a
child in our child welfare case,
the Children's Court attorney
from the DA's office, the
juvenile probation officer
assigned to the case along with
all of the other participants in
the child welfare case had to
appear at that hearing, so we
weren't repeating things to them
at different times. So they all
had the same information at the
same time. Conversely, when we
had a child welfare hearing.
The uh the uh children's court
attorney from the DA's office
and the juvenile probation
officer.
And the attorney represented the
juvenile probation officer, the
juvenile public defender all had
to be present at the child
welfare hearing. These are two
entities that are within the
same organization, child, you
know, children, youth and
Families department. Thankfully
in our court at one point in our
district, the chief probation
officer and I think the county
office manager or someone at
that level had monthly meetings
to review the status of these
crossover kids. I don't think
that was happening
Anywhere else. I hope it was,
but it's that kind of
collaboration and working
together of all of the entities
that goes to the issue of
training for judges for DAs, for
probation I'm, I'm sorry for the
public defender's office and
everyone else who touches that
child.
Thank you.
On page 35 we're also proposing
another new act which is
reinstatement of parental Rights
Act. There are a small number of
kids, teenagers every year who
really would do better back at
home with their families and
their families have finally
gotten on top of whatever led to
their parental rights being
terminated. It's rare cases, but
it's enough that, uh, we believe
it's
important to include this and
there are several states in the
nation that have reinstatement
of parental rights as a
possibility, not happening
often, but again, rare and
important for these young
people.
Um,
yes.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, one of the other
important items that's near and
dear to my heart given my
involvement nationally and
locally with training and
teaching and sometimes the deaf
ears about domestic child sex
trafficking is a provision in
the families in need of court
order Services Act, and I, I
think it's recommendation number
10. I'm not sure what page
that's in, uh, in, in the
report, but it has to do with an
internal conflict in our
children's code, which
makes reference to pros you
know, children who would
otherwise be caught in an adult
act otherwise uh called
prostitution.
Meanwhile, the children, the
delinquency Act says that a
delinquent actor is an act
committed by a child that would
be considered a crime committed
by an adult except for
prostitution, so we can use
prostitution in Finkos.
And yet are the inconsistency is
that the clarification and the
juvenile justice case that
Delinquency Act says that you
can't charge a kid with
prostitution. These are kids
under the age of 18 who are
exploited who are being
victimized, and we want to call
them prostitutes, underage sex
workers, bad language that
stigmatizes and mischaracterizes
what children are going through
who have been otherwise
exploited not only by the
Exploiters that we call the
pimps, but the exploiters were
called the buyers who very often
go unnoticed and unindicted,
quite frankly. Thank you.
Thank you, Judge. So the
recommendations that we've put
forward are the things that we
anticipate, uh, to, to be
working on with our next
iteration of the task force
assuming our funding comes
through, um, and one of those
first things that, uh, Miss Sabo
already referred to is that we
want to make sure that we have
that 3 branch involvement in
strengthening our child and
family welfare system that we
make sure that we have good
legislation
action, good judicial action,
and good action from the
executive, which of course
includes CYFD and the Office of
Family Representation and
advocacy.
Um, so recommendations start on
page 41, uh, we're at, and, and
these again are the things that
we were not in a place to bring
full uh.
Uh, fully developed to the
legislature for this upcoming
session, uh, but,
uh, policies, I mean, we're
challenging this group to
consider the possibility of
universal basic income in the
state of New Mexico.
And we realized that's a big
hopeful ask, but wouldn't that
be amazing if we could act like
Alaska who makes great money off
of their oil and gas and then
provides an annual payment every
year to a family. Why couldn't
we do that if we know that we
have that wealth in our state.
Um, the report that Ms Sabo
wrote shows that we had there is
a distinct drop off in child and
family welfare cases for $100
increments in increase in
family, uh, income, and wouldn't
that be a remarkable experiment
for us to conduct here in New
Mexico, Judge.
As a resident of the state of
New Mexico for my entire life,
quite frankly, I am very used to
hearing the term from all
sectors, certainly not
exclusively from the legislators
that we can't afford that.
I would suggest that we have
help from the feds if we take
it. It's some, it's a law that
was passed in 2018 called The
Family's First Prevention and
Services Act that actually
provides for reimbursement to
the state of Title IV.
e-money when you're using
prevention services to keep kids
and families out of the child
welfare system. I'm not certain
that we specifically address
that in any of the report by
Kathleen's shaking her head that
we did, but that's one of the
underpinnings of money that
could be available.
Unfortunately, we still do not
have approved by the feds a plan
for New Mexico to utilize those
funds under the Families First
Prevention Services Act. I, you
know, I'm not, I'm not, uh, in
the know enough to know to be
able to address that. I
understand that that's in the
works and may happen soon, but
it's federal money that is being
reimbursed to the state for
those specific services. I'm
suggesting that we want to think
about.
Wrapping up the formal um
presentation. I have some
members who have questions that
I want to start getting to.
Thank you.
Um, just one other thing that I
want to put out there and again,
uh, page 41 is where the
recommendations start, but one
of the things that we would like
to do that will address also
safe haven babies is that we
would like to change a term and
talk about a dependent child for
children whose families have not
been at fault.
Um,
Maybe the parents have died,
maybe the uh parent is in a
coma, that sort of thing. And so
we want those children to not
bear the stigma of that name.
Thank you.
You're welcome. I have 89 people
on the list.
10 people on the list. Thank
you, um,
11.
Um,
Uh, did I hear 12 now?
Oh you're, you're jazzing with
me, huh? You're gonna be
punished for that.
Um, as you can see, guys, this
is a, that's a lot, right?
So we need to manage our time,
right? So I'd, I'd like you to
try to keep your, your questions
and time to 4 minutes, so I'm
gonna say something my colleague
next to me says, you're
responsible for managing your 4
minutes. So that means if you're
getting an answer that's taking
too much time, it's on you to
interrupt the answerer. That
means a member of the panel to
get to the point because as you
see, we are already over time
fortunately we have staff who's
going to be
next and they're, I'm sure happy
to wait, but, um, 4 minutes each
and that includes the answer,
all right? So representative
Madrid.
I know it's tough life's a nice
criteria to start out with,
right?
Now I understand where you're
coming from,
right?
So very quickly, thank you uh
for the presentation.
Um, Judge, you said something
that really hit home on me and
it's going to be as quick as I
can. I'm a product of foster
care.
I was, uh, left for adoption. I
was left in foster care by my
mom, who I think did the right
thing, did what as hard decision
for any parent mother to do and
did it for me.
And did it for a better life. I
was fortunate and blessed that I
was adopted, not adopted, I was
put in foster care. A few months
later, another siblings showed
up.
And we grew up together. They
try to split us up to do visits,
weekend visits, and we'd stop
eating. And so the, the um
welfare said, oh my God, these
two have bonded. They may not be
able to be split up.
And this is back in '64 when I
was born. I'm gonna be 59.
And to know that that's the
relevance of what we're talking
about today.
Was that that brother of mine.
is by blood.
I didn't, I don't know if
there's anything else.
And you know what, I would
protect him.
Nobody would touch him. Nobody
could abuse him. Nobody would
use him.
And you know what his nickname
was? But the Willie.
And it goes to your point that
when you're young,
And we're straddling in the
fence of survival that even only
now at 59 I've come to realize
the roads I've been to.
And the struggles I've been
through, the good thing is that
I was blessed and had somebody
that came in and one day and
said we want to adopt two boys
or two girls. And the state
looked at each other and like,
are you kidding me?
We might have some, we might
have one.
So that being said, I want
clarification to be made to the
public here and to the to this
panel.
And that is, there's a
misconception about foster care
on the level of that they have
and get paid for the number of
kids. I was in foster care with
my brother and 4 other sisters
that were not my sisters, but
they took us in as a family.
They embraced us, they loved us,
and they took care of us.
And to think, or to know, what
you said to me is that they
don't get any compensation. This
was another state, mind you, the
state over.
But to know that these foster
parents
the will of what's left today to
provide to these young people.
It's tough. We've got 2 minutes.
In my first year on the floor as
a young representative coming
in, you're still figuring what
am I meant to do? What am I
supposed to do?
What is the difference I can
make.
And representative uh Dow.
Had a day for foster care
parents.
And she brought them all in and
lined them.
On the front.
Yeah.
You know what I saw and you see
it in my voice. You hear it in
my words.
I saw a purpose of what comes
out of this that I realized I
just got to continue progressing
and always salvaging to save so
many things that have been lost.
Maybe more in our state than to
understand.
That these are young people's
lives, but they would be nothing
without foster care parents that
should not be diminished or
employed as they are making
money.
Because for 2, whatever you
might have contributed, would
not have made a difference. It
was still simplicity of love,
care, and family.
Thank you, ma'am. Thank you.
Thank you very much for sharing
that representative, uh,
Representative Lujan.
Thank you, thank you for sharing
that as well. I think that
These are hard topics and I want
to commend you for the work,
but, uh, questions to the task
force, who are, who are the
legislative branch involved in
the task force, Madam Chair.
Is your mic on? Yeah.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, Senator Linda
Lopez has been involved with the
task force all along, uh,
Senator Duhig, uh, offered to
take a look at some of our
legislation and made some
specific recommendations to us.
Um, we have had, uh, that is our
primary connection at this
point.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So when
you're getting to the point and
the recommendation that the
three prong, um,
Uh.
Gathering of the the branches of
government executive,
legislative and judicial, how,
what is the you want to put that
into statute that we participate
that all branches participate.
Can you explain that? that's one
of our recommendations that's
outside of proposed legislation.
We would like to see like the SM
5 task force have connection
with the Children's Code reform
taskforce, those sorts of
things. It's not legislation.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
I appreciate that and, and
appreciate our legislators who
have been participating and
working with you. I think that's
a lot, it's a heavy lift, it's a
lot of work, um, and as you as
you can tell, we all are very
anxious to get things changed or
addressed in our state as we
have some of the, you know,
it's.
Not so good outcomes for our
kids and the welfare, and I
appreciate the judge saying that
this is on all of us. It is.
It's a reflection on us as a
society and as communities here
in New Mexico, um, my question
is, the reforms for for a family
court. It's something I want to
work with you. I I don't have
much time, but I want to lend
myself to say I want to work
with you on some reforms of the
family court. Um, I don't
believe that a lot of things
that they have in place are
working. I've been talking with
our secretary at ECCD about some
of those reforms. I'd like to
just
Put that out there to you to let
you know that. I really
appreciate what you're saying
about getting a, a, a, a
paycheck to every New Mexican,
uh, taxpayer in New Mexico, like
they do in Alaska, that's
something actually I've been
really interested in looking
into. We are an energy state. We
are one of the richest states.
We live in poverty.
By choice.
By by by our action, by our
policies, by all the all the
things that we have in place. We
don't have to. We are a rich
energy driven state. We have the
money to do this just like
Alaska does, and that's
something I really like to work
with you on. Thank you very
much. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I have 3
questions, so I'm going to ask
my questions.
First, and then you can
decide who's gonna answer those.
First question is
Um,
I haven't been able to read
through the entire report, but
what
What is a recommendation to make
sure that there are no longer
kids.
Being abused over and over and
over and over again by parents,
um, when you're returning, I'm
all for keeping the kids
together, but we, we see and we
hear issues or uh instances of
these kids being abused and and
uh this is happening over and
over again. They keep returning
the kids. It happens all over
again. So I'd like to hear what
the recommendation was for that
second question, what's the
Recommendation to end the
practice of these kids sleeping
in CYFD offices.
Um, and the third question is,
um, did the task force include
uh foster parents.
And was there a bipartisan?
Makeup of the, of the task
force. Uh, thank you, Madam
Chair, those are my three
questions.
Thank you, Representative
Martinez, um,
we, um,
I don't know what anyone's uh
political leanings were. I truly
have no idea. I am hopeful that
I had bipartisan representation.
I truly have no idea. Um, so
that's, that's the quick one. We
did not address kids sleeping in
offices. We did not address
removal over and over again
because the work that was
started with the two committees
came up before those specific
things were
brought to our attention, um,
and, uh, we, you know, we only
had a limited amount of time. We
had committees meeting, uh,
twice a month, uh, in, in on top
of our task force meetings,
working to put out the package
that we put out. I don't have
the expertise. No one on our on
our task force has the
individual expertise.
To talk about how we do a better
job of recruiting foster
parents, how we do a better job
of fully supporting foster
parents, how we support CYFD in
making sure that services are
developed statewide in 2013, our
uh mental health system in New
Mexico was completely wiped out
and we've had a very difficult
time in all parts of the state
coming back up to speed on.
That, um, when, when was the
task force put together? 2022 is
when the first funding I was not
a part of it until because
because the instances of these
kids being abused has been
happening.
Much before 2022 and the the
question about foster parents
was, were there foster parents
on the task force? Do we? I
don't remember if this time
we've had foster parents. I
don't know.
I don't remember. I'll just go
ahead and
and uh.
We had hoped to have a very
large amount of participation by
people with lived experience,
including foster parents. We
were under such a limited time
period from January to June that
we and, and prior to that we had
had an open meeting where we
had.
Youth come in and testify about
their experience, um, there was
even something in the press
about that reported about it,
much to the court's dismay. But
we had to this, in this instance
forego that to some degree and
under the Annie E. Casey grant
that we hopefully will get from
their foundation. They want us
to expand that, and we agree
with that, um, bringing people
in, more people in with lived
experience, lived expertise as
Judge Rometo called it, so we
we just could not under the time
crunch we had for the it was 6
months.
And the last month was spent
writing, but Representative, I
commit that we will make sure
that we have at least one foster
parent representative, um, and
I'm sorry I did not realize that
we didn't. We certainly put out
notices widely, uh, and anyone
could have attended.
But, but, yes, we can work on
that,
Judge.
Just very quickly, Madam Chair,
and Representative, one of the
things that the committee didn't
really have anything to do with
who was selected to be on the
committee. That was advertised
and people who wanted to be on
the task force submitted a
request to be considered. We
didn't have a choice of who was
put on the committee, at least
to my understanding, those were
folks who stepped forward and
said I want to be on the
committee.
Um, and very quickly, the, the
CYFD has taken a different, I
think a different approach to
recruiting foster parents,
um, sometimes referred to as
resource parents because they
are a resource to the kids and
to the families from which they
come and my family was a foster
family for a season and and as
representing Madrid said, it's a
thankless job, but thank God for
for foster parents who take kids
in. We need more of those folks.
Speaking their voice, they
should have an opportunity.
Thank you. I think we need to,
all right, but we will have a
thank you answer going forward.
Thank you.
um, I have uh Representative
Chasey and then representative
to I mean Senator do him, thank
you, Madam Chair, and I'll try
to be really quick here. This is
a very dense report and I was
going through the
recommendations as you were
mentioning the pages. Um, if all
went well
When might there be a bill ready
to introduce, would it be as
early as 2025?
For the additional
recommendation, well, OK, I
don't mean to be smart here, but
a bill on what? There is a lot.
Well, I guess that's my
question. Are we talking about,
um, a bunch of different bills,
so we are hopeful that the
pieces that we already have
drafted, we'll find sponsors for
this session coming up and that
things will go to legislative
drafting services, so we, we
already have several proposed
bills in.
Draft form. OK, thank you,
thank you, I want to thank Judge
Rome, Madam Chair, for pointing
out that we're all part of a
system. So if we all start
unloading on either CYFD or law
enforcement or foster parents or
biological families.
We're really unloading on
ourselves.
We're all part of this. So let's
try to be constructive and, and
get something done. We don't
need to burn anything down here.
Um, I practiced law in this
field for a number of years, uh,
each experience is unique. Every
kid is unique. Every mother is
unique. Every father is unique.
Every grandmother, every.
Um, guardian is unique. The
judges.
It, it goes on and on, um, you
know, foster parents aren't all
perfect. We just had a foster
parent on trial last week for
having abused a baby.
In New Mexico. We have a lawsuit
filed that was in either
yesterday or today's news, um,
by an adult who was a child who
was removed from her parents
because she's poor. They were
poor.
And it was a terrible, terrible
outcomes for all the children.
It's in the news clips for
today. So,
I, I represented kids and, and
the foster parents who were
really, really well trained and
um, really good. I had a set of
foster parents in Corral, they
said we don't foster to adopt,
we will.
But we're aimed at reuniting the
family that needs to be the
orientation and then so that
people don't think this is where
they're going to go get their
next kid because that's not the
purpose. And so I appreciate
what you're doing, um, I also
think reinstating parental
rights is not a bad idea. I
represented a kid who became in
it.
A much older kid and his father
wasn't the offending parent
because his father was in
California, but his father never
could get his head around the
fact that he had to be
adjudicated, never.
The kid ended up with absolutely
nowhere to go. He was in an
institution in Utah.
Giving him back to his dad, we
were, we were going there. The
CYFD attorney and all of us were
going there when I retired
because there really was nowhere
for him.
And um.
I think the approach of trying
to find a way to fund families
who are at risk because of
poverty.
Give them what we're going to
pay the foster parents money for
food, money for clothes.
So the and and and then provide
the support so that you can
prevent the breakup if possible.
I, I saw so many families who
were like split for like 4 or 5
years and all they were all that
had happened was poverty.
So, um, I, I really, I think
you're on the right track, and I
thank you and um that's it.
Um, I have Senator Dehig, then
Senator Ivy Soto, then
Representative Reeb and OK.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you all for being here and
presenting to us today, um.
I, I don't blame this task force
for not addressing every single
issue in our child welfare
system. We have a lot of issues,
uh, to deal with, and I know
that.
That you are taking a look at
some discreet ones, um, but I, I
don't think anyone would expect
would expect a panacea, uh,
from, from this task force or
from anyone. I don't, I don't
think that's gonna exist without
all of our work. Um, I'm really
glad to hear that foster parents
will be involved in the future.
I think that is an important
voice at the table.
I,
so one of the things that I, I
really liked about this was the
the focus on not, not removing
children based on poverty alone,
um, but I then someone sent me
this report.
From the.
National Coalition for Child
Protection Reform, um, that is,
it's a 2022 rate of removal
index, uh, that's measuring how
many the the rates of removals
and rates of placement in
various states and then
specifically, um, kids living
under poverty who are being
removed. And according to these
numbers, it looks like.
If I was to only see this, I
would think we do not have an
issue in New Mexico with
removing children just based on
poverty. Now, I don't know how
to interpret this and and this
very much surprised me because
just this was not my anecdotal
understanding of how things are
going. Uh, one of the things
this was based on was the
federal data, um, listing the
number of children removed at
some point during the course of
a given year. And so I don't
know.
I don't know if you guys know
what kind of data is being
provided to the feds that would
be used in a study like this, if
they are getting all that data
and this is accurate, then.
I, I, I'm just I'm confused. I,
I don't know how they got that
data, um, and my understanding
is that CYFD does not collect
data on families' incomes, so I,
I don't know how those things
have been put together. I'm
sorry.
And Madam Chair and Ms. Conley,
I appreciate that. I mean, my,
my first thought when looking at
this was, there's that, that,
uh, there's lies, damn lies and
statistics, um, which is hard to
say that they are trying to lie
in any way, but that, but that
if you don't have good data,
then you don't, you can't trust
results necessarily, um.
But uh but I appreciate all of
your work on this. I appreciate
that you guys are going to
continue working on these issues
and I'm sure continue addressing
some of the, the other issues
about, you know, repeat, um.
Uh, abuse and and issues like
sleeping in offices. I, I have
faith that this is, if there's
any group who is committed to
working on those, uh, it would
be this, this task force. Thank
you.
Thank you, Senator. Senator Ivy
Soto and then Representative
Reed.
Thank you very much. Um, I would
ask for you all, uh, I don't
have a lot of time. If you just
take notes with what I have to
say.
Um, on page 9, subsection I
neglected child. Couple things,
uh, with regard to uh what you
have on deadly weapons, so,
um, a deadly weapon under your
definition is a deadly weapon,
not based upon what it is, but
based upon how it is used.
A firearm based on your
definition is a firearm based
upon what it is.
If you were to strike the
definition of firearm.
Then a firearm would be a deadly
weapon based upon how it's used.
You still get to the same place
you want to be, especially with
the word negligently. So, uh,
just that way you have apples
and apples between deadly
weapons.
And firearms by putting them in
the same category. Second thing,
um, on page 11, 0, also on page
10 under negligent child uh
paragraph 2,
you try reframing some of the
language that's in IPO, please
don't do that. The language
that's an FFA is very carefully
created. Leave the language in
NFPA alone. Don't try to
rephrase what's an FPA, um.
The uh
On page 13.
Um.
You, you have.
On a paragraph 11 of page 13.
And you have that.
Uh,
um, the conditions other than
the inadequate financial
resources of the parent.
That is, that is what part of
what, uh, it shall be in the
disposition judgment that
assumes.
Financial inadequate financial
resources of the parent. That
doesn't suggest if there are, it
assumes that there are the way
that it's written. You make the
exact same drafting error on
page 16, also under a paragraph
11. Um, if you turn down to page
16.
Uh, you have a problem that was
just discussed actually on some
of the side talk a couple of
minutes ago, which is we don't
pay foster parents for their
services. We provide
Financing to the child that that
goes through the through the
parents to provide for the
child, but that is not financing
to the parents, that is to the
child. And so the thing is when
you say any other and news page
16 under paragraph 14 when you
talk about any other assets that
would benefit the child. Any
other assets that benefit the
child is the support that goes
to the foster parent. So when
you, that includes the 4E funds.
So when you, when in paragraph
15, when you say that they not
be used for foster care
expenses, you've just eliminated
the 4E funds from being able to
be used in the manner that
they're being used. You make the
same mistake on pages 17 and 18
in subsection C and D.
Um,
Then uh in on page 35 under the
new reinstatement Act, and I'm
skipping over a bunch of stuff,
but under the new reinstatement
Act, why is that not being filed
in the court that did the
termination of parental rights.
Um,
because some court terminated,
that ought to be the one that
considers the reinstatement,
Madam Chair, and Senator Iy
Soto, members of the committee,
and I apologize, I've not been
as formal as I needed to
previously. Um, that is because
we don't know where they're
going to be living by the time
this needs to happen and if
they're in Katterine County now,
we don't want them to have to
haul to Raton.
To hear this case.
We did specifically think about
this. OK.
I mean, I think, I think, I
think you need to put some some
conditional language in there
then that if they're still
living in the same judicial
district and needs to be filed
in in the court where where the
termination took place if
they're not still living in that
same judicial district, then it
needs to be filed in the
judicial district where they're
living. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator.
Representative
Reeb, then Ream and then Senator
Neibert, OK,
thank you, Madam Chair, um, and
members, um, I, I'm not gonna
get into a lot of the stuff that
I want to talk about because I
don't have much time but I
wanted to focus a little bit on
um your time limit changes on
page 21 and 22.
And I, I do understand what
you're trying to do here and but
I guess my concern is, could
this have a different effect and
we have such a problem with CYFD
vacancies. I mean, I guess
you're a judge who deals with
this all the time. I hear CYMD
reports aren't done on time, uh,
maybe see way of the people
don't show up because of the
lack of people filling those
positions, and I don't, I don't
want to see the reverse thing
happen to where cases dismissed
with prejudice, um, and, and I
don't know what that actually
means.
In the sense that can that, I
mean, I know in a criminal
aspect, but does that mean that
can never be brought up again if
a kid comes in with a broken arm
and CYFD drops the ball as
they've been dropping the ball
frequently, um, and that case
gets dismissed because of a
problem at CYFD and a lack of
resources, then something
happens later and the kids
abused again. The other arm is
broken. Um, can that first case
be brought up and are this this
exception on page 22 unless the
court
A finding as to circumstances
beyond the control of the
parties. What are those
circumstances? If you could help
me understand that.
Madam Chair and Representative
Reed, thank, thank you for the
question. I, I think those are
some of the things.
We struggled with and that
beyond the con the control of
the parties is something that
we're punting to or directing to
the Children's Court Rule
Committee for them to determine
what that means. I'm not sure
how in legislation you can
address that because that
dreaded lawyer answer depends on
all the facts and circumstances
and a few other things that are
supposed to be hilarious and
they're not. I, I think that
that one of the things that our
systems
Making up the child welfare
system very often resort to, and
it's very real. We don't have
the resources or the time to do
all these great things that if
we could afford it and if we had
the time and resources that
would be workable.
The kids and the parents
affected by this didn't ask to
be in this system, and it's, I
think for me personally as a
judge to have ever said that and
perhaps I did would have been
not holding myself accountable.
We need to make those resources
available, I think to
Representative Luhan's comment
earlier about the resources
available in this state, poverty
is inexcusable. Similarly,
resources that the courts and
the and the entire child
welfare.
System need really boils down to
attorneys and judges and, you
know, workers within CYFD. What
is it that is happening and
there are a lot of theories and
a lot of finger pointing going
on about why we have such high
turnover, um, and, and those
need to be addressed in greater
detail to address those, and
that's part of the
recommendation that says this
needs to be.
The executive, the legislature,
and the and the judiciary
working together collaboratively
to address that, I don't mean to
cut you off because I don't want
to lose all my time, but I just
don't want to hurt the child and
can the second can with
prejudice, does that mean that
case cannot be mentioned at all
in the next proceeding?
It could mean that. I mean,
technically that's what it means
when a case is dismissed with
prejudice, but it's that
specific case. It is not unusual
that another case could be filed
under a different set of
circumstances, and it's a
different case then arguably
it's just my concern is I don't
want to punish a child for a
broken CYFD system, so I think
we need to really look at that,
um, also, uh, I'm not gonna get
into the whole firearm thing
because I'm sure everybody else
on here is going to have huge
problem with that issue in and
of itself.
We all have been dealing with
that. We have a criminal law on
the books for that, but if I, I
don't understand CYFD extremely
well, but you have your, your
petition that's filed then you
generally have like what a a 10
day hearing. Can I finish this
real quick question. It's like
10 day hearing and then you have
your adjudication and if in that
and then your termination if
that's where it goes. So if.
If you're adjudicated, um, under
this neglect for the firearm
thing that that's not
appealable, correct? That's not
what appealable.
Uh, it is adjudications can be
appealed, yes. I was thinking
it's just termination of rights,
but even the 10-day hearing can
be appealed.
OK, and, um, and I would, I
thank you for answering that. I
also just do have a concern
about the makeup of the
committee, um, I, I, that's a
big concern of mine. I just
wanted to to say that. Thank
you, Madam Chair. May I add one
other thing, if time permits, if
it doesn't, I'll stop. I think
we need to move to the next
question. So, um,
representative.
dream
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I'm
going to apologize up front that
I'm going to cut you off because
I've got several questions. One
of them is how many children
were taken into foster care
strictly because they're poor.
I expect it, Madam Chair,
Representative Rehm, members of
the committee, I expect it's
very small.
Thank you
Um, I have, Madam Chair, and I
have a real problem trying to
understand the definition of
negligent, unsupervised access
to firearms. Could you tell me
what that is?
Uh
All I can do is an example, um.
Johnny, we're having a problem
with coyotes.
Will you go take care of them.
We know that Johnny has already
had his training, his, his
parents do a good job with him.
That's not negligence, and
that's not unsupervised in that
his parents have specifically
allowed that.
We had the horrible circumstance
of the Rio Rancho police officer
who lost a child when one of his
other children got a hold of his
service weapon that if that was
a standalone event and that's an
exhausted police officer coming
home not properly securing his
weapon at that moment, that is
not negligence. That was a
horrible accident. It would be a
case by case determination. If
we have a police officer who
comes home and every single day.
leaves his weapon on the coffee
table and you know, just yells
at the kids, you better not
touch that thing, then that's a
different problem. OK, let me
cut you off there and why I'm
doing that, Madam Chair, is
because under our House Bill 9,
which is the safe storage of
firearms.
We have exceptions listed in
there and you have no exceptions
listed, your definition is very
bad. Uh, anyway, uh, I want to
move on from there, you know,
and I would, I would use this
example. So do you have another
paragraph that says negligent,
unsupervised access to drugs,
chemicals in the in the um
household, and you don't need to
answer that. We'll go to the
next one.
Um.
The deadly weapon that was.
Uh, Madam Chair, and panel, how
many of the cases that came
before the court.
And were continued, Your Honor.
You were saying many of them
were continued.
Where most of those continued by
whom and for what reason? What
I'm really going is that CYFD
were they prepared or not?
Madam Chair, Representative, uh,
Rehm, I, I would say that I
don't know if there's any data
on that. I, all I can tell you,
I can respond anecdotally about
what I experienced sitting on
the bench.
Very often it was uh because
circumstances precluded going
forward with the case and one of
those that frequently came up
was.
Attorney uh X.
was in my courtroom and had to
leave town to go down to Hobbs
to be an attorney in that case,
and we couldn't keep that
attorney beyond the time
otherwise that judge might find
him in contempt. So it goes back
to the resources issue. Yes,
there were times that attorneys
were not prepared and not
exclusively CYFD attorneys. It
may have been
you know, the, the parent
attorney who had not yet had an
opportunity to visit with his
client because that client was
just served.
Yesterday and he just made
contact with with her today. So
those are any number of
variables that contribute to
continuances that shouldn't be
happening but do and and and if
if I may add to that, uh, that's
very interesting to think about
that piece of it, um, because we
need to make sure that a
parent's counsel can't game the
system, so we need to make sure
that our rules address that.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I
want to
keep my time for the next panel.
OK
good management of your time,
Representative Rehm. Um, now we
have Senator Nibert. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Is there anything
in this that talks about the
goal being best interests of the
child.
Um,
Senator Neibert, there is not
because we're not changing
anything that is already in the
children's code and we already
have best interest of the child
as the centerpiece of the
children's coat. When did that
change that's been there all
along in child abuse and neglect
cases and Guardian ad litems
that represent children are
required to represent the best
interest of the child. Judge
Romero, uh, your decision-making
on best interest?
Well, first, when it comes to
Indian children, whether it's
under the Indian Family
Protection Act or the Federal
Indian Child Welfare Act best
interests of an Indian child has
been defied federally and in our
state law. So there's little
discretion to determine what's
in the best interests when it
comes to placement in other
aspects of that child regardless
of whether you know whether
they're Indian children or not,
things like well-being,
education, uh, dental care,
medical care, those are things.
That ultimately it's up to the
judge to accept the
recommendations of the
children's attorney, the GAL or
the youth attorney or even the
department, but it's the judge's
decision to decide whether it's
in the best interests of the
child or not. The others make
recommendations about what's in
the best interests. Some are
confused about that. Judge, I
said this is in the child's best
interest when you're making a
recommendation. I, you know,
the, the, the book, the book
stops with me. I'm the one that
needs to make that.
Decision, not you. I've been
concerned for years that we have
put reunification as the goal of
CYFD and not the best interests
of a child, and we have had
several hearings that have
discussed that very issue and
has judiciary and elsewhere.
And I wanted to see if you've
done anything with that because
I, I'm concerned that it's not
there, um, my, my second point,
um,
you know, neglect from the
child's standpoint.
Uh, has nothing to do with
money.
Neglect is how
The, the resources that they
have the, the uh uh emotional
and love that they're receiving
and what have you and and it
seems to me that some of the
drafting in your effort to take
the economic status out of the
equation.
You know, the definition of
neglect, neglected child.
One child could be neglected in
this situation and that's a
child experiencing the exact
same thing in another situation
whose parents don't have money.
would not be a neglected child.
Under your definition, and so it
seems to me that we will be
looking at the child and and
what's available to them and it
doesn't mean that these are bad
parents, but that child's not
receiving something that they
ought to be receiving, there
ought to be some some mechanism
for that. I think we ought to
look at the child and and where
they're at and not necessarily
the parents, but uh uh those,
those were two points and then
I, I had many things like center
Iy Soto.
About just how this stuff's uh
working and I think you better
go through this with a with a
fine tooth comb and, and shared
a lot of this stuff out because
it's just.
In my opinion, not going to work
in its present form.
Thank you.
I have on my list uh
representative Lord and then Cia
Lopez. Am I missing anybody?
It's hard to believe I am, but,
um, OK, um, so Representative
Lord and then Senator Cedil
Lopez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I got
lost in there like I don't know
where I'm in this placement. So,
uh, I'm gonna use my 4 minutes
to ramble. Um, so.
OK, I got the tick going.
Uh, well, the reason why is
because Iy Soto brought up
Senator, sorry, so sorry,
Senator, uh, brought up a bunch
of great points, Representative
Ream.
Uh, um, represent Reeb.
And you know also when he was
talking about the HB 9 that
makes me very concerned about.
A family already grieving if
their child got a hold of a
firearm and now they look at the
possibility of losing their
child.
I mean that that's a serious
concern.
That if the parent is charged
with that and then the child is
then removed from the home. I, I
don't like that at all. That
makes me. It's very disturbing
for me.
Um, so questions already been
asked that I had how many
children have been removed just
because they're poor. I don't
think that's a very high amount,
but I want to give you my own
lived experience. I was
illegally adopted my, my, uh,
doctor that raised me just want
a kid.
Kept me.
And they were very well off. Her
parents lived in Beverly Hills.
They had a lot of money and they
her and her lesbian partner were
both drug addicts and alcoholics
and so my lived experience was
it didn't matter that we had
tons of money. They left me
neglected all the time. So your
examples, anecdotal or not, I
have the opposite, you know, I
can show you stats where people
have come from money and are
often abused, and I think it
goes back to, uh, sorry, now
senator.
Sorry, I can't keep track of you
guys. I made the point of, I
don't think it really matters.
What matters is, is what's in
the best interests of the child,
and are they getting the care
whether they are poor or rich
because if you're going to give
financial support to someone
who's a drug addict, how do I
know that they aren't gonna use
that for drug addiction like in
the CRE Act, how we didn't
mandate the care. If you're not
going to mandate care.
Look, let's just be real. If you
want the kids to have the best
experience in life and you want
them to have to end up being
good citizens and having good
life life story. That means
you've got to look at the
parents. Are they mentally
capable of taking care of the
child? What help do they need?
Do they need behavioral help? Do
they need to learn how to
parent? Are they drug addicted?
What are you doing for the drug
addiction? We have learned here
in this committee that you could
throw money at all kinds of
problems it does not fix them,
especially in my situation. We
had tons of money, didn't.
Fix anything that happened with
me, my childhood, except it had
a lot of cool stuff.
Um,
It doesn't make
For a better situation for a
child to say,
OK, there's a situation where
the parents don't have money,
we're going to give them money
without, I'm sorry, I'm just so
sorry that so many times we
think that throwing money at it
is going to fix it, and there's
nothing happening. The parents's
still a drug addict. The parents
still abusive, the parents still
in a domestic violence
relationship. If you're not
going to fix that root cause,
then all of this is for nothing.
absolutely nothing, to want to
always put the kids back in a
situation where they're being
abused with.
without fixing the abuse in the
first place. I want to
definitely see more stakeholders
involved with this, foster kids.
I'd like to see a Republican.
And and your team. I didn't see
one. I saw a Democrat and the
Republicans. Um, I don't think,
I don't trust CFD to handle any
of this. I don't think they can
handle any of this situation. I
think we're just gonna have a
further disaster.
Uh, but the one thing we agree
on is I brought forward Finkos 2
times, and it didn't go through.
So if you guys want to work with
me to bring forth Finkos because
you have that as.
Number 13 on your solutions. I
present it twice, didn't go
anywhere. And your other problem
with your definition deadly
weapon, that could be a knife,
baseball, bat, slingshot, and
then at page 10 you say
unsupervised access. So not for
kids carrying a baseball bat. I
mean, we're going from firearms,
which kids should not have
access to, but now I'm going to
knives, clubs, baseball bat. I
mean, it's way too objective and
I think too many kids are
getting caught up in the system
and I think too many children be
taken away from their households
over, by the way, also a human
It is a deadly weapon. So I'm
finished. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative,
did it briefly comment if you
wish, if you appropriate. Madam
Chair and Representative Lord, I
think we agree a lot more than
it appears to you. I am willing
to talk with you about that, um.
Behavior change is always the
underlying requirement in case
planning once a child is brought
into custody.
It, no, because it doesn't need
to be because it's in other
parts of the code. It already
exists. We didn't go through and
change the entire code we only
change small pieces. We didn't
break down and redo the things
that we're already working.
Yeah, rap, rep, but this is not
a back and forth. I, I gave him
a little bit of time to they are
interested in talking with you,
obviously, so that's a good
thing, so thank you, sure, yeah,
thank you, Senator, uh, Cedilia
Lopez.
Um, you, Madam Chair, thank you
for the presentation. It was
really, um, really helpful and
thank you for all of the work.
As I understand your primary
task was to revise the
Children's code based on an
impressive list of people's
experience.
The judges, the, you know,
people working at the advocates
working in the system. So I, I
appreciate that, but then I
think you guys went a little bit
further than just revising the
code with your recommendations
and that's, that's good because
we, um, you know, we need to
think about what your lived
experiences were just have a
couple of questions about the.
Some of the recommendations, and
since I only have 4 minutes,
I'll just ask you about two of
them. One of them,
recommendation 24.
Well, actually I'll start with
23. 23 says that the the
legislative and judicial
branches employ the three branch
approach where feasible and
appropriate to reform, uh, child
and family welfare, um.
And then you have a footnote
referring to a web page. Could
you tell us a little bit more
about what you think of 33
branch approaches? Is it your
task force that has the three
branches or what, what does it
mean? It,
um.
What do you,
I'm sorry,
are you Senator Lopez and Ma,
are you right, I've got the
page. Are you asking? I mean, of
course, the three branch
approach is talking about the
three branches of government.
Are you asking us that we say
how that should happen? I don't
know yet.
OK. All right. Well, that's,
that's helpful, uh, I guess you
don't know because that's
something we should think about
because sometimes we are at odds
with each other and the entire
system needs to focus. Ha you
correctly pointed out on the
best interests of the child. Um,
and then the second one and the
reason I ask is sort of related,
you talked, um.
You on the 2.
Um,
24, you talk about concrete
supports, um, and we talked a
little bit about this already,
um, why can't we simply give the
money that the foster people get
for housing these children to
the parents. Why can't we just
do that? Because I, when I
worked at Ela Citario, and I
would look at the poverty of the
parents whose child got taken
away and then these foster
families who have like 6 or 7
kids and had all these checks
coming in.
And had a big old house and
everything. I just felt like
there was something wrong with
that picture, um.
Is there anything stopping us
from just diverting the money
from the foster family to the
To the family whose child has
been taken away. So, um,
Madam Chair, Senator Serio
Lopez, members of the committee,
um.
Representative Lord has some
good points in that you can't
just throw cash to people who
are going to put it up their
noses or into their veins, so
there may be reasons we can't do
that.
I don't know all of why we
can't uh I certainly represented
parents who could have gotten
their children home sooner if
they were in better financial
circumstances because their
behaviors had changed, but they
still didn't have a big enough
room or even a home, etc. Well,
that's, that's exactly my point,
right, and that's the point
which I, I agree. I don't, I
agree with Senator Avioto the.
could be better rewarded, but I
really agree with the sentiment
that people's kids shouldn't be
taken away from them just
because of their poverty. But
the reality is these kids are
not going to school clean or
they're not going to school at
all. They're going to school
some in some cases hungry, they
may not have a home. I mean, I,
I just met with a, a homeless
family, um, and the kid is
planning to go to school and was
connected with the APS homeless
program, but I just think of the
odds, um.
And so these,
these supports has necessary to
develop policies to use state
and federal funds for concrete
supports. That's not the same as
these big checks that family
that foster homes get without
all the the the.
Conditions and you know,
everything else you have to do,
um, anyway, that just struck me
and I, I understand the
sentiment I think is very
important. The children just as
uh Senator Lord or
Representative Lord said, not be
taken away just because they're
poor because there's more to a
family than being poor. Um, I
mean, then, then, uh, physical
things and then finally
crossover kids, oh, I'm done.
OK.
All right, well, some point we
need to understand crossover
kits, so I wanna, it's amazing.
I, it's clear to me you've all
have been working
extraordinarily hard on on
recommendations and proposed
legislation that I gather we're
going to be seeing um.
In the next session, um,
you're hearing from folks here
that, uh, how it's drafted and
the details of the drafting are
going to be extraordinarily
important and significant and
I'd encourage you to be mindful
of that when you come to us with
a bill because um it's gonna be
the heavy lift if you know, just
on the language part, and then
there's the policy part which of
course you're seeing many of us
have sincere interested in and
um a lot of sincere views about
and so, um, encourage you to be
reaching out to people you think
might have good suggestions
about wording and so on, cause
there are experts here on our
committee and in the legislature
who are very good at at advice
with that. So I just want to
share that with you because
there will be hurdles, um, if
the drafting isn't, isn't
precise and so on, and I was
hearing a little bit of that
from some of our.
Members on the committee, so I
just want to encourage you along
those lines, but it's clear to
me that you all have been
working extremely hard and I
commend you for that and
appreciate all the work that you
have been doing. So thank you
very much and may I just give
them a statutory reference in
terms of something that may work
for them on the drafting, and
that is 32-28.
13.
B
Paragraphs 3 and 4.
And what you'll find there is
the standard that we put in IPA
for excluding poverty.
Yes, and if you look at that
language, it is, it is very
clear that that what we do is
that, is that we exclude um we
exclude community and family
family poverty, isolation,
single parenthood, custodian,
age, crowded or inadequate
housing, substance abuse,
non-conforming social behavior
shall not by
Self constitute.
The evidence
For removing a child, but we, we
have, we have, but, but we also
have a standard in there that
the particular conditions in the
home and the likelihood that
continued custody of the child
will result in serious emotional
or physical damage to the
particular child. So, so just
we, that was very carefully
worked through language and that
you should plagiarize that.
Thank you, Madam Chair, I
respond very briefly to thank
you. Senator, we worked very
consciously to know.
Not try to undo anything of if
we think IPA is the platinum
standard of practice, and we
would love to carry that
platinum standard forward to
every child and family in New
Mexico.
Thank you.
Thank you and thank you for your
willingness to accept feedback.
We really appreciate that and I
appreciate you. Thank you so
much. Thank you, absolutely.
So the last substantive item on
the agenda, and then we'll do
have our committee discussion
and public comment.
Um, is.
a a briefing, I guess is a
better way to put it on.
Ortega versus Grisham and um
It's a preliminary opinion, but
I thought it's, it's one of the
first, we don't have a lot of
opinions in the state
interpreting Second Amendment
issues and so on. We have to
look outside of New Mexico
often, and this is an opinion
that addresses a recent bill
that we passed, um,
on the 7 day waiting period.
And it was in response to, I
think it was a preliminary
injunction and restraint
restraining order as well.
Um
In an effort to stop
implementation of the law, and
it's preliminary, meaning
there'll be additional
litigation, no doubt, but I
thought, and it's a 100-page
opinion.
By by Judge Browning, who is a
very well respected judge and
our district and known to be
very thorough, so, um, I asked
staff to look at it, so um we
have Simon Suzuki, who's briefed
us before, and Christina Esquez
a relatively new staff member
I've worked with her and she's
done some excellent work for me
on some bills. So with that, the
floor is yours.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee. First of all, thank
you for the opportunity. Um, and
before we start, I think it's
really important to note that
all the opinions expressed in
this presentation on Ortega v.
Grisham are my own and Mr.
Suzuki's and not the opinions of
LCS. Um, I also want to make it
clear, chair, you just went over
this, but, um, the district
court's opinion on the motion
for a temporary restraining
order and the preliminary
injunction that we're discussing
today are part of ongoing
litigation, and they will be
heard later at trial on the
merits, and this decision is non
Residential.
So first, let's talk about the
issue. So the issue in this
case was whether the plaintiffs
are entitled to a temporary
restraining order or preliminary
injunction to stop the
enforcement of the waiting
period law based on US Supreme
Court case law regarding the
Second Amendment.
Um, the facts of this case are
that there were 2 New Mexico
residents who tried separately
to purchase firearms on the day
of the waiting period law went
into effect, which was May 15th.
Um, plaintiffs were told by
firearms sellers that due to the
waiting period law, they would
have to wait 7 days before they
could take possession of the
firearms. This was despite both
buyers having passed their
federal instant background
checks. Um, both plaintiffs
already own firearms. They plan
on purchasing additional
firearms, and they were able to
take possession of the firearms
that they went on on.
May 15th to purchase after the
required seven-day waiting
period had elapsed. Um,
plaintiffs then filed a
complaint against the governor
and the attorney general in
their official capacities. And
they also filed a motion for a
temporary restraining order in
plenary injunction to stop the
enforcement of the waiting
period law. Um, the plaintiffs
allege that the waiting period
law violates the Second
Amendment of the US Constitution
as they believe that it burdens
the citizens of New Mexico's
right to keep and bear arms. Um,
the case remains an active
litigation, and the district
court.
decision, um, on this motion is
non-presidential, which we
already discussed, and it
remains subject to appeal for 30
days from the date the order was
filed. So this order was filed
on July 22nd. So the deadline
for the appeal is kind of fast
approaching.
Um, I think in order to sort of
fully understand the facts we
need to have a little bit of
context, so I'm going to discuss
a little bit of uh the substance
of the waiting period law. Um,
this law requires a waiting
period of 7 calendar days to
pass before a firearm can
transfer from a seller to a
buyer. Um, during this time, the
firearms shall remain in the
custody of the seller or the
Federal firearms licensee that's
performing the federal instant
background check.
Um, in this statute, firearm is
defined the same way as it is in
multiple sections of chapter 30,
Article 7, which is um an
article on weapons and
explosives. So I'm sure you guys
are all pretty well versed in
this definition, but it states
that any weapon that will or is
designed to or may readily be
converted to expel a projectile
by the action of an explosion.
The frame or receiver of any
such weapon and includes any
handgun, rifle or shotgun, but
shall not include an antique
firearm as defined in 18 USC
Section 921 16. Um, a powder
actuated tool or other device
designed to be used for
construction purposes an
emergency flare or a firearm in
permanent inoperable condition.
So that's the definition of the
firearm that we're working with.
Um, it's important to note that
the waiting period does include
the time that it would take to
do.
instant background check. So,
you know, that 7 days, usually
those are instant, that's why
they're called instant
background checks. However,
there are cases where it takes
longer or sometimes doesn't get
done at all. So this bill was
drafted with the intention to
close the Charleston loophole,
which is what this is. So now,
if the federal instant
background check hasn't been
completed within 20 days, the
statute says that the seller may
transfer the firearm to the
buyer.
Um, and the crime of unlawful
sale of a firearm before
required waiting period ends
occurs when the, the transfer of
ownership, possession or
physical control of the firearm
from the seller to the buyer
before the end of the required
seven-day calendar, uh, 7
calendar day waiting period, but
does not include temporary
possession or control of a
firearm provided to a customer
by a proprietor of a licensed
business in the conduct of that
business. So you are allowed to
handle the firearm when you're
looking to buy it.
Um,
each party to an unlawful sale
of a firearm before the waiting
period ends, it can be charged
separately for the same sale.
And each firearm sold unlawfully
would constitute a separate
offense. Um, if a person
violates this law, they're
guilty of a misdemeanor. Um, and
the sentencing authority for a
misdemeanor requires that you
would have a sentence of
imprisonment in county jail for
less than one year or a fine of
not more than $1000 or both the
imprisonment and the fine.
Um, there are 5 exceptions to
this law, and those are as
follows. It's to a buyer who
holds a valid federal firearms
license to a buyer who holds a
valid New Mexico concealed
handgun license pursuant to the
concealed handgun carry Act to a
law enforcement agency.
Between two law enforcement
officers that are authorized to
carry a firearm and certified
pursuant to federal law or the
Law Enforcement Training Act
here in New Mexico or between
immediate family members, which
means a spouse, a parent, a
child, a sibling, grandparent, a
grandchild, a great grandchild,
a niece, a nephew, a first
cousin, an aunt or an uncle. And
so that's kind of the entirety
of that law. And now I'm gonna
hand it over to Simon for
analysis.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um so I,
we understand that this
committee has studied this
issue,
um, pretty thoroughly, Senator
IV Soto gave a pretty in-depth
presentation last interim and
Mr. Cummings and Ms. Dorsey also
um updated the the committee
regarding the Rahimi opinion,
so we're gonna just uh not get
into too much detail about the
law, but, um, as
You mentioned, Madam Chair, and
Ms. Vasquez, this issue was over
a motion for a TRO or
preliminary injunction. So just
for the committee's information
generally to get a preliminary
injunction, the movement has to
demonstrate a substantial
likelihood of success on the
merits. Um, and that would be
the merits of their Second
Amendment claim.
Um, make a clear and unequivocal
showing that they'll suffer
irreparable harm absent the
preliminary relief.
That the balance of the equities
tips in their favor, which means
that the likely harm they'll
suffer outweighs any harm to the
state.
Um, if the preliminary
injunction was granted and to
show that the um preliminary
injunction is in the public
interest. The standards change a
little bit based on who the
parties are and the type of
injunctive relief that's
requested, but generally those
are the requirements that the
court imposed. And then a TRO is
just a preliminary injunction
without notice that has a
a much shorter expiration date
on it. Um,
So the courts typically require
a showing of immediacy and may
impose other requirements on the
movement.
So, uh, so this, this court um
determined that the plaintiffs
were not entitled to a
preliminary injunction and
The judge went into detail on
each of the elements, but for
the committee's interest will
focus on the first, the
likelihood, the substantial
likelihood of success on the
plaintiffs, um, the merits of
the plaintiffs Second Amendment
claim. So many of you are
familiar with the, the, the
Bruin test, which was recently
clarified or modified by Rahimi,
which is a two-part inquiry
where the court has to first
look to the plain text.
Of the Second Amendment to
determine whether the conduct
that's regulated by the statute
is covered, and this is a purely
textual analysis.
So you know, following the, the
Supreme Court case law. This
Court did just that. It looked
at the text of the Second
Amendment, the operative clause.
The right to keep and bear arms
and determined.
Uh
You're looking to Justice
Scalia's opinion in Heller, some
other
opinions from the circuit courts
of appeals.
You know, plain dictionary
definitions keep means to have.
Bare means to carry in public.
And
So, so, you know, therefore, the
plain text of the court
determined the plain text of the
Second Amendment did not cover
purchase. The court acknowledged
that
The Second Amendment may cover
like or likely covers the
purchase of firearms because if
a person was not able to acquire
firearms, it would, would likely
amount to a functional
prohibition on keeping firearms,
but that is not um,
that wouldn't be that right
wouldn't be established through
a plain text analysis. Um, so
applying only the plain text
analysis, the court determined
that keep does not include
purchase.
The and it may get a little bit
confusing, Madam Chair, so
please interrupt me if, if, if.
You know, I get too into the
weeds, but the court was faced
with somewhat of a novel issue.
It's, it's been addressed by
some, some of the district
courts, some of the circuit
courts as to whether
a previous opinion by the
Supreme Court, Heller, that
established these cons
presumptively constitutional
categories of firearm
regulations, um, whether that
was subsumed by Bruin or
abrogated by Bruin, and the
court determined that it was
not. So these were the safe
space, um, the sensitive space,
uh.
Places that fell under the
sensitive space doctrine, um,
laws that prohibited possession
by felons and the mentally ill,
and um.
Laws that required licensing for
handguns. And, and finally, the
one that applied to this law
were laws that regulated the
commercial sale of firearms.
So the, so after.
Uh
Making that first determination
in Bruin, the court then looked
Um, at whether the waiting
period law was a commercial
regulation. It determined that
it was and uh held that because
it was commercial, the law was
presumptively constitutional.
And the um the standard that the
Court fashioned, and, and again,
this is uh unique to this
particular case. There there is
is not any definitive precedent
on it in in
Our circuit or nationally
through the Supreme Court.
is whether the regulation
applies to the sale of firearms
at the point of sale,
whether it unduly burdens the
buyer over the seller.
And um.
Whether it is a long standing
regulation.
Uh, and, and the court applied
long standing as a different
standard from the historical
tradition standard, um.
Set forth in ruin and
Just kind of the, the, you know,
main point is that it's a
regulation is long standing if
it dates to some point in the
20th century.
Uh, and the, the court.
You know, justified that
determination by pointing to
several examples. Um,
additionally, because it's a
presumption, presumptions can be
rebutted, and the court
determined that the plaintiffs
were unable to rebut the
presumption because they would.
They they would be unable to
show that it had more than a de
minimis effect on their right to
keep and bear arms. The court
characterized it as a brief
delay in in their acquisition of
the firearm. And then finally,
the court went to the to the
second part of Bruin, which for
the purposes of this
presentation is the third kind
of part of the analysis. Here is
whether the um the the
statement, the, uh, if, even if
the plain text of the Second
Amendment covered, uh.
The waiting period, the conduct
covered in the waiting period
Act.
Uh, if
The defendants carried their
burden, so the state carried
their burden to demonstrate that
the law is consistent with the
nation's historical tradition of
firearm regulation.
And as the court, the Supreme
Court said in Bruin, as they
said again in Rahimi, a law
doesn't have to be a dead
ringer. It doesn't have to be a
historical twin.
Rather, the court, the trial
court has to determine whether
it's relevantly similar to one
of the historical uh firearm
regulations. So looking at the
why, the reason, the legislative
intent behind the regulation and
how that regulation impacts the
the right to bear arms.
Um, so the state, uh, cited two
types of regulations, uh, one
that
dealt with the sale of firearms
to intoxicated people and the
other were these historical
licensing regimes and, and these
were, um.
Colonial era territorial era,
uh.
Laws that generally prohibited
the sale of firearms to Native
Americans, enslaved people,
and then, uh, other citizens who
held.
seditious viewpoints against the
government. Um, the court
determined that the waiting
period law was relevantly
similar to the latter category
of regulations, these licensing
regimes and because of the, so
the why, the why, the reason for
these regulations.
The court determined were
To protect the public from
people.
deemed to pose a potential
threat, and I encourage all of
you to read the opinion. It's
very, very detailed and, you
know, the, uh,
Judge Browning is very careful
to explain his reasoning, but
that um.
That
Basically this the waiting
period law did the same thing.
It, it identifies a group of
people that may
pose a threat and
The and in terms of the how the
uh
The court determined that they
weren't that the how how the
historical examples affected the
um the Second Amendment right.
We're not similar to how the
waiting period law affects the
Second Amendment right
in instead, the court said that
the the historical examples went
much further. The historical
examples completely barred
possession, um, banned the sale
of firearms to these groups of
people, whereas again the
waiting period law merely poses
what the Court called a brief
delay in acquisition.
And with that, Madam Chair, we
will stand for questions.
thinks that's, that was super
helpful and concise, which I
really appreciate, um, members
of Senator Cervantes, thank you.
That we're a little behind and
we're going to get to maybe some
free for all.
At the end of the day, yeah, so,
so I won't, I won't go too deep
into this. I just think it's
important to recognize the work
of a lot of people in this room
on the Senate Judiciary
Committee, the House Judiciary
Committee, for really doing
pretty incredible work and our
staff who's here as well too,
you know, the gun regulation,
gun laws these days is about
threading a needle. That's
really what it comes down to.
And some people get it right and
some people get it wrong. Uh,
we've, we've had some executive
orders coming in in the last
year that have been promptly
enjoying.
And struck down as
unconstitutional. Um, we in the
legislative committees that I've
served with uh are trying really
hard to make sure that we only
pass gun laws that are
constitutional.
That are going to survive and
that's not easy to do because
the Supreme Court, as we're
learning here, has got a moving
target. You'll excuse the, the
pun, uh, um, however, uh, I
always look with some amusement
at my colleagues over here to my
left because a couple of years
ago I said that the Supreme
Court's original analysis in
Hell and Bro would not stand the
test of time and that Clarence
Thomas didn't know what he was
doing. Um, and that was pretty
brazen comment. I know it's a
pretty brace, well, you all
thought I was a nutcase.
Right, yeah, I'm sure you did
and and you know some street
lawyer from Las Cruces is
telling the Supreme Court
justice that he doesn't know
what he's doing. He doesn't know
what he's doing. Um, and, and
clearly we're already seeing the
court backing away from that
historic analogy test and the
reason it was easy for me to
predict they'd have to back away
was the Rahimi case, which is
there's no way the court is
going to say, yeah, you have to
sell guns to people regardless
of domestic violence order and,
and there was no way in a modern
society the court was going to
be able to just.
By doing that. So they've
already had to start backing
away from this historic analogy
test and it's important for us
to recognize that the court is
beginning to open the doors a
little bit for us and we can
start trying to go through some
of this very carefully and
slowly if we want to maintain
what has been my goal, which is
to not pass things for show. We
talked about that earlier this
morning. It's easy to pass when
the speaker was here. It's easy
to pass laws that'll get us a
nice press conference, give us
high fives so we can go smoke
cigars and have a brandy, um,
and feel really good for.
About a week.
OK, so no cigars. Uh, but, you
know, we'll feel good for about
a week until the federal courts
step in and grant an injunction
and strike the law down, which
we're doing some up in New
Mexico too and it's an exercise
that I guess makes some people
feel good for a few moments,
but, uh, in any event, I just
think it's important to
recognize Brandon, who's here,
uh, the, the Judiciary Committee
members who presented Daniel
presenting with Brandon last
year. We've taken a good
opportunity to learn the law and
this committee should really be
commended on the deep dive,
Madam Chair, you following up
this year.
to, to really dig in, learn the
law, know what we can do and be
intelligent and responsible
about it and we should, to me
this is a celebration of our
work, right? It's to say, hey,
we passed, I was the sponsor and
the author of the 7 day waiting
period, but I don't do it alone.
We do it with a lot of committee
work, a lot of staff work,
reading all these cases, a lot
of thought, a lot of study, and
we threaded the needle and at
least right now we've got a
federal judge who arguably is
probably the most thorough
judge. It's no surprise that he
wrote a how long is this
decision?
105 pages. Yeah, 105 page
decision. Uh, he's trying to
make sure that he's, his rulings
are going to get, uh, looked at
up at the Court of Appeals and
maybe by the US Supreme Court,
and he's, he's laying a good
foundation and I'll just, at the
risk of getting in trouble with
anybody, which, you know, I'm
getting in a lot of trouble with
everybody these days. Uh, Judge
Browning is probably regarded as
one of the most conservative, if
not the most conservative
federal judge in the state. Um,
I gotta imagine he's a
Republican appointee, brilliant
judge. I'll say that, so I get.
Out of trouble with him when I
call him conservative, but, but
he's brilliant and, and there's
a reason he wrote the opinion he
did and took the time he did.
Um, and when he's saying we got
it right, which we're the one
who wrote this, we're the ones
who passed this. When he's
saying we got this right, I
think kudos to this committee,
Madam Chair, kudos to our staff
and, and, and it's a real
privilege to work with all of
you and to be able to say
whether you agree with the 7 day
waiting period. I know some of
y'all didn't like it. I know
some of y'all opposed me on it.
I respect that, but, but you
should, I think, take some time.
Pride in the fact we're doing
extraordinary legal work here,
and, and Madam Chair, I, I, I
think it's important we take a
moment to recognize that. Thank
you.
Uh, thank you, Senator, Senator
Neibert.
Since the chair already asked
the question I was going to ask
as to how many pages Judge
Browning uh wrote, uh, I will
point out that had it been a 14
day waiting period that we may
have a different result.
Well, I don't know cause if if
it's turns on the word keep.
Right, which is what one of the
predicates was, well, I'm just,
you know, I guess I shouldn't
jump in, but I'm, I'm, I'm
choosing, yeah, sorry, I'm
treating him like he's a serious
person.
Well knowing Judge Browning and
I, I think you may have had a
different result had it been 14
days. I think the 14 days was
definitely the outer limits, uh,
and.
You
agreement to reduce it to 7
days, made it, I think, at least
in Judge Browning's eyes,
palatable.
Anyway, we don't need
congratulations kind of, yeah,
yeah.
Yeah, yeah, I guess that's about
as close as you're gonna get
with him.
Um, senator Ivy Soto. Thank you.
You know, first of all, I, you
know, I,
I did uh uh worked with Senator
Cervantes on the bill. Did did
vote for the bill. I, I also did
Peru the opinion I do recognize,
given that it's Judge Browning
105 pages means that he kind of
phoned it in.
Most of his opinions are much
longer than that, um, but I will
say that that if there is, if
there is a weak point in his
opinion.
Um, it is, it is, it is that he
he gave weight.
To the testimony that was
provided as to the number of
lives that that some people
believe will be saved by the 7
day waiting period.
Um, and, and, and, and, and the
reason I say that's a weak point
is, is in Myer versus Bruin.
Um,
The
Uh, in, in that opinion, it, it
states very clearly and it's
very succinctly and Haller and
McDonald beheld the 2nd and 14th
Amendments to protect an
individual right to keep and
bear arms for self-defense in
the years since, the Court of
Appeals have coalesced around on
a two-step framework for
analyzing the Second Amendment
challenges that combines history
with means and scrutiny means
unscrutiny being a balancing
test of the social benefit of a
policy.
That's a means and scrutiny.
Despite the popularity of this
two-step approach. It is one
step too many.
Today we declined to adopt that
two-step approach.
Um, to the extent that Justice
or that Judge Browning
Um,
Found himself
Relying on or articulating what
certainly sounded like a
two-step approach.
On, um, by weighing and giving
weight.
To a means and scrutiny.
Uh, of the evidence supporting
the policy.
Uh,
that would seem to run.
Uh, directly afoul of that of
that sentence and Nerro versus
Bruin.
Uh, and I, and I, in fact, I see
both of our analysts kind of.
shaking their head in
recognition of, of the text that
I'm not right and and and if I
don't know if you guys want to
comment on that at all.
Um, Madam Chair,
no, I mean, Senator Ivy Soto is
correct, um.
But, and, and, you know, Judge
Browning gave a lot of footnotes
and, and would it seem, I'm
assuming he would disagree with,
with that characterization. Um,
But based on the Supreme Court's
clarification of the test in
Rahimi, the court looked at the
why and the how, so it.
This opinion, um,
would, would say that.
After Rahimi that that there
there is um that the that the
trial courts have to give at
least some consideration to
legislative intent and how, how
they do it, that it's, it's it's
it's not dispositive, but that
it's um and I can't think of the
quote off the top of my head,
but is central to the um the the
relevantly similar analysis. So
when a court's determining how
it's relevantly similar.
They have to, Madam Chair, uh,
Figure out what our.
You know previous legislatures
had done and
Determine whether the the
current law in question.
Have the same intent and the
same effect.
Sure, would it be close enough
for horseshoes?
Yes, I get it. Um, nonetheless,
like I said, that is, that is
the one issue I think though,
Madam Chair, uh, that I think,
uh, we would be wise to watch if
this goes up by eel.
So.
Anyone else, uh, any other
member? OK, um, well, a few
things, yeah, there, there can
be an appeal on the denial of
the request for a preliminary
injunction. So we'll be waiting
till I guess next week to find
out whether there's going to be
an appeal. I don't know if the
plaintiff has announced whether
or not he intends to appeal. I,
I did read the news article, but
I don't remember seeing anything
about what the intentions of the
parties were with regard to
that. So that's, that's 0.1. A
0.2 of us.
If there is no appeal, then
there's going to be a trial.
This is not dispositive, as I
said earlier, there will be
further, there will be a trial,
there'll be evidence, and that
should be an interesting thing
for us to watch because there'll
be conversations and evidence
apparently about what's
historical and um some of the
commentary on Bruin when it was,
um, issued by the Supreme Court
is, this is going to be a
fertile field for historians.
They just created
Subset of a legal experts that
are all historians and now that,
now that's gonna be a cottage
industry. And it's frankly going
to increase the cost of
litigation significantly for
people and, um, so it's an
interesting point, but so we'll
see next week, whether it's
appealed, but if it's, um, at
some point it's going to make
its way down, presumably to the
court again and there'll be a
trial and it's going to be an
interesting thing to maybe watch
and read about and and wait for
an opinion on, but at the moment
our
7 day waiting period law is at
least initially deemed
constitutional. And again, I'd
point out that the likelihood of
success is one of the criteria
and Browning apparently believes
that likelylihood of success for
the enjoiners is low. OK, so.
Just 11 point, Madam Chair. Um,
so as to the first Bruin
question,
whether keep includes purchase.
Um, Judge Browning took guidance
from the 9th and 5th Circuit.
Um, so both the Ninth Circuit
and the 5th Circuit, um,
Determined previously that keep
does not include purchase.
That's interesting because
when I heard that point I turned
to our vice chair and I said, I
don't know. I, I, I don't know,
that's, that struck me as a
little splitting of the hairs,
but, you know, maybe that would
hinge on the 7 day, you know,
but OK, yeah, very good point.
Thanks very much. Thanks for
your work on this. I appreciate
the staff support that we're
getting. Thank you. All right,
um, we are now on.
discussion, anything any one of
you wants to talk about either
from yesterday, today, or moving
forward, yes, Senator. Thank
you, Madam Chair. I promised a
little bit of an update to the
committee on some of the work
that we talked about yesterday
and that we are really fortunate
to have great people working
with us and staff to research
things. Yesterday we talked
about the Best Buy murder, um,
those of you that were here, I'm
sure, uh, found that very
interesting. I think a lot of
you were shocked to find out
that despite the the accused,
the murder, the
Carjacking in Santa Fe. The
manhunt statewide that the uh uh
risk assessment tool, what we
used to call the Arnold tool,
the court's now calling
something different recommended
he be released now after all of
that, so that should help us
understand why those of us on
the Judiciary Committee for
years have now been having
hearings to really challenge the
use of that tool. That was
yesterday, and that was in part
because again the legislature is
repeatedly being uh the, the
target of the, of the crime
problem we have in our state by
not having more strict
sentences.
So this morning we made some
news you all probably noticed
this morning with a number of
stories on yesterday's, uh,
meeting on, on that case, I, I
told you that I would look into
a second case in Santa Fe this
morning, the district attorney
of Santa Fe was quoted as saying
that um that the crime in Santa
Fe is unacceptable. I think
that's the right word. Of course
she is the district attorney's
responsible for enforcing the
laws and chief law enforcement
officer of Santa Fe and has been
for many years now. Uh, so I'm
glad that she recognizes that
the result of those efforts is
unacceptable.
At this point in time.
Uh, she also said that we need,
I'm gonna quote her, we need
stricter sentences on violent
crimes.
And again, we talked about that
a lot yesterday. That's the
default for everyone. We need
stricter sentences, and
yesterday I pointed out that the
accused on the Best Buy case was
facing
many, many more years than they
pled that case down to.
So it shouldn't come as a
surprise that when we dig into
the other case that's been
discussed of late in Santa Fe is
the Sonic drive-in shooting of a
customer goes into do what we
all do all the time.
Went to Sonic to get something
to eat, I get a soda, get a
burger.
Um,
And the individuals killed.
Shot dead there.
The individual who shot him.
Um,
We, we looked at Mr. Romero, I
believe is Mr. Romero, and
again, all the information we
look at is public knowledge,
public information. We just have
diligent, good staff. We have
the time and just incredible
diligence to go find it. So what
do we learn about Mr. Romero.
When the district attorney's
solution to crime is stricter
sentencing. What we learn is
that Mr. Romero
Before this murder and his most
recent run-in with the law, was
charged with 22 charges in Santa
Fe. Uh during the time by this
district attorney, the district
attorney who's claiming we need
stricter sentences to to curb
crime. Mr. Romero was charged
with 22 crimes in 8 different
cases.
Under those crimes he faced over
40 years under our existing
laws. He, he could have gone to
40 years under our need for
stricter sentencing. The
district attorney out of the 22
charges and 8 cases pled him
down to one.
One charge.
Habitual offender, 8 years.
Um, and this individual, uh, was
dismissed on all other of the 22
charges.
Instead of being sentenced to
what could have been 40 or more
years if those district attorney
had chosen to prosecute the case
to its fruition, to trial,
taking the opportunity and we
had confidence and success
instead of the 40 years he pled
to the one charge of the 22 and
was sentenced to 8 years of the
40 plus that he was facing.
I hope this always illustrates
the fact the solution is not
adding more and more years to
our, our books.
It's the dodge that we're
getting in the press. It's the
Dodge in the press. It's the
Dodge that is being sold to the
public and the public's buying
it and, and we need to push back
not again, as I said this
morning, not to preserve our
honor, not because it's about
our egos being bruised. We're
just not going to get to
solutions unless we talk about
the facts, unless we talk about
where the real causes of of our
problem are. So this individual
is facing 22 charges, 8 cases,
the district attorney who says
our solution is stricter
sentences.
Played it down to 1, he got 8
years. He was given time served
almost 2 years. He was released
halftime for good time and then
he murdered, accused of
murdering a customer at Sonic.
Is the solution really stricter
sentences?
As the district attorney seems
to be arguing for in the press
today. I, I, I will agree with
her on one thing, the crime
problem in Santa Fe and
statewide is unacceptable. Her
word again, I certainly agree
with her on that.
We may have a difference of
opinion of why we have the crime
problem.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator. Anyone else wish
to weigh in on that? Yes,
Senator Abio.
Uh, well, since, since, uh,
Madam Chair, since, uh, the Vice
Chair raised the issue of the
First Judicial District
attorney.
Um,
who spent a lot of time.
Instead of focused on
Folks residing in the first
judicial district spent a lot of
time focused on Hollywood.
Um, do we know how much money?
was appropriated for.
Special prosecutions, I think
they were.
There were special
appropriations that were
requested
should be fairly easy to
everybody's looking the same
place,
aren't we? You should red you
are
um it didn't we do didn't we do
a $1 million appropriation? I
thought we had $1000. Was it
$1000? I shouldn't say.
I thought it was an.
I know, I know there's multiple
years that there were special
appropriations.
And
I'm just giving the, the
prosecutor misconduct that
occurred.
Resulting in everything being
dismissed with prejudice.
Um, I'm just wondering if, if,
if, if there's an interest in
clawing back that money.
Um.
Madam Chair, Madam Chair, if I
may,
just free dialogue, I hope,
yeah, um, Senator Iy Soto's
point, you weren't here
yesterday, Senator Abby Soto,
but I, I hope you'll go back and
watch the video from yesterday.
I hope everyone will. Uh, the
district attorney, when she said
the problem with the
unacceptable crime in Santa Fe
is the lack of stricter
sentences. She also said that
her quote in the paper was, we
need to better fund the justice
system. We need a better funded
justice system. Now those who
were here yesterday heard hours
Of testimony of the funding that
we put into the justice system,
the public safety in the last
few years, 400+ million dollars
not spent, not utilized. So to
your point, Senator Ay Soto, is,
are we using the dollar smartly,
um, whatever money we spent on
the Baldwin case,
I think we're all taking your
point, but, but I did want to
make sure that her quote was
thorough, which is the problem
is the lack of stricter
sentencing out of Santa Fe and
the lack of funding the judicial
system and anybody who was here
yesterday knows that's not the
problem either.
And you know, uh, Madam Chair,
and, and, and Mr. Vice Chair,
uh,
What are the things?
That
if I may suggest that we might
want to take a look at.
Um, in terms of funding.
Uh, is, um, does that have the,
the $7759,697. There we go. Um,
thank you. That's, that's
amazing work. That's what was
spent on the Baldwin case. Yeah.
Um, so far, but you know, uh,
but, but that is that the the
courts.
The courts are under unified
budgeting.
Um, the public defenders are
under unified budgeting.
The DA's
are under
14 different budgets.
Um,
13.5 I guess.
And, and, and really we.
What
Two things I think, I think we
ought to look at.
is, is having the DAs be under
unified budgeting.
Um.
B
Uh,
Frankly, when there's a, when
there's a major
When there's a major, um.
Special prosecution or something
that it makes it easier to to
move some of the funds around
internally.
And some of this.
But, but also right now there's
there's.
What you, what you get is, is,
is, is DAs playing against each
other in terms of certain
initiatives, as opposed to if
they had unified funding.
Um,
but, but then the other thing
is, frankly, the the PD funding
ought to be equal to the DA
funding.
It'd be easier to to market that
way if we're under unified
funding.
Uh, for the, for the, for the
DA's.
Um, and, uh, they pay for
different things.
Um, right, the, the, the PDs had
to pay for rent the the DAs
don't.
Uh,
the DA's prosecuted 100% of the
felony cases, the PDs only
defend.
80% of a
Uh,
right, so, so I think it all, it
all comes out in the wash, but,
but, uh, but, but I think, I
think in terms of, in terms of,
of some of the accountability on
the funding, I think, I think if
we, if we went to a, to a more
unified through the AODA.
Uh, we might, we might actually,
uh, uh, get into a better
situation of, of really actually
more efficient ultimately uh
funding of a prosecutorial
dollars in the end.
Uh, before the year is out.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator. Anyone else?
Representative Reeb.
Madam Chair, I think that the
the unified budget was talked
about. It's been talked about a
bunch and the difference I think
being is that the DAs are
elected and that's a very
different deal, um, then.
A public defender who's
appointed and, and things of
that nature, but it's been
talked about. I think also the
problem with the DA's and the
public defenders is there's just
no staffing, I mean, I was told
since I left in 2014, they've
had 5 applications for a
prosecutor in the night and
that's why we're getting
contracts, so I don't know, you
raise the money the the
legislature raised the salaries
up to where we thought that
would fix it, but in the rural
areas, nobody's going there.
Um, so I know that's been a
discussion, the unified budget
just runs so different when
you're elected, um, so that's
always kind of been the issue,
but.
I mean
But the the the money in the
Baldwin case was for all those
cases. Just throw that out
there.
And I could write you a check
probably with what I got of it,
so.
I'm just, I'm just pointing that
out I think it's selected is the
issue with the unified budget.
Well, yeah, and also the courts
have a unified budget, but we
know who the boss is and you
they're all co-equal and they're
how one would like decide who's
got priority in a unified budget
when you've got DAs, all of whom
are autonomous, duly elected by
their own communities. That's
different from a Supreme Court
saying, I hear you, but we're
doing it this way and that's the
end of it. You're all getting
this amount of money where it's
just, it's just a harder thing
to manage if at all, whether you
can manage it at all, right? And
I also think you
Senator Cervantes and I know
that they're talking about
combining some of these
districts together, um, getting
rid of some of these DA
districts and so that could
help.
Oh, really?
Oh no, I think it's pretty.
Oh, is it not?
She probably told her friends
already, so you know.
Oh,
they know, yeah, there you go.
All right. Yeah, I didn't want
to interrupt you, uh, but I, I
kind of agree. I think it's
you're talking two different
kinds of structures, yeah,
exactly. Senator Niber.
I would push back a little bit
on the thought that the DA's
budget and the public defender's
budget should be the same
because the prosecution, the
state bears the burden of proof,
which
is ultimately more expensive
than simply the defense. So if
you're looking at budgeting, I
think you have to consider which
of the two would have a a more
expenses in terms of, of experts
and what have you and who bears
the burden of paying for those
expenses, so it, it shouldn't be
1 to 1, uh, I would suspect that
there probably needs to be more
analysis before you make, uh,
just say we're gonna throw a
week.
Money to each and Madam Chair,
I, I, I, I, I completely agree
with you, Senator, and I, I,
when I was a prosecutor, I never
had to pay.
For the investigations done by
the cops. I never had to pay for
SLD scientific Laboratory
division come, to come and
provide expert witness services.
I never had to pay for any of
that stuff as a prosecutors all
provided by other agencies.
Uh, all subsidized in the work
that we did. Whereas the the PDs
had to pay for everything if
they wanted to do it. So you're
absolutely right about that.
And, and then the second
thought, maybe I didn't quite
get the pushback, but we do have
some judicial districts in the
state.
That uh number one, we don't
have any lawyers in those
counties. There's some counties
with no lawyers, and there's
some judicial districts with
very few lawyers and ultimately
we as a state are going to have
to address some of those
concerns, uh, and it may be
consolidation, maybe some other
mechanisms to deal with the
issues that come up, but that's
something that we probably do
need to get a get a.
That of
Thank you, Senator.
Representative Re.
Yeah, Madam Chair, on that
point, the other thing is, is
the DA's office reviews the case
and then makes a decision to
proceed forward, which really
engages the public defender. So
there's that upfront analysis,
if you would.
Like
Uh, anyone else want to air an
issue or weigh in on anything
Sorry, I've been doing this 24
years. Um,
We used to routinely in this
committee and in related
committees have a guy named Tony
Ortiz who would show up at all
of our committee meetings. Um,
Tony Ortiz used to be the
representative of the Sentencing
Commission.
And he was
he used to staff this committee,
right? Representative Chasing,
I'm glad you're, you're, you've
been here even longer than me, I
think, perhaps. So, yeah, he was
a fixture in this committee. He
was staffing it. He was always
in the audience. Uh, he would
always be in our committees
whenever we looked at sentencing
issues.
What I, what I, I wanted to
recognize, Tony, I don't know
what happened to him. I'm sorry
to say I lost track of him, but,
but.
He worked on that group.
Yeah. Oh, did he on the, on the
children. Oh, great, good, good,
good. Well, the reason I'm
bringing up Tony's name is
because it's important for the
public and the district attorney
in Santa Fe and the press, the
media, the Albuquerque Journal,
the Speaker, let him have it
this morning. Um, you, you
people need to know.
We don't pull this stuff out of
our ass, um.
Um, the, we have a sentencing
commission that their entire
task and job is to study our
sentencing, right? And, and make
sure that our sentencing is in
line with the federal government
that is in line with other
states that line with itself
it's internally consistent that
we don't make one crime because
it's because it's a crime du
jour, right, or the most recent
crime and capturing the
headlines that we had suddenly
let's throw the book at that
crime, right?
The Sentencing Commission is a
deliberate, thoughtful, steady
process that has learned minds,
not me. I don't do criminal, but
has learned minds who are in the
business on both sides, district
attorneys, public defenders, and
people in the entire criminal
justice studying our sentencing
structure now.
Where's Tony?
He's not here today, and I don't
think there's anybody here from
the settings and commission, and
I have to tell you, I didn't
hear from anybody from the
sentencing commission on any of
the agenda for the special
session, including increasing
sentences on felons in
possession.
So I began asking what happened
to the sentencing commission?
Where did they go? because they
used to be a fixture in this
committee. We would never have
had a discussion of increasing
sentences without somebody
saying we've studied it, we've
looked at it. Here's our advice
to you. We ultimately have the
authority to vote, but they
would guide us on these issues
where I need guidance because I,
I don't know this area of law.
Where'd they go? I don't know.
I'm asking questions. Madam
Chair, we'll ask that question.
We'll bring him here. My
understanding, I'll just tell
you the, the buzz that I got
when I asked around is that the
Sentencing Commission came into
disfavor during the previous
administration. Uh, the Martinez
administration headed by a
district attorney, perhaps fell
out of favor. I don't know. I
don't know if that's true or
not, but, but even if that's
accurate, we've had 6 years of a
new administration to reassemble
the Sentencing commission.
My understanding is we'll look
back at the mass, Madam Chair,
Brendan, who sits on the
Sentencing commission? Did you
look that up?
Yeah
Oh, do you, Madam Chair, do you
mind him telling us? I don't,
but I think he needs to come to
him. Would you come to a
microphone just real quick?
Just there's, who's supposed to
sit on the sentencing
commission.
Um, Madam Chair, let me just say
that the uh CJI, the, the
criminal justice Initiative is
working with the Sentencing
commission. So when they have
been here, the Sentencing
commission has been present.
Linda Freeman.
And, and so forth, and that's
good to know that so they're
functioning, I guess they exist.
Yesterday we heard a
presentation that there's with
behavioral health that they
don't have an executive
director, haven't for years.
They don't meet on and on, so
I'm, I'm hoping that's not true,
the Sentencing commission
executive director I was told
they don't I was told they don't
have an executive director Linda
Freeman,
OK. All right, well then I'll
stand corrected there too, but
anyway, we don't need to dig too
much into it. I don't need to go
through the list, but, but I
did, Madam Chair, I wanted to
remind.
Folks, and you'll excuse maybe
view of coarse language, but
I'll say it again, we don't pull
this out of our ass, um, and,
and this is not just stuff that
we somebody gets up on the wrong
side of the bed and says that we
need to have more years added to
this sentence. Um, and, and we,
we're trying to do this very
deliberately thoughtfully. I
think we have a good process. We
have great people working on
this, and I think the public,
the media, um, need to know that
and and this committee needs to
know that we used to have that
kind of support here and we need
to get it again. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator.
Representative Chase, just, just
one thing, and I'm not sure if
you said it and I didn't hear
it, but you know, um, our our
judges, uh, we have a hybrid
system where there's a, um, the,
the judicial, uh, interviews,
but our judges are elected and
we do. They did form.
an authority to create a unified
budget. Just, just that.
OK.
Uh
Yeah. You might want to turn
your mic on, uh, Representative
Reed, OK,
yeah, you're, yeah,
yeah. Oh, I just said if you
don't get retained, you just get
reappointed.
OK, um, anybody else want away
and yes, um, Representative
Brega.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, I'm, I'm gonna change the
subject a little bit here. Um, I
wanted to just recognize
Representative Madrid and uh
Representative Lord, um, in the
discussions today, they shared
some of their own personal
stories and things that are,
we're all working with things
that are very deep and, you
know, they're, they're, um,
I mean, they have a lot of.
Different aspects to them and,
and, you know, for them to be
able to stand up and talk about
their lives and the things that
they've experienced as it
relates to our making public
policy, um, I think that
It's important that we recognize
them and I wish, um,
Representative Lord, I did have
a conversation with her and in
the restroom, um, you know, the
more we do this, the more
similarities we have and um you
know, it affects all of us as
New Mexicans, but.
Those things that they were
raised with, and, and this goes
for all kids and you know, all
of us, um, our childhood
experiences really affect us as
we move forward into our lives
and how we relate to people and
how we relate to situations. So
I just wanted to, to hopefully
close with uh just recognizing
these individuals because it
takes a lot of courage to do
that.
So thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for that, Representative.
Yes, Senator Cedila Lopez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I think
that that is really a good point
of how our personal effects, um,
our, our view of policy, um, and
I just want to say I think it's
really important that they get
involved with this update of the
Children's code that the people
uh get involved with this update
of the Children's code because I
think it's important to update,
and I think the idea of removing
poverty has a has a base, you
know, taking poverty away is the
sole basis for removing
children.
It's just one thing that we
could do that would be very
profound.
So all I want to say is just
encourage people to be involved.
I know the Linda Linda Lopez,
Senator Lopez created the
commission using some of her.
What do we call it now, Grow
money or whatever it is, um, and
Junior money that we don't call
junior money anymore,
and they've done a lot of work
and they have a lot of
expertise. I think it's really
important that we keep an eye on
that, follow it, maybe invite
them again or somehow support
them, um, because I think
It's something we ought to do.
It's, it's time.
Thank you for that, Senator. Any
anyone else? Um, yes, um,
representative.
Cadena.
Mhm.
To come in and and talk into a
mic.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Linda
Freeman, who was the long
standing executive director of
the Sentencing Commission has
announced her retirement
effective September 30th. So she
has done a fantastic job in the
footsteps of Tony that we all
appreciated for many years and I
hope to see their leadership
come back and flourish and you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thanks
for sharing that. That was
helpful. Thank you.
Anyone else want to weigh in on
any topic.
That's relevant to our
committee, let's put it that
way.
I'll drink less coffee tomorrow.
OK. All right, well, I'm gonna
cut you off.
For sure
All right, we have public
comment now, um, and I see on
our list Peter Kubra.
Thank you everyone. Um.
I'm sorry about the hour, but I
wanna say this for 40 years now,
I've been working with the
legislature on behalf of people
with disabilities, and I've also
during those years, represented
everyone in our prisons and
everyone in the Burlio County
jail and everyone in the state
training schools, every kid in
the delinquency system.
The special session was a train
wreck, and we all recognize that
and I'm gonna ask you to focus
on those issues in this way at
this time.
In the developmental
disabilities waiver program. We
have 6800 people.
More than 1000 of them are
people who've been in trouble
with the law. Our people who
have behavioral health
disabilities. And yet in the DD
waiver program. These are people
who are under continuous
supervision. They have
wraparound services and case
managers and a place to live.
And they don't get in trouble
with the law very much.
After they're in that continuous
supervision arrangement of a
waiver program where they have
24 hour supervision and support.
Now, why don't we do that for
people with substance use
disorders and psychiatric
disorders.
I have been trying to convince
the Medicaid agency.
To set up a waiver program for
people with behavioral health
disabilities. And if we were to
do that, we could capture people
as they leave the jail or they
leave some other difficult
situation, homelessness, enroll
them in the program,
continuously supervise them.
And help them stay stable on
their medicine and and not
intoxicated. And so I'm asking
you to think about this. This
was the focus of the train
wreck, right? If we work with
the executive branch to create
this, it could be a win-win
instead of no offense, but
people calling each other names
right now.
I think that we need to sell the
administration on this. I want
your help to do that and if they
won't do it of their own
volition, I'd like you to
introduce legislation to compel
it that we have a program like
this for people with other
disabilities, not just low IQs.
And so I'm asking you to help
convince the administration.
And if need be, uh, legislate so
that we have a bill that just
says what Colorado just did
their legislature told their
executive, you have to set up a
substance use disorder treatment
program using Medicaid to pay
74% of the cost. Please, will
you help get this done?
Thank you. And thanks for
sharing that. We have seen some
of your correspondence and we
appreciate your thoughts on
that. Thank you. Thank you.
