LeBron PhD and um we've been
fortunate to have Tyler here
since last night, and we've been
able to visit with him. So I've
asked Tyler to introduce himself
and give a little bit about us,
give us a little bit of
information about his background
and then begin his presentation.
So thank you. All right. Well,
thank you so much for having me,
everyone. Uh, I'll say this is
my first time in the great state
of New Mexico and uh I must say
this is the first time I've ever
done a presentation in a
football stadium, so that's
pretty awesome.
And the second thing I learned
is that most of Louisiana's hot
sauce actually comes from right
here
um, so just a little bit about
myself, uh, I'm an assistant
professor at Cornell Medical
College, uh, based in New York
City, uh, most of my research is
on the consolidation of health
care, uh, and one of those
avenues is within private
equity, uh, acquisitions
particularly focused on
physician groups as well as
long-term care facilities like
nursing homes and hospice, um.
And uh I also teach in the MBA
program in the Johnson School of
Management, which is up in
Ithaca, um, so I really
appreciate you having me here
today and so, uh, let's just get
started, um, I wanna say one
thing just from your last panel
discussion, um, about, uh,
confidentiality of like health
care prices you can actually
find that uh that information
online now through these uh
analytical files called
Transparency and coverage data.
So you can actually get the
price
that are negotiated between the
hospital and the insurer online.
The hospitals are supposed to
post that, uh, on a monthly
basis. It's a really messy data
set, but I encourage you to go
look at it, um, and so without
further ado, I'm gonna jump in
if you want to look at the
slides, uh, I'm gonna be talking
about the corporatization of
medicine, the opportunities and
concerns. Um, before we get
started, I have to just give a
shout out, um, and give my
disclosures here, uh, without,
uh, funding from the National
Institute on Aging.
The physicians Foundation and
Arnold Ventures, none of this
research would be possible.
Um, as long with, along with all
of my co-authors.
So today I'm gonna talk about
consolidation and just give an
overview because you have to
understand the past to
understand what, how we got here
and then talk about private
equity, given over 1000 ft
overview, and they're like,
what's the evidence behind it?
So
I think of why consolidation and
merger waves. So these are
periods with high merger and
acquisition activity. There have
been 7 major uh major merger
waves in the United States, uh,
these periods are characterized
by silk activity that is high
levels of mergers followed by
periods of relatively fewer
deals, right? These waves of
occurred between all of these
time periods that you can see in
the in the handout, um, and
we're we've been in one since
about 2011.
So why do they happen? There's
several reasons. Um, they're due
to shocks. uh I'd like to call
shocks and air quotes here, um,
think of like economic shocks.
All right, so this is economic
expansion that motivates
companies to expand to meet the
rapidly growing aggregate demand
in the economy.
The second is regulatory shocks,
so this occurs through
deregulation that may have
prevented previous corporate
combinations.
And then the third is
technological shocks. These
could be major changes in
existing industries, uh, that
can create new and fragmented
industries and firms that do not
have time to adapt quickly and
thus increase the adaption speed
by acquiring, right? There are
several other reasons too. Um,
one of them being when a company
shares are priced above their
fair value that organizations
can capitalize on this by going
through an acquisition in which
they buy the targets with their
overvalued shares.
OK, so all these shocks do not
singly bring on a merger wave,
but in combination followed by
large amounts of capital
liquidity, um, are necessary for
a merger wave to take hold.
Now, one of the things that I
always kind of, it's, I think
it's pretty obvious, um, is what
are the motivations to
consolidate? It's actually
really simple. It's growth.
Growth, growth, growth. So
health care organizations
seeking to expand are faced with
two strategies for growth
through internal or de novo
growth.
Or through mergers and
acquisitions, right? So internal
growth, uh, is a lot more risky
proposition. It may be slow and
an uncertain process and an
organizations are at risk of
competitors rampantly taking a
large market share and any
competitive advantages are
dissipated by the actions of the
competitor. So the only solution
is to acquire an uh another
organization that has
established facilities,
resources and services in place.
So I'm gonna be talking briefly
about horizontal integration and
vertical integration just to
distinguish between the two
because I feel like sometimes
it's kind of a nebulous term of
like mergers and acquisitions,
but horizontal immigration, this
is like, think about it when two
hospitals merge. Why? Well, it
could be from responses to rises
in managed care cost pressures,
right? But like the ultimate
question here is is why should
we care? Well, it always falls
back on the consumer, right? So.
Hospitals that have or acquire
market power are able to charge
higher prices on a permanent
basis and 100% of that is passed
on to consumers, right? And
there's mixed evidence on
quality improvement, so prices
go up, quality doesn't improve,
so the ultimate question is what
are we paying for, right? An
example of this is Summit Alta
Bates in the Bay Area after they
emerged, uh, prices increased
between 28 and 44% due to the
merger, right? And
A lot of mergers and
acquisitions they claim they're
gonna create financial synergies
and efficiencies, but the
evidence suggests, uh, that it's
it doesn't really do that. So,
The ultimate question here is,
by just merging or changing
forms of ownership.
And prices go up a quality
remains uncertain or mixed, um,
what are we paying for?
So then there's vertical
integration, OK? So think of an
acquisition that involves uh an
acquisition of firms that are
closer to the source of supply
or to the ultimate consumer.
Think of a hospital or a health
insurance company acquiring a
physician practice, OK? So those
are the two distinct types of
integrations or consolidation
combinations, um, that I'll be
talking a little bit about
today.
Um, now with vertical
integration, the less is a
little is clear in this in this
uh field of study, but one of
the things that is concerning a
lot of economists, health
services researchers and
regulators is this thing called
foreclosure. So think of an
insurance company that might
acquire a single or a
multi-specialty physician group
that pre-merger contracted with
the insurance company's
competitors to offer them
discounted in network rates,
right? This transaction may be
anti-competitive if the
insurance company post-merger.
Has the ability to exclude the
physician group or its
facilities that it's part of
from the competitors' insurance
networks and the incentive to do
so perhaps because a substantial
number of employers who purchase
insurance plans for these, uh,
their employees view the
insurance company's plans as the
next best option to gain access
to the physician group. So how
could this be problematic? Well,
this term foreclosure is
particularly problematic is
because the physician group
includes could include must have
doctors or facilities
without which a regional
insurance network or
unattainable or highly
unattainable or unattractive to
employers.
The other big issue with
vertical integration is raising
rival cost. So take that
instance of an insurance company
that acquires a physician group,
right? But rather than excluding
the physician group from its
competitors' networks it
requires them uh to demand
higher reimbursement rates,
right? So this, this raises the
cost of the insurance company's
rivals to build viable insurance
networks and may result in
insurance company winning
customer accounts from
employers.
You know, and there's other
anti-competitive harms and
benefits such as in this
continual example a physician
group, uh, continues to be
included in rival insurance
plans, but also because the
insurer owns the physician
group, it gains access to their
reimbursement information,
right? Uh, or innovative new
approaches that could improperly
advantage them, right? And I'm
gonna be talking about Optum,
which is a subsidiary of United
Healthcare here in a second, uh,
in this. So,
You've probably heard that Opton
United, so Optum, which is a
subsidiary of United Healthcare
has been acquiring physician
groups all over the country, and
it's often quoted that they, uh,
I'm directly employing 90,000
physicians. That's actually not
true. Um, they have usually a
loose affiliation that 90,000
does. They directly employ
roughly around 10,000 physicians
and you can see here what we
call these things called
payviders, where they're an
insurance company and then they
also provide the care. OK, so
you've probably heard of CVS at
Uh, acquiring Oak Street Health,
um, those types of companies,
we, we term these as payvirs,
but Optum has been dwarfing
other insurers in the
acquisition space. Um, and just
here is UnitedHealthcare and
Optum acquiring physician groups
over time, um, the, the, the,
the line graph right there shows
you the number of acquisitions
and then the cumulative number
of physicians and clinicians,
um, in, in the optimum uh uh
practices directly employed.
And so to try to understand why
physician groups were selling to
Optum, um, uh, we, we actually
did some qualitative interviews
and then we tried to pick out
the common themes of why they
were acquiring them, right? And
so, the first was leverage,
right? When you join a larger
group, you can.
Uh, gain leverage over your
insurer or other insurers to
actually increase prices. That's
a big one. The next is, it's
very hard for physician groups
to remain independent, you know,
EHR regulatory systems put in
place, the cost of capital
becoming more and more expensive
labor costs going up, right?
It's very hard for these
physicians to remain
independent, and this is why
part of the time uh of these
practices have decided to uh
sell to Optum.
And same thing will come up with
private equity here in a second.
And I don't wanna offend any
nonprofit hospital people here,
but this was just uh what was
said to me by a several
physicians that there's a
failure of nonprofit health
care, right, as it relates to
containing health care cost,
right? And then there's a
movement towards value based
care, um, which is probably the
biggest driver of this, right?
And so what do I mean by that?
It's Medicare Advantage and risk
adjustment, um, so in Medicare
Advantage, it's not reimbursed
on a fee for service scale. So
And Medicare fee for service,
you're paid on volume. So for
every procedure you do, you bill
and you get reimbursed and
Medicare Advantage, it's based
on a cappitated rate that is
reflective of how sick your
patient panel is. And so in
devising these reimbursement
models, they've come up with
this thing called HTC
hierarchical clinical
classification uh codes or risk
scores and the higher you can
make your risk score this, it
makes your patients appear to be
sicker the more you get
reimbursed. And that is why
you've seen a huge movement in
the Medicare Advantage space by
these payvir organizations as
well as hospitals starting their
own insurance companies, OK? And
I'll talk a little bit about
that here in some preliminary
results on that.
The other is data, right? If you
can incorporate data, you have
the potential of combining data
between plans and practices to
reduce inefficiencies and
improve quality, but, you know,
acknowledging that it's
currently not a reality, right?
Um, combining data between plans
and practices could be powerful,
um, in reducing inefficiencies
and improving quality, but
currently there's no evidence
out there to suggest that.
Um, the other is frustrated
enrollees. A lot of uh enrollees
or uh patients, um, are
frustrated and plans and may
have played a role, it may have
played a role in the surge in
these Pvider models, um, by
voicing that primary care
services uh weren't being met
and under under the old primary
care model.
Um, and then the other is,
Selling to a payer or an
insurance company, a private
equity form, a health system.
Think of it this way, if I'm
selling to a hospital, I become
an employee of that hospital. Do
physicians like to be told what
to do, most cases, no, right?
Um, and hospitals aren't able to
buy practices at the amounts
that private equity firms and
insurance companies can do. And
one thing I want to point out is
when the optim Optim has been
making acquisitions since 2007.
They haven't actually sold a
single of their
Practices after acquiring them
unlike in private equity you
typically try to sell it in 3 to
7 years. So there's some
continuity there.
Um, and the other is physician
ownership and autonomy, right?
Um, you know, they, they feel
disillusioned through the system
and as, as one person pointed
out, as as much as physicians do
not like to admit it, insurance
companies and physicians talk a
similar language, whereas they
don't with hospitals as much.
Um, and then challenges in
raising capital and also a lot
of negative experiences with
hospital management, so there's
a lack of empirical evidence on
this pro on this vertical
integration phenomenon right
now, but it's looking looking
ahead it's important to look at
patient care quality cost in
these Pvider models and then
this upcoding of what I'm about
to show you here on Medicare
Advantage beneficiaries and the
frequency of patients switching
to pay vir plans and the price
impact between rival payers.
And vertically integrated
medical groups and the provider
experiences in these emerging
models such as physician
turnover.
So here this isn't published
yet, this is just for your own
knowledge, um, the very
preliminary, but those things I
was talking about with risk
scores and the Medicare
Advantaged population, um, there
are 3 components to calculating
a risk score. There is what you
capture at the clinical
encounter. There is one that you
capture through health risk
assessments, which is
essentially a person a nurse or
whoever goes to the person's
house and does a a diagnosis,
um, uh, or a survey to see if
they have any
clinical uh uh diagnosiss that
weren't captured in the
encounter and then there are
chart reviews that essentially
kind of do this a similar thing
as well. And what you can see is
in these Optim acquired groups,
their risk scores are a lot
higher than those that are not
in the optimum acquired network,
right? And so if you were to
actually translate this into
money terms for each additional,
um, for each patient that is
covered under United Healthcare
plan, they're receiving $2800
more per patient
Uh, in the Optimal choir groups
versus the non-optimal acquired
groups, right, which equates to
around 500,000 $500 million or
so, give or take.
Um, so shifting gears to what
you're probably most interested
in, um, but I had to highlight
that because that is a big mover
in the consolidation space right
now is private equity, OK? So
you might be at yourself,
let's just clear the air on what
private, private equity is OK,
private investors, these are
private investors that invest
capital and private companies
and then they receive a
controlling equity stake that is
not tradable on on a public
stock exchange. So you might be
asking yourself how
it works. I'm about to get that
in a second, right? But what are
the private what is private
equity's goals after they make
the acquisition, they control
most of the time the majority of
the economic and voting
interests of that organization,
OK? And then they they try to
restructure uh the financial
governance and operational
characteristics to increase
profitability, right? The
fiduciary duty is to these
investors, which I'll talk about
here in a second. And then they
sell in 3 to 7 years and uh
expect her.
have a return on investment of
around 20%.
So in the next slide, I just
show you kind of how these
things are structured. This is a
very, very basic illustration,
but in that black box there you
see private equity fund LP. This
stands for the limited partners.
All right, so this is kind of
the shell company, um, which is
directed by a general partner,
which is the LLC and individual
fund managers that are part of
this fund manager. That's it
right there.
Yep, that's the one.
Right. And their job is to go
out and find a portfolio of
companies to acquire, right? It
could be strictly health care
focused. It could be a mix of
healthcare, energy, industrial,
whatever, right? But what
they're doing is also trying to
find outside investors or
limited partners. These limited
partners are typically endowment
funds, pension funds, and high
net worth net individuals, OK?
And then they inject their cash
in and then they go out and try
to acquire these companies.
OK.
Now, private equity markets, I
think of them 3 distinct
markets. I think I'm within the
lower middle market, right? So
this is annual revenue of
companies between 5 and $50
million then there's the middle
market and then the upper middle
market. Think of the lower
middle market is like acquiring
individual physician practices,
nursing homes, hospices, home
health agencies, and then the
middle market is getting into
large practices, um, or
multi-specialty practices,
nursing home chain.
Um,
uh, you know, hospices, national
or regional chains, and then you
have your platform. OK? So what
typically a private equity firm
does is they go and they acquire
a well-run, um, well
established, let's say, nursing
home chain in a in a in a
regional area. Then they use
that nursing home to go out and
make additional acquisitions of
single facilities or small
regional chains to roll up into
that group. So what it appears
is that like you see, you know,
New Mexico state nursing home
chain owns this, but in reality,
the parent company is the
private equity firm, right? And
you might not actually ever know
it.
Right. And so the next slide I
show kind of just the
illustration of how these things
work, right? And when I'm
talking about this platform uh
organization making individual
acquisitions. These are called
roll up acquisitions or bolt-on
acquisitions, whatever you wanna
call it. All right, um, and so
the private equity firm or the
publicly traded company will
typically gain control of that
hospice platform. They'll align
their interest, right,
operational things, um, and then
there's a sense of urgency to
try to
S in 3 to 7 years and they make
these they make these
acquisitions based on patient
level, staffing level, and
market level factors, right? No
two private equity firms are
alike.
Right. And so getting into the
the finances of the roll of
acquisition model, right?
They're based on a bit of da. So
earnings before interest, taxes,
depreciation and mortization.
Think of this as essentially
like a proxy for cash flow, OK?
Um, and then the private equity
firms focus on fragmented
markets to consolidate, right?
Why? Because if they're very
fragmented, you can buy them for
cheaper, and then you can
consolidate them and create
efficiencies.
But also sell it down the road
at a much higher rate or higher
multiple of a bit of data, OK?
And so private equity firms
typically buy these platform
practices, uh, around 8 to 12
times a beta dot, right? And
then they use that uh that
platform practice to recruit
individual clinicians and
acquire smaller practices and
they'd buy those usually at 2 to
4 times a bit of da and then
those smaller practices now
become the value of the
platforms practice.
Though this thing called
multiple arbitrage.
Now, multiple arbitrage refers
to the increase in valuation
multiples that often can be
achieved through this roll-up
strategy. So smaller companies
often trade at lower valuations,
uh, multiples think of a bit of
ta or price to earnings ratio
compared to larger, more stable
companies. So when a PE firm or
private equity firm acquires
these smaller companies and
integrates them into the larger
platform company, the overall
business may command a higher
valuation multiple due to
increased size, stability, and
market share.
So the firm that can sell the
combined entity at a higher
multiple achieving a a profit
from the increased valuation,
hence the term multiple
arbitrage.
You might be asking yourself how
these deals are financed. Um, so
take the next slide there where
it says target for uh how are
deals financed. So let's say you
have a private equity firm or
what we call a sponsor, and
they're interested in acquiring
a hospital, right? The target.
Um, let's say that that hospital
was appraised for $1 billion
right? Just theoretically here.
And that private equity firm has
$500 million of equity on hand,
right? That they need to raise
an additional $500 million to
make that acquisition, so how do
they typically do it? Well, they
go to an arranger or an
investment bank. And then that
arranger or investment bank goes
out and finds a syndicate of
lenders, right? These could be
high worth net individuals, it
could be endowment funds,
pension.
or whatever to loan them the
money to make that acquisition.
So one thing I want to note is
the $5500 million that they're
raising as a as a loan is
usually collateral, the assets
of the hospital in this case are
used as collateral, um, to
finance that, that loan.
And so therefore, that debt is
dropped onto the actual
hospital. OK? So let's say
hypothetically here the target
sold for $2 billion 500 million
dollars is returned to the
lender. The private equity firms
is 1 is $1.5 billion with only
using $500 million of their own
money.
Um, so that is kind of a very
simple uh illustration of how
what we call leverage buyouts
work, OK? And that typically big
deals are uh uh acquired during
using this mechanism.
And a lot of there are a lot of
corporate practices in medicine
laws throughout states and they
all vary, um, but so a
for-profit entity or a
non-clinical or non-physician, a
lot of times can't own a
physician group. So the
workaround is to create a
management service organization
and that management service
organization then acquires the
actual administrative assets of
the practice, while the non the
the the clinical assets or
clinical operations remain
independent.
OK.
And so they're actually owning
the administrative part and the
think of the roster, the patient
roster, um, going forward when
they make the acquisition and
typically these management
service organizations also have
a management fee of usually
around 2 to 5%, OK?
And so then the next slide just
shows you the distribution of
how many private equity deals
have been going on, uh, from
1995 all the way to 2022. You
can see in 2021 it exploded with
a large amount of them being
physician physician groups.
So why are physicians selling
their practices to private
equity firms. Well, when you put
it in context, it actually makes
a lot of sense, right? The first
is an infusion of capital. You
need to expand in order to grow,
you need to expand. You need
forms of capital to do this,
right? Plus, administrative
relief, administrative relief
right over private equity firms
will come in and say, hey, we're
going to put in our own
administrative, uh, operations,
you know, EHR systems, billing
systems, you keep practicing
medicine the way.
You do, you don't have to worry
about all that stuff anymore.
You can just focus on the
patient. That is one of the
selling points. The other is
standardization and knowledge
transfer. So let's say that
there's a new CMS billing
regulation that goes in place. A
lot of the private equity firms
through their top level um MSO
will disseminate any new
knowledge to the clinicians to
make sure that standardization
is uh is adequate in meeting CMS
standards.
The other, probably most
important thing is you improve
your market share against your
competitors. If I join a larger
organization, I can command or
negotiate higher prices with the
insurance company, right?
And then private equity is also
selling point is, hey, you keep
practicing medicine the way
you're always doing it, um,
we're just gonna kind of be in
the background. So you have more
autonomy uh than selling to a
hospital or a health plan,
right? You're still your own
employee, you still own part of
this LLC and when we go to sell
in 3 to 7 years, you get to
share in the profits after we
sell it, or also known as the
second bite of the apple, OK?
And then, and also increasing
marketing budget to gain more
self-paid patients, which are
the most valuable, right? They
can help with marketing,
increasing marketing,
commercials, billboards, that
type of thing that they might
not have otherwise had, right?
And then financial synergy,
which, you know, has been proven
time and time again to not
mergers and acquisitions don't
actually provide financial
synergy, but I put that in there
because a lot of physicians that
we interviewed say that.
And then
Operational efficiency as well.
So what's the controversy
surrounding private equity,
right? Uh it's selling to the
private equity when you hear
those interviews, right? It
makes a lot of sense. Um, but
there are several controversies
with it. First is young
physicians will work for
decades, uh, at income levels
discounted from the
pre-acquisition levels, right?
They face significant buy-ins,
uh, to profit from the second
sale. And so, therefore, a lot
of young physicians in these
corporateized practices.
I
uh have high turnover.
Um, and then there has been an
exploitation of market failure
and loopholes, right? Um, so we,
it was touched on on physician
management companies earlier a
lot of these are hospital based
where such as like EHR or
emergency medicine, neonatology,
anesthesiology, right? When at a
private equity firm comes in and
acquires those groups that have
emitting privileges in those
hospitals. The patient will come
and they're not typically, you
know, choosing their emergency
medicine physician because,
well, it's an
Emergency, the hospitals in
network, but the physician group
after being acquired moves out
of network. And so then the
patient gets slapped with a
surprise bill, OK? And so
envision KKR exploited this
loophole several years ago and
patients were being slapped with
hundreds of thousands of dollars
and uh and surprise bills
because of this issue and this
led to the surprise Billing Act
or the No Surprises Act, OK.
Another big thing is Medicare's
payment for physician administer
drugs under PER P are tied to a
percentage of the drug's average
sales price. So this creates an
incentive for physicians to
prescribe the more expensive
drug among competing options
that have been proven clinically
to have the same effectiveness,
OK? An example of this is an
ophthalmology, and I'm gonna
show you a figure here in a
second where ophthalmology drugs
to treat wet macular
degeneration injections are very
expensive and they comprise of
15% of Part B's total budget.
OK. And then there's this thing
called stealth consolidation
which kind of gets into the
antitrust things that we're
talking about a little earlier,
um, there's this thing called
the Hart Scott Redino Act, and
this mandates that all mergers
and acquisitions must be
reported to the federal
government if the deal value is
above $119.5 million. Anything
below that doesn't have to be
reported to the federal
government. Now most of these
private equity deals are well
below that threshold. Think of a
physician group
Right, with like 4 or 5
physicians that might sell for 3
or $4 million but if that
private equity firm is doing,
you know, dozens of those in a
local area, it might fly under
the radar of the federal
government and they now have a
local monopoly on the market,
right? And this was a uh shown
with US anesthesiology partners
in Texas, um, where they were
driving costs up around 40 to
50% um by making these roll up
acquisitions and flying
completely under the radar of
the federal government.
And then there's, of course,
increased risk of ovary
utilization over billing and
upcoding, um.
Which for self-explanatory
reasons I won't go into, but
I'll talk about that stuff and
my results section here in a
sec. And then the other big one
is replacement of physicians
with advanced practitioners.
And so here's just a, this is
called a uh an event study or a
difference in different events
study and that dotted line you
see at zero is the point of
acquisition and what we're doing
here is comparing physician
practices of ophthalmology
physician practices that were
acquired by private equity
relative to other ophthalmology
practices within the same
geographic market.
And we're looking at what macro
degeneration injections and that
green one that you see there is
the most expensive and the blue
one is the least expensive, but
they've been shown clinically to
have the same clinical effect on
when these drugs are
administered and what you can
see after acquisition, after
that dotted line, you can see
that green one go up, that the
really expensive one, while the
least expensive one, the use of
that goes down, right? So this
is kind of an indication of like
All incentives can change when
you have these these for-profit
entities come in and try to
create more efficiencies but
also increase profits.
So I'm gonna talk a little bit
about dermatology,
anesthesiology, neonatology,
hospice, and nursing homes, all
which private equity has been
involved in.
So I published this paper back
with my colleagues back in uh
gosh like 2018 or 2019. It was
probably the first private
equity piece that came out, um,
and dermatology was actually
probably the first
specialization that was being
acquired by private equity
firms, um, and what's
interesting about this is what
we find is same thing dotted
line right there at 0 shows you
the point of time of acquisition
by a private equity firm, um,
compared to.
other dermatology practices
within the CM geographic market
and here we're looking at prices
so those that are negotiated
between the insurer and the
group. So what we see after
acquisition about 4 quarters
after we see prices increase
around 7 to 14%, right? It
doesn't seem like a lot, but for
an outpatient setting like this,
it's actually a considerable
amount of money.
And now I'm gonna talk a little
bit about physician management
companies and um and that are
owned by private equity or
publicly traded and how it
affects commercial prices again
those that are negotiated
between the practice and the
insurer after they're acquired.
And what we find is in this
event study, same logic follows
is that from before to after
physician management contract
periods or acquisition.
We saw loud amounts or those
prices paid increased by 17% and
the unit price for these
anesthesiology procedures
increased by 19% um relative to
non-physician management
facilities, OK? Um, and results
do not show evidence that
anesthesiology practitioners
were moved out of network so the
threat of moving out of network
was surprise bills, right? And a
sub sample analysis, what we
find is that physician
management companies without
private equity investment
increased.
amounts by 13% while private
equity physician management
companies increased by 26%, so
10% points more, right?
And then, same story here, we
looked at a physician management
company called Menax who is one
of the largest publicly traded
providers of NICU units and
pediatrics and obstetrics in the
United States, um, we looked at
how when they made an
acquisition of a physician
group.
What happens to their negotiated
prices.
And what we found was that after
this affiliation or acquisition,
there was a differential
increase in the mean price of
the 5 most common types of
critical and intensive care day,
uh, days in the NICU emissions
by $313 per day. This equates to
around a 70.4% increase.
And what we show in this paper
is that quality of care does not
change.
So when you have a change of
ownership that takes place, you
see prices increase by 70%, but
quality doesn't improve. So
that's the ultimate kind of
question that we're trying to
answer here, what is the value
being created?
And then I'm gonna talk about
hospice here for a second, so
private equity is also in the
business of hospice, right? Um,
I published a paper back in uh
in Jamming Turtle medicine back
in 2021.
Where we showed that roughly
around 1 in 5 or about 25%, 24
to 25% of Medicare beneficiaries
receive their care from a
private equity or a publicly
traded company, OK? So you're
like, so what, like what does
that all mean? Well, let me
introduce you to the basics of
Medicare reimbursement and
hospice. So it's based on a per
diem rate uh for each
beneficiary respective of the
actual services provided on a
given day so with.
Regular routine home care, it's
usually around $200 per day.
That's what the hospices, uh,
paid for that one individual,
individual person. How much
resources they use comes out of
their own pro uh own own pocket,
it lowers their profitability,
OK, um, but there are 4 levels
of hospice care. There's routine
home care, continuous home care,
and patient respise care,
respite care and general respite
care, OK? And in hospice there's
A U-shaped pattern of resources
used, OK? So your your first
couple, you know, 1st 14 days of
being in a hospice and your last
14 days until you unfortunately
expire are the most expensive
for the actual hospice agency to
provide that care so the most
profitable days are in the
middle, OK.
That's the sweet spot. But what
kind of incentive structure like
this, what could go wrong or
what could happen? Well, the
longer you can find a patient
that can live in hospice, the
more profitable that hospice
agency is going to be, OK, and
I'm gonna get into that in a
second.
So there are several, several
hospice profit levers, OK?
Profit maximization obviously
and then you divest after
extracting the profit to
maximize profits in the short
term. So how do you maximize
that profit? You can do it in a
couple of ways. The first is to
increase your net service
revenue.
This can be done through
strengthening your referral
ties, selectively targeting more
profitable patients that require
less complex care and are
associated with longer lengths
of stay.
OK, and I'm gonna get into who
that that population here is in
a second. The other is
decreasing your operating
expenses, right? Your nursing
care operating uh nursing care
comprises around 50% of all
operating expenses in a in a
hospice agency. This is the same
for nursing homes as well so if
you you can keep your net
service revenue the same,
decrease your operating
expenses, you increase your
operating margin or you can
increase your net service
revenue and try to keep
operating expense operating
expenses the same.
And you're gonna increase your
profit margin, OK? So,
What could this lead to?
Well,
I'm gonna talk about why hospice
is an appealing investment,
right? Hostas are appealing to
institutional investors due to
the stable Medicare payments
relatively easy market entry and
minimal capital re uh
requirements you don't need a
brick and mortar setting to do
this. Most of the hospice isn't
provided in the person's home so
you don't need a lot of upfront
capital to do this, right? And
so what are the benefits, right?
It could achieve economies of
scale through clinical
standardization, quality
improvement, and integrated
systems, thereby enhancing the
care.
Profitability while reducing
clinicians' administrative
burdens, right? So what are the
cons? right?
you prioritize short-term above
market returns potentially
affecting patient care by
reducing operating costs and
selectively enrolling and
targeting those required less
complex care and longer hospice
stays so the number one
population that it's hard to
diagnose if they have less than
6 months to live or dementia
Alzheimer's related patients so
in hospice you have to be cert
by an independent physician you
have if you have less than 6
months to live in order to
enroll in hospice, but it's
really hard to diagnose these
types of individuals, right? And
then patients that don't live a
long time in hospice they
actually typically die within
the 1st 14 days of being in
hospice aren't profitable. These
are cancer patients, so a lot of
these hospices which I'm about
to show you, try to selectively
enroll dementia, Alzheimer's
related patients after
acquisition.
Um
So here's kind of the geographic
distribution on that map right
there showing you.
Private equity and publicly
traded owned hospice agencies
throughout the United States.
They're almost in every single
state in the United States.
And then here is kind of the
growth over time of uh publicly
traded and private equity, um,
hospice, uh, beneficiaries that
receive their care from them
over time from 2013 to 2021, as
I said before, about 25% of all
Medicare beneficiaries receive
their care from one of these two
groups, um, well for profit
overall is the predominant
actual deliverer of hospice care
in the United States around 80%,
right?
And so here, same that same
logic applies. You see that
dotted line there after
acquisition you see that blue
blue bar there, that's dementia
patients and what you can see
after acquisition those increase
and we see about an 18% increase
in dementia patients after
acquisition, OK?
And then when you actually want
to compare quality of care we
use this thing called CAScore,
the consumer assessment, uh,
health, uh.
Perspective, uh, survey system.
And within that cap system,
they, they surveyor, survey
patients as well as their family
members on the quality of care
that they receive. And what I
can show you here are the
normal, the quality measures
that are measured in caps, um,
for hospice.
And within hospice we make two
comparisons we compare hospices
that are owned by private equity
and publicly traded companies to
not for profits, and then we
compare private equity and
publicly traded companies to
for-profits that were never
required. And what you can see
here as it moves to the left, it
favors that group over the
private equity publicly traded
owned hospice agency and you can
see over time here, um, there
are large effects, uh,
suggesting that not for profits
provide better hospital.
Quality of care and to their
family members, um, uh, then
publicly traded in, uh, private
equity owned. And then when you
compare them to other
for-profits that were never
acquired, their quality of care
is actually not as good as well,
right? So you can make the
argument here. I'm not saying
one way or the other, but for
profits that aren't owned by
these are differentially
different than private equity
and publicly traded owned ones,
OK?
Now moving into nursing homes,
this has been a really hot topic
for a while now by CMS, uh, not
to like toot my own horn or
anything, but that Joe Biden,
the State of the Union back in,
or was it 2022 mentioned in one
of my studies, you know, as Wall
Street firms take over more
nursing homes, the quality of
those homes has gone down and
the costs have gone up. That
ends on my watch and so CMS has
tried to take an uh uh proactive
steps to try to improve nursing
home, uh, uh, transpar
Currency ownership transparency,
um, going forward, but there's a
lot of work to do and I'm going
to talk about that here in a
sec. But you have to ask
yourself why did institutional
investment get involved in
nursing homes, right? So there's
this timeline here where there
have been palsy events that have
unfolded over 30, a 30 year time
frame that has shifted the
nursing home industry from one
of long-term market dominance to
and favorable reimburse
reimbursement and rapid growth
fueled by two.
Rapid fueled by debt financing
to a challenging business
environment that requires
increasingly creative strategies
to raise capital and finance
basic operations.
So the shift uh from cost plus
to Medicare perspective payment
and subsequently to value-based
reimbursement environments along
with the growth in lower
reimbursement Medicare
Advantage, and Medicaid
reimbursement, um, has over time
reduced the commitment of
federal and state governments to
cover nursing home cost, which
has made it more difficult for
operators to uh obtain private
capital, uh, to for long term
investments.
So what makes nursing homes
different from other health care
settings? It's a pretty unusual
setting. It's the only Medicaid
long-term care benefit that
federal law requires state
Medicaid programs to offer.
It's the only care environment
in which healthcare dollars
through Medicaid fund housing.
And more than half of their
revenue is from federal and
state government sources such as
Medicare fee for service,
Medicare Advantage, and
Medicaid, and they deliver
medical and long term care
benefits within the same
building, right? It's a very
unusual place.
The nursing homes are fronted
with a lot of challenges, right?
They increasingly serve a more
complex patient population as
the baby boomer age, uh, uh
generation starts to age into
these, um, they're battling
increasing hiring and retention
costs, and they're struggling
amiss an increasingly tighter
reimbursement environment. So
that next slide, I'm gonna show
you that figure there, it shows
you the actual profitability of
nursing homes over time around
2015 or so, 2006.
16, on average in the United
States nursing homes operate on
a negative profit margin.
And without COVID relief
funding, they would have most of
them would have closed.
Right, so this is the state of
where nursing homes are.
But you might ask yourself, what
are the capital options for
nursing homes if they're in
financial distress, how are they
gonna get capital, right? The
first is your local community
bank but that local community
bank is not gonna give you a
loan because you're in financial
distress and you're at high
risk.
The second is tax exempt bonds,
but this is only relative to
nonprofits and 80% of all non uh
nursing homes in the United
States are for profit so they're
not gonna be eligible for that.
The other is this thing called
HUD 232 loans.
HUD 232 loans are federal
government sponsored loans that
uh basically have an arranger an
investment bank, uh, arrange a
loan for that nursing home to
modernize their facilities or
build a new wing, right, to make
it just standard because a lot
of the nursing homes were built
back in 191940s through the
whole Burton Act and they had
this like institutional like
setting, right? And who wants to
put their their parents or their
grandparents in that type of
situation,
but HUD 232 loans have very
strict financial requirements.
And it's a slow, laborious
process, and it's known as the
often as the lender of last
resort.
So
You go to next you go to
institutional investors such as
real estate Investment Trust who
will buy the actual physical
property and the land that it
sits on or you go to a private
equity firm or a publicly traded
company.
So
What is a nursing home to do
with poor government policy
declining reimbursements and
more complex case mix. They're
kind of stuck in a pickle here,
you know, um, so kind of you
know, I kind of leave that open
ended for you to think on, to
chew on, um, but I just wanna
show you some the distribution
of private equity firms and real
estate investment trusts
investing in nursing homes
you've seen uh we did we did a
paper that was commissioned by
ASPI or a report by ASI to show
kind of this distribution over
time.
Um, private equity, um, has
slowly been moving out, um, but
they did reach a peak of around
9% or so, uh, back in 2018 while
real estate investment trusts
have actually been accelerating
their investment in the actual
physical properties of nursing
homes, so you might be asking
yourself what is a RET? Well, it
stands for Real Estate
Investment Trust.
And what happens is it can be
done in several ways. There are
two structures they're called a
triple net leasing agreement,
which basically is your basic
tenant landlord relationship
where the tenant, which would be
the nursing home, pays the RET
rent. That rent is typically
tied to CPI, a CPI or an
inflation index, right? So
periods of high inflation, your
rent's gonna go up, um.
Or it's tied with uh just a
price escalator of typically
around 3 to 4%, OK? So we've
been currently in a higher
inflationary state in the in the
US and cost of labor has been
going up so nursing have had to
make hard decisions by cutting
their staffing due to high rent
costs, OK,
um, so that's what a read is I I
think there's a lot of tax
advantages to it and ways to
shield yourself from liability
as a nursing home, uh, but you
can ask me about that later if
you're if that peaks your.
Interest
And then we published a study in
JAMA Health Forum, um, where we
said, OK, what happens after a
private equity firm acquires a
nursing home and what happens to
your long stay residents. So
nursing homes have two distinct
populations. You have your short
stay patients which are
typically people think of
getting rehabilitation services,
OK? So think of a hip surgery
and need to get rehab.
Long stay patients are typically
self-pay or on Medicaid, and
this is like kind of where they
reside and live, and they do get
nursing care, OK? And what we
find, and you can see this map
of the geographic distribution
is when we look at acquisitions
between 2007013 and 2017, we see
that emergency department visits
increased by 11%. We see
hospitalizations increase around
9% and we see quarterly Medicare
total costs go up around 4%.
OK, and so these are usually
claims based measures that are a
proxy for uh trying to assess
the quality of care within a
nursing home.
And so I, I touched on um.
CMS trying to create
transparency initiatives, um,
they've set up a good, a good,
good process. It still needs a
lot of improvement where they
they release ownership of, uh,
these nursing homes and it's
supposed to include the parent
companies so we did uh uh an
informal study where we took all
of my mergers and acquisitions
data and compared it to the
ownership data that's released
by CMS and we found that only
about a third of private equity
firms are actually captured in
that ownership file and.
Only around 2015 to 25% are uh
covered by real estate
investment trusts.
Um, so there's a lot of work to
be done, but, you know, there's
a lot of reporting issues
related to this, and that needs
to be ironed out.
So, you know, in discussion,
right, private equity is a
growing player across the
healthcare sector. The jury is
still out on its advantages and
disadvantages, right? Um, but we
do know that physician prices
after they're acquired, um,
increase after private equity
acquisition and we don't really
see any difference in quality of
care. It might go down a little
bit, but most of the time we
find null findings, right? And
we also see that a lot of the
times in my dermatology paper
we.
See that there's an increase of
advanced practitioners that
replace doctors or
dermatologists.
So the ultimate question is what
is the value that is being
created from the physician and
the patient perspective, right?
Um, and in long term care we
need to increase ownership
transparency and set federal
certification criteria for
ownership, which is in progress
and then require greater
financial transparency and
accuracy, so, um, I'll, you
know, the next one is showing my
age here, uh, big Jerry Springer
fan back today my Doctor Braun's
final thought, um, you know, we
need to
Include policies that
incorporate capital market
dynamics, right? Policymaking
focused on a small percentage of
the industry such as private
equity can unintentionally sever
access to capital.
However,
What needs to happen in my
opinion, um, is that when you
have outside or external
investors come into your state,
there needs to be a system put
in place where they have you
they can prove they have
financial viability and you can
see all the other organizations
that they've acquired in the
past and what their quality of
care is, right? so trying to
think of a way to manage these
cross-sector, uh, crass cross
market mergers and acquisitions,
um, I would be that would be a
big thing and I think Zury who.
It's probably gonna come on
here, can talk a little bit more
about like some other issues we
can do, such as putting if you
wanna do one of these private
equity deals, put every you
know, for every dollar that is
spent on the deal, put another
$1 in escrow just in case
something bad happens and then
that money can go to prop up
something if it was to close or
make sure that patients can get
the adequate care that they
need.
So thank you so much and I look
forward to your questions.
Questions? are you nodding
Representative Martinez, I see
you nodding. All right, there
was one.
Anyone else?
Nyber.
Anyone else? Do hig.
Anyone else?
Sometimes questions prompt
questions. I understand that,
so, um, take about, I don't
know, 6 minutes each and then
maybe they'll.
More questions.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair
I appreciate the time. Uh, I
just have a couple of questions.
You're,
your discussion about
Um,
Senior living centers.
You make it sound like it's
almost not a good investment.
So senior living is very
different from nursing homes,
senior living consists of
continuing care retirement
centers and assisted living,
which are not nursing homes.
What I, what I'm talking about
is an assisted living center.
Assistant so assisted living is
very different from the studies
that I show so nursing homes are
very different.
Nursing homes provide post-acute
care and long-stay care, um,
where these individuals need
direct care supervision usually
24/7. Assisted living is
typically individuals that can
live almost independently with
maybe light.
Forms of nursing care year
round.
Because I have a uh.
Facility, Madam Chair, in my
district.
It goes from.
A simple assisted living all the
way to acute care and
I've talked to a lot of the, the
residents there and they, they
actually love it there. They
have a contract with a local
hospital.
provides emergency care.
Um,
It's privately owned and I think
they're providing a great
service.
Right. Then I look at some of
the facilities in Albuquerque.
Um, that the state has got
involved in.
And I wouldn't put a family
member in one of those homes at
all.
I think this goes to what I keep
saying is when the government
gets out of the way and lets.
A business run it, they're gonna
do.
The they're gonna provide the
best absolute service they can
because
That affects their bottom line.
Uh, my second question is, and I
was trying to find the slides
here towards the end.
Uh, you show a map of New
Mexico.
And there's only one facility
that has been acquired.
Was it hospice or nursing home,
it might be nursing homes.
Uh
Location of nursing homes
acquired by private equity
firms.
Do you know
Do you know which facility that
is, that single dot on the map.
I, I don't have it on top of
him, but I can definitely find
that out for you.
I, I'd be very interested to see
who or what facility that is, I
mean there was 1,806 facilities
apart across the United States,
um, but I can definitely look in
that for you. Um, so getting to
your first question, um, you
know, I guess this testimony is
not about for profits themselves
like I've showed you that
for-profits are definitely
different from.
Pub publicly traded in private
equity related companies so that
might be the very case that, you
know, uh, that for profit might
be providing good quality care,
but what we can show you through
actual causal inference is that
after a private equity firm
acquires a nursing home, not an
assisted living facility, a
nursing home, quality goes down
and costs go up, right? And that
falls on the taxpayer, right?
Um, and, uh, yeah, I can't speak
to that facility. I'm there's a
and I don't want to paint
think it is a broad stroke here.
There's a lot of good for
profits that are trying to do
good work, right? But in this
study we find on, on average,
uh, hospitalizations go up 9%,
emergency department visits go
up 11% and quarterly met total
costs go up around 4%. So, you
know, you know,
we have to make a distinction
between for-profit and private
equity here, um, and you know,
with nursing homes.
The only way to really kind of
create a profit most of the
time, um, is if you can get the
Medicare patients because
they're the most uh most most
lucrative, um, but those are
hard to come by and then the
other 80% of your occupied beds
or Medicaid patients, and
typically nursing homes lose 20
cents on the dollar for each one
of those patients. So the only
way you can actually turn a
profit most of the time I'm
speaking in general here is to
decrease your operating expenses
and by decreasing.
Operating expenses you have to
reduce your nursing or your
direct clinical staff ratios.
And it has been proven time and
time again in peer reviewed
literature that when you have
lower hours per resident day or
direct clinical staff within a
nursing home this leads to poor
quality of care and what you can
see in a lot of other studies
that you systematically see the
reduction of RNs, LPNs, and
certified nursing assistants
after private equity firms
acquired them, so I think you
have to differentiate them,
right? They're not exactly like
regular your regular for-profit,
you know, who might be doing a
really.
Good job
Does that make sense?
Yeah, um,
Brings up other questions, but I
have to formulate those, so.
Oh
I'll, I'll reach out. I'll reach
out, feel free to email me
anytime I talk about it
unfortunately my brain doesn't
work that fast.
It's a lot of stuff, you know,
if, if possible if I could have
your contact information I I'd
like to reach out.
Thank you.
We can get you contact
information um for you, for
sure. Um, I have Senator Neibert
and then Senator Duhit.
We could probably have a full
day discussion, uh, on these
issues because they are quite
complicated, um.
When you were talking about the
reasons that
These transactions are
occurring.
Uh, the, the thought popped into
my mind as to what was the role
of
Government
And
Causing some of this because as
I've seen within my lifetime, I
used to go to the doctor and
just write a check and pay for
my visit now it's, I don't know
what happens. I just get a bill
sometime later, uh.
So it's much more complicated
and I'm wondering whether
The complications that have
largely been a result of
government action.
How is that causing the mergers
and consolidation within.
All of these areas, frankly, uh,
do you have a comment on that?
Um,
Yeah, it's a lot, um, so you
know, first thing is, you know,
talking to a lot of physicians,
right? Uh, you're, you're,
you're single, single solo doc
practice is almost dead, right?
Even the ones that are less than
10 or have around 10, it's
almost next to impossible,
right? Um, when you think of,
uh, you know, the current state
of reimbursement in the United
States, there's a big emphasis
on, uh, risk sharing and value
based payment, right? Um, it
makes it really hard for
physicians.
To actually maintain a
profitable margin and keep your
lights on during that and plus
EHR systems and just the cost of
labor going up so they have no
choice but to go and.
Join a larger group, be it from
a hospital system to a private
equity firm or an insurer,
right? The also thing that you
have to think about too is a lot
of these physicians are near
retirement, right? A lot of them
are trying to sell their
practices their last financial
windfall before they retire and
of course, if I'm a physician,
and I'm trying to sell my
practice. I'm gonna go to the
highest bidder, right? It just
makes logical sense. Like I
built this practice for 34
years, of course I deserved the
most.
Money I can possibly get so most
of the time private equity is
the one that can outbid
hospitals. Optimum in its case
usually pays all cash for their
deals, um, you know, that's one
component. The other component
is the younger generation. The
younger generation doesn't want
to hang their own shingle up and
build their own practice. They
want to work 9 to 5 and have a
good work-life balance. They
don't want to be taking calls at
2 a.m. They want to go home at 5
and, you know, live out their
personal life, which I don't
blame them.
You know, and so it has created
a a structure where corporate
types of practices, um,
Allow that, you know, they allow
this type of structure to be put
in place that younger physicians
value, right? So, it's a
culmination of these things, you
know, I was talking about the
economics of, you know, where we
have been over the years from an
economic stand we had
historically low interest rates.
That allows you to buy cheap
debt, and this fuels mergers and
acquisitions, right? So it's a
lot of economic policy as well,
as well as demographic shifts
and value systems being
different over time.
But the difference here is with
private equity they have a
fiduciary duty of making as much
profit as they possibly can and
flipping it in 3 to 7 years,
right?
The ultimate question which I
can't answer, right, or
philosophical question here is,
does that align with physi uh,
with patient, patient quality of
care, and the patient.
You know, it's not for me to
answer, but it's difficult to
say all private equity has that
model because a group of
physicians having a uh common
practice is really private
equity. They're putting their
own capital into our practice,
so, so, so, you know, there's a
variety of private equity
vehicles.
The one that you're focused on
is one that is really trying to
assimilate.
Or consolidate.
a large practice or many
practices, package them to do
exactly what, what uh the goal
is, which is ultimately to to
sell it for a higher price than
what they acquired them for, but
There, there's other private
equity models, it's just
attracting capital from the
private market through
individuals instead of through
corporate means or or or
otherwise. So, so, you know,
private equity is not just the
one model that you've presented
there, there could be other
private equity vehicles.
Sorry for interrupting you
there. Um, I'll say this, we
focus on private equity firms
that fill up form ADVs by the
SEC, OK? What you're talking
about is not technically private
equity firms you're talking
about private individuals that
muster up their capital to make
an act to make an acquisition or
poor to make improvements into
their organization completely
distinctly different because the
financing models are very
different as well. Remember me
talking about those leveraged
buyouts, the ones that are
filling out those form ADVs.
are typically doing these types
of deals where the debt is
dropped on to the hospital or to
the practice or to the nursing
home and then that is used as
collateral to um you know, to
get that loan and then, right.
They have to use that loan, they
have to generate revenue to make
the calls on that loan, right?
You can put a lot of pressure on
the organization and if you
remember from the 1990s with the
physician, publicly trained
physician management companies.
A lot of this was happening back
then, and you know the history
with that is a lot of them
failed, you know, so you have to
be cognizant of these types of
structures and classifying
private equity, um, in, in
different ways. Does that make
sense? I hope.
Well,
it, you know, the problem with,
with these general terms is
You're focused on one area and
really the, the, maybe the, the
terminology of filling out the
forms, but, but the big sense of
private equity is just
individuals.
Getting together their money and
making an investment.
And, and it could be a joint
venture, it could be a variety
of other things and it's not
just related to health care, it
could be any investment vehicle.
I, I, I, I'll have to agree to
disagree with you here, but like
a private, a private equity firm
is different from a group of
individuals that go and make an
acquisition or invest in a
capital, you know, then there's
venture capital firms, there's
angel investors, there are all
these different terms. But in
the sense of this, we're talking
about an organization that has a
limited partner, an LLC, a fund
manager that goes out and
directs to acquire these
organizations. Yeah, I, I just
want to make sure that that that
there are other.
Vehicles that would fall under
what I consider a private equity
umbrella that are much different
than than your specific model,
um, the, the, the other.
Well, there there's many
concerns, but
In my part of the state, it's
difficult to
Continue to have uh.
Keep nursing homes open, keep uh
assisted living facilities open.
We've had many closed one just
got converted to a hotel, um,
and to have
Specialist medical specialist
come in and, and practice, uh,
and so they're looking.
To
Attract
These professionals into our
community and frankly we're
looking for anybody willing to
make those investments to to
attract those medical
professionals to our part of the
state and so
You know,
I'm concerned that
Again with uh uh if we
Really put a lot of this stuff
under a microscope and, and, and
start regulating and doing a lot
of things that we're going to
detract.
That investment from occurring.
So do you have any
recommendations? How, how we can
still attract the capital still
attract the interest still
attract the physicians and yet
try to avoid some of the
pitfalls that you pointed out.
Yeah, and so, yeah, and that is
just kind of the state of
nursing homes and just post acu
care across the nation. So I'm
sorry to hear about that in your
region, um, I'd say the first
thing is, yeah, obviously, you
know, I made it in my
you know, disclosure, we
shouldn't restrict capital, but
we have to think cognizantly how
to do that. So the first thing
is especially in like nursing
homes, right? um, we have a
system in in in in the United
States where nursing homes have
to be surveyed by a state
surveyor at least once a year
for recertification, OK, those
recertifications a lot of the
times haven't happened in 2 to 3
years because of underfunding,
um, high staff turnover and
poorly trained state surveyors.
But
A lot of times these nursing
homes get acquired by a private
equity firm and exit out in that
3 year time frame and you would
never even know because of
certification didn't take place.
So I think the first thing I
would do is try to reinvest
in the state surveyor system.
And make sure that anytime
there's a change of ownership
that takes place. Um,
You put that under a microscope
to make sure that they have the
financial viability to do it and
look at all the other facilities
that they have acquired, be it
in your state or across states.
And see how their quality care
differs if the quality of care
is pretty poor.
You have the the grounds to
reject the actual change of
ownership or the acquisition.
Right, that would be the first
thing.
Um, the second thing is.
You know, this might be a little
kind of
Out there, but if you were to
have an institutional investor
come in, have their holding,
holding the investment longer.
Then let's say 3 years.
That would be 11 of them too. So
it creates some stability within
the organization.
The 3rd, um, you know, and Zuri
might actually, uh, touch on
this a little bit, um, is that
for every dollar or of the deal
that goes through.
You put another percentage or a
certain amount of money into
escrow.
So that when
That let's say that the deal
gets successful or it's
successful, and they
successfully exit and there's no
problems with quality care, cost
of care or anything like that,
um.
That can be returned to the
investor.
But let's say it does go south,
such as in Stewart Healthcare or
Hahneman in Philadelphia, right?
That money can be returned to
the hospital so that it can
actually keep the lights on and
find a transition period of how
they can get out of that issue,
right? I think those things
don't restrict capital and
don't.
Uh,
Dissuade investors to come into,
into a state, right? Um, those
are some three of the creative
ways that I can think of off the
top of my head.
So enforcement, you know,
improving your enforcement,
right, with state surveyors.
Um, holding patterns as well as
this escrow type of system.
Uh, Madam Chair, I know I'm
beyond my question but one more
I we don't have a long list yet,
so my, my last question, you,
you mentioned 11 of these
groups, uh, situations had a
Medicaid or Medicare
reimbursement rate that resulted
in a loss, so you had to cut
staff, had to, you know, you had
to deal with the operation side
and I'm wondering.
How do we, how do we, because
that seems to be
Again, a government imposed
situation at the if the Medicare
reimbursement rates aren't
sufficient to sustain that model
and we're having, you know, uh
companies having to cut
services, cut staff, and it
results in a, in a decrease in
quality of care. That seems to
be
Our government's fault. So you
make really good points there.
um I will say that in the in the
perspective of nursing homes,
the predominant payer is
Medicaid, right, which is state
run, and I always say this
whether people like it or not,
it's you get what you pay for,
right? And in Medicaid nursing
homes are typically losing
around 20 cents on the dollar,
right? So you have to make
really hard decisions if you
want to improve staffing you
want to make sure they don't
sell to you know uh
Institutional investor. Increase
your Medicaid payments, right?
That will retain private
investors and nonprofits from
closing or selling to these
types of institutions that you
don't want, right? I, and I'm
not saying I, you know, if I
want them or not, but I'm just
saying if your goal is to remove
this type of institutional
investment, maybe you increase
your Medicaid payments.
Because that
That seems to be a common theme,
not just with, with nursing
homes and maybe assisted living,
but even our doctors in our part
of the state complain about the
Medicaid, Medicare reimbursement
rates not being sufficient to
sustain their operations some of
that along with cost of capital
going up,
right? Some of that we need to
look at what we can do on this
side of the table.
Absolutely. Thank, thank you,
Senator, Senator do have.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, and thank you for, for this
presentation, um.
It's a lot of information.
I don't know if I that I.
Probably have absorbed less of
it than I think I have.
Um, but so you you've mentioned
a couple times.
Uh, selling within 3 to 7 years,
um, so does that mean that when
a
Say, a private equity company
comes in, buys a physician
practice, not opt, he said, but
uh
uh then they're there and then
then they're selling it to maybe
another. Usually it's typically
in other private equity firm and
it's rinse and Pete,
yeah, um, and sometimes it'll be
a large multi-specialty practice
or even a hospital, but most of
the time it's other private
equity firms
and Madam Chair, and
Mr. Brown, uh, so have you
noticed, have you seen any
trends of kind of what the
What happens after they they
leave.
And what kind of impact that has
on, on uh services for patients.
So the problem is that because
it's happened in the last decade
we don't have a lot of post data
yet to assess that situation. I
can say that, you know, uh,
And the dermatology market,
which was the first mover, there
have been several of these
platform practices that have had
to close individual group uh
practices within certain
geographic regions because they
they scaled up too fast and took
on too much debt, and they're
not generating the revenue to
make the calls on that loan, um,
you know.
But yeah, no one really knows
yet because it's kind of still
kind of a new phenomenon, you
know.
No, that, that, that makes sense
and I'm sure that what that
suggests to me is that we're
thinking about oversight here.
We should, it should be longer
than 7 years, um.
Uh, the, your suggestions.
About looking into the financial
viability and who else they've
acquired and how things went
there and then the putting stuff
in escrow. Do you know, are
there other states who have who
have implemented policies like
that who we might look at.
Um, so I believe, I mean, I'm
speaking general here. New
York's New York state of New
York.
North Carolina, uh, Connecticut,
I believe they have certain, I
don't believe New Mexico is a
certificate of need state, um,
but any time there's a change of
ownership or a new facility that
wants to be built, it has to go
on behalf of like whoever
oversees er certificate of need
and they have to prove financial
viability, why this change of
ownership is taking place and
then you have to justify it for
societal welfare, um, so you
know there are a couple of
states that have done it, but
there are also states that have
repealed.
Certificate of need such as
Florida and they're having good,
you know.
Good success with that
apparently but no one's really
assessed that right now, um, so
yeah, I would go to those
states. I think New York might
be the most strict and the North
Carolina as well. So it doesn't
allow uh they they they look at
things very under close scrutiny
whenever an institutional
investor wants to come in and
make an acquisition through
their certificate of need laws
and Madam Chair, Mr. Ron, do you
know that in those states where,
where they are doing that. Do
you know if that has had
Uh, a negative impact on access
to healthcare.
Yeah, I, I can't speak to that,
sorry.
um.
And then, uh.
The last count I'll make a
comment again, plug in SB 15,
you had uh early in your
presentation.
You had talked about and talk
about horizontal integration.
That when hospitals uh have a
require market power, they're
able to charge higher prices on
a permanent basis and there's a
100% pass through to consumers.
Um, I'll just note under the
The the policy that we've been
that we were talking about this
morning because looking at
increased costs, uh, would be
one of the, the lenses through
which it's looked at, I think
that would
Not only would there not be that
passed through and increased
costs to consumers, but any
increased costs, even related to
uh complying with the act could
not, I think, be passed on to
consumers if they have to, if
they're agreeing not to increase
patient prices and Jane Wisner
is giving me a look that makes
me think I might be speaking out
of turn here, but, oh, OK.
It is kind of right by the
light.
to the extent that that folks
are concerned that having this
oversight would create increased
costs for the entities that
would then get passed on to
consumers, I think it's
structured in such a way
specifically to avoid that.
Thank you, madam chair.
You're welcome. Anyone else?
Um,
Uh, yes, Representative B block
and then Representative Jones.
Thank you, Madam Chairman. Thank
you so much for your
presentation. Just a couple of
quick questions for you. Uh,
I've just seen in the
presentation a few times it says
like evidence lack of empirical
evidence now, Madam Chairman,
I'm just wondering, do we, do we
have that evidence it's just not
published yet or or where can I
find.
Where you're making some
conclusions cause.
So anything that you see with a
barcode on there, you can just
find that peer-reviewed article.
Great. OK, thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you for that. So
I'm just wondering regarding
like.
Negative impacts of private
equity and health care in the
general sense.
In the general sense of I don't
not sure what you mean in the
sense like, where you say lack
of empirical evidence now on
page I don't know what page it
is, it's like the first I'll say
this, the quality of care is
proven empirically that prices
go up. What I mean by prices are
those that after acquisition the
prices that are negotiated
between the insurer and the
physician group or hospital or
whatever those prices go up.
There's mixed or lack of
empirical evidence on quality of
care changing.
So prices go up and quality
doesn't change the ultimate
question is what is the value
being created? We're gonna be
hearing from Zuri on that point
in terms of quality. You don't
have impirical evidence, but I
understand there is a
standpoint, um, but I, I, I'm
talking from a physician group
standpoint from a nursing home
standpoint you can see
empirically quality of care goes
down.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair,
thank you for that. So I, so
I've been looking at the
presentation and I see that
there's a focus primarily at
least in my opinion from what
I've read and I may be wrong,
but on a like long term or I'm
sorry, a hospice care and
anesthesia, anesthesiology. Have
you looked at like outpatient
and surgery results as surgical
centers, Madam Chair um.
So I have not personally, but I
can point you to uh work done by
Michael Richards and Chris
Whaley, where they show that
after a private equity
acquisition prices go up.
And feel free to reach out to
me. I can send you that study.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair,
that's all I had.
Representative Jones, thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you for your
presentation. I'm really trying
to digest this too. I have a lot
of as as a nurse and I've worked
hospice and various places. I, I
can relate to a lot of what
you're saying and I'm still
looking at this, the hospice um
section here and how I can see,
I can definitely see how there
would be a preference for those
long stay patients because you
would, you know, you would.
It's just a lot less work and
more money. I mean, obviously,
and that would apply to anybody
who does that for business, but
I know I'm concerned about the
statistics and maybe we'll have
to get together later and talk
about that because I think an
average of statistics would.
And and any policy that would
come from that or changes that
would come from that might
negatively impact rural areas.
In a very bad way because I, I
know in rural areas.
Any hospice provider will take
every patient and, and it's
just.
That's just the way it is, and
there is no preference in that.
Right
So what, what are your comments
about that? I'll say this study,
uh, the predominant, uh,
acquisitions took place in urban
areas, um, and you know,
marketplaces in in hospice are
really difficult to to discern
because they typically have
their headquarters in one part
of the state and then they have
nur you know nursing aides go to
different parts of the state to
provide the care, right? But I
will say that the majority of
the care that is provided within
these private equity and public
security companies happened in
urban.
areas and so in this analysis
from a statistics standpoint,
what we do is that.
In the control group of
for-profits that were never
required they had to be within
the same geographic footprint of
those that were acquired by
private equ and publicly
treated, so we're comparing
within the same market, if that
makes sense. And we can talk
about that more and get into the
weeds of it, um, but it accounts
for that type of issue that
you're talking about.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair. I, I appreciate that
perspective. I just, I think it
highlights the fact that we need
to be super careful about us as
a rural state and.
You know, to be using statistics
that are.
That may not apply to us, but we
can talk about that more, I
hope.
Yeah, we, we also include this
thing called a state fixed
effect so we compare within a
state. So acquisitions that were
acquired in New Mexico were only
compared to hospices within New
Mexico. OK. Yeah. Thank you.
That's better. Thanks.
Welcome
Anyone else with questions or
oh, I'm sorry, Representative
Barrego.
Go ahead. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Um,
Doctor Brown.
Fascinating information, um,
brings up a lot of questions.
Um, and one of the things
And I think about a lot because
I sat on the pension system for
a long time and uh Madam Chair,
one of the things that we talk
about a lot in our, when we had
our para meetings where
mortality rates.
And um, you know, especially in
our actuarial studies and how
much people are paying into the
system and so on and retirees
and
The
Actually wanting people to live
shorter lives because that
funding goes back into some of
it goes to the beneficiary, but
the rest of it goes back into
the fund, and just thinking
about this.
And what you are presenting
today is that the medical system
is wanting actually according to
what I'm hearing.
People are living longer.
And there's, you know, so I, I'm
just thinking about this from a
numbers game and kind of what it
is, um.
People living longer, how does
that affect the healthcare cost
in the long term and how do you,
I mean, are there
Empirical studies that show, you
know, some of these
differentiations and how they're
compared to each other and how
it, you know, on the one hand
you have people living shorter
life or wanting them to live
shorter lives and on the other
hand you have people.
Living longer lives and.
Actually making money off of
that, so how does that all
equate to each other?
I have no idea, to be honest
with you.
I'll try to find some studies
for you, um, but yeah, I can't
speak to that. All I can say is
that after institutional
investment, uh, length of stay
goes up within uh hospice
agencies based on the the the
current payment structure, the
per diem rate, right, um, so I
mean I think it's beyond the
scope of this this conversation,
but on the federal level CMS has
to start considering how to
revamp that per diem, uh,
payment rate so they.
Avoid this type of loophole, you
know, together going forward.
And, and Madam Chair, the reason
that I bring that up is because,
you know, we have a retiree
healthcare system, which we
As retirees pay into in order
to, you know,
Help
With our healthcare as we age.
And so, I mean, I think that
there really is some sort of a
uh interesting correlation there
that probably would.
Um, present itself with some
interesting information in how
much, how long, um, retirees pay
into their healthcare system,
and that's why I raised the
question, doctor, is because I,
you know, I, I really think
about that is like how New
Mexicans are being affected.
Yeah, I will do some searching
for you and see if I can find
something and shoot up shoot me
an email and love to discuss it
more. Thank you so much. Thank
you, madam.
Thank you, Representative.
Anyone else, we have a few
minutes.
OK. Um, super interesting,
really helpful information,
doctor, and, and thank you for
coming to present, um, and now
we have a resource that we can
go to when we have questions on,
on this issue. Really appreciate
it. Um.
We are gonna start our next
presentation about 2 minutes,
uh, Doctor Zuri Song, who is our
next presenter. He and some of
his colleagues at, at Harvard
have done studies on things like
Um, the quality of care as
related to, you know, corporate
medicine, private equity, and so
on. So, um, that's kind of our
next part of our study, but we
have a few minutes while he's,
he told me a minute ago he'd be
on in a couple of minutes, so.
Be great.
Is there someone on?
Ashley Watson, who's Ashley
Watson,
right.
Mhm.
Folks, if we get back to
placement, please.
In public, could you sit down?
Yeah I.
OK.
All right.
Doctor Song.
Hi everyone. Hi there. Oh great,
we have a bigger picture of you
now. Um, is there a way to have
a larger picture of, oh, it's
only while he's talking. OK.
Let me, give me a second. I'm
trying to get the crowd to
settle down.
Sure, no problem. OK.
All right, members. Um, so
Doctor Song, if you would
introduce yourself, describe a
little bit about the field that
you work in. Um, I did tell our
membership that um you've, you
and some of your colleagues at
Harvard have published articles
on
on the role of private equity
and patient outcomes and that
and that sort of thing. So, um,
the floor is yours.
Got it. Thank you very much for
having me. It's an honor to join
all of you here. Thank you for
accommodating me from Boston.
Um, my name is Zuri Song. I am a
primary care physician at
Massachusetts General Hospital
and a health economist in the
Department of Healthcare Policy
at Harvard Medical School.
Similar to Tyler and other
colleagues here and across the
country, uh, I've worked on a
number of teams of academic
researchers studying the impact
of private equity acquisitions
of hospitals and physician
practices. So I am um delighted
to uh to have this opportunity
to share some of that work with
you.
Uh, and in doing so, crediting
the hard work of many colleagues
across other universities, uh,
beyond Harvard.
If you would like, um, I can
share my screen. Is this a good
time to do so? Yes,
yes, you may.
Could you let me know if that's
coming up on your end?
Yes, it is, and we also have
some hard copy slides as well.
Great. Thank you.
Uh, I will go through
essentially a review of the
evidence to date on uh the scope
of private equity acquisitions
and the estimated impact uh
across US hospitals and a number
of physician practices. Um, this
may overlap some with what Tyler
has already shared with you and
with what Adii will share with
you. Uh, I will try to avoid
overlap, um, and I hope to leave
with you, uh, a framework for
thinking about these
acquisitions, uh, and a few
pieces of data to guide your
thinking uh for New Mexico.
And your your communities.
Uh, so first, I just want to
mention the broader context in
which primary care, uh, sorry,
in which private equity sits,
um, private equity is a focus of
many state legislatures now and
certainly many of our federal
committees in Congress and the
US Senate, but it still remains
a small relatively small part of
a much larger picture of
provider consolidation. Um, this
top graph shows you that roughly
80% of US doctors now are
employed or owned by hospitals
or health systems. That's a
Very fast change from even 5, 10
years ago. And the bottom shows
you the number of hospitals that
continue to be acquired and
merged year on and year out. So
even though there's been a bit
of a slowing if you stack up all
the bars, the bar keeps getting
taller. On this slide, you have
a really nice plot which remains
true just to today. There's new
data out today which I didn't
include here, but, uh, this,
these two divergent lines on the
left, um, shows you the number
of hospitals in the US in a
health.
System in the blue and not in a
Helst health system in the
orange, and these two lines have
indeed continued to diverge now
through at least 2022. The table
on the right shows you several
prominent prominent examples of
large health systems that have
joined other large health
systems, even though they were
geographically apart. So
typically we think of
consolidation as buying up your
neighbor to become bigger in a
particular area, so you garner
greater market power to
negotiate for higher commercial
prices. That's
The classic health economic
story. It's been shown time and
time again over 30 or 40 years
of very rigorous empirical
study. Um, but this is something
new. This is hospitals on one
coast joining hospitals on
another coast to become one
system, so-called cross-market
mergers. So in this setting of
provider consolidation.
We have this very pressing and
striking growth in the prices of
medical services. That's this
line at the top pinned at the
pinned starting at the year
2000, the turn of the century.
From then to now, the growth of
medical services here in the top
line has far outpaced the growth
of the growth of everything else
we buy in our lives in society.
Groceries, gasoline, all the
goods and services that people
buy in their lives.
Those prices, despite any
inflation that's going on,
that's growing at the bottom
line, but the top line is health
care prices and these continue
to diverge as well.
So we're here today partly
because of private equity and in
my state of Massachusetts, the
half of the picture on the left
here has been the top dominant
story in our domestic policy
debates in our state, uh, for
about the last 9 months or so,
the Stuart healthcare system,
which is a system of 8
previously nonprofit Catholic
hospitals that were acquired by
a private equity firm around
2010, uh, recently declared,
went into bankruptcy proceedings
that um
Uh, have, have largely concluded
but yet are not entirely over.
On the right, uh, at the top
here is Hahneman Hospital in uh
Pennsylvania around
Philadelphia, where the initial
uh story of private equity, um,
business strategies began to
emerge in this anecdote, another
hospital that was uh bought
using substantial amounts of
debt that later went into
bankruptcy. Delaware County
Memorial Hospital, another
example here on the bottom
right. Although these are
prominent examples that bring
this issue.
To the 4 and garner lots of
media coverage. I do want to
note at the outset here that
these remain the exceptions
rather than the rule. The rule
for most hospital acquisitions,
as you'll see, is that the
hospital makes more money after
private equity acquisition. That
charges go up for payers and
patients in society, and that
the hospital is eventually sold
or continued to be held by the
private equity firm, either sold
at a profit or continued to be
held, uh, to be
sold later. Uh, and so these
dramatic stories are really not
the average. These are the
exceptions, and we should keep
that in mind when we think about
policy levers, um, even as
important as these stories are.
If you look at this gray bar
right here in the middle of your
screen or the slide, this
describes roughly 1200 contracts
or deals that private equity
companies have made just in
these last 5 years or so, 2018
through 2012 uh 2022, um, that's
been dominated by provider
acquisitions.
So relative to the 5 years
before that, acquisitions by
private equity firms have
largely been in direct health
care provision, as opposed to
medical technology, as opposed
to payer services, which are
still prevalent, but provider
direct provision of services has
been a dominant target of
acquisition.
On the right side, there have
also been growth in various
types of biopharma acquisitions,
uh, new molecules, new potential
drugs, new potential devices,
that's still going on, uh, but
the provider acquisitions have
dominated the landscape.
In this diagram, I want to
illustrate to you a basic
framework for thinking through
the classic model of a private
equity acquisition. The classic
model is a debt-financed model,
and it's very different from
your local academic hospital
buying a subsidiary, very
different from any one of us
going to a grocery store or
another consumer goods part of
the economy and buying
something, how does private
equity buy a brick and mortar
healthcare provider. Well,
imagine here on the left, a
private equity fund, which is
is basically a pot of dollars
that's been raised by a private
equity firm. A piece of that box
is chipped off into this blue
box here, as the acquisition
price, the amount of money that
the private equity firm spends
to buy a healthcare provider.
You'll have probably this in
front of you, the whole picture
drawn out, but basically in the
classic private equity
acquisition, it is majority
debt.
And minority existing money.
Which the word equity denotes.
So in a classic model like this,
I've illustrated this as 70%
borrowed money, 30% existing
money. The 30% existing money in
the acquisition price comes
largely from your investors. Uh,
if you are the private equity
firm, your investors in America
generally tend to be or the most
prevalent types are pension
funds of public retirees, uh, an
example would be the Calpers
California Public retiree
system.
Uh, they would be endowments,
endowments of various types of
institutions. Um, they would be
sovereign funds of other
countries, uh, the wealth of
wealthy people, certainly, and
other institutions, including
banks and hospitals that have
their own investment arms. That
comprises roughly 98% in a
classic scenario of the 30%
that's real money.
Leaving 2% of the 30% that's
real money coming from the
parent private equity firm. By
real money, I mean existing
money you've already raised.
That 2% of 30%, if you multiply
2% by 30%, is only 0.6% or less
than 1% of the acquisition price
comes from the coffers of the
parent private equity firm. So
most, most of the money is
borrowed. There is some entity
out there, a bank, so uh for
example, that is willing to
A majority share of the
acquisition price for a fixed
rate of return.
Another unique aspect of private
equity is that the collateral
For this debt is not the goods
and services and belongings of
the parent private equity firm,
but rather it's a physical
infrastructure, land and
buildings and machines and tools
of the acquired entity. So the
acquired entity's own stuff is
put up as the collateral for
that loan, which again, relieves
the parent private equity firm
of more skin in the game. And
you'll see this as classically
described by many scholars in
the field is essentially a theme
of the private equity
acquisition model
And
Essentially minimizing skin in
the game of the parent firm,
putting most of the risk of the
new debt onto the acquired
entity. Indeed, if a hospital
gets acquired on day one, it
does have the pressure of
beginning to have to generate
revenue to pay down interest on
this new debt, uh, or else it's
collateral is at stake. It's
collateral being its own
belongings. In physician
practices, just to shift framed
a little bit in physician
practices we're learning that
after roughly about 3 years,
most of them are sold to a
2
Parent second private equity
firm, that's the two with a
little circle here. About
two-thirds of physician
practices get sold to another
private equity firm.
After just a few years, about
20% of them get sold to
corporate owners. I've given you
some examples here. I'm not
listing them by prevalence
necessarily, but just well-known
large companies that own
healthcare providers, and about
5 to 10% go to the private or or
rather the public, um.
IPO market to the stock market,
initial public offerings.
Uh, you could set that aside for
now. Uh, what I really want to
convey on this framework is the
movement of dollars, how the
money moves here after the
acquisition is made. So why is
the private equity classic
acquisition model profitable?
Why was it so popular in the
1980s and 191990s, and after
spending 2025 years in other
industries, finally made its way
into healthcare. Well, in those
20 to 25 years in other
industries, several things were
honed. One is that your limited
partners or your investors.
pay to the parent private equity
firm management fees for the
privilege of having their
dollars be managed.
By the private equity firm.
These management fees are
typically 2% of the value of
this fund per year. So even if
the dollars, even if the money
wasn't doing anything, even if
it was just sitting there, uh,
that's 2% per year in management
fees.
There are also management fees
coming from the acquired entity
back to the parent private
equity firm. That's so-called
for the privilege of having
yourself be managed by a
Private equity firm with
management expertise, accounting
expertise, expertise of
restructuring and potentially
improving efficiencies. I'm
giving you a taste or flavor of
some of the um
Strategies described in the the
value of those management fees.
So you've got these two streams
of management fees coming back
to the parent firm. If nothing
happened to the acquisition. Um,
those two management fees
themselves, those two streams
themselves would add up to be
greater.
Then the 0.6% of the acquisition
price that the parent firm has
chipped in, meaning after a year
or two,
A little bit of skin in the game
you've chipped in as the parent
firm is completely offset by the
management fees that have
already come back to you. So now
it's technically speaking, zero
financial risk. Now, you still
have some reputational risk, you
don't want the acquired entity
to go under or bankrupt or do
something that's not desirable,
uh, but in terms of cold hard
Do here of uh how much you put
in, how much you've gotten back.
You've already gotten back more
than you put in. Now, the big
one is when the provider entity
is sold. When a hospital is
sold, then all those proceeds
come back to your limited
partners and to you as the
parent private equity firm. It
comes back by the first in this
example, 8% of the proceeds
going all the way to the only to
the limited partners who are
investors, and then percentages
9 through 100 gets split 80/20
between your investors and you.
That's the bulk of it. So this
is the classic model of a debt
financed or sometimes called a
leveraged buyout. And this is
how most hospitals in America
are acquired by private equity
firms. But I have to caution
that this is just one depiction
of a classic sort of average
middle of the road kind of
acquisition. There are lots of
variations on this theme.
Um, private equity is not
monolithic, and in a lot of our
emerging work, we're finding
that indeed, the management
strategies after acquisition are
not monolithic too, uh, but
never, nevertheless, we need a
conceptual understanding or
framework of how this happens,
uh, and this diagram gives you
that. Within this diagram, there
are lots of financial
engineering strategies that have
been written about by, again,
lots of other scholars, our
colleagues in the field.
That describe how private equity
firms can use this debt and
further make this acquisition
price more debt and less equity
soon after acquisition to make
their acquisitions seem more
financially appealing on the
market. So if you are a um
retiree fund, or if you are a
institution with an endowment,
and you're deciding between
whether to put your money into
the stock market at a 5 or 7%
return on mutual funds or to
government bonds at a 3 to 4%.
Turn or to some other investment
vehicle, you may be swayed or
persuaded by private equity
firms saying to you, put your
money into private equity, where
your returns might be 15, 18%.
Um, part of that argument comes
from how this percent debt is
really used. There's something
called the internal rate of
return that is mechanically
higher, the more debt you put
into an acquisition.
So there's a little bit of
gaming here around the numbers,
uh, but that also means the more
debt you use, the less skin you
have in the game. And as we come
back to policy levers in the
end, you'll see that skin in the
game as a colloquial phrase,
really is important in how the
private equity model works.
OK, in this table, I just wanted
to offer you some uh big picture
distinctions between venture
capital here on the left, and
private equity here on the
right. Basically, venture
capital are smaller acquisitions
of smaller stakes in startup
ideas. It's you're betting on a
person, you're betting on a
product, you're betting on a new
emerging industry, and you're
not taking majority ownership
stakes. You're taking a small
minority stake, you're not
owning
That that this new business or
this new idea, but you're
betting on it, and you are
looking for a home run,
something like a 50 to 100x
return. And you know that most
of your bets won't work out, but
if one is a home run, it'll
offset everything else. The
difference with private equity
is that it's almost
The opposite in many of these
ways. Private equity is taking
majority or full ownership
stakes and not an early stage
idea, but generally, usually a
mature, successful business, a
mature existing successful
healthcare provider. And I'll
show you, or we could talk later
about just what that means, uh,
because one of the pushbacks of
private equity.
Uh, industry, uh, folks or
colleagues in industry is that
private equity invests in uh
financially distressed
healthcare providers. The data
on that tend to disagree with
that view. The data suggests
that private equity firms, on
average, target financially more
successful hospitals rather than
distressed hospitals. Uh,
there's a study from August 2024
this year, that shows that. But
in any case, it's majority
stakes in successful existing
businesses, and you're not
trying to hit home runs. You're
not trying to get 50 to 10.
Ex returns, you might just be
pursuing a 2 to 4x return, a 5x
return. So essentially,
You're trying to go for a single
after single after single, as
opposed to home runs, but the
singles are assuredly singles,
because of all the financial
engineering strategies you can
undertake, including the use of
bankruptcy and the bankruptcy
markets, including the use of
debt.
It is generally uh understood
that private equity acquisitions
tend to be profitable. They are
not, at the end of the day, um,
Uh
They don't have the risk that a
venture capital investment does.
Uh, most of them end up
profitable for the parent firm.
Most of them end up profitable
for the investors. And again,
that's why those pictures at the
beginning of the stories in the
news, um, are captivating, but
they're, they're more exceptions
than the rule. So.
Yes I
I think it would be helpful. We
did get a pretty good overview
about how private equity works
from Doctor Brown. Um, it, I'm
wondering if we could.
Slides where you're talking
about outcomes and that and that
sort of thing and I I hope I'm
not being rude, but I think it
would be helpful if we did that.
Is, is that OK with you?
Absolutely
Jumping to that right now. OK,
cool. So we will start with
hospitals on the empirical
evidence. On the map here on the
left are 2018 data of about 130
hospitals acquired by private
equity firms. Uh, I'm showing
you this not because we're
interested in 2018 per se, but I
just wanted you to compare this
to the next slide, which is now.
From 2018 to now, uh, that
growth has been all the way to
460 hospitals acquired by
private equity. So I'll show you
the data on
These acquired hospitals, not
all of them, but the ones we
have data for, uh, and changes
in quality of care, and some of
the financial outcomes. Uh, but
across the country, including
here in New Mexico down here,
um, as a whole, these private
equity hospital acquisitions
account for about
25% of the rural population in
the US. Rural hospitals
generally have more market
power, command higher prices,
uh, because there's no
competition in rural areas, um,
and that's been shown in other
studies.
And these private equity
hospitals are about 22% of all
for-profit hospitals in the US
now, so just in a few short
years, you have that big jump in
the number of acquisitions.
On physician practices, which
we'll also talk about after
hospitals. Uh, you've also seen
this big growth. So on the left
here is a study from a couple of
years ago that our team did,
which showed basically something
like 8% penetration into
physician markets, so about 8%
of physicians were owned by
private equity across the
country. Arizona is a hotspot,
New Mexico, actually quite a
contrast with Arizona, but now,
looking at these medical
specialties, that penetration
has dramatically accelerated as
well. So you went from 800
practices in
In 2012 to almost 8000 practices
in 2021, acquired by private
equity firms. And in one third
of metropolitan areas, this is
work from our colleagues at
Berkeley, one single private
equity firm has greater than 30%
of that market in a third of
metropolitan areas now.
All right. A few other maps, and
then we'll go into the hospital
evidence. OBGYN offices, Women's
Health, often a target of
acquisition. Tyla's work on
nursing homes. Tyler's work on
hospices and our emerging work
on methadone clinics or
substance use addiction
treatment centers here on the
bottom right. So just other
targets of acquisition which we
could talk about other sectors
of the delivery system. For
hospitals, this is our first
study from 2020, looking at 200
hospitals that were acquired by
private equity compared to 500.
32 controls. We basically found
that private equity hospitals
after acquisition, saw a 27%
increase in net income driven by
a 7 to 16% increase in charges,
that's the asking price.
Sometimes just to charge the
cost ratio, which is the asking
price divided by the cost of
delivering care. So if there are
staffing cuts, then your
denominator gets smaller and so
you're charged the cost ratio
can also rise. It was also found
that there was a small increase
in
Mix, which is the reported
sickness of the patients coming
through the door. Uh, this can
either be truth or it can be
coding intensity, which is a
behavioral change. Uh, some may
say it's upcoding, it's tough to
say that without knowing exactly
who's coming in, but uh just
from a broad level, it seems
like on paper at least, patients
are reported to be sicker, and
I'll show you better clinical
evidence that suggests it's
probably not true. It's probably
a coding effect.
Medicare as a share of the total
admissions goes down, Medicaid's
share stayed the same, and so,
it follows that the share of
commercially insured patients
admitted went up to supplant the
Medicare share. And as you all
know, commercial patients pay
higher prices, or their payers
pay higher prices than Medicare
patients.
If we want to look at quality of
care, the best way to probably
do that in hospitals is to look
at what's so-called hospital
acquired conditions by CMS. So
our federal government has
defined in administrative data
conditions that are basically
markers of poor quality care
like what you see here on the
screen, that have to actually
happen in the hospital for it to
be uh eligible as a hospital
acquired condition. So if you
walk into the hospital with any
of these already, it doesn't
count. Um, these measures.
Only count uh the absence of
these.
Uh, adverse events before
admission, and then the
development of these adverse
events during admission. So with
that definition of patient
adverse events in the hospital,
we wanted to study what is the
impact of private equity
acquisitions on the development
of these adverse events in the
hospital. This study from
December of last year, uh, is
targeted at this question. On
the left, you see a red line,
which is the composite or total.
rate of hospital acquired
complications, these adverse
events. And in the blue line,
you see a similar measure for
the non-private equity
hospitals. This vertical line is
the private equity acquisition
date.
So we have 3 years before
acquisition to the left, and 3
years after acquisition to the
right. In the years before
acquisition, private equity
hospitals that eventually got
acquired, actually had a lower
rate of hospital acquired
infections.
The red line is below the blue
line to start with.
But immediately after
acquisition, the red line jumps
above the blue line.
And the blue line is kind of
just trending gradually downward
over time, and that follows
national data which showed that
basically over the last couple
of decades, US hospitals on
average, in general, have had
improvements in safety and
quality.
Various things like checklists,
washing hands, all sorts of
interventions have generally
improved the safety of hospital
care. So, we expect this general
gradual slow down trend. But
what's striking is that the
private equity hospitals
Go in the other direction after
acquisition.
The graph on the right tells the
same story. It's just after
statistical adjustment. Before
acquisition,
All of the differences between
private equity and the
comparison hospitals are very
close to 0 and statistically
indistinguishable from zero, so
no differences before basically,
and afterwards, private equity
hospitals had more.
Of these complications. How much
more?
We're calculating that there was
a 25% increase in hospital
acquired complications after
acquisition. This was driven by
a 38% increase in central line
bloodstream infections. Despite
16% fewer centralized being
done.
This was also driven by 27%
increase in patient falls.
The interesting result behind
Falls is that in the comparison
hospitals, people are falling
less, um, because over time,
hospitals are just getting
safer, and I'll show you another
graph that shows you that
nationally overall, hospitals
are staffing up over these
years. In general, hospital
employment of human beings is
going up during these last
couple of decades. Um, but
staffing is getting cut at
private equity hospitals after
acquisition.
Um, so at private equity
hospitals,
It's not that people are falling
more, it's that patients are
falling at the same rate as
before.
But the comparison group has
patients falling less. So
relative to the comparison
group, the private equity
hospitals are not demonstrating
a decline in falls. It's
demonstrating a continuation of
the same rate of falls. So
that's a relative increase of
about 27%.
We also find a doubling of
surgical site infections at
private equity hospitals after
acquisition.
That's despite
Control hospitals.
Having a decline in surgical
site infections. So the two
groups are just going in the
opposite direction.
And that's also despite 8% fewer
surgeries being done. So let me
explain why there were 8% fewer
surgeries being done after
acquisition, and why there were
16% fewer central lines being
done after acquisition.
Basically, and this is using
100% Medicare data.
Um, from CMS.
Basically, after acquisition,
two things happened in private
equity hospitals that uh
probably underlie these results
and we're
In the process we're having
shown some of these in in the
process of showing the rest of
this. The first thing is that
the patients who came in the
door after acquisition were
actually younger.
And the Medicare patients who
came in the door, who got
admitted after acquisition.
Or less likely to be dual
eligible.
Meaning they were less likely to
be disadvantaged.
In other words, more likely to
be advantaged in various
socio-demographic, socioeconomic
ways. So younger and more
advantaged, typically would mean
fewer complications, slightly
healthier patients. But even
among that group, we saw more
infections and more adverse
events.
The second thing is the staffing
cuts, because of staffing cuts
that we're now quantifying.
be around 16 to 18% after
acquisition. There are just
fewer clinicians around to do a
surgery, to do a central line,
and that's probably part of it
too. But the bigger story is
probably that patients are just
a little healthier. They just
don't need centralized or
surgeries as much, uh, and
despite that, the rate of these
adverse events was going up.
This is some of our emerging
work that's currently not out
yet. If I had to guess, these
results will probably be
published around January.
Or something like that, maybe
December.
Uh, so these are, uh, currently
under peer review and
technically embargoed, so I
would just ask you to uh not
share them given that they're
not final. We, we would like the
final word uh to eventually be
out there, but as far as we can
see now, there's a 17% increase
in emergency department
mortality after private equity
acquisition. We don't see this
on the inpatient unit. In the
inpatient units, after you've
been admitted to a private
equity hospital, those patients
are not dying more. Uh, in fact,
they're dying a little less.
Uh, in the private equity
industry picked up on this
astutely after our study came
out, and that makes total sense
because patients are a little
bit younger and less
disadvantaged. So we expect
mortality to be on average
lower. Uh, we're still struck by
the fact that there were these
adverse events, infections and
falls relative to the comparison
group, those went up, uh, but of
course those can go up without a
person dying. There are a lot of
bad things that can happen to
quality of care in the hospital
before you see a death. So we're
not surprised that death didn't
go up.
We definitely expected death to
go down a little bit, and they
did.
But what struck us was the
emergency department. This is
the everybody coming through the
door, not the patients who were
already seen, already tested,
already consulted on, and
eventually admitted.
All of those people were the
slide before.
Those were all adverse events on
patients who had been admitted
to the inpatient wards. This is
everybody coming through the
front door into the ED. So among
those patients, we see this
decline.
In the control group, this
comparison group of hospitals in
the triangles, the dotted
triangles here.
The gray line
That mortality is going down
gradually over time. Again,
consistent with this national
movement towards just safer
hospital care, hand washing,
protocols, checklists, the ED is
doing that too. So on average,
patients in American EDs are
just dying less and less by a
gradual amount year on and year
out, but in private equity
hospitals acquisition uh in
private equity hospitals after
acquisition, ED debts go up in
this blue line, the blue solid
line here. So that
Divergence in these two lines,
that gap is a roughly 17%
increase in the 1st 3 years. We
also see a 20% increase in
transfers. That's sending
patients from your ED out to
another acute care hospital. We
also saw a 12% increase in
transfers from the inpatient
wards. So that's the same story
in the ED and in the inpatient
side. This increase in transfers
to other hospitals. That's
again, probably because
shortages in staffing don't
allow you to take care of
patients as deeply or as
Meaningfully as you would like,
and you're sending them out the
door sooner. Um, the general
rule about patient transfers is
that sicker patients are
transferred out. Healthier
patients are kept, uh, often
receiving hospitals won't even
receive healthier patients. They
will only receive sicker
hospital sicker patients that
they're able to care for, that
the transferring hospital cannot
care for. Healthy patients
typically the receiving hospital
will say, you can take care of
this patient. We will not accept
this patient. And so, increases
in transfers convey that on the
Margin, the sickest patients are
probably being sent out already.
And so among the remaining
patients who are less sick than
the sickest.
The adverse events are happening
or increasing.
And these ED deaths are
increasing, so it just adds a
further layer of concern cause
you're dealing with patients
after all the transfers already
gone out the door.
On staffing cuts, we are seeing
a 16 to 18% reduction in ED and
ICU salaries after acquisition.
We're seeing a 12 to 17%
reduction in total staff and
total hospital salaries after
acquisition.
Here's the graph from the Bureau
of Labor Statistics at the
federal level, that shows you
national trends in hospital
employment. It is and and this
blue line shows you that the
period of our study.
Our study uses data roughly from
2008 to 2020 or so. And during
this period, hospitals are
definitely hiring more people.
They're not cutting staffing,
but private equity hospitals do
cut staffing.
This this is a picture of my
colleagues at MGH during the um
COVID pandemic, uh, and we did a
study looking at the uh pandemic
period, basically what we found
was that private equity
hospitals relative to a
comparison group had an 11%
increase in the mortality of
non-COVID patients. So if you
look at all Medicare patients
coming into hospitals during
COVID, 85% or so were still
coming into the hospital for
non-COVID reasons. Uh, so
despite the pandemic,
Uh, garnering most of the public
attention, the vast majority of
patients being hospitalized were
coming in for non-COVID reasons.
Among that vast majority of
patients, there was an 11%
increase relative to the control
group.
And non-COVID in hospital
mortality, sorry, 30 day
mortality, out to 30 days.
That's important to us because
it's another suggestion that
potentially there were decreases
in staffing and resources and
just bandwidth. If, if you have
already cut your staffing to be
more lean in an effort to be
quote unquote more efficient.
Um,
And then the pandemic hits.
Now you have to devote the rest
of your available bandwidth to
the COVID patients and for the
rest of your patients who don't
have COVID, you just have fewer
human.
And physical resources to
Care for them. That's probably
underlying this, uh, but again,
this is still uh in process and
not in the final published form
yet.
All right, what is the final
published form is some of this
work on physician practices.
I'll go through this uh more
quickly. You've already seen
this slide uh before on the
growth of physician practice
acquisitions. One thing to note
is that physician practices of
these types of specialties.
Have been the targets of
acquisition in early years, and
Doctor Braun has a nice paper on
dermatology acquisitions with
his colleagues at Cornell, we've
studied gastroenterology with
dermatology and with
ophthalmology in some of the
papers that um
A company uh Tyler's study, and
what we basically show is that
there was a 20% increase in
charges and 11% increase in
prices after acquisition. This
is comparing 578 physician
practices acquired by private
equity to 222,800 non-acquired
comparison physician practices.
And essentially it's sort of a
matched control group just like
the hospital.
Method. The way we studied the
hospital acquisitions is
analogous to the way we study
the physician acquisitions. This
graph basically shows you the
financial story before
acquisition, the differences in
the prices and charges are
basically hovering close to 0.
In fact, if you squint,
Private equity practices that
got acquired.
Had actually lower prices before
acquisition. But after
acquisition, everything jumps
above zero and everything holds
above 0.
And these differences are
maintained. So these differences
are about a 20% increase in
charges and 11% increase in
prices.
If you think about a simple
profit function going back to
economics 101, what is profit or
if we sanitize the word a little
bit, what is margin in health
care? Um, profit or margin is
essentially price times
quantity, minus the cost of
doing business. Price times
quantity minus the cost of
delivering that care.
So they're basically 3 levers
for increasing one's margins
after private equity acquisition
in this simple.
Framework. One is raise your
prices, which we just saw. One
is raise your quantities, which
we're seeing now. Uh, this is
from the same study showing a
16% increase in aggregate
patient volume or visits. That
breaks down into more more
unique patients, more new
patients, and the greatest
puzzle of all, which I think
we've probably solved is there
was a 9% increase in long
visits, and it's a puzzle
because there were staffing cuts
at the same time. So prices went
up.
Quantity was going up and the
cost of delivering care was
going down, because in the
subsequent slide,
We have a separate paper that
shows a clinician replacement
ratio on the margin after
acquisition, private equity
practices replaced their high
cost labor, i.e. MDs with lower
cost forms of labor, i.e., nurse
practitioners and physicians
assistants. So on the margin,
There were staffing cuts of that
replacement nature.
So despite having fewer
physicians, on average, patients
were being seen for longer
visits, uh, still in a 24 hour
day and more patients were
coming through the door. That is
probably possible because of a
coding effect uh that shorter
visits were being coded as
longer visits. Longer visits do
have higher prices, uh, and they
pay better.
We also show that relative to
health systems,
Private equity practice
acquisitions have a farther
A fact or larger effect uh in
price increases. So one of the
often responses you'll hear from
the private equity industry is
that we're no worse than your
academic health system acquiring
you or your nonprofit health
system acquiring you or a
non-private equity parent
acquiring you. Uh, you may be
upset because we raised prices,
but everybody raises prices. Uh,
and qualitatively, that is true.
There are 40 years of studies to
show that prices in healthcare
go up after providers.
Consolidation, like I showed you
at the beginning. Um, but if you
look a little bit closer, I
think there is a distinction,
um, in this work led by our
mutual colleague.
Yasis when he sing at the Brown
University Brown University
School of Public Health, we see
a relatively sizable, it's a
pretty large increase in
professional fees among GI
doctors who do a lot of
High volume and profitable
procedures, notably scopes,
endoscopies, and colonoscopies.
Um, the prices for those
procedures are actually going up
more.
After a private equity
acquisition, then after a
regular, you might say, health
system acquisition. So this
might not hold in every
situation. I'm not trying to
overgeneralize this, but I think
when you hear the argument that
we're no worse than non-private
equity, uh, it just bears asking
the question, uh, whether that's
that's fully accurate.
On the right here, uh, is
another version of expanding
one's margin or or profits
essentially, which is the use of
different products. So this is a
retina practices for, for eye
diseases, uh, and it's a study
again led by Ya Sweeney and our
team, showing that there was a
21, 22% increase in the use of
expensive injection medications
into the eyes after private
equity acquisition relative to
the comparison group.
With a concomitant roughly equal
increase in Medicare spending.
That followed.
Here is Doctor Brown's paper,
which he may have covered. I'll
I'll, I'll defer this to him,
but this is for dermatology
practices with his colleagues at
Cornell that show an increase in
the visit price after
acquisition.
This is another mutual
colleagues of ours, including
Doctor Brown here from
Um, uh, mostly colleagues at,
uh, Berkeley and elsewhere that
showed that private equity
acquisitions of anesthesia
doctors uh also followed a
similar story of price
increases, and this is about
acquisitions of staffing firms,
not necessarily of the hospital
or of the clinic, but it's an
analogous story.
Here's a study led by our
another mutual colleague from
the Oregon Health and Sciences
University, Jane Zu down here,
which basically uh has a survey
of roughly 1400 doctors asking
them, what do you think about
private equity and health care
these days. So doctors are
responding to this survey, and
basically, you see that relative
to independent practice.
Uh, or let me put it this way,
uh, doctors are being asked,
please compare private equity
ownership of you.
To other types of ownership of
you, and how do you feel about
that? So, first, compared to
independent physician ownership
compared to you own your
practice.
Relative to that, how do you
feel about private equity owning
you? Uh, the dark blue bar here
is much worse. The brown bar is
somewhat worse, so worse
dominates better.
But as you move towards a
nonprofit health system owning
you or another corporate entity
owning you or a for-profit
health system or hospital owning
you, then the much worse and the
worst gets smaller.
And the favorability gets
better.
So there's a little more
sympathy to private equity among
physicians when compared against
other types of corporate
ownership. But when compared
against your true autonomy of
being out there on your own, you
know, older.
Model, if you will, uh,
independent practice, uh, that's
where the unfavorability largely
resides.
And if you ask physicians about
the values they have, uh, and
how those are affected by
private equity uh uh ownership,
physicians are saying that,
well, private equity ownership
is not terrible for health care
innovation, of course, with
private dollars coming through
the door, you could buy an
electronic medical record system
you can invest in things in your
clinic, you could do stuff that
you couldn't before, so the
money might be nice, so the
Strongly negative and somewhat
negative views for health care
innovation are in the minority.
But as you move to the left here
and you look at access and
quality and patient well-being
and physician well-being and
prices for society and health
equity, than the negative views
start to get into the majority.
So, that's a dichotomy. The only
thing I'll add here is that
there's a generational divide in
how private equity affects
physicians. Older physicians who
are more likely to be owning
their practices, are more likely
to be receiving a fairly
generous cash buyout from a
private equity firm. They no
longer have to do payroll, they
no longer have to do malpract.
They no longer have to set the
schedule, and they could
decrease their patient load and
patient responsibilities
gradually as they ride off into
transition into a a potential
retirement stage of their lives.
For a younger physicians like of
my generation, I'm 88 years out
of residency training now, for
my colleagues who work for
primary or who work for private
equity owned uh practices. The
story is very different. For a
young doctor on the front lines,
you're first asked to sign a
non-compete.
Uh, meaning that if you don't
like
Your employment and you want to
move to another practice, uh,
you've got to go beyond a 100
mile radius or 50 mile radius.
You often have to move your
whole family to get out of that
employment. If you want to stay
in the same specialty. Of
course, you're trained in that
specialty so you can't easily
switch to a different specialty,
and then you're on the front
lines and you're faced with the
pressures of generating
increased revenues to perhaps
pay down interest on the new
debt, uh, or perhaps just yield
returns for investors and your
parent company. So you're not
getting the generous cash
buyout.
Your older ownership partners
are. You're on the front lines
delivering, uh, but the people
making the decisions about
selling a practice are often of
a different generation.
OK. Lastly, and I'm gonna finish
right here, uh, women's health
practices, we mentioned that
before, there's another version
of um early in life, uh, private
equity interventions, which is
acquisitions of fertility
clinics, again, from our
colleagues at Berkeley, 8 out of
11 fertility clinics are backed
by private equity, uh, and after
private equity acquisition of
fertility clinics. There's a 28%
increase in the volume of IVF
cycles that are run. Of course,
this mechanically leads to more
babies that are born.
There's a 14% increase in the
IVF success rate or the birth
rate.
Uh, IVF just incidentally is
often not covered by insurance
or it's more out of pocket. It's
more of a free market than, say,
surgery in a hospital or our
Medicare patients in the prior
studies. This is more of a
private cash paying free market,
a little bit aside from
insurance, not entirely, but a
little bit more away from
insurance. Um, Tyler's work on
nursing homes, Tyler may have
mentioned this. Uh, I also want
to cover one of our colleagues'
work. This is a great paper from
University of Pennsylvania, that
shows that after private equity
Positions of nursing homes,
there's a big reduction in
nursing assistants per patient
day, a big reduction in the
patient's quality ratings of
the, of their nursing home
experience, and that study also
showed a 10% increase in patient
mortality. Tyler's work, Doctor
Bra's work has shown an increase
in ED visits, hospitalizations,
and Medicare spending.
Uh, and finally, also Doctor
Brown's work from Cornell showed
an increase in hospice
acquisitions that was related to
more patients with dementia
being admitted to hospice, and I
know that Doctor Brown has more
up to-date work in this area, so
I'll leave that to him. Um, I'm
gonna stop on this slide, which
is our policy levers. Happy to
discuss this with you. Uh, this
is a study from, it's a short
paper from last year that
basically lists a group of
policy levers by sort of
category in an acronym that does
not easily roll out.
the tongue, but it's basically
state level and federal level
policy levers for dealing with
the influence or the penetration
of private equity into the
healthcare delivery system,
direct ownership of healthcare
providers, hospitals, doctors,
nursing homes, hospices, and so
forth. Uh, and so at the state
level, there's some things that
can be done, uh, such as
enforcing corporate practice of
medicine laws, the National
Academy for State Health Policy,
which just had its annual
meeting in
Tennessee a few weeks ago. I,
I'm not sure if your colleagues
from New Mexico attended some of
those state sessions uh at the
beginning of the meeting, but we
talked about uh model state laws
that were developed for
protecting patients and
clinicians from the undesirable
effects of private equity
acquisition. Um,
There are also federal levers,
uh, making the, the moral
hazard, which means the no skin
in the game. Reality a little
less appealing would probably
help. um, making the proportion
of debt used to buy a healthcare
provider, just a little smaller
would probably help. Um, closing
the tax benefit, which is called
carry and carry.
varied interest of private
equity profits would probably
help, although that's been tried
by several administrations and
tough to get through, um, the
Congress, uh, at the federal
level, and uh they're also
aspects of the Attorney
general's at the state level or
attorneys general, uh, and what
the Federal Trade Commission and
the Department of Justice can do
at the federal level to uh put
in better oversight of serial
acquisitions, what's sometimes
called a roll-up strategy.
We're a private equity firms go
into a community, buy a large
practice, then roll that up with
smaller practices in the same
area of the same specialty. We
see that a lot, and that's what
explains the price increases
that you saw on the prior study.
Uh, that's being further
scrutinized by the Federal Trade
Commission. Um,
And then transparency, which is
something that we talk about in
a lot of states, uh,
Massachusetts, California.
Um,
Many states have talked about,
and I know at the National
Academy for State Health Policy.
This was a big topic among
states. How do we make private
equity acquisitions in your
state, more visible to begin
with, so that lawmakers and and
policymakers are aware of them
in the first place, uh, as
opposed to the status quo right
now, which is this number is a
little bit higher these days
because it changes every year.
Right now, the threshold for
mandatory reporting of a private
equity acquisition to the feds
is about $119 million.
Uh, and most physician practice
acquisitions, most nursing home
acquisitions are well below that
threshold. And so, even a lot of
hospital acquisitions don't meet
the threshold. So, um, if you
could lower the threshold, you
shine a little more sunlight
onto just these acquisitions
taking place, and so you try to
avoid the scenario where across
the street, the doctors got
acquired and nobody knew. Three
years later, those doctors got
sold and nobody knew either. Um,
that's sort of a starting point
for a lot of states. Here's a
map for which
States have these corporate
practice of medicine laws.
That's right here in the 2nd
row.
New Mexico is down here, which
this paper says doesn't really
have um on its books, at least
at the moment, um.
Don't quote me on this. I don't
know this for a fact, but this
map suggests New Mexico does not
have a pre-existing corporate
practice of medicine law with
significant um
Um, authority, and this is a
separate study that I'm happy to
share, but it's a longer
narrative about uh these policy
levers, uh, categories of
improving oversight, um,
improving transparency, uh,
protecting patients with minimum
staffing ratios in hospitals,
uh, and
nursing homes, for example,
preventing the asset stripping
or the selling, selling off of
real estate and sale lease back
arrangements. Uh, so this is
just a, a longer narrative that
goes through that. So,
Uh, this is basically my
conclusion. Happy to take any
questions. Thank you for your
time and it's an honor to share
this with you. Thank you. Thank
you, doctor. Thank you, doctor.
So I'd like to allocate about 20
minutes for questions. We're
running a little late, so happy
to.
From any of you, um, so we have
Nibert.
Anyone else? OK. Senator
Neibert.
Thank you, Madam Chair. um
Or harp on the private equity
things we talked to the prior
doctor on that, uh, but
I'd like to look a little bit
about uh New Mexico, maybe
doctor, you can't answer
specific New Mexico questions,
but I, I, I am kind of
interested, um.
How many hospitals in New Mexico
are
Owned by private equity
corporations, a type of private
equity corporations that you
were talking about that were
holding them for a period of
years and wanting to sell them.
Thank you, Senator, for that
question. I don't know the exact
number off the top of my head.
If you look at the map that's in
the slides, uh, it's around 9.
But I might, I might be missing
a few, the county might be a
little bit off.
Mm.
And one of the
was that
When a private equity uh company
buys these hospitals, a jettison
certain practices, a lower the
uh staffing levels and what have
you, um, I'd certainly be
interested in in seeing some
numbers on that occurrence in
the in the New Mexico hospitals
and, and whether or not there's
specific.
Uh,
I guess the specific effects of
that were uh uh documented
decline in the quality of care
here, uh, so, so I think we'd,
we'd wanna see some of that you
may not be the one to get that
to us, but uh maybe somebody
could supply that uh to us.
Uh, would you have that
information or, or not?
Thank you, Senator. At the
moment we do not have a New
Mexico specific analysis.
However, um,
I could sort of describe how
that's possible uh for your
colleagues or, or others in the
state, and any other
researchers, um,
Which is there are uh
Annual Medicare cost reports,
um, as many researchers know
well, uh, in which hospitals
have to report to the federal
government various inputs to the
production of care. Now, those
reports are often um a struggle
to go through, um, and we're
still learning about a lot of
the pitfalls in interpreting the
numbers. So for example,
operating margins or days of
cash on hand might not be
accurate and may not reflect
what's really going on in the
hospitals. But that's a source
where hospitals have to attest.
Uh, a hospital executive has to
do a test every year that it's a
truthful set of data points to
the federal government. That's
public data, so you could
certainly pull off the New
Mexico hospitals there, and it's
annual, uh, a second source is
the American Hospital
Association annual survey.
And there, um,
You have hospitals that report
uh their staffing, um, and you
can see how that changes year on
and year out. Um, in the uh
literature so far, there are
anecdotes, uh, there's at least
one study that I know of that
specifically calls out um
decreases in unprofitable
service lines. Uh, and we do
believe that that's probably
going on and we see it in some
of our work as well, uh,
although we haven't quantified
that for New Mexico, um, and
then in the 16 to 18% staffing
cuts that we
found in the work that's
currently going through the the
last part of the peer review
process. Uh, we also don't have
a New Mexico specific number for
that, but it's um 16 to 18% on
average across the country and
Perhaps New Mexico is different.
I just don't know.
My, my last question, and
Um
And I'm generally not uh uh a
great advocate for, for my
colleagues that are called trial
lawyers that uh do medical
malpractice work, but uh it does
seem to me that if
All this information uh is
accurate in New Mexico
hospitals. We have a very
active, um,
Trial bar that uh uh is quite
active in suing our hospitals
here. If, if the quality of care
in these hospitals is uh
diminished in those hospitals
and they're not uh uh giving the
same care that we would see
elsewhere. It seemed to me that
that uh malpractice suits would
arise and just the economics of
uh
Conducting your business in a
New Mexico hospital would force
those private equity hospitals
to uh.
Reconsider their staffing levels
to make sure that they're
delivering uh reasonable care to
to their patients and at least
be uh comparable to the other
hospitals in the state, uh,
because I would think that that
That fact would be something
that uh uh Senator Cervantes
and, and others uh would
certainly exploit in, in
malpractice suits, uh, when,
when the level of care is
diminished and so it seems to me
that uh uh the
Legal system would force through
through the the private uh
lawsuits would force private
equity hospitals to uh
reevaluate their business model
and their staffing levels so
that they are delivering
comparable care. Uh, do you have
any comment on that?
Well taken, Senator. Thank you
for that. Um,
I, uh,
My conjecture on this, given
that I am not uh a lawyer by
training, um, and have not been
involved in legal cases as an
expert witness in this domain
around private equity. Um, my
conjecture here is that it will
be rather difficult to prove
causation, um, even if you could
show there was an increase in
adverse events, um, because
inevitably in hospitals, um,
accidents happen. Um.
Falls and infections happen to
be able to establish a strong
causal link from that all the
way back to the private equity
acquisition is going to be
rather difficult on a case by
case basis. You might be able to
say on average, as we do in
academia, that on average,
there's a treatment effect.
There's an effect of the private
equity acquisition, but in an
individual case when there is a
plaintiff and a defendant, and
you're proving that it was the
initial acquisition which caused
it, um.
There's a long journey towards
that which is not a linear
journey. That's going to be hard
to show, uh, I think. In
addition, there's yet to be, in
my view, precedent law on this.
There, uh, to my knowledge, uh,
are not.
Um, major precedents as far as I
know, of litigation uh that
claim this.
Path of a causal mechanism from
private equity acquisition,
where the defendant to say the
parent firm and a patient who
was hurt in the hospital. Um,
so, I just don't know about that
prospect. I certainly follow
your argument and your thinking,
um, but I think in the legal
world, um, there's a lot that
can happen, which we in the
research world or in the policy
world may say is unacceptable.
Uh, or is it baffling or or
motivating for us to respond,
um,
But it may not be illegal, uh,
for example, in the state of
Massachusetts, um, the private
equity firm that purchased our
large previously nonprofit
Catholic hospital chain, um,
sold their acquisition for $800
million and took that out of the
state. Um, that was not illegal,
it was completely legal as far
as
Uh, as far as we know in the
research, um, profession. So,
um, I
I don't know about the prospect
prospects of this.
Uh, I'm not suggesting.
Cause of action just because
you're a private equity
hospital.
What I'm suggesting is, is
you're, for instance, if there
are 10 number of infections.
Uh, greater in a private equity
hospital than in a another
ownership uh category.
Your private equity hospital is
going to be most likely subject
to additional malpractice suits
because of the higher number of
patients who are suffering those
uh damages. And so you're going
to have more suits and, and over
time, you're going to see the uh
dollar effect on your operation,
and they're going to have to
do something to affect the uh uh
amount of money that they're
paying out in.
Lawsuits and one of those would
be we better increase staff, so,
so that we don't have that
infection occurrence. So that,
that's my point. Um, so it just
seems to me that, uh, at least
in New Mexico, we might see over
time.
Private equity may have recently
cut staff, but over time they're
going to have to address that
situation because I suspect
malpractice suits are going to
finally hit the bottom line and
they're going to have to figure
out what do we do to decrease
these occurrences. Uh, thank you
very much for your presentation.
Thank you, sir.
Jones.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
And, and thank you so much for
this presentation. Lots of good
information and we should always
strive to have safer.
Better patient care.
Um, I, but I'm fascinated with
statistics, and I, I just a few
things jumped out at me. For
one, and I'm not sure this
needs, uh, more than a comment,
but uh when we look at private
equity physician practices and
the map you showed us of Arizona
was dark blue, and New Mexico,
especially my district in
southwestern New Mexico is is
just pale.
And then we look at the
following maps where Arizona
again has OBGYNs, they have
hospice, they have uh nursing
homes, methadone clinics, all of
these are plentiful in terms of
private equity,
um, you know what I see that
what happens in my district, my
Southwest district, people go to
Arizona for care and, and I
don't know that that matches up
with what we're saying they
could go to El Paso, they could
go to Albu.
Turkey, or they could go to
Arizona if they're about similar
distances, and a lot of people
go because they can get
specialists, they can get
quality care, a level of care
that they can't receive here.
And it's just, I noticed that
because that's my experience in
my, in my district. um Yeah.
And then a couple of other
things I noticed, um.
We were looking at uh advanced
practice providers and how the
advanced practice providers
were.
We're having longer visits and
we, we assumed that it's not, I
don't think you stated it
exactly, but you assumed that
that was because they were
coding incorrectly, but don't
advance practice often have
longer visits than physicians.
Uh, thank you for both.
Address them in turn. On the
first one, I really appreciate
you describing the relatively
equal distances, uh, my main
comment there is that both can
be true, um, that your
experience that you're
reflecting here of your
constituents and their choices
of where to go for care can
coexist, can readily coexist
with the pattern of private
equity acquisitions. Um, and
that's because in these studies,
we are testing or detecting the
differences in outcomes between
the private
group and a matched comparison
group of non-private equity
physicians.
On average
And so what I'm showing you on
price increases and quantity
increases,
Our average effects around an
average, there is a huge
distribution. Uh, you, you're
gonna have many practices to the
right of the average, to the
left of the average, and it is
completely plausible that an
area with more private equity
physicians could be attracting
more patients. Um there are
mechanisms for advertising to
draw patients into your
practice. They're a mechanisms
for increasing referrals into
your specialty practices. There
are a number of ways that
patient demand could reflect
strategy.
is to get patients in the door
to increase the volume as we
found. Um, and so, uh, I think
what you're conveying, which I
find really interesting, is
our patients is the question,
are patients going to private
equity practices because they
like them better.
Um, and I don't think we know
that yet, uh, because even
though we have found these
adverse events for patients in
the inpatient setting in the
hospitals in the outpatient
setting, there's essentially no
evidence right now, at least in
this rigorous type of study
design of changes in quality of
care, um, in all of these
specialties on the outpatient
side. So it's potentially true
that patients are seeking
private equity practices. It's
potentially true that private
Equity practices are attracting
or drawing these patients in in
a number of ways. It's
potentially true that patients'
other options, whether it's
closer to home or in the other
areas that you noted, um,
Without private equity
involvement or without as much
private equity involvement,
don't offer the same amenities
that a private equity financing
could offer. So I, I just, I
think you bring up a really,
really important thing, which is
the nuance with which
We, at least in the research
world, have been learning to
think about private equity. It's
not monolithic, it's not good
versus bad necessarily. It's why
are these acquisitions being
made, um, and what are the
positions that the physicians
find themselves in. Many
physicians are looking for extra
capital to buy things that they
need for their practice, whether
it's human labor or
supplies and Medicare payments
and Medicaid payments are not
increasing to give them that.
Private insurers are not
increasing their fees to give
them that. Here comes a private
company that says we'll give
that to you, uh, and we'll give
you a road towards ramping down
your practice if you're at the
later stages of your career. Um,
and that financing can do a lot
of things in the short term.
It's just that that financing
comes with strings attached, uh,
with financial strings attached
that require return
a profit to investors. So that
is where the tension is, but um
I think that many physicians in
practices do need sources of
capital and the private
industries where they can find
it. Uh, quickly for your second
question about the coding, um,
you make a very good point. It
is difficult to know whether the
longer visits were truly longer
because they spent more time
with patients, or because it was
coded to be longer. Both can be
true. We really have no idea in
the data. I think on average,
nurse practitioners and
physicians' assistants typically
bill under the ID of the
Supervising doctor. So we often
can't even tell who's actually
Billy, because it's all under
the same doctor ID, um, but it's
just a little bit puzzling to us
that if you're bringing in more
patients through the door and
more visits per patient, and
you're cutting a bit of
staffing, and you still have
only 24 hours in a day. How is
it possible that on average,
every patient's getting a longer
visit.
Um, so we think it's probably a
coding effect.
But it could be truth, if you're
really working through the late
hours of the afternoon or
evening, you might be able to do
that, but we, we find that a
little less probable.
OK, thank you.
Your perspective on that. One
more thing, cause I am
fascinated. I'm always thinking
of the variables and statistics,
um, on the additional evidence
of acquisitions of physician
practices, private equity retina
practices versus control. Um,
22% increase in expensive
agents, the, the drug, I'm
assuming is what we're talking
about?
Yes.
There's a 22% increase of 22%
increase in the
And that medication over that
period of time.
Uh, how do we know that that
medication didn't increase in
cost.
Oh, it's because in Medicare,
the price, uh, we can see that
the price was
Uh, generally pretty stable, and
this is a utilization effect.
Um, spend any change in spending
can be decomposed into a change
in price versus a change in
utilization or quantity. Here it
was a it was a change in
quantity. I just don't have the
the detailed tables to show that
here. Um, but this is a
substitution story. um, and this
is not just in the retina
practices, but with a patient of
a given clinical condition, you
can treat a patient in a
conservative manner, or in a
more aggressive manner, you can
choose medicine.
That are lower cost or higher
cost or higher priced. And in
this case, what we're seeing is
that higher priced medicines are
being used more commonly for
this, for the same clinical
condition. This is partly
because these are physician
administered drugs, which, as
many of you know, in the fee
schedule is a so-called Part B
drug, Part B drugs in Medicare
come with a 6% markup. Uh, it's
more profitable for practices,
no matter who owns the practice,
it's just more profitable for
practices to infuse or deliver.
For their own position
administered drugs as opposed to
a tablet that a patient picks up
over the counter.
Um, thank you.
Thank you represent. I don't
know why my mic is suddenly
acting strange. Um, but, uh,
thank you, doctor Song. We
really appreciate your
participation in our hearing,
provided some great information,
particularly on patient outcomes
and we appreciate that very
much. And thank you for making
yourself available on a very
busy day. I know you had a long
meeting before our, our
engagement with you, so thank
you.
Thank you so much.
Take care. Take care.
Take care.
OK, OK.
Um, one last presenter on this
issue of um.
Private equity, but the goal,
the focus I'm hoping will be on
suggestion changes in policy,
you know, legal, you know, laws,
etc. So, um.
Where are we? Sorry about that.
Do we have Robert on?
OK, let me find my.
OK.
Patrick, excuse.
So just so you know, our
original presenter, um.
fell ill today, so her boss, who
is uh her her uh supervisor will
be presenting, and his name is
Patrick Woodall.
And he is managing director of
policy for Americans for
financial reform and Americans
for financial reform education
fund. So, Patrick, are you on
the line?
I am. OK. Um, are you on the
telephone or can you, can we see
you?
It is not allowing me to start
oh there it is. 00, great.
Here I am, um.
So Patrick, we've had an after.
Discussing private equity, its
role in hospital care, doctor
practices, and so on. So my hope
for this presentation is that
we'd focus more on policy
suggestions, which I know
you're, you're, um, group works
on, so with that kind of
parameter, um, we look forward
to hearing from you.
Thank you so much. Um, it is
great to be here. I'm
Can you see my slides?
Yes.
Wonderful. I'm Patrick Woodall.
I'm the managing director for
policy at Americans for
Financial Reform. I really
appreciate the time to talk to
you today about the growing
impact of private equity on the
economy and on people, including
in New Mexico. I'm uh as the
chair said, pinch hitting for my
colleague Aditi who is uh can't
be here today, so bear with me
and I have a few more slides,
uh, or different ones that were
circulated, which I will
identify. Uh, Americans for
Financial reforms a coalition of
200 civil rights consumer labor,
faith-based civic and community
groups dedicated to advocating
for policies that shape the
financial sector to serve
workers, communities, and the
real economy, and to advance
racial and economic justice.
Private equity is an important
part of that mission because
it's got a predatory and
extractive business model built
on financial engineering that's
hurt workers, tenants, patients,
communities, and the climate.
Today I want to give a little
bit of a big picture on its role
in the economy, how it affects
people and communities, that
includes how it's grown, some of
the possible regulatory
approaches to mitigate or
prevent some of the worst
private equity abuses.
So
What is private equity? How does
this work? So, private equity
firms are Wall Street investment
houses. They pool money from
large investors, mostly pension
funds, college endowments, a
wealthy families, and others,
and they buy up, they use this
money to buy up companies, real
estate, and other assets, and
even infrastructure like water
systems, the private equity
industry has been around since
the 1980s era of hostile
takeovers, but it really
ballooned following the 2008
financial.
when the these firms rapidly
brought bought up struggling
companies, and they began to get
a tighter grip on the economy.
That industry makes predatory
purchases using financial
engineering and exploiting
attacks and regulatory blind
spots to extract value from the
takeover targets. The industry
claims it provides management
expertise that can foster
turnarounds and increase
companies in value, but far too
often, the firms just extract
the value from the
Target portfolio companies,
leave them mired and
unsustainable debt, and these
firms are much more likely to
end up in bankruptcy than other
companies.
Private equity has taken a
bigger and growing share of the
economy. The assets under
management of surge, really
picking up steam after the
financial crisis and for most
categories of private equity
assets, the growth has been
above 10% a year for the last
decade or so, far more than the
overall economic growth or the
the wage growth, and total
assets under management for all
these categories in the US and
exceeded 7 trillion in 2021.
A huge amount of this is
leveraged buyouts, buying up
companies. The number of
leveraged buyouts tripled from
about 2000 after the financial
crisis to over 6000 in 2022. 1
KKR uh private equity official
told investors the firm had
invested into the recovery after
the 2008 financial crisis, and
was eager to profit on the
recovery from the pandemic and
indeed, uh, the number of deals
went up and the value of the
deals went up. They went up to a
$1 trillion in 2021 before
cooling off as interest rates
began to rise. These take
takeovers are called leverage
buyouts because they're financed
by large loans, about 60% of the
cost of the takeover, but the
loans are not repaid by the
private equity firm. They're put
on the backs of the companies
that are acquired. These target
firms have to shoulder and repay
these immense debts that finance
their own acquisition, that debt
burden often compromises.
is the financial viability of
the firm and leads to incredible
pressures to cut costs. Often
wages or quality of services in
order to repay that debt.
I'm sorry, some of my slides for
some reason that I do not know,
not showing all the way, but
leveraged buyouts let private
equity purchase.
Firms purchase companies with
very little exposure or risk,
but leave them vulnerable
because of the debt load. So in
general, the firm puts in only
about 2% of its money of the
purchase price. Most of the
takeover is funded by investors
and by debt. So generally
there's like 60% debt and then
uh the the investors think
pensions in this case are
putting in like 30, 38%. The
portfolio firm has to pay off
the debt, but it also
has to pay fees and dividends
and profits to the private
equity owners. The investors
limited partners, this is the
pensions, have to pay management
fees to the private equity firm
of about 2% of the assets and at
the end, when if they sell the
firm that 20% of the profits go
back to the private equity firm,
uh, if it's sold or converted
into a publicly traded company.
The private equity firm pays the
investors from the proceeds of
the sale, less the fees.
Here we go. That shows how this
sort of this streams work, and
then the portfolio plays the
debt payments and the and the
fees and the PE firm pays the
investors when the target is
sold. The investor,
yeah,
we had a pretty good tutorial
this afternoon.
Private equity firms work. I'm
wondering if you could jump to
the portion of your, your
presentation, what we're talking
about solutions.
Yeah.
I'm very sorry that I was told
that I was to give a general
overview on private equity and
to talk about solutions. So I,
I.
I am happy to skip way ahead. So
I mean, I think there's some
real
And this will make my
presentation considerably
shorter, um.
So I think there are a bunch of
things that that states can
think about that will really
address some of these questions.
One of them is really basic uh
basic transparency, the private
equity industry thrives on our
opacity. It's very difficult to
determine what a private equity
firm owns. It's very difficult
to trace an asset from its from
its existence back to the
private equity owned firm. This
is especially been true in areas
like
Healthcare and um and and
housing and critical
improvements on transparency and
disclosure are needed. That
includes uh establishing
beneficial ownership disclosure
requirements in critical
sectors, especially for health
care, housing, and
infrastructure.
There also need to be clear
disclosures to pension funds
invested in private equity for
the long-term health of the
fund, but this includes getting
a clear picture of what they're
investing in, uh, and what the
implications of that investment
are what are they, the
implications for workers, for
housing, uh, the litigation
history, pension funds generally
want to invest in things that
are supporting communities and
it often could be very difficult
to tell with what the private
equity investments are.
And they also need real
information on fees and returns
of these investments. The
generally private equity uh uh
funds offer disclosure, they
offer promotions on fees and
returns that are
Not really uh actuarially sound
or or or accounting base and
instead offer a models that
don't really reflect the return.
What we've seen is that they
often overestimate their returns
and especially now, we are
seeing that that returns from
private equity are going down.
So knowing what those really
mean for the pensions is very
important. I think addressing
some tax policies, including
closing a carried interest
loophole.
And uh raising corporate and
income taxes on private equity
owners is an important component
of this.
Another is to address worker
protections, you know, private
equity really thrives on sectors
where occupational segregation
means that women and people of
color make up the majority of
the workforce, and this includes
health care and retail and
restaurants and the care
economy. These workers generally
have low pay, few or no
benefits, really uh shifting
schedules and uh precarious
incomes, many are on public
assistance, although they were.
Making sure that the wage and
hour laws are being enforced
that workers are not locked into
their jobs through non-compete
clauses that they're free from
harassment. These are essential
elements in these sectors.
I think tenant protections are
very important. Private equity
owns many, many, uh,
multi-family, uh, properties as
well as.
Thousands of, uh, manufactured
housing communities and bought
up a ton of single family rental
properties, and they're more and
more tenants that are in these
situations. These are tenants
that have faced rent hikes, they
declining upkeep and uh absurd
amounts of new fees, and so, uh,
addressing, addressing caps and
rent increases, just cause
eviction protections, allowing
manufactured housing communities
the first right to purchase and
conditioning state support for
multi-family purchases on or
developments is important in
addressing these uh corporate
landlords from exacerbating the
housing crisis.
on health care, there obviously
are.
Increased inspections of private
equity owned facilities that
tend to have real problems with
quality and enforcing state
surprise billing law, and
especially where the federal law
falls short, like on ground
ambulances. I think, um, and
then there are some antitrust
elements that can be really
important. The uh obviously
private equity is an acquisition
machine, a large portion of
these acquisitions are serial
acquisitions.
Where they buy up a firms in the
same space in the same economic
space or they expand their
geographic reach by adding on
smaller companies and in many
cases these are a fall below the
pre-merger reporting
requirements in federal law.
There are new uh Department of
Justice merger guidelines that
clarify that amassing market
power through serial
acquisitions and roll-ups can
violate the Clayton Act.
And they've already forced
divestitures on a private equity
on anesthesia practice and a
veterinary hospital and these
kind of approaches to address
the sort of amassing of market
power in uh in sectors and in
geographies is critically
important.
At the same time,
Many, many of these purchases,
especially for healthcare and
senior housing facilities are
non are currently nonprofits as
the the prior uh panelists
explained on on hospitals, and
if a private equity firm wants
to buy them, there is a
conversion process theoretically
to maintain the public mission,
but also to shepherd the assets,
really the the the the lack of
having paid taxes for the uh to.
Make sure that the subsequent
operation still operates for the
public good.
You know, there are more states
doing more on private equity
healthcare transactions,
specifically, and, and that's
shown in this map, you know,
some of them are, uh, have, have
legislation in place already or
there's pending legislation that
would give review and approval
process by health or or uh or
attorney generals to review
these kinds of transactions.
And then there are issues
related to public spending. Um,
obviously,
On the health care sector, a
large portion of the rationale
for private equities involvement
is the steady revenues that are
in large part public revenues
and and on the state from
Medicaid, but also many other
programs on the state level and
as part of the care economy.
There are elements that you can
um can impose on those, on those
grants or disbursements that
would include requiring the
disclosure of the
Parent corporation.
Prohibiting the payments of
dividends from new additional
debt, uh, prohibiting real
estate sale lease backs or other
asset transfers without consent.
Requiring the suspension of
management and monitoring fees
and requiring that the firms not
pursue future uh acquisitions to
prevent public funds from
actually
supporting more merger activity.
I think all of these are are
smart policies to make sure that
the that public funds are not
going to firms that are gonna
extract value and compromise uh
the.
Quality of of services. I think
that's especially true in health
care where, where the sale lease
back of hospitals and nursing
homes where the extraction of
dividends and these management
fees are adding additional
pressure on making it pressure
on the, on the, on the
facilities to make ends meet,
and that leads to substantial
cost cutting on wages and
workers and on quality of care.
So I think that that was where I
was on on this and I'm, I'm
sorry I was not clear on what my
precise
Presentation was to be about.
Uh, not at all, Pat.
And we appreciate your input on
the solutions, anyone have
questions or comments? I do, um.
We are at least comments, uh, we
here in New Mexico have been
using a great deal of public
money to support our healthcare
system.
We, um, we have something called
a patient compensation fund,
which is, which is like an
insurance fund for physicians
and hospitals and we have put in
over $100 million into that fund
over the last 3 years, um, in
addition, we've been raising our
Medicaid, um, reimbursements for
certain healthcare providers.
We're talking about doing it.
Even more
Um, so there's a litany. I have
like a 4-page document where
I've been trying to put all
together all of the public
support we've been putting into
to health care in the state and
it's, it's significant. Um, and
I'm saying that because I think
um, given that,
We should be cognizant of where
the money is going and how it's
being used and where it may be
taken and I'm not sure you have
a comment on that, Patrick, and
I don't know if other states are
doing the same thing, do you?
Public investment from
To their health care systems.
I think it depends on the state,
but many states obviously do uh
invest quite heavily. Obviously
there's Medicaid and there are
programs like the ones that you
described. I, I think from our
perspective, it is critical to
think about putting guardrails
on public money that uh go to
private equity firms and, and
facilities, and the reason is
because
That the debt load and the
extraction through things like
dividends and asset transfers
and real estate sale lease
backs. They substantially
constrain the ability of the
firm to deliver quality care,
which is in most cases really
related to staffing and funding
workers. So if you are giving
public money to a firm that is
greatly compromised if it's
finances are precarious.
Because of the debt load and
this extraction, you're sort of
subsidizing the private equity
firm and your possibly going to
facilities that have lower
levels of quality, right? That
there's been decades of research
on private equity owned nursing
homes that have found that they
have more violations, the
patient care is worse, the
staffing ratios are worse. You
just heard from a panelists that
talked about the same concerns
on the hospital.
So those are real concerns.
and a large portion of that is
because of the extraction of the
financing from the entity.
So if you have a nursing home or
you have a hospital or you have
a home care network, if they're
sucking money out to pay
investors, that is money that
inherently is not going to care.
So if you want 100% of your
money to go to care.
The public money to provide
health care then conditioning
that funding on on barriers to
extract and financing is
something that is a smart move.
Thank you. Um, appreciate your
map that shows what other states
are doing that will give us some
kind of um places to look for
other ideas and so on. We have
introduced um
A merger and consolidation
statute and we're probably going
to be working on it even
further, where there are going
to be more disclosures and more
approvals, and it sounds like
some of the other states are
doing that as well.
Is that not right, Patrick?
I think some states are
considering all private equity
transactions separately from
other healthcare transactions or
scrutinizing them more
carefully. I think there,
there's some important unique
things about private equity to
consider. One is the roll up
strategy, where, uh, and this
has been extremely prevalent in
healthcare, but not only in
healthcare, where a private
equity firm will buy us one
portfolio company, and they will
they
We buy up other firms in the
same business line and add them
into the original portfolio
firm. What, what has happened in
federally is that those
acquisitions have been too small
to qualify for the pre-merger
notification for the Clayton
Act, and that means essentially
that the Justice Department
doesn't even look at those,
those acquisitions, the, the
change in the
2023 federal merger guidelines
clarifies that sequential
acquisitions that can build
market power or have the ability
can substantially lessen
competition or tend to create a
monopoly in violation of the
Clayton Act, and most state
antitrust laws are mirrored
quite closely on the clay. So
ensuring that any, any measure
that you adopted would include
this. And the way that it works
essentially is
You know, they buy one big
dental practice and then they
absorb other small dental
practices, and before you know
it, you have this sort of
regional dental monopoly or a
large powerful uh dental
practice that essentially is
disadvantaging other dentists,
but also patients in terms of
delivering quality of care. This
has happened in home health
care. This obviously happened
for a while, uh, was
was very prevalent in nursing
homes, um, and we've seen some
of it in hospital chain
roll-ups. Doctors, physician
practices is another area where
it's been extraordinarily
common, uh, where the, the US
anesthesia partners grew by, by
uh
A hearing a lot of anesthesia
practices together to create a
really nationally dominant,
dominant player, and this year
the Federal Trade Commission
required it tovastaturian, I
think, 2 states. So, addressing
these unique elements of
sequential acquisitions and
roll-up is vitally important,
you know, we've seen it in
health care. I mean, this is
happening all over the place.
This happens in car washes, auto
body shops, and uh veterinary.
practices in funeral homes, so
it's a, it is a very common
technique amongst uh for private
equity acquisitions and gives
the ability to build market
power that disadvantages rivals,
largely small businesses and
doctors' practices and often um
uh raises prices or lowers
quality and harms consumers.
Um,
Being willing to step in, we
really appreciate it and know
it's a little later on the East
Coast, so um I appreciate your
participation and I think we're
going to move on to our next
topic, so thank you.
Thank you very much.
Mm.
So, um, we have.
Next on our agenda.
We have private equity
contributions to New Mexico
Healthcare Troy.
Clark.
I think it shows.
Thanks for hanging out with us,
Troy.
It's been an enjoyable day.
Really?
There's many definitions to
enjoyable.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee, uh, and by all
serious and I think it is
enjoyable to at least have
discussions about the issues
that we're facing so that we get
a different perspectives that
are out there.
I'm gonna start off the same way
I did earlier today because of
the importance of it.
As we talk about private equity,
I'm gonna reiterate that our
number one issue in health care
in this state is access to care.
Anything that is distracting us
from improving access to care, I
believe is problematic and it
needs to be very thoughtful and
measured on the way we go about
that.
You've heard today, uh, I think
first and foremost probably
confusion of what is private
equity, which hospitals, I will
tell you that my data that I'm
gonna share uh in my
presentation, probably comes
close to some of the others with
some people have referred to uh
9 hospitals, I believe it was
Dr. Song that are private equity
owned, uh, some have referred to
38%. I think that actually
probably includes publicly
traded trying to figure out uh
where differences may be, uh.
May not be exact, and I think
that's because of probably a
question that Represented
Martinez asked earlier.
What is it that we're really
talking about if we have a
unique uh subset, but I think
the message is still the same,
and I think you will hear it,
um.
I, I'm not here to try and
undermine the discussions of
what uh has been said earlier,
in fact, uh, uh, my point of
being here today is to talk
about what's happening in New
Mexico, not what's happening on
a national level. I think there
were questions that were asked
that really uh resonate as to
why do we need to focus on
what's happening in New Mexico.
If we have 9, if 9 is the
accepted number I can correlate
my uh number to that or my data
to that uh number of PE owned
hospitals. I would tell you that
probably if we have the same set
of data would say there are 3
acute care hospitals, which most
of us think of, that's the blue
H that has an emergency room and
services and then we have 6
post-acute.
Uh, facilities, uh, as I look at
it, I actually have 5 posts to
cut. I think there's one that is
publicly traded so it doesn't
meet the exact definition of,
uh, private equity but probably
gets thrown in there to meet the
night.
As we look at that with 3 post
acute care or 3 acute care
facilities and 6 post-acute care
facilities. Most of the data
that has been shared today comes
from studies in urban areas.
As you look at the maps somebody
highlighted Arizona has a lot of
blue on it and New Mexico didn't
we don't have speaking for
hospitals, there's a lot of
conversation about private or
physician practices and about
nursing homes. I don't have data
on that. My my data is strictly
around hospitals.
Um,
We don't have urban areas. Our
largest urban area doesn't even
have a population of 100 people
around the 8,850,000 range.
Many of the drivers, as I have
practiced in my career across
this country, that drive some of
the uh decisions that they were
talking about for movement of
patients in referral sources
simply don't apply in New
Mexico.
We are a rural state. We have 4
communities in our state that
even have more than one
hospital.
We have two of those communities
that have 2 hospitals, 2
communities that have more than
2.
The nuances and differences are
extreme for New Mexico from the
data that they have shared.
To the point, let me talk about
quality. As I pull the data for
our New Mexico private equity
hospitals as I have 9 hospitals
included.
Using what I believe are the
same measures that Doctor Soong
talked about the CMS related
quality measures. If I take
those those measures times the
number of hospitals that each of
them applied to and you have to
realize that some of those
hospitals are small and have
either no data to report or so
small that CMS will not record
it. So of the avail of the
hospitals that have available
data, there's 190 total
reportable measures from the
private equity owned facilities
in our state.
Of those 190.
Our New Mexico private equity
owned hospitals are at or above
the national average on 139 of
those.
If you do the math at 73.2%.
Troy, are you gonna provide us
with the names of the hospitals
that you believe are private
equity.
If you would like, I'll do my
best here. I believe the 3
private equity owned hospitals,
and it'll be the only time just
to be clear that I break
anything down to a hospital
level, everything else is
amalgamated, but the three
hospitals that I have that are
acute care would be memorial, 3
crosses, and Los Alamos.
A 6
Post acute and again one of them
is actually publicly traded, uh,
would be Massa Valley, the peak.
Haven
Central desert
And Kindred.
And I missed one, sorry about
that, or actually I missed a
combo rehab hospital of southern
New Mexico and the long term
acute care of Southern New
Mexico.
So you're not counting any of
the loveless um hospitals.
Loveless uh hospitals are
actually publicly traded.
They're a public entity, they're
not private equity, uh, as
community health service CHS is
also a publicly traded so it
gets into this question of
what's in, what's out, so it's
partially public equity, private
equity, is it not?
Uh, publicly traded is a
publicly traded company. I think
Doctor Brown uh expressed that
earlier and talking as they were
talking through that are there,
was it previously private equity
that had some investment still
good, I don't know what level of
investment they carry on.
Uh, OK, well, I, I do, but I.
See
So having said that, I could go
back and rerun the quality
numbers and pull those others
into it, uh, but I believe
today's discussion was on
private equity, so that's where
I focused on.
Having said that, uh,
In our state
As we talk about and as I
emphasize the need for access to
care.
The last 3 expansions of access
to care in our state.
Happen to come from private
equity. We have a behavioral
health unit the peak who
expanded in Espanola. They've
also expanded here in Las
Cruces, and we have the Three
Crosses Hospital, uh.
That is what we are looking for.
I'm not saying we're looking for
private equity.
I want all kinds. We need
everything that we've got in
this state. We need a lot more
of it to address the access to
care issues. I say that just to
say that we have had the
contributions from private
equity to our biggest issue.
And that's why we're focused on
these things and that's why I
think we need to remain focused
on those efforts.
Additionally
When you look at our post-acute
facilities.
We only have one.
Post acute facility and by post
acute facility I mean a
behavioral health facility, a
physical rehab facility, or a
long-term acute care places
people are transferred to that
need additional care passed a
stay in an acute care facility.
We only have one freestanding
behavior or post-acute facility,
which happens to be a physical
rehab facility, joint venture
between Loveless and UNM.
That is not private equity
owned.
We all know the behavioral
health problems that we've had,
and they just talked about the
expansion by peak, uh, in the
spanola into an area in our
state that has significant needs
for uh behavioral health, uh.
Patient.
Lastly, I would share as we talk
about uh all of our hospitals,
but since today is on, uh,
private equity.
When these hospitals come into
their communities, how do they
survive and thrive? They don't
survive and thrive by running
their operations into the
ground.
We don't survive and keep
patient or keep our nursing
staff.
If we
Leave additional work onto them
by cutting the staff.
We're in a nursing shortage
situation those nurses, if they
are not treated well, can go
across the street, can go to the
next hospital, can go to the
next city and get a job like
that.
Along with a signing bonus.
We are short nurses, we are
short doctors, we are short
providers. So the concept of
thinking that we're going to
come in and cut is not the
concept of how you grow a
business and make it more
valuable. In fact, I think Dr.
Braun highlighted that one of
the things that caused the
market value or the uh
multiplier.
To become greater was bringing
stability.
By bringing greater numbers
together.
That's what we have been seeking
for is stability amongst our
rural facilities.
That's our concern is the
instability, the fear of losing
them in further decrementing our
access to care.
So as our hospitals have come
through, I've shared a stat in
the past and I've broken it out,
but the stat that I've shared is
the amount of community benefit
that is provided throughout our
state by all of our hospitals,
about 255 million by not for
profit uh entities, about 131
million by.
For-profit entities.
Of that 131 million, almost 62
million of community benefit and
the communities that they're in
was delivered.
To the communities by private
equity owned facilities that
would be the 9 that I referred
to.
Before
Again, we are in a position that
we need more access to care. We
need more providers, we need
more facilities, we need more
nurses. I highly encourage you
that as we look at these issues
that we do not promulgate
additional measures that
distract from increasing access
to care.
I do not believe that the
problems that we have on a
national level with private
equity that have been shared
extrapolate to New Mexico.
That's not to say we are without
problems in our health care, uh,
at all throughout the state.
But in fact, I would say one of
our most challenging hospitals
has been in Gallup.
Trying to find stable
leadership, trying to find
sustainability. It is not a
private equity owned facility.
It is not a for profit entity.
You have problems in all kinds
of different areas. It's nothing
that is unique to private equity
or for profit.
There are health care challenges
as we passed the healthcare and
Delivery Access Act if your
I can tell you passing the
healthcare Delivery and Access
Act brings more financial
sustainability to hospitals
which as you heard from the
presentation makes them less
attractive for a takeover.
I think that's a positive move.
I think you heard Doctor Braun
and Doctor Song
Guardrails in to protect those
dollars you did.
Hospitals have to report back on
an annual basis and show that at
least 75% of their HDAA funds
that they're bringing in.
are expended in the state of New
Mexico.
I think that was a very wise
guardrail. I told my members
that was 100% of the
conversations I had with
legislators before we tried to
pass the bill.
And I support it.
Why?
Because our biggest problem is
access to care.
And if we send the money out of
state, that's not solving access
to care in our state.
I'll stand for any questions.
Thank you, Troy. Um, I see
Senator Doheck.
Um, Representative Martinez.
Senator Duhig and then
Representative Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Troy.
Thank you for, for working with
us through, throughout this uh
this interim. It's been critical
uh feedback and, and I think is,
is gonna result in in much
better legislation having,
having had these discussions. I
do want to, I, Madam Chair,
there's a question about the
number of, of.
Places that are
private equity owned uh in New
Mexico by my count, if we
include uh ardent, which did
just become publicly traded, um,
there would be at least 15, uh,
but
I wanna, I wanna.
Maybe because we, we just heard
that that the healthcare
Delivery Act that that makes us
us less.
Less attractive to
Two folks who would want to come
in and do acquisitions and so I
wanted to uh mention so with
Ardent just going public, uh,
and their their prospectus that
they file with the SEC and and
they send out to investors, they
actually had a whole section in
there saying, hey investors,
come invest in us because New
Mexico just passed this act,
where we are getting all this
money and for for them
specifically, um.
Uh, over the in the next year
they are projected to get 143
million extra or extra dollars,
million, um, $143 million extra
dollars just for art and on an
annualized basis, um, and they
are promoting that too investors
as as a, as something that that
is making makes them attractive
to to come in and, and, um, and
invest, uh, and so, and the more
we we
They're doing a lot to make
ourselves more attractive to
medical providers, and we should
absolutely keep doing that, but
when we do that, we make
ourselves more attractive to
folks who would come in and
acquire those providers as well,
because it is more profitable
for them to do so, and so that's
why it's important that as we're
making these investments in New
Mexico to support medical
providers, we have to have, uh,
the appropriate oversight and
regulation that goes with it to
make sure that those investments
are doing.
What we want. What we want is
for them to be staying here in
New Mexico and improving
healthcare in New Mexico, not to
be filling investor pockets.
Outside of New Mexico and so.
And I, I will say I, I think
that the memorial, what's
happening here with Memorial
would indicate to me that
New Mexico isn't that unique and
that that this data that we saw
about the impact of of of these
acquisitions nationwide.
Doesn't
There's nothing about New Mexico
that means it's not happening
here as well, and I think
memorial is an excellent case
study, uh, that, that, that
shows that. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Senator. So we have
rep Martinez and Representative
Jones next. So Representative
Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
I'll, I'll make it quick, um.
Can you kind of explain to me?
You know, I know
MRI machines, X-ray machines,
they're all very expensive.
Who, who isn't investing in
those? How, how are those being
purchased for hospitals, I know.
Espanola, for instance.
Um,
There was always a joke that
that's the hospital you went to
to die.
And now Presbyterian has taken
it over and.
It looks clean in there, people
are happy, people are getting
healthy.
Without
Um, some of this.
Investment, this private equity
investment money.
Um,
How are those?
Things are gonna be paid for.
I mean, look look at what's
happening with with Guadalupe
County.
That hospital was going under.
Santa Rosa would not have
medical care. Tell, I'm just,
I'm curious without
Without these companies, how?
How are these things gonna be
paid for?
That's a heck of a question,
represented Martinez, but Madam
Chair and uh Representative
Martinez, um,
Part of the business model in a
hospital has to cover the cost
of replacing your assets whether
that's equipment or whether it's
buildings or not.
When you get into financial
straits you've already spent the
money on the building. You've
already spent the money on, uh,
the cash.
On the MRID equipment, etc. but
you still recognize the
allocated portion spread over
time through depreciation.
I don't want to get into
accounting too deep.
But what that causes things to
happen is in these small
communities that you've talked
about is.
When they run short on cash.
And they're not having to pay
for the equipment when that
equipment or that building needs
to be replaced, they're in a
position that they don't have
the cash to replace it.
One of my hopes from this uh
healthcare and delivery and
Access Act is that we have a
state that has the most modern
equipment and buildings that
there will be significant
reinvestment in infrastructure,
you can go into many
communities.
Uh, throughout our state where
the buildings were built with
for those who are as old as I
am, Hilberton funds back in the
60s and 70s.
5060 year old buildings have not
been replaced and updated and
need to be.
So where were those funds come
from? You, you have to pay the
bills that require the cash
today, but hospitals are looking
for where is that ability to
have access. In fact, uh
represent or uh Cha Chandler,
you mentioned all the dollars
that went in. I remember off the
top of my head, one of those
funds that you approved this
year, I believe, uh, if I have
the number right it's $1000 for
Tucum carry.
Happen to be a facility that I
in my previous role that I used
to oversee.
I've crawled under that building
to see.
The rotted
Cast iron pipes of a 60 year old
building.
If we don't have funds to
replace that, we lose all access
to care. It's not losing like
one doctor, it's losing all of
the providers and the facility
that could keep that care there
whether it not to be transferred
outward.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and Mr.
Clark.
I just think we need to find a
balance. We can't discourage.
Some of these companies from
coming into New Mexico to make
those investments that will get
us to the point where
We have all the modern equipment
we have.
Doctors that are trained in in
those fields.
If we truly want to.
Expand health care in New
Mexico.
If we want to get away from.
The
The impending doom that we're
facing.
In the medical field.
We need to find a balance. We
can't vilify people who are
willing to come in here and make
those investments because the
state.
They were flush with cash now,
we're not gonna be in a position
to be paying for all this.
In the future, especially if we,
if we do away with oil and gas
like I've heard some of the
plans are. Where's that money
gonna come from?
We need to be very careful.
Um, about you finding some of
these.
Private equity companies that
are coming in and making those
investments because if we do
that.
We're gonna be in a lot of
trouble in the future.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Oh, thank you, Representative.
Representative Jones.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'll be
kind of quick because.
Almost the same question, just a
little more generalized because
it applies so much to my
district with my one hospital
that is Quorum owned, um.
Not just equipment, but what if
we
If what if we incentivize these
privately owned companies just
to go somewhere to some other
state where it's just easier,
it's easier for them to to do
business and to have their
hospitals. What would you see
happening if we did that to my
district or and others as well,
but.
Specifically Members Memorial.
I, I, Madam Chair, and
Representative Jones, I.
Hope to not think about losing a
single hospital. You've heard me
talk about that outside of the
context of this discussion back
when we talked about HDAA.
We're not in a position in this
state to lose a single provider.
It will impact every part of the
state. If your hospital was to
close in Deming.
Clayton up in the northeast
corner would feel the effects.
All that business that currently
is taken care of and the care
that's given close to home in
Deming would be pushed
elsewhere.
And take up beds that other
facilities throughout our state
couldn't uh provide and that's
not to let me weave in a comment
here this.
That's not to say that going
back to Senator Dehig's comment
that we think there should be no
oversight.
My message is we need to be
measured in the things that we
do.
To make sure that we're prudent
that we don't undermine those
efforts that we've made in
improving access to care.
Throughout the state
Thank you so much and yes, I do
agree obviously that we need to
have that balance and thank you.
I appreciate that. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Oh yeah, there you are.
Thing to say. I think we're all
getting a little punchy. I'm
certainly feeling a little
punchy.
Um.
Any, oh yes, Representative
Barrega.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
You know, as I think about this
whole kind of system, I mean.
Really, it's very organic and in
a lot of ways. And I'm gonna go
back a little bit because.
Having sat on the para board for
a long time, and I think about
the ERB board as well.
Um, you know, the individuals
are.
And, and the municipalities and
state and so on are investing
into their pension fund. And in
turn, the pension funds are
investing into private equity at
a certain percent.
And that's why I say it's
organic in a lot of ways, um.
And
As I think about the individual,
especially after they retire,
which I am retiree. Um, we're
also investing.
Besides the pension fund
investing into private equity,
um, the individual is investing
into the healthcare system, the
retiree healthcare system, which
also in some instances may be
investing into private equity. I
mean, so it's it as I drew my
little model here and thinking
about it.
Um, we have, we do have to be
very careful about.
How and and not to say that.
Certain things shouldn't be
regulated, but um.
You know, there is a cycle here.
Of investments that are
occurring and the private equity
is also
Having to return on those
pension funds.
So as I sit here and think about
this, I, I really, I mean,
there's a lot to be, as I say, I
guess, Madam Chair, the devil is
in the detail.
And, um, I think that we just
need to be very careful about
how we proceed and
You know, what percentage of the
pension funds are actually
investing in private equity.
Because, and what percent of
return are they obtaining from
private equity and that's why I
say the devil is in the detail
because one of the presenters
earlier mentioned that we don't
know exactly.
What
Or where those uh investments
are taking taking place within
that private equity so I just
wanted to mention that, Madam
Chair, because I, I really think
that it's important that as
we're looking at this, we also
don't shoot ourselves in the
foot. So thank you for that.
Anyone else?
Well, I think we can all agree
we don't want to shoot ourselves
in the foot.
Um, but we do have a
responsibility to look out for
the patients of New Mexico.
And uh and and it is a balance
between ensuring that we're
supporting our healthcare
providers.
In those hospitals that are good
actors and I'm not saying
they're, well, we know of one
potential bad actor in the
state.
Um, but
That's our responsibility and
the reason I scheduled this
topic was so we'd have a good
understanding about how the
healthcare delivery systems in
the state and country and
because you can learn from
what's going on in other other
states, so, um, I feel it's been
a really good conversation
about.
Where we might be going and
Um, thoughts we might have on
going forward so I appreciate
your participation, uh, Troy,
and we, um.
Uh
Enjoy the and accept the
information that you've provided
us, so thank you.
I'm gonna
We have next on our agenda,
measuring the quality of care in
New Mexico nursing home Vicente
Vargas. I also wanted to, to
raise a couple of things. One is
I wanted to let you all know
that we've been informed by
alleged counsel that tomorrow,
you know, we had originally
scheduled a half a day, will be
considered a travel day in terms
of our per diem and so on. So
it, OK, so be aware of that, all
right?
Um, the other thing is I think
we are the minutes provided to
folks.
OK, could someone, um,
We have a motion from Senator
Neibert,
2 from Senator Cervantes. I'm
sure he would agree.
Um, any, uh, opposition to
approving the minutes?
OK, um, any other business we
have to get done? No? OK.
So thank you for tolerating
that, um, Mr. Vargas, uh, you
are the executive director
director of the New Mexico
Healthcare Association.
OK, thank you.
Yeah, push the button when it
turns red, it's on. Thank you,
thank you. Good afternoon, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee, my name again my name
is Vicente Vargas.
Um,
I am here to talk a little, uh,
to talk about the um quality of
care being delivered by nursing
homes and the status of nursing
homes in the in New Mexico.
So, um, it is somewhat of a,
you'll have a handout in front
of you. I know it seems long,
but it, I will not hit every
slide, um, much of that is for
your information, um, so I wanna
start out first, um, to give
you, uh.
Idea of the makeup of nursing
facilities in New Mexico, um, as
you can see on the 2nd page, um.
14 nursing facilities in New
Mexico are nonprofit 51 are for
profit and for our state run.
So as you, you know, it is, it
is definitely a for-profit
market out there.
The second, uh, the 3rd page
gives you a bit of a uh facility
profile compared to the rest of
of the country. Um, I'm not
gonna go through all those, all
that data. What I do want to
point out though is the uh
average Medicaid payer it um.
In in New Mexico nursing
facility if you walked into a
New Mexico nurse afilities
facility it's gonna be 69%,
close to 70% of uh residents are
Medicaid um members compared to
61 in uh in the United States
and then for those of you uh for
your regions broken down by
congressional district with uh
CD2 being uh the, the largest
with 75% Medicaid payers.
So as you can as this as this
shows, um, nursing facilities
rely on Medicaid, uh, payments
to to operate that is, that is
their their main source.
I'm not gonna go through the
economic impact, um, of nursing
facilities in the state. I just
want you to have that in your
um.
In, in your possession, but I
will point out though is the
direct effect in those columns
is essentially um if you nursing
facilities ceased to operate in
New Mexico that is the direct
impact that that they that they
have um.
The next slide, private equity
and health care, again not gonna
try to do this when you have had
an entire day of this. So I get
it, um.
Um, it was good to hear, you
know, walking into this um
hearing, um, seeing that it was
the hospitals and nursing
facilities on the on the agenda.
It was definitely good to hear
from your experts that we
understand the private equity
cuts across all the entire
continuum and spectrum of uh of
health care, um, and has been
and the other thing you know, to
point out, um.
As we said
again, the definition of private
equity, what is, I think it's
been.
Out there without a clear idea
of what that is, um, there is,
um, for example, a, um.
A website
That in uh.
That says it's an index of
private equity risk in states
and the reports that 35% of New
Mexico nursing homes are private
equity.
But if you look at the research
of uh and the and the research
methods, um.
The website uses owner uh the
ownership file from what we call
Care Compare.
And that does not and that does
not distinguish between
for-profit and private equity so
when it says 35% it's lumping
for profit publicly traded.
Into the uh, into that equation.
So it becomes difficult to to to
know what private equity is.
What then and the uh and I
apologize for not numbering the
slides. I do apologize. Um, but
the next slide is is titled
Private Equity and Healthcare,
um, I think one barometer and
that was, this was spoken to
earlier about how um I think it
was hospitals functioned during
COVID-19, um.
For nursing facilities, there
was, there's been various
studies on how nursing
facilities performed during
COVID-19. Um.
The primary driver for COVID
COVID-19 outbreaks in nursing
facilities was community spread.
Nothing to do with ownership,
uh, ownership type. It was the
community that you were in.
Um, yeah, um, nursing facility
ownership had a minimal uh
relation to the infection rates
in long-term care facilities.
There was another study that was
done that really looked at that
took private equity owned
nursing facilities and compared
them to for-profit and nonprofit
uh facilities across the
country, well, about 11,000
facilities across the country.
Um,
And the result was that there
was, there was a negligible, um,
difference between infection
rates, deaths in nursing homes
during COVID-19, um, there's a
negligible difference between.
Any of the, you know, that cross
section of for-profit and
nonprofit and uh private equity,
um.
The way we the way I see that
is, you know, there's no
I mean, you can't, there's no
bigger barometer that we've seen
about the quality of care.
And the type of care that any
healthcare provider, uh,
delivers then during COVID-19,
there was no time to pivot. You
either were prepared or you were
not prepared, depending on, on
where you stood and there was
just no, there was a negligible
difference between uh those
infection rates and and other
uh.
Other ways of evaluating
COVID-19.
There's been talk about
Private equity or you know, or
anybody, you know, any company
coming into New Mexico and and
or any state and we're looking
at New Mexico to talk, you know,
to um comes in, bleeds the the
the facility and then sells it
or anything like that.
Since 2019, there have been 4
closings of nursing facilities
in New Mexico.
Um, in 2019 there were two
nursing facilities that were
closed. That company no longer
operates in New Mexico. It had,
it had its portfolio was larger
than those two facilities. The
other facilities were bought up
by existing providers, um.
Two were left over that.
Excuse me, that we're that we're
not purchased, um.
And then in 2021, 1 facility
closed because they consolidated
into one building so there was
no impact on residents in that
in that community.
And um in 20 and there was one
other facility um in northern
New Mexico that, um.
Because of low senses could not
stay open.
Um, it had to close. The state
of New Mexico did um approach
the largest operator, uh,
nursing facility operator in New
Mexico to run that facility and
that the the largest nursing
operator operates over 20
facilities in New Mexico, so
they had the bandwidth to to try
to keep that facility open and
they did for about a year and a
half, it was, it was not, uh,
financially um viable to keep it
open.
And there was just no census,
uh, to come and I shouldn't say
no census there was very few
residents from that community.
Uh, using that resource. So yes,
when it did close there were
some residents and families that
were impacted by that, no doubt
about it, for sure, and
especially in a rural community,
but it wasn't for the lack of
trying to keep it open, um.
Um, Troy with the hospitals
talked about private equity or
just the guardrails already in
exist and I I'm sorry, I'm in
the next uh slide and it's it's
NIF payment regulations and
penalties.
They're, you know, we talk about
guardrails, um, for private
equity or and making sure that
the investment the state makes
is uh is being protected.
There are already guard rails in
place for payment uh.
On payment for Medicaid payments
specific uh not even Medicaid
payment, just in general
monitoring the costs that um
that facilities, um.
That that facilities expand to
keep their facilities open and,
and, and operating. And those
are, those are through cost
reports.
Um, the state has a clear
picture of what those costs are.
The state uses those cost
reports in order to audit and
ensure that the costs that are
being reported are within the
provisions of the New Mexico
Administrative code.
Um, there are, there are limits
to what you can um report as a
cost, including your, your uh
lease, you what you pay for a
lease.
Um, and other facility costs
such as equipment and um and
such.
You can't go you know the the
New Mexico administrative code
has a general reimbursement
policy that says,
Facilities will be reimbursed
the lower of either build
charges.
Or prospective rates, um,
established by the New Mexico
administrative code. So whatever
the lowest, uh, the lowest cost
is and that is in there so there
is definitely a ceiling.
Um,
And again, those costs are
report are reported.
And um the other thing that
those that that that the um that
the cost reports do is that
those cost reports are used to
establish Medicaid rates for
each facility.
Another, say, guardrail, not
necessarily on costs, but on the
provision of care our CMS
penalties that um.
Some of your presenters have
talked about, they'll see
penalties are issued um through
the survey process.
You're one of the experts said
one of the ways to ensure
quality care is to uh have um
strong surveyors, um, and, and
frequent surveys.
As I understand it, New Mexico
is one of the most has is.
Current on every nursing
facility survey in the state of
New Mexico on an annual basis.
There was one report, I think
that there's some surveys are 2
years old, you know, this
facility hasn't been seen in 2
years.
That's not occurring in New
Mexico.
Every facility gets visited
visited at least once a year.
Sometimes it's more if there is
a complaint survey.
From a family or a resident, the
nursing facilities will be
surveyed and it's not just on
that complaint. The surveyors
have a wide range of of of
authority to look into many if
not all aspects of a nursing
facility's operations. Um, and
at any point, if there are
violations, they can um they can
go as high as $20,000 per
violation.
That, that, uh, that a, uh, that
a surveyor may find, find, and
it's per instance and the
federal government has just
recently amended it's, it's its
rules to allow for stacking to
allow for a peristance basis and
on a daily basis.
That they are out of compliance.
So that is that and the purpose
of CMS says for civil monetary
penalties is to um the, the
purpose is to ensure quality
care for residents.
Another guardrail that we talk
about with regard to reduced
staffing is.
If you reduce your staffing,
you're gonna have to reduce your
senses commensurate to that.
We do have in New Mexico a 2.5
hour per resident day, uh,
minimum staffing level, um, and
it is on a 7 day average.
Um,
So it's it and I should say
facilities are in the business
of.
Admitting residents as much as
possible. If there is a reason
that a facility is limiting its
access to residents.
It is, it is more often than
not, it is going to be because
they do not have the staff to
adequately care and provide
quality care to those residents.
So they will shut down a wing
because they don't have the
staff and, and we all know that
there's a shortage of 8000
nurses, and I'll point out
though in New Mexico for nursing
facilities.
Nurses, what's not reported is
nurses are not necessarily what
nursing facilities need.
Nursing facilities need
certified medication aids.
That is the backbone of a.
Of a nursing facility hands
down, um.
Although nurses are great,
nothing against them, but we
need CMAs.
Um,
Go on to the next slide. It's
titled New Mexico NIF G Level or
higher tags.
I have this slide as an as an
indicator as to.
To try to see where the what the
There are problems, no, no
doubt, not everybody is perfect.
I am not saying that, you know,
healthcare is a high stakes
game, is a high stakes industry
it is when something.
Bad happens.
Typically
Someone's health is is impacted
by that. This, uh, this is,
this, this is uh this slide here
shows nursing facility G level
or higher tags. I talked about
those tags in the previous
slide.
G level or higher tags are
either someone, you know, there
was an immediate jeopardy
finding or someone who's
actually injured in a nursing
facility, uh, a resident, um,
and, you know, between 43 of
2021 and quarter 2 of 2024, um.
There has been an average of uh
of.
12, it's, you're averaging 12
tags per quarter so I
understand.
The tag, any tag is a bad thing.
But there just doesn't seem to
be a sharp increase in survey
findings for uh the quality of
care that a uh a nursing
facility is uh providing.
The next slide I will point I, I
will, I have on here is a
federal minimum staffing
mandate.
If we want to talk about what is
going to limit access to a
nursing facilities uh care.
It, this is an example of that,
and that's a nurse, the, the
federal government just passed a
staffing mandate rule.
That would require 3.48 hours uh
per resident day.
Of care.
So every resident should receive
3.48.
Nobody is opposed to that in the
nursing facility industry. It,
it, it's makes sense.
However,
What comes with that?
Is no funding.
If you remember, we were, you
know, right now it's 2.5 hours.
3.48 hours puts 65% of New
Mexico nursing facilities out of
compliance.
Today.
There's also in that role at
24/7 RN mandate, which again,
Nothing wrong with having a
nurse in a facility 24 hours a
day, 7 days a week.
However, in New Mexico with that
past 80% of New Mexico nursing
facilities don't meet that
requirement.
It is, this is the the epitome
of an of an unfunded mandate for
New Mexico, it's going to cost
$30 million projected annually
to cover the cost to.
Um,
To, to meet the new staffing
mandate and we would need 490
new combination of CMAs and
nurses to meet this staffing
mandate. And it's, I could get
into it. It's very, it's a very
convoluted mandate, um, because
sometimes that 24/7 RN can
qualify for the 3.48 hours.
It's.
It is convoluted, but there is
no there is no funding for that.
I would hope that this that that
our legislature and our
executive would look at that and
and have this as a um a
priority.
To evaluate and consider because
this is will limit and it will
be in effect next year.
They are giving a glide path.
But
At $30 million facilities are
Medicaid, uh, recipients, so
they're price takers, not price
makers. They can't increase
their the the cost of care on on
most residents.
What I will point out on this
slide as well.
is when we talk about Medicaid
reimbursement rates.
Another, another thing that an
expert talked about to help uh.
Improve quality of care.
New Mexico nursing facilities
have not had a nursing uh uh
Medicaid rebate, and a rebase
essentially looks at your costs
and then rebases your Medicaid
rates to, to, to recognize those
costs. New Mexico nursing
facilities have not had a rebate
since 2016, 2017, so we're still
operating under those costs.
That's not to say that rates
themselves haven't been
increased.
But keep in mind on that.
It has been a very minimal
amount of state funding that has
helped increase those old rates.
Rates have been increased on the
back of what we call a bed tax,
and that bed tax is paid by
facilities to leverage federal
funds that then are returned
back to facilities and in the
state of New Mexico, quite
honestly, uh, for operational
costs.
And part of that return from the
federal government is used to
increase rates.
There have been slight
Funding for, for rates but not
on, not, not anywhere near what
facilities have received.
Through the bed tax that they
have funded.
Um, on their own.
My next slide is New Mexico uh
nurse NIs working hard for
residents.
Nursing facilities are, are, are
continually working um to, to
improve the quality of care and
holding themselves accountable.
Um, the, through the New Mexico
Healthcare Association which
represents 64 nursing facilities
in New Mexico.
On our own, we have had um we
have had two initiatives
recently, um.
That have been voluntary um to
participate in by nursing
facilities. One was a
restraintree initiative. The
goal was to to reduce restraint,
um, um, restraint, uh.
Use in facilities to 0.
That did occur and has was
accomplished in 2021.
Facilities in New Mexico, um,
don't, are not you are.
I've not been found through
survey process or anything else
to be using restraints to
further their residents.
We are now in the in the process
of an antipsychotic medication
reduction initiative, um.
That is um resulted and that
started in 2022 and we already
have 3 facilities in New Mexico.
That are in the top 10% of the
country in the reduction and,
and even the use of
antipsychotic, um, um.
Medications
And these figures, we use CMS
data. We don't use.
Our own surveys or our own polls
or anything. This is CMS data
that is being used.
Um, and then we also have, we,
we, you know, through our
association we do awards to
recognize healthcare workers in
facilities and caregivers across
the spectrum of caregiving.
Genesis Healthcare in New
Mexico.
The largest um operator on its
own, it has a uh um healthcare
initiative called Leading from
the Heart, which very important
about that one is that families
and residents are very important
in this, they are the ultimate,
uh, um.
Of importance in this uh in this
in long term care. However, none
of that happens without
recognizing and supporting
healthcare workers. That is if
there's.
Like that maybe 2nd tier, it's,
it's the, it's the frontline
caregivers that that our
facilities.
Should and need to recognize and
care for as well.
Um, for the work that they do.
And that is what Genesis is
doing from leading to the Heart.
I'm not gonna go through
everything to show you that, uh,
to, to discuss that, but it's
there for you to to look at.
Um, and then we also participate
in national quality care awards
and
And that's, and that's uh those
quality of care awards are, are,
are determined by a national
organization, um.
And we have, uh, and there's 3
levels bronze, silver, and gold,
and our facilities. Fortunately
have not received the gold, have
not gotten to gold status, but
are working in the, in the, in
the second tier of silver.
So we are, we do and nursing
facilities do work to improve
quality of care.
The next slide is New Mexico
nursing facility or NIFS quality
efforts. These are efforts by
nursing facilities to improve
the quality of care and in these
efforts are what?
We see as the best way to
improve quality of care in
nursing facilities. It's worked
across the country in every
state, quality of the, the
metrics have shown.
Quality of care going up, when
you use value-based purchasing
programs.
Essentially value-based
purchasing program is um is
intended to reward facilities or
award facilities for meeting
certain quality of care metrics
and again, those metrics are
determined by this uh by CMS.
One of them is the nursing
facility value-based purchasing
program established in 2019. It
was intended to improve the
quality of care and more
importantly, reduce avoidable
hospitalizations. That is a
rehospitalizations.
are um are an expensive endeavor
on the state and we wanted to
reduce those.
And essentially optimize health
for for all New Mexico
residents.
Um, these incentive payments
also include participation in
echo and telemedicine.
Um, and also you, you receive,
um, incentive for admitting high
acuity residents.
I will go, so 11, and you'll see
some charts and we are the blue
line on these next 4 charts. Um,
and these are the four quality
measures.
In that nursing facility
value-based purchasing program.
This is what determines whether
a facility receives quality
payments or not, or the level of
quality payments. I'm not gonna
go into that program in depth.
But what this shows overall is
This program works.
Antipsychotic use is down and
below the national average.
UTIs continue to stay down and
below the national average.
Long-term pressure ulcers or
long stay pressure ulcers, same.
And I think the last slide um on
this one is, um, it's the long
stay point right pro measure.
This measures
re-hospitalizations.
And as you can see, our
rehospitalization rate is, has
stayed pretty constant since
quarter 1 of 2023 and continues
to be well below the national
average. National average of
rehospitalization is 16%. We are
at about 10%.
So
What these facilities do is they
take that quality incentive
money and they reinvest it into
these programs. Now, I will say
there is, there is an argument
out there that people will say
when nursing facilities are
asking for a rate increase or.
Whatever the case may be, is
that you have these programs you
have this program. This should
help your facility.
Keep the doors open, pay staff,
pay, um,
also you all sorts of expenses.
When these when these programs
are created, everyone knew the
point was to focus on quality of
care and quality measures. And
that's so now they, now it's
being asked to spread that money
across other needs and
Possibly take away from these,
from these uh these efforts by
facilities to improve the care.
Um, has it happened is the data
shows, but that's what we're
facing.
We have another value-based
purchasing program called the
Healthcare Quality surcharge.
Now this one is the 800 pound
gorilla in value-based
purchasing programs. It, it, um,
we're talking about after you
leverage federal funds, it's
about a $90 million program.
It's huge, it's, it's very
important to our facilities and
to residents. And again, when
you, when you, when you look at
the quality measures in this
program.
It's a winner. It, it works.
It, it, it, there's just no
doubt falls with major injury
are below the national average,
long stay depression.
Keeps going down and below the
national average and you then
you have vaccinations, which is
very, very important, especially
during COVID-19 is and it is
important in
Nursing facilities in general,
um, an outbreak of the flu and
influenza.
can literally be deadly in a, in
a nursing facility. Um.
Vine it does show the
vaccinations are going up or, or
non-vaccinations are um.
are not going to, but we're um.
We're we're getting, we're
getting there to the national
average, but we're not far off.
And same thing with
pneumococcal.
The next slide is New Mexico
nursing facility quality
measures.
This is a this is a.
Uh, these are quality measures
that are outside of those
programs, but that are still
measured by CMS.
And
For the most part, we are below
the national average, where we
are not below the national
average and and above the
average, we are above the
national average is like 3% 3%
above, um, or 0.3% above the
national average. We're, we're,
we are, um.
Either in line or.
Right at the national average.
Um,
So I wanted to share those with
you to show the quality, at
least the measured quality of
care in nursing facilities.
Again.
I am not saying that everybody
is perfect, that everything is
great.
Things happen
Accidents happen
Absolutely. I'm not, I'm not
going to deny that.
The last slide I have, Madam
Chair, and, and members is our
continued
Effort to improve quality of
care and access.
We are trying to improve the
access of care for residents'
behavioral health conditions.
And relieve the the stress that
they put on nursing facilities.
And that also includes residents
with substance use disorders.
We're, we have approached the
state about a Medicaid add-on.
Which is not a rate increase,
it's an add-on that a facility
receives for a resident that
they admit with a qualifying
behavioral health condition is
our proposal. And once that
resident no longer qualifies
that facility never no longer
receives the add-on, and we are
requesting a $150 add-on for
that.
This not only are we requesting
the $150. We're requesting and
part of our proposal is to
require facilities to provide
wraparound services. It's not
enough just to admit the
resident. You have to provide
quality care to that behavioral
health res the resident with the
behavioral health condition, and
that is specific type of care.
Um, so if that facility does not
provide that care in the state,
and we're asking the state to
monitor that. If the facility
doesn't provide.
it, they don't get the money and
they probably will then get a
CMP as well.
Um,
We project for $2.6 million
investment, you can leverage
federal funds and
Essentially, nursing facilities
could admit 175 residents of the
behavioral health condition a
day or care for a resident for
100, 175 residents a day. Some
of those residents will be will
be continual.
For sure, right? You know, you
have a resident with a dementia
with the what we call dementia
with behaviors, those can be
violent behaviors, um,
threatening behaviors.
And then there's some that are
in there for, you know, 3 or 4
months, but regardless, it would
care for 175 patients a day or
residents a day with a 2 with a
$2.65 million fund. So everyone
has skin in the game from
payment from the state to the
facilities having to provide
that wraparound service.
What I'll leave you with
Members
Is that whether it's private
equity for-profit, nonprofit.
As the as the quality of care,
as the CMS quality measures
show, we're
We could do better.
But there doesn't seem to be a
crisis occurring with the
quality of care or access.
Can it be better? Yes, that's
why we're, that's why we're
requesting funding to rebase if
we're saying Medicaid rates to
be adequate, then please work
with us to rebase our rates.
If we want better quality of
care for behavioral health
residents, please work with us
to invest $2.6 million to
improve the care that those
behavioral health residents
receive and will enco will will
allow facilities the confidence
to admit those residents.
Access like Choy said or uh Mr.
Clark mentioned the biggest
driver for access is is is is
staffing.
At 8000 nurses and who knows how
many CMAs
short.
That creates an access problem
for sure.
We're not there aren't
facilities
that are operators are not.
Um, firing or letting go nursing
staff to help.
Um,
increase their profits. it
doesn't no good.
They'll be losing money on the
other side through CMP fines and
such and
They need, they need those,
those nurses and caregivers in
order to increase their senses,
which, yes, does, does, does
create a profit as well.
Like Troy said, we agree.
Appropriate oversight is, is
great.
But appropriate oversight can't
just be the only mechanism like
your expert said, please help
with other things to, to
accompany that that appropriate
oversight.
Increase rates.
More healthcare workers. We
need, yeah.
We, we don't produce them, we
employ them.
So we would, we would support an
initiative by the state to to
create more healthcare workers
and more nurses, um.
We, but we don't create them. So
with that, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, thank you very
much.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Vargas. Um.
Questions, comments from
members.
Um, Senator Dohick.
Madam Chair, I know it's the end
of the day. We're all tired. I
will be brief, um.
I'm looking at, so on the
Medicare website they list all
of the, the nursing homes in New
Mexico, and they all have
ratings, 50%, uh, there are 68,
uh, facilities in New Mexico,
um, 32 of them are rated at
below average or or much below
average, and then two of them
aren't rated at all because
there's they.
That the indicator I get is that
there's so many problems with
them, um.
And so,
To me, that that would if if
half of our facilities in our
state are, are, and the the
ratings are based on health
inspections, staffing, and
quality measures. So if half of
the facilities in the state uh
are below average or well below
average. How is that not a a
crisis of care.
I, I would, I would point for
me, that it, it would look at
the data that I showed.
And we are, again, below the
national average on, on, so I
mean for both the national
average, that's the data that I
have from CMS.
Um,
When you look at the the.
Citations that are issued. And
again, here, here's a, here's a
um.
The difference between quality
of care and citations. Citations
many times are.
A citation for a point in time.
Quality care is a continuum
across time. So if somebody
walks in a surveyor walks in and
there is a
Uh, prescription bottle of
medicine that was sitting
unattended, and they noticed
that.
That could be an immediate
jeopardy tag, $10,000 fine.
OK, is that a quality of care
issue? Or was that a point in
time where
The person, you know, someone
set it down.
Do they do that all the time? We
don't know, but we do know over
time on the quality of care
metrics that we continue to stay
below the national average. So I
guess for me, you know, based on
what you're saying.
Then there's a, there's a crisis
across the country then, with
nursing homes.
In many other states, um, and
Yeah, it just doesn't from what
we're seeing doesn't seem to be
the case.
Nor from even our state
regulators.
Yeah
So, I mean difference of
opinion.
OK. Thank you and thanks,
manager, I, I.
I tend to, uh.
I tend to trust what I'm seeing
here with by the folks whose job
it is to go in and assess these
facilities and they are.
There's also a whole bunch of
they've been cited for abuse.
Most of a lot of the ones that
I'm seeing too that are much
below average and cited for
abuse our genesis healthcare,
um, I just.
I don't know, I'm
I am a little stumped at what we
have heard from you here today
versus what?
What I see on I, I hear you,
and, and I could, and I would be
happy to take you to so you
could see exactly where I see it
on where I get the date my seat,
the CMS data as well.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you. Thank you. Any anyone else
with questions or comments? Uh,
well, thank you, Vincente. I
know you had to rearrange your
travel plans a little bit and
for to make this meeting, so we
appreciate your attendance Madam
Chair.
Specific thank you to you for
inviting me. I appreciate that
so much. Thank you. Have a good
day. Yeah, take care.
Everybody, we have committee
discussion and then public
comment. Everybody's discussed
out, I think.
We like have this brain thing
like all this information
getting into our brains.
People are about to explode, I
think. Anyone wanna share any
thoughts about this or any other
topic that is appropriate for
our committee.
Yes, Senator Nibert.
I, I do have a question about uh
what Senator Cervantes brought
up yesterday in the lawsuit, um.
We we planning to do anything or
have you decided what we might
do at the next meeting? We, um,
haven't had any further
discussions other than
yesterday, you know, I'm open to
seeing if we could have a add
that to our agenda and so we'll
have a mind blowing agenda in
November.
But I, you know, I'm open to
including a conversation about
that and maybe inviting the
various parties to share their
different perspectives and that.
Did you get a copy of uh uh.
Did you get a copy of the brief
that was filed, OK,
there was a brief
OK, well.
OK, you got a copy though,
right?
OK.
Great, OK, because I'm told it's
very good. I haven't, I just
started reading it. It might be
illuminating for when we have
further discussions. OK, and I
don't see any further
discussion. Uh, we, I know we
have one person online. Do we
have anyone um present? Yes, we
have person present, um, if you
wanna.
Public comment up here, um, turn
the mic on and we up at the
front tier.
Uh
We'll do this first, you first,
it's.
And then we'll go online, OK?
Um, and we ask that people limit
their comments to 2 minutes, OK.
You push the button right there.
Can you hear me? If it's too
long, you can cut me off.
OK.
My name is Yoli Diaz and thank
you for the opportunity to
speak. I believe that the funds
the state provides needs to
ensure that they go to patient
care. I am an advocate for
access to needed health care. I
am concerned that we have 3
private hospitals in this
disenfranchised area. A report
with 2018 data showed two of our
hospitals with the with the 5th
and 8th highest charge to cost
ratios, meaning the 5th and 8th
highest, most expensive
hospitals.
Uh, and the third hospital
didn't didn't exist at that
time. I understand that someone
or an entity must pay for health
care.
I am concerned that our New
Mexico marketplace has offered
plans at Memorial Medical Center
does not accept, as reported in
the national NBC media. I am
concerned with what I've
witnessed with Memorial Medical
Center denying immediate
services especially cancer
treatment. I am concerned with
the research I've done, uh,
through record requests, I found
one indigent care is written in
the lease between Donana County,
City of Las Cruces, and Memorial
Medical Center, Lessee. 2, the
2004 policy written in the
lease.
specifically included cancer. 3,
my record request received May
2, 2024, showed that MMC's
policy since the 2015 and 2016
policy removed outpatient
oncology and chemo services and
outpatient dialysis, and I will
disclose that I'm not an
attorney, but I do question if
this was legal in the first
place due to the lease and then
MSA 1978 Indigent Hospital and
Health Care Act for the least
required expanded
Care services monthly reports by
Memorial Medical Center to both
lessers. My record requests to
both the city and county
provided no responsive
documents. 5, my record request
for reports to the county's
indigent database provided a
spreadsheet with 0 data for the
years that I requested of 2017,
2018, 2019, 2020, 2021, 2022,
and 2023. thus far the year 2024
has three entries. How can
anyone assess what is
Happening if reports are not
provided or a database is not
being utilized. I questioned the
oversight that should have been
provided. I question
accountability and transparency.
I questioned the enforcement of
legal contracts and enforcement
of legislation like the patient
medical debt Protection Act. I
feel that we are watching a
healthcare war or that I've
watched a healthcare war and
that the most vulnerable are
expendable. I think it's
important that residents receive
care they need when they need it
and where they need it.
Unless they want to go somewhere
else again, I believe that funds
the state provides needs to
ensure that they go to patient
care. Thank you.
Thank you. All right, we have
one person online, I believe, so
we're, where is my
I is she on now?
Leo, or where, where?
It's Mary.
Come on, can you hear me?
Yes. OK.
Um, I, I think I'll be 3 minutes
and I'll go quickly, but um I
really am going to try and bring
in a different perspective from
a consumer point of view. Um,
thank you for letting me speak.
I know you're exhausted and I
just have to say that it is
wonderful that you have devoted
an entire day to this very
critical issue. Um, as you know,
I'm the executive director of
the Health Security for New
Mexicans campaign that
represents 1.
70 diverse organizations and
thousands of residents and there
is no question that New Mexico
needs a strong consolidation
oversight site law, one that
protects communities from the
all too many negative impacts of
corporate takeovers, but I want
to raise today the urgent need
for other legislation aside from
this consolidation oversight
bill. Legislation that is
actually complementary to its
intent. First, I need to point
out that the
Proposed legislation only
addresses future consolidations.
a large percentage of our
hospitals are definitely
controlled by out of state
companies whether hospital
chains or private equity firms,
and there are people in New
Mexico who live in Las Cruces,
Gallup, Allan McGorgo, even
Santa Fe that must need need
that protection, um, because
there's a lot of evidence of
some negative impacts of
hospitals that that they're that
they they that they need.
Um, we also think it's important
to include other legal options.
Um, it expanding our current
whistleblower law to cover all
those who work in health
facilities, uh, is, is very,
very important. It should not
just apply to oversight of
future consolidation bill, as
was suggested by uh the
superintendent, and as mentioned
earlier, the OSI has heard and
received numerous complaints
from medical professionals about
medical
Practice restrictions. I, I must
give you a quote from Gallup
physician Doctor Kathy Mezov who
read the statement was read to
LHHSC last year and she what she
says, and this is a quote, the
stark reality is that our broken
medical system does not allow
clinicians to practice as we
were trained to be responsible
for the best care of our
patients. Moral injury is a
constant theme that is being
discussed.
Now in medical journals, and it,
it on, on this vein, there's
another legal option that
actually two of your speakers uh
referred to, and that is passing
a corporate practice of medicine
law which prohibits corporations
from interfering in clinical
decisions that should be made by
licensed health professionals.
Now, Doctor Brong pointed out
that private equity firms are
actually taking advantage of the
loopholes in existing state
laws.
So we're seeing a movement and
this includes Texas, North
Carolina, and others, and New
York and California are
strengthening their laws. Oregon
has has is proposing what what
many consider to be the the
strongest uh law uh proposal in
the nation. And uh Doctor Soong
is correct. Our state has does
not have a corporate practice of
medicine law. So both
whistleblower and corporate
practice of medicine laws would.
Mary, I'm gonna have to cut you
off.
Oh, OK.
Thank you, thank you though.
I wish you, you know, there was
no limit.
Said for for um testimony, and 3
minutes, um, I assumed around 3
minutes,
which is actually it's, it's
too, sorry, it's really 2
minutes, but since you
mentioned.
3, so it doesn't say thank you,
Mary.
All right, everyone, uh,
I thank everybody for your
participation. It was like I
said, my head's about to explode
with all the information we
received, but really appreciate
everybody's, uh, you know,
active engagement on the, on the
subject, so thank you. Yes,
Senator.
Uh, ma'am, I just want to thank
you for putting together these
very intense, but really
incredible last two days and
it's a lot of work to run a
committee like this and to do
the agenda and make sure
everybody's here. So thanks to
you and Nancy for what you've
done for us. Yeah, and thank you
for mentioning Nancy and, and,
you know, the rest of the staff
has, has really been so
supportive of all the work that
we've done so far and it's been
a heavy load this year, really
heavy, so thank you.
Thanks guys
Thank you. Thank you, Senator.
