We used to microphone there we
go there a little bit better and
i'm really pleased by the turn
out i'll tell all of you have
not been here before to the
blake to stay or for a committee
meeting here so we're bringing
you all here for the first time
christine and I remember rips in
challenging we're hoping that
among the many things that the
isolation that you're going to
see me doing that with the
committee I like to send people
to isolated places where you
have to as I understand it hang
out in the hot tub uh uh
and maybe get over some of the
partisanship in some of the
obstacles that seem to divide us
during the sessions and maybe as
a country as a whole so i'm i'm
really pleased to have such a
good turn out a long way it's
about I don't know six seven
irish moscow's or so
if I am fairness about when a
drag all you don't south eating
issue you all should expect me
to be dragged all the way up
here this is not bad when it's a
hundred and four degrees in
moscow's so this is a nice are
break so thank you all for being
here on time will get started
we've we've christine started to
keep saying that that I am
selling makes things informal
for me say
we are we we have an agenda but
we also left a lot of good time
I think for us to have some free
discussion and i've tried
purposefully not to put too many
parameters on the speakers we do
have because we have district
attorneys we have public
defenders here in my goal is to
have them tell us what they
think we need to hear and it may
be we we don't give them a
chance to structure as it might
be uh we we have a couple of
housekeeping things to take care
of first well we have an odd
circumstance because the fiscal
year of ends today and then a
new one begins tomorrow so
you'll have to fill out two
evidently two of your forms for
meetings so please note there's
there's an aside a mistake that
you have two of these in please
felt a separate one for each of
the two different days
we have we've we've adjusted the
schedule a little bit from our
original meeting we're going to
be in redo so and rosal but I
think we've had to flip the
dates.
And and this is always
something I appreciate from all
of you and our presenters to get
everybody's scheduled
coordinated in make the travel
and hotels work in in locations
and all that work nancy there's
a great job of trying to juggle
all of that so we we we're going
to flip the rose well and read
those of dates we're going to do
one day first day and read those
second day in ross will and i'll
let them last year now right now
um I may not be able to join you
in the second day ross will
because of the court setting the
right but I can't get out of it
but will do that too so we need
to get I think you said there's
a deadline for people to get
reservations is that right at
the other mount guard some of
the miscolorado drivers asked us
to try and get that right away
by by the third so by what
thursday right so please make
that a priority of yourselves to
get miscalebook and what else
they do
and see that there with the
legislative interim courts
corrections and justice
committee but all confirm and I
can.
You're ready to know that just
may federal priority alright and
there is the third thing wasn't
there.
No me- maybe not okay let's get
to work then again welcome to
the beautiful part of the state
uhm.
Was your challenging anything to
start with us with no it's
really pleasant to be appealing
we're going to enjoy the weather
in the beautiful environment
thank you mr chair
mister bellis come on upfront
join us for a few minutes to.
Tell us a little bit about what
you're doing up here and welcome
him rick
chairman surrounders first year
channeler senators and
representatives are we'd like to
welcome you I am the village
administrator up here first
given the timing of the meeting
and when you probably drove up
if you drove up
i'll do the official apology
which is if you've never come up
the hill and of course we post
the return is thirty miles an
hour but we are a ski resort so
every employee up here coming up
about the time you think of this
in the winter as the slogan
challenge in in the summer it's
the formula one grand pre coming
up the hell so they tend to push
because everything's a race here
and there there are bets usually
once a weekend who has the best
times getting here
obviously I want to welcome you
all here to this beautiful
weather that we have
we are very fortunate I live
down the hill so it works out
really well for me because in
the
summer it's cool at night down
there but then when it gets
higher I get to come up here and
work all day and it works the
inverse that when it's called up
here you get to go back down
there and there's no snow.
So it's a beautiful place to be
I couldn't think of anything
better
and used to be for eight years
before this job I retired and
came into this but for eight
years was the town manager at
the town in towers so certainly
i'm familiar with the issues of
recruiting retaining police
departments particularly in our
rural areas of the country and
trying to compete with the
larger areas and in some cases
the state so
where we're all ease looking at
all our communities up here in
the end channel circle for
whatever help we can get on
support for our law enforcement
where it's shares department or
local police
prior to that they had the
unique experience of arraving
just in time to tell us counting
when we were building a new
county complex we're building
the new court house in the new
jail and we went from having
three cells to.
Your classic two story jail
reflecting more of an urban area
and trying to recruit up for
that and doing the training in
the certification
wanted to do that juvenile jail
i'm originally from their east
coast and it was really ironic
to find out that after spending
twenty years out there dealing
with the problem server juvenile
justice domestic violence
housing
street crane homelessness
drug abuse although well when he
came in a new mexico and it was
beautiful and rural we wouldn't
have those urban problems only
to find out that.
We had about the same level of
problems but far less resources
and for less particularly the
nonprofit support groups
available here and I think
that's one of her biggest
problems in the world
communities is the support
systems that we provide.
Funded partially by local
government partly by the
communities and of course with
the help of the states and in
many cases
but it's very difficult for our
nonprofit support systems in a
rural hospitals to be able to
carry that burden
just to struggle in in the
engineered circle of our village
which you know is pretty small
five hundred seventy five people
depending on them the season to
have a full time ambulance in
the ems department to respond
police department to respond
twenty four seven
as well as red river angel fire
eagleness dollar members we have
to work pretty closely together
and very fortunately we have a
joint nine one one system appear
which we were able to get steep
money for and we're very
appreciated for that and I was
fortunate to be part of putting
that together there too
and are published participate in
that as well I think our
communications system is pretty
good but we have huge distances
to cover between us and then
less we can do that
cooperatively it just doesn't
happen if I have one or two
people on board and really it's
just a high government the
mountain to read river but you
can't drive that
with traffic it can be up to an
hour to get around to help them
if there ambulances responding
to question or somewhere else
you're delivering a patient
to the house bill so we really
have to work together well.
I think you have probably the
quietest but the toughest job of
any of the committees because.
I don't think it gets the
intention until there is a
problem and people don't realize
how complex the solutions are in
the systems are that you have to
put in place to solve them and
how much it costs to do that.
And it it has to compute with
all the other priorities but I
appreciate everything you do um
we all do and we know how tough
it is and that we try to keep
our communications with their
representatives going and are or
priorities before a front but
you are a representative of this
and they know this is really
where the work is done in the
river beach throat so thank you
for everything you do and
you know we're a little easier
going down the hill if you leave
by for
the step doesn't get out till
five so you will bill his
pressure and that little drive
but a please come back in the
winter if you haven't been here
before it is it is beautiful I
mean it's it's a part of new
mexico the latter people don't
even realize exists and.
One of the nicest things we have
yours
are springs we and everybody
says well how deep your wells is
out and water and we go while
there's this.
Series of brings it just pop out
of the ground and you know so I
know it's it makes people invise
that are in the southern part of
the state but.
That mountain water is real we
actually it is totally untreated
although we pass it through all
the tests and systems but we
never had to treat it and it's
amazing and
we have the
cleanest water flowing water in
the state of new mexico of any
stream and at the same time we
have the most visited location
which is the williams lake trail
and they know you probably don't
have time to do that but please
come back at some time and hake
their trail up to williams lake
it's just an incredible view
it's a one of the few places in
the country where even if you're
not a high car you just announce
the slope is so gradual
that you can make it up there
are two what is what the highest
peaks and in the state of new
mexico and along the southern
rackies.
So welcome i've taken open after
your time but enjoy your state
thank you
changes anyone have any
questions and what.
Well thank you real group
quickly because you have spent
time quite a bit of time really
in the county government retails
county.
Around again we will call
yourself the administrator is a
deal is that a title manager how
does that work where you the
best it's the same as town
manager city manager
the college administrator
because originally there there
wasn't immunicipality here there
was just the village ski
corporation.
And the beginning of the
government was really just the
water and sewer entity that was
here and they were struggling
and they couldn't keep things
going so the village
incorporated and
brodone full time staff and that
enabled us to do police fire and
all the things that everybody
else does then brief briefly you
mention that there is a um a
jail facility in touch yes in
that and that is a newer
facility.
Yeah it's it's easy to thousand
ten twelve yeah so it's a would
say it's about ten years old now
but it's still being going
through iterations of evolving.
Do you help me understand what
it's
iterations in involving so how
how many how with your capacity
there and how close do you ever
get to capacity or under
capacity over capacity.
It depends on who the judges are
at the time and what the policy
is let's stop there I mean I
mean I mean you're making an
essential point that I think a
lot of us have been trying to
make for a very long time which
is yeah the number of people
that are detained or held
depends to your observation on
the judges are at any given time
but are interrupted you go ahead
with
yeah that that has become an
issue at times I think it's it
concerned between the community
and
the courts sometimes district
magistrate
when they were hoped for a file
cases and sometimes people are
released but as the judges say
unless the taxpayers want to be
transporting people back and
forth during trails from other
jails throughout the state.
Uh.
Who is place who is incarcerated
and who isn't is is much a part
of
capacity as it is as to the law
and
so that that's one of the
interesting.
Facets of operating the
facility.
Well inadvertently youth you've
stepped into something that I
think is interested in this
committee thing for some time
which is the idea of whose
cougates he deemed and for how
long and why pretend detentions
been the big issue but what
never gets discussed as we can
pass the large but we have to
work with the county officials
and the judges and others who
were really having the ultimate
say that who's been held and
who's not held and capacity so I
appreciate the abservations that
it's it's an insuring
observation because we don't
bring in the county managers
very often or the uh the people
that are deciding who the house
and how much we want to spend
housing and so forth so we'll
have of a presentation a little
later today from representatives
of the county governments but
you're inadvertently you made a
point that that I think is
important to this committee a
great deal which is working with
local governments yeah mister
chairman one of the things that
I would revert back to the
interrupt as a is that
I know that very frequently the
judges really would prefer not
to incarcerate because based on
the levels of the crames
sometimes they relate to mental
health issues supposed to be
this issues family issues
homelessness that
the crane really is secondary
it's it's a it's a matter of a
behavior and
when you have a rural community
like we do.
We may have a state of the art
jail but we don't have the
social support systems we don't
have the metal health services
we don't have
uh
even if you want to put an ankle
bracelet I am someone and
release them on the road since
we don't have the sophistication
here to be able to monitor the
people and that that becomes a
hinderance not just for the
courts and for law enforcement
but for the families sometimes
that really feel that they need
to help and this may be a first
time crame for example so I I
hope that.
When laws are tightened that
it's taken in the consideration
that without the support system
for the person coming out or
even in the interim coming into
the system.
You're just overloading the
system and you're not doing any
of the city justice including
the community.
But I appreciate you helping us
get that message out there but
which is we are we can increase
penalties all day long but it's
a tiny component of a much
bigger problem so thank you very
much anyone else questions
energy to him thank you mr
chairman and thank you for being
here in percentage and I just
want to point out something that
I learned in the last couple of
weeks which is that because we
don't have juvenile detention
facilities here in basically the
entire corner of north east new
mexico
there's AAA youngster who uhm
needs is is going to be on trial
here in the towers area that is
housed in farmington and to have
that child transported back and
forth for the trial the closest
that they could find um is is
alba kirky which is still if you
drove from the albuquerque
community up to here is still a
long distance for that child to
be transported every day for
those trials so
you know the research that i've
done actually backs up what he's
seen which is there's limited
resources here in this community
and in the juvenile system
there's even more limited
resources thank you mister
chairman not a question as to
comment thank you thank you for
the observation senator we
actually built a very beautiful
state of the art juvenile
facility in the jail but the
problem is because we don't
it's a radic how many juveniles
we have in and a lot of
facilities have that we do we
can't use it we can't afford to
and when we send out it's not a
question of proximity it's a
question of availability of the
space and uh.
It is difficult to see a
juvenile sometimes you know
spending more time in a van
shackle handcuffed uh
then in the court or getting
help
it's not helping him and it's
not helping us and I I don't
have the solution to that but.
Thank you for that observation.
Thank you yes representative.
Thank you for your presentation
and thank you for having us here
today it was a beautiful driver.
Um mister chair because and I
was going to bring this issue up
later on but
because you brought this issue
up and and representative to
heal mentioned it.
I had a conversation recently
with some.
State police that deal with the
juvenile center in alba kirky
and mister chair.
I have been period disturbed
since I have that conversation
only because of the capacity
issues that they're having at
the center.
And also
just the **** that's occurring
in the juvenile facility
I mean I think we were made
aware of this last year with
some of the bills that came
forward but I think that
actually sitting and how and i'm
not going to mention it he names
but.
Uhm I was really disturbed by
hearing the situation that we
have in the due for no detention
center
and the part of it probably is
that capacity
is way exceeded
the disrespect that's happening
the disrespect towards our state
police
the lack of fear from the
juveniles
and then there are some
juveniles that are mixed.
Um I mean the population is next
because there are some people
that are mentally ill in there
and so I I don't know how we
fixed out but I just wanted to
put down on the table mr chair
thank you
committees where one of my
habits on this committee and I
think it works well is to allow
some unscheduled time on our
agenda so to see at the other
day three time and that's a good
opportunity for you
representative where others to
bring up some of these
experiences that we have in and
share them with one other and it
also gives i'm a ribbers of
challenging ideas for future
presentations and topics and and
things we should be talking
about but uh I we we had you for
five minutes on the agenda to
welcome us and and we put you to
work right away but you're
experiences invaluable to us in
the experience that you had and
and even your comments I think
are
eliminating to all of us that
that the problem we talk about
chrome on this committee is is a
with a broad question that we
don't deal with maybe just by
passing a line free trial
detention for example thank you
thank you thank you.
All right her next presentation
uh little bit behind mister
bailey.
Stevens welcome thank you
committee members so then you
get a little orientation and
first of all while these
gentlemen are taking their seat
let's just do this role quickly
and we can discount go across
the table and introduce yourself
very very quickly so we don't
get too far behind but I do
think I know we've got a number
people that are watching us them
on the streaming format and to
be good for them to know who's
here we've got every seat filled
on the committee which is now a
good for the chairs to see that
that interest in the committee
and
please to have that so when you
introduce yourself we'll start
with you representative to hear
what has come around the room
thank you mister chairman linda
heo senate district twenty four
in the beautiful standard fee uh
city city different but also a
part time resident of your
intous.
Thank you mr chair mariana and I
am house district eighteen which
is albuquerque is unm c n m and
nob hill area thank you.
Thank you mr chair natalie
figueroa senate district
eighteen in the north these
tides about the turkey.
Good morning mr chair joy gere
west side of burnly o county
house district twenty nine will
we just celebrated the thirty
fifth anniversary of patrick of
national monument.
Good morning mr chairman good
morning everyone and my debbie
saranyan I represent houses to
twenty one and britannia county
the montana high school myself
does part area thank you
morning mr chair and everyone
who's here today a
representative since the borego
beautiful cotton would mall area
and adjacent to rearrange it
will start from the other side
of the room
thank you and mister chair and
rear either district sixty four
chavez rose they'll increase
county of eastern side of the
state on the texas border thank
you.
Mister chair bill hall district
three represent bloomfilled
astec northwest part of the
state thank you.
Thank you mister chairman good
morning everybody it was
beautiful this morning and last
night so very thankful for
having this here my name is no
coach having a state
representative in district
thirty one which is the far
northeast heights of album kirky
little claim a high school.
Thank you mister chairman john
blockhouse history to fifty one
and beautiful astonishing
amazing alamo gordo thank you
mister chair
good morning mr chair every
thorton
four district nineteen which is
these mountains albert ricky and
to her edgewood more
estancia and all the way out the
clients corners.
Good morning mr chairman state
center mainly stewart from
albuquerque the international
district and you skateway area
just to accept
good morning mr chairman and all
senator crystal brantley I
represent the seven counties of
the southwest corner of new
mexico.
Representative of christian
chandler house district forty
three i'm from my cell amounts
but I also represent parts of
santa fe and sand of all
counties
and i'm jose surrounded mse
center from district thirty one
which is the southern was by the
state my district orders el paso
and mexico as well as someone
parking the border communities
and it's about a fourth of doing
you in the county mostly
farmland but good part of the
city as well too so again
welcome everyone our first
presentation is the topic that
we russell with quite a bit over
the last couple of interims
mostly the the difficulty that
we were experienced with passing
some very complex laws on
canada's and then not having
them in forced at all in what
what my observation was over
those last couple years was the
fed said we're not going to do
it in the state police said
we're not going to do it and the
local law enforcement said we're
not going to do it and
visiting with our our state
agency represents it including
the former uh uh
superintendent have of
regulation license who is head
of all this in and again uh
senator true here was good
enough to come on a very last
day of work today to at what are
these meetings where we said how
come we passed all this complex
law on marijuana and
limitations regulations and uses
and none of it gets enforced at
all we had
a people on the reservation I
think with an essentially slave
labor right chinese slave labor
living in deplorable conditions
massive grow houses and I think
in your part of probably your
district I would guess and are
thorn I think the
just flagrant the violations of
the laws the touting the fact
that nobody would touch them and
so this last session we pass
them authority and and I
appreciate those who were I
think and try and grab that and
go with it to be here with us
today too so the
the the topic they try to put
something created when I do this
has now.
After part there's the part of
that expression that i'm
familiar with down south that I
can't say but you know back
recommend from you told to do
something or get off the pot and
so let's figure out are we are
we ready to are we ready to do
something about this now so
gentleman tell us are we going
to start doing something
mr chairman manifest you
remember the committee thank you
for allowing us to be here today
and bringing us up here I have
with me my ccd director told
stevens my general council for
ccd in sayers and my executive
assistant coin you terror who
thinks most of the time she is
my boss.
But I thought i'd give it real
quick overview of the canvas
industry in hurrat and then get
into HB t I will tell you this I
never dreamed of my wildest
years effort that I would be
regulated or handling
candleless.
This is compliments of center
city here who is what are my
friends who brought me on board
and as a director of moved on up
so
this is our third year going
into a fourth year correct into
the candidates industry it's a
maturing industry like anything
else it's in its ups at senate
downs I think it's brought in
one point seven billion dollars
straight across.
So that economy not to the state
but to the economy where
noticing that it's stand flat I
believe you'll have to hand out
it's kind of leveled off in kind
of being status called right now
we're in the middle of haven't
demand study completed we'll
have that shortly short enough
and you will know kind of where
the if it saturated or what we
need to make adjustments or if
we do need to make just also
slight on page three just for
your information gave you the
top three or the top ten cities
of that cell canada and the
recreational man the medical
sales a lot of the eastern side
are down toward someone park for
center civil this is the
chairman as he will know that
are really big place really they
do a lot of lot of sales in that
particular area our license
premises which is locations
there around sixteen hundred
some of the premises will have
more you know some of the band
together and i'll have the their
facility you know multiple at
one location so we have
approximately sixteen hundred
lights and criminals
will get the end ten and I I go
pretty quickly always have but
it's one thing it did allow us
to do in the budget we got ten
more additional compliance of
officers your inspectors it did
a lot for us in a senator and
the chairman pointed out.
Multiple times is correct that
there were guidelines and guard
rules in place to handle the
candidates regulation we got
into the point as you mentioned
earlier their other agencies
that either couldn't do it
windowed in have the the man
power so we brought this forward
it was debated a lot and I
believe everybody on this
committee here voted in favor of
it and I appreciate that.
Then the chairman's correct it's
time for me to to do something
and i'm gonna do the best we can
with what we've got we're going
to be learning as we go but what
it allowed us to do well first
of all the budget has given us a
three year run a special on it
so then in three years if you
don't think it's working or
we're doing it wrong or
something like that that the
budget goes and then we'll be
back to square one I hopeful
that we do a good enough job we
make a difference here that
it's.
Noticeable in there and then it
gets done budgeted for time.
But we're first of all we're
going to bring on to additional
compliance officers you're
inspectors we had nine total
with the supervisor were
struggling I think we did
fifteen hundred and sixty five
inspection so far this year
our goal is as the ones we have
in place that are good partners
in and good compliant with us
that we can help them stay
compliant or keep them there or
shepherd him along the way
obviously there's some that
don't want to be moved for don't
want to do it right that's the
ones we're going to go with on
the other side of it with with
these additional ten I am really
considering along with the
director of you know kind of
structuring it much like cid
where I have these individuals
and locations instead of
traveling four hours down to
coral's bad have some
individuals in them locations we
already have one in los cruces
uh santa fe and albuquerque but
we need one up and farming then
you know we need to spread him
out and that's the goal we are
going to take at least one or
two of these positions and turn
a man to port their watching and
learn in the bio tracks you can
see some oddities when people
are to make an adjustments that
maybe.
The just wants not belong there
in your crop went from bringing
in four pounds for plant to ten
pounds or whatever and i'm just
pair phrase and that but so
we're going to be watching that
closer going to be able to do
that much closer if we put him
in more spread out the
efficiency of it's gonna be
better than response time the
financial side of it and they're
going to be able to work more
closely with the jurisdictions
because the jurisdictions play a
big part in some of this they
get to determine how close
retailers can be they get to
determine a lot of this stuff
that we don't have the authority
to do but we can work with them
closely and let him know what's
come in and what we're going to
do and what we're looking at so
we have in fact started the ccd
is the last license you less
stock you make now used to it
was one of the first would now
you gotta go through the water
you got to do through the planet
in his own and you gotta go
through the local you gotta go
through cid to make sure all the
teased are crossed and eyes are
daughted as opposed to initially
we could get a license then we
were chasing it on the back side
it's it's pros and cons to that
you know what slows they are the
process of getting the new
license but least was when you
go into it you're ready to go to
business so that's what we're
out with that uh director
stevens here has kinda gave me a
charter where he thinks he wants
to put individuals and how we're
going to do that and have we're
going to monitor to keep these
inspectors doing their jobs and
doing what they need with the
resources they need
on their mendors straight aside
we've issued forty two notices
of uh contemplated action since
tooth and jane june twenty seven
two thousand twenty five we have
another attorney over in the c c
d now we're catching up on some
of the backlog we have thirty
settlements that are agreed to
we've revoked had to revoke
eighteen business license it's
not something we set out to do
the summer so agreed as you
can't bring him in the line you
discount and they they get their
jude do justice they get to go
to here and they can appeal that
some of them do appeal that the
n k one the big one down in the
slancer that we've dealt with
they've appealed it I mean
they've even sued me personally
over it it's been quite the.
Quite the show on that one of
the fines issued over the years
we issued four million three
hundred and sixty seven.
Collected only five hundred and
four thousand or attorney back
here has found other ways that
we're going after once they
don't meet the deadline and in
case when them's got a million
dollars fine I don't know if the
gentleman is still in jail he
may be you may not be I don't
know but getting the money who
knows if we'll get it or not
what will work it at it trying
to get assets going through the
prior to through the process of
not just letting it set their
say we gave you a fine but also
trying to get it
of this money that still load
we've got seven licensees that
are on payment plans and we
allow him to make payments that
they can set down and go through
it with us a many of our you
know represented by attorneys
and so they get their due
process
now the enforcement bureau that
I have entrusted us with and I
take it serious
this is something that I when we
asked for it I knew was asking
the big ask just taking a lot of
a lot more responsibility
easiest thing to do is they were
administrative and back off and
run from it but it wasn't
happening and something needs to
happen you you guys get in you
dated from commissioners
constituents I get in a dated
from individuals out in the
field again from everywhere.
So you you may seem fair to give
us the authority and we're going
to hire individuals on the
compliant side they're already
set the higher right as soon as
july first we get start higher
spow the top of my type
individual that's going to be
the bureau chief the police
force is gonna be the first one
I hire home let them help pick
us out the other five officers
if they're going to be working
with I really want season people
that know what they're doing
that's the deltand drugs and
things in know what we're
getting into we're going to work
really hard it find in that.
The the the these officers are
convention directly back to the
superintendent and person asked
why was the highest level we
take it seriously that we're
gonna you know outfit of what
the powers of a police force
i'll only be here another year
and half there'll be somebody
else coming in and other
superintendent they need to be
able to.
You know sheffered it through
and make sure we don't get
ourselves into trouble we're
going to get sued there's no way
out of it I mean it's going to
happen but it's going to give us
the ability and I hope the
ability for the judges in the
the systems the the days and
everybody else take us more
seriously when we are in fact in
the criminal side of it now to a
lot of times I felt like we'd go
and we'd push and I tried a lot
a lot of things
to get the judges and gets
people to go with us but you
still got to have the
partnership that somebody else
had wouldn't pick up the
criminal side and go forward so
we'll be moving forward with
that like said july first I
think spo had one more question
we got it back to him we're
gonna advertise for the the the
police bureau chief the one
that's going to be the law
enforcement following that will
go for the other five vehicles
are already been picked out and
we got him to get the money for
it and.
It's gonna give them the same
authority as a police officer
all the way through through and
through this was right before
she left us you'll sit down with
me and and and we are friends we
discuss and talk this was her
brain child was it not I mean
this was she realized we're at
across roads that we have to do
something if we're willing to
take it on so and thank you and
she left me with that to take
off within that's what we're
doing they're going to be
primarily the going to
investigate and identify stuff
that is criminal activity stuff
that is elicit stuff that has
been altered stuff that has been
dangerous will they be about
inspecting no and initially they
may go with inspectors to look
at retailers and get comfortable
with it but there's plenty of to
keep them busy we've already
handed off at least two that I
know well we've handed off the
other agencies they don't appear
to be moving forward at all so
we're going to reach back out to
and work with them say hey you
want us to take it on now let us
just take it all the way through
i'm assuming they'll probably do
that that would be my guess
they'll probably be happy
that we'll do it will be we get
complaints from outside we get
him from other sources we get
him from inside inspectors so
they'll be coming from
everything hbt and also gave us
powers to altered products put
on administrative hold that's
another thing each to be tie and
brought on it allows us to
embargo and see suspected legal
or dangerous products it gives
clear statutory guarantees to do
process if we do it we just
can't go into somewhere even if
we know they're elicit and and
just destroy it we have to go
through the court system we're
going to have to develop and i'm
hopeful with this authority
we'll be able to better develop
our relationships with the court
systems and the other gentleman
talked about the courts and
that's where I struggle to it
gives us a clear path of pain
orders from the district courts
of how to destroy altered in
dangerous products or more than
products than they're supposed
to union or for instance if
they're supposed to have seven
hundred plans we roll in there's
thirty thousand plants I still
don't believe the felony side of
it thrown the magill's going to
be the really hard been changes
of it part of it or it already
be done.
I think it's going to be getting
rid of the illusive product in
the financial that goes with it
when they lose the product how
you know that gets destroyed and
gets their own way but like said
my presentations are usually
fairly quick and so with that
and we'll stand for questions or
if director stephen says
anything you want to add.
Piece by far more knowledgeable
with the day to say details and
everything that's happening but
thank you sir.
The.
The.
Mr chair madame vice chair
committee members thank you for
having us today um everything
that the super tendent mentioned
is is how we are looking to
continue to clean this up we've
really ramped up our inspections
as superintendent stated it's
not always about fines and
ravications it's about setting a
high bar and helping these
licensees reach that bar we've
changed up the way we do that
with reinspections in
overwhelmingly were seen success
with a lot of these licensees
being able to come into
compliance and fix some of these
smaller things superintendent
said we come back a couple of
times it's not then then we'll
start the display process
were very excited to have some
additional officers to carry
these out we've also been
conducting pre inspections these
have been fairly successful
although canabas is not on sight
we are able to go in and look at
places that maybe have had a
history of illustrated activity
and see if that's continuing
there and see if we can stop
that problem before it it
happens the last piece that the
superintendent talked a little
bit about is the bill track or
the seed to sale for rinsic kind
of investigations that we're
looking to do right now everyone
is out full till on the road
inspecting superintendent is
correct there are average yields
average creations average times
of harvest that this science
this is not something you can
snap your fingers and make a
tomato plan grow any faster you
can't do the same thing with
canada so
these are its world weed us to
people that are leaving for
rented trails a kind of creek
appearing to be compliant but
manipulating the system this
will be able to go look at those
inspect those and then refer
those to the enforcement of
europe bureau if we find that a
superintendent said they're
going uh ten thousand plants in
their only allowed to grow seven
hundred those are kind of the
things that we see with the
criminal side.
And not using track and trace
correctly so the expansion of
the inspectors is huge and we
thank you for the opportunity to
have more criminal enforcement
of this
superintendent stated we've got
a lot of agencies that are
really overwhelmed underman this
is something that we think we
can help on and we will still
continue to work with those
local jurisdictions and local
law enforcement they will still
be brought in on these and we
will still work hand in hand
with us.
Thank you.
First parcel show pants who want
to be on the topic middle divide
at the time on that initial past
through and then we'll see how
that takes a sort of good deal
of center thorton and then
senator heel um.
All right i'm coming around
gerrit.
Changer.
Appreciate we.
Okay right now looks like we can
safely do five minutes to each
member so i'll recommend you for
that amount of time senator
thank you mister chair
mister barely did it just what a
couple quick questions it it
sounds to me that inspections
that you're doing now or sort of
more of a warning process for
compliance issues such as this
is more of a.
Overnight process for a month
love you distributors in the
owners and and and so I might my
question was what are the worst
kind of violations that you are
seeing right now as you go
through somebody's inspections.
This.
Mr chairman and senator members
of the committee
there's several different types
right more product than they
should have considerably more
product things that they don't
have the testing information
that documentation that it's
been tested for like per
pesticides and things along that
type
of support could be on the
danger side too but we have
product that has you know have a
california label no just stick
in a mexical label over the top
of it so you know it didn't come
from the mexico and asked for
the learning process you know
we're three years in most of
the should know it but if it's
something and have a videos
right videos is another another
huge one so we see what they're
doing we see if anybody break an
enter things are being moved in
and out when they shouldn't have
been but uhm III think is the
learning process we've come
along something and this is the
direction I don't give just for
this I give other agencies
within my under my perview is.
If it's nothing not extremely
unsafe or it's something that
become can be corrected.
We try really hard to educate
them now prior what was happened
and we had a three people to
start with and in nine you know
would go in we'd rate correction
to save what to do and then we
would have the time with the get
back and reinspect to make sure
in course it wait till next year
we'd have the same thing now
we're able to go back or we will
be able to go back and make sure
the corrections are made in the
understand we're going to be
back to check
directors even do you have
anything to add to that about
the safety of it
mr chairman vice chair committee
member
no the the sit it as you
continue here right on the head
no testing more product than
they should not using the track
and trace that insurance safety
of these products that we know
they originated in new mexico
the ground with new mexico water
son uh in by hard working new
mexicans uhm the last thing that
the superintendent mentioned was
surveillance I think this is
huge in the industry because it
allows us to give insight into
not only what they're doing the
superintendent mention we can
see what they're bringing in
what they're bringing out it's
also an easy way for the
licensee uh to show that they uh
we misunderstand that they have
an opportunity to show not
necessary there is innocence but
they're compliance
those who tend to be the largest
ones we do work with some of the
smaller ones usually the smaller
violations are no s o p so they
don't have an s o p for letting
a visitor back
they might have a sign up that
are in an area that they need
things of that nature we try to
work with them local permits can
sometimes be a problem a lot of
time so they have those now that
we front loaded and they just
don't have them placed we talked
to one jurisdiction where we
kind of mentioned they said you
know they'll have to come back
to actually get the actual
certificate and I simple but
they'll have it the violation
will be that it's not printed we
can take care of that pretty
quickly so a lot of the smaller
ones were able to correct on
site very quickly and we do
point them to the statutes and
the rules that would affect them
and help them navigate that but
the superintendent is correct
those of the largest issues we
see and those are typically w.
When we start to uh take AAA
bigger interest go back a little
sooner and then if they don't
have these things cleaned up or
they aren't able to show that
this product is compliant we
give them those avenues in that
new process as well.
Thank you for that just what
other questions uhm I guess in
page six you mention the fines
about four point three million.
And collections only about five
hundred four thousand
and
so what's the problem with the
collection process is that a
lack of funds in that
you evoke their license and
therefore they have no more
business nor to pay the find
what's the problem with the
collection site.
On miss chairman and members
committee and senator a lot of
times they're out of business
rate they'll have several
facilities yet take their way of
doing business away.
They probably never intended to
pay anyway but
and i'll use this astancy one we
have two of mouth or so agree
just you know thirty thousand
plants to there and told me they
had thirty thousand one hundred
and we're supposed to have seven
hundred.
They're totally unless it's a
totally criminal it's part of
the hearing process they will
get fined up to you know a
dollar amount of what it is not
collecting it.
There's going to be a challenge
in it is challenged not some of
the pace and i'm getting the
settlement agreement they don't
lose their license you don't
have to sometimes you'll get a
fine in you still have to pay
and you'll still be in business
but a lot of these are the
really big ones that are totally
elicit um
and I could a let our attorney
speak to a little bit I know
with the and in cable and she or
or maybe stretch stevens we're
going after it I don't know if
it's property wise or how
they're going to go about it but
we're really trying hard to to
make a statement but sometimes
they just leave the state
they're just gone and you know
the challenge you're getting it
back so it looks like a lot of
money in the first time you did
the million dollars fine and
everybody was really excited I
wouldn't so much because a new
collected the money along with
it was going to be a challenge
to i'm hopeful you know that
that we never have these
individuals back in business but
the challenge to is the license
that can be given back out to
family members or stuff like
that so you've got.
Mister chair madame chair
senator um one of the largest
challenges we have is serving uh
these individuals
that there are four fines that
total three point three million
all four of those were criminal
in nature meaning that these
warrant are traditional just
normal biolations were we we
give someone at ten thousand
dollar fine for maybe not having
a camera system still that
leaves a million left of the
total fines we've collected half
a million and we we've got those
seven other one payments
recently are a legal division
was able to obtain a court order
compelling payment for one of
these after that we will give
time for that person to compel
into comply then we'll notice
them again which will have to
track them down again
unfortunately it listed
operators don't leave addresses
force
and then we will finally what's
called a four a two oh nine
which is a motion from the court
to enforce that so we are
walking kind of a process that
normal collections agencies and
agencies do um I think dealing
with the elicit operators makes
it really difficult to serve
them because unfortunately a
they still get their new process
and uh we have to serve them
before we can actually collect
that fine but we are working in
that process and have created
that and our legal team does
stay on top of that.
Thank you that's all my
questions this chair.
Thank you mister chairman and
and thank you for being here
gentleman I I tell you I just
honestly couldn't be more proud
of the work that you're dealing
um tied when you came on to
regulation licensing department
if there was just something in
your resume and in your
personality that really spoke to
us and so i'm glad that you're
here and that you've really dug
again and that you're really
committed to helping make this
better and claim you know I just
think the world of yourself
thank you for the work that you
do I have a couple of questions
arm I know we worked really hard
to get the delta eight
legislation and then it died in
concurrence over in the house
and a a could you just like
really briefly because I got a
couple more questions explained
the importance of that and why
this is really a public health
issue that the department really
has no authority over.
Mr chairman of the old members
of the committee the delta aid
is a himp derived product it's
ultra synthetically it's not
tested it's put in stations to
stores that you know my fourteen
year old kid can go get
that's been as it's a hand
product it takes it away from us
to what we could do in the
authority I I believe for the
most part so there is some talk
about it I know albuquerque
recently passed a law but did
meaning think as it has already
said the the cut it back to
where it was right back we're
started uh there's several
states that have
done a way you know abandoned in
some inparts on the pieces my
recommendation for what it's
worth is if you're gonna
banned other than the cd CBD oil
is that you ban at all because
as soon as you do deal to eight
there's dealt denied in their
delta tin and you can't all they
go to do as alter it with some
torture of psy-type chemical and
you're right back where he
started i've heard stories of
people's kids that you know
specially college kids got a
whole time got high got second I
mean I talked to my son
everyday's fourteen years old.
All the threatening to stay away
from all of it you know you can
back in the day when I was young
you could get a joint and smoke
behind it building and that
you're some special right but
nowadays it can be dangerous it
can be truly truly dangerous so
your answer.
This is a a national challenge
that everything is uh status
facing currently you're seeing
some
states try to band them take
clever ways uh there are
lawsuits that do come up from
this
recently one band was up held by
a circuit court which is
exciting it should give a a
little bit more precedent and
courage for states to move
forward but these are we're not
talking about naturally derived
can of annoyed from him that
have shown that they can help
people these are sympatically
derived or altered or created
through a synthesis using a
number of chemicals there's no
testing there's no not
regulation and there's no
oversight and I think the
largest challenge for us are are
our children can obtain these
there's no age limit uh so
superintendent is correct his
fourteen year old son could walk
into a gas station and purchase
a hemp bape uhm that could have
all kinds of chemicals left on
it from being converted from the
can of annoyed naturally occurs
to the synthetic caninoid but
essentially these are
unregulated untested unsafe
products uh in this is a
national challenge that we are
all trying to navigate and I I
believe the superintendent is
right we need to
do something in order to to
protect our use and and protect
our citizens thank you mister
chairman and I know my time is
running short so i'm in a hot to
my last question I I one comment
I do want to know what the cost
to destroy is so that in your
next budget session in the
thirty day session we can figure
out how do we get the money for
that I I recognize that it's a
costly endeavor it's not just a
matter of confiscating that you
got to be able to destroy it to
and we know that there's a cost
to that the last question ages I
really do want to know are you
all beginning the prices of
documenting all of the work that
you do the processes that you d.
There is a new administration
come in and my fear is that as
we transition from one admin
both of you are exempt as we
transition then you know I don't
want things to be lost it really
has to be built into the as as
dare actly used to say secretary
of do it it has to be built into
the fabric of how we do business
so what are you all doing to try
to prepare for that change.
Mr chairman and senator and
members of the committee where
we are right so peace we are
trying to define and put stuff
for down in your or some kind of
a history that somebody behind
us coming forward.
Can can step up and pick up
that's one reason I felt so
strongly about trying to get in
through is that way we could put
a path in there.
To to get it forward what we're
attempting to do is not safe
it's not safe for me it's not
safe for them by people don't it
somebody may have slummered
somebody may not I mean we've
already had some threats and
some things that go with it.
Ah i'm assuming it was of campus
with me never know might have
been something else but will
work at hard to put something in
the history of it
obviously or hopefully or
employees that are left at our
partner and exempt that they can
in fact
curious forward but it's going
to depend on administrations
rights couldn't pay on
leadership it's going to depend
on what's there my hope is that
we have enough down moving
forward that.
You know it's can keep move and
forward as for the cost
I don't know I mean.
Since i'm not so
maybe I shouldn't say that loud
so worried about some of the
penalties that go with it in a
more in interest in the
structure of it for the
financial site that will be less
to some extent I know when they
did the forming to work with the
state police on that one up
there they were able to they
didn't take in over over twelve
plants another sample they took
small amount of number and then
judge gave me authority to
destroy it and put it in the
ground we looked out there right
we had the owner of the land
wanted to use some of his
equipment and so that helped out
i'm on a plan on because it's
written in here that some of
these departments.
Must help us rate i'm on a plan
on secretary of service and a
dozen loader and whatever I need
we're going to know more as we
move forward and I think it's
going to depend on the size we
have reached out in working with
an mo with state police at least
on the like the oils and things
as the smaller volume stuff and
maybe they have a secure you
know we have to have a secure so
don't bring change because break
the china custody but we are
already working toward things
like that if we get a big big
role it's gonna just I wouldn't
have to figure it out and go
from there and they will know
better next year I hope I mean
as the the chairman said I mean
I need to show some progress by
the time I see your again
no sir but I understand what you
were telling me you know make it
work get off the part so.
Thank you superintendent thank
you mister chairman.
Thank you mister chair my
questions about the chesting
labs those are essential to the
whole process we have seven uh
license to inspect it and I
remember last summer there was
one that was out of compliance
can you just update us on is
that an adequate number and how
is that going.
Mr chair madame chair committee
members representative I think
there is AAA balance to the labs
we've seen this and other states
where if the labs get we get too
many of them uh
there's too much uh competition
and there's one for inflating
testing moving things through so
I think there is a magic number
I do believe we can we could
afford to have a couple of more
we have only inspected to this
year we did inspect all of them
last year we did find that loud
one lab was in
a serious compliance deficits we
worked the process and
unfortunately settled with them
in that lab decided to close up
so
we will continue to inspect
these we've got a brand new
environmental scientist that
we've hired who i'm extratic
over he's got a background in
chemical engineering he has a
background in the industry he
set up these testing labs so now
we're having a better vetting
process these live applications
are getting through um and we
with our goal is to inspect
every facility every year I
think if you've know this
gentleman to my right that means
we're going to try to get to to
we're not just going to set the
bar and meet the bar we're gonna
try to exceed it but uh we have
inspected every lab uhm we have
found some challenges and just
like the other licenses we work
to bring them into compliance
and work with them but I do
think there is a magic number I
don't know quite what that is um
but as we start to see that
number ballot out will start to
assess that.
Great thank you that's my
question.
Mr chairman i'm in a yield my
time I too had concerns and you
know focused around the
struggles that it looks like
you're having collecting defines
but I think you did a great job
addressing those challenges to
uh senator thorton's line of
questioning.
Great seeing no one else i'll
just said a few things for
someone to think of an echo the
comments of senator hero with
regard to the thanks to both of
you.
Uh clay
began pushing me a couple of
years ago really hard to and
i've i've tried to respond to
that when putting this on our
agenda repeatedly over and over
and he buys me in july that
tiers and that'll get me any
read every time right but but he
he's been on this and I
appreciate that I was
appreciated because as they said
earlier I represent the
community of someone part there
earth I believe thirty six
dispenseries in the committee of
someone part as one is it was if
I got that right is at that rate
mr chair that's that's probably
approximately yeah we get new
and every day probably right
around that forty to thirty six
that would be correct yeah
there's one grocery store there
might be one there might be one
alcohol er establishment thirty
six dispensers this wasn't this
isn't the district I represent
and when you say you've got
people coming and going every
day this is just not healthy
this is not a healthy
environment for my community and
for someone park to have thirty
six forty dispensers one grocery
store maybe one one liquor store
and we can we can celebrate the
tax revenue and say where this
is a great economic driver I
know this has been a political
agenda for many and and thought
this was what we wanted to do
but I think we really have to
ask ourselves is that this is
what we want a new mexico to be
it's really not what I want to
make it's going to be it's not
what I want my district to be
and i'll just give you the the
numbers statistically no
surprise he mexico's has the
highest by far
per capita number of retail
dispensers by far of any state
in the country we become the
maca promoter and in we have to
ask ourselves as that really
what we want we want to be I
looked at the numbers we've got
we've got thirty licenses per
hundred thousand that's when we
when you look at saturation they
look at per hundred thousand
population we've got thirty new
mexico for a hundred thousand
colorado as eighteen.
California has less than five
hundred thousand I I just spent
a week in california was all
over the place where my wife's
from I never saw the dispenser
the whole time I was there the
last year I was in mexico city
where marijuana's legal and
every side of spencer either I I
went to colorado I don't see I
just wrote through especially
and there's a dispensery every
few feet right now we went with
coming up your despite your it's
just a it's a last bigger strip
for gambling for here it's
mother
I think we've better I think we
have the responsibility because
we we passed this law we did it
with the the governor at the
time this was a signature
accomplishment but I think we
have to be able to step back and
say we maybe didn't get it right
maybe we weren't ready for what
we've done maybe we've we've
over overdone it and and I hope
you all will remember the fact
that when you drive back to us
but you're you'll see what I
saw.
Uh and realize that that's
nothing compared to my district
or we can be happy about all the
texas come in leaving their
money here but what does that do
the community what does it do
the kids what does it do to the
to our other efforts that
economic development we've been
a race track there were trying
to do other things
who wants to come there right
when that's the environment
they're coming into
I hope the explanation will
think back apart from what you
all are trying to do to force
the laws I hope I hope you'll
tell us and help with the
benefit of senator here in this
committee we'll set the go we
may be should maybe we don't
want to be that state where bill
boards and and tourist come and
employers come and people who
would think about moving their
business and their families here
and think yeah this is the place
I want to be this is the this is
the environment that I want to
be in
a you made a an interim
observation about
target and smoke at a nose claim
I guess cause close are you
clothes you know you know go
smoke a joint mouth back and you
know I like to what he said it
cause i've been there and a you
know behind the the school house
uh
on fifteen but
the the the the bottom line is
that
this is this is now a dangerous
product and this is in these are
dangerous chemicals i've seen
some of the latest thirties
vapping and are there some that
there's some recent publications
what it's doing to young people
we now have uh an incredible
rate of teenage drug use in new
mexico as well too I think we're
probably the highest there too
in terms of drug use among
teenagers and so is there a
correlation while some say not
but I I don't believe that I
believe there's got to be a
correlation between dispenser
reason the availability and
we've got twenty four seventy we
had a legislation in the senate
floor where some of us were
trying to think even with
senator here we're trying to
eliminate the twenty four seven
drive through windows we had a
debate here i'm seeing i've seen
center messages he was proud for
some of it most of us were not.
We had a debate where we debated
closing alcohol drive through
the windows you would have
thought the world was going to
end when we proposed that and
enacted that that we didn't want
to have drive through this to
try and deal with the but you
can drive through and get part
twenty four seven no
restrictions no limitations and
that was though when we tried to
limit that I was a huge issue
one of the big issues when
california has such a low.
Density of dispenseries will the
big difference in california I
believe is that california
allows local governments to
regulate in a way that I think
we prohibited local governments
from being able to do in our
legislation so I i'd like to go
back and look at that all but
and senator view you can tell me
understand that better but when
we try to say he local
governments could could limit
somebody from having a twenty
four seven drive through uh we
were shot down right and I know
we got a letter to this medicine
well I had a beer last night
with one of my friends and it
felt like medicine when I had a
beer so you know me again will
let's be consistent let's not be
hypocrites about about all of
this and and I do think that we
should probably let local
governments have a greater say
about how many of these
businesses they want to have on
their main street and in what
hours they want to do this to so
again I appreciate the
presentation and all of you let
me do it but I might my goal in
in this has been is it always
well be with this panel and
every one of us what we can do
but what are we going to do to
move forward you all I hope by
the end of this session will
tell us what you think you need
to do you serve at the pleasure
the governor I think largely you
said you're gonna be here year
and a half I hope that maybe the
next governor will keep around
hope you'd be willing to do that
to have that cannot be in the
next administration democrat
republican whoever may be
because this this is not a
partisan issues best I can tell
but I I hope that we'll hope
there won't be a year and a half
from now but tell us what we
need to do in the next session
tell the governor show control
the next thirty day session and
we'd like to work with her to
try maybe change the perspective
of new mexico now is this this
mecca with from air one and so
anyone else
I haven't your representative
have a ten abitency to go less
and then just throw green aids
so.
Well think you mister chairman
and taking gentleman i'm glad
that you mentioned as final
because I visit my mom on a
regular basis in a spinelle and
it's disturbing to see so many
so much unbalance and when we
talk about economic development
in communities and when we're
talking about healthy
communities we need to have
balance in terms of the types of
businesses that were licensing
and um you know I see a lot of
communities that are off balance
because there's
you know a couldn't glamoration
of a certain type of business in
those communities and that is
not healthy for any community
especially when they are located
on the central business district
and close to the banks and so on
we're talking about developing
healthy communities and we're
talking about our policies for
moving forward
we really need to be thinking
about
the number of licenses that are
going to one particular industry
um mr terror
and I just bring that up because
you know when I go to spring
your I see that yesterday when I
was driving here I was coming
from my mother's house and
writing fun in front of the wall
greens was a gentleman on the
floor that they were trying to
revive and you know it's last
night my brother called me and
they broke into my mom's
business one of my own or her
businesses so I just think about
this on a regular basis mister
chair
is what we're promoting and and
I you know it's kind of common
call that you mention the mechan
for what that but in it in
another sense that is not
comical at all so thank you for
that and thank you for being
here today.
Like an auctioneer right you
will give everybody chance and
there is quiet and I think okay
now is now my chance to really
steer things up and of course
now i've got a long list of you
off who want to go back and join
in so so i'm going to limit you
all to just three or four
minutes i'm going to be pretty
strict so we don't get too far
behind but i've now got a
represent ribs of read
ceremonies to represent behind
in uh represent block and I want
to be faired everyone to give
you any chance but i'm but
because we're trying to see
somewhat close to schedulement
ask all of you to say no more
than three minutes please so be
concise control before
representative thank you mister
chairman it was just something
that you mentioned about our
youth and something I would like
the committee to think about it
I have of trade to bring
legislation.
We're not really thinking about
how it is affecting our youth
and the legislation is is just
to to make it like alcohol so
that we can basically make it a
delinquent act for a child to
possess marijuana because it is
against the la and then we can
get services for them through
jpo and for their families and
things of that nature so I
wanted to bring that up again to
say I think we're somewhat
neglected in our youth and this
problem and the problems are
having in the schools and to I
can never seem to get out of one
committee with it but I love a
lot more discussion on the issue
of how we're protecting her kids
and how we're helping our
schools deal with this mayor
want a canvas problem that's
coming into our youth and and
then we're sending to them to a
civil penalty for some community
service it's not helping them at
all and so just wanted to make
that comment in and hope the
committees will start thinking
about maybe focusing a little
bit more in the canaba's issue
with our youth and that's all I
have they keep mister chair.
That thank you mister chairman
because you you can open up the
dialog and I appreciate that
from just the police force for a
couple things just to think
about.
Does this as this bill you know
took many many years to pass we
we don't want to make mistakes
with regards to alcohol
licensing but there's kind of
two components one is.
We said unlimited licenses and
let the market battle it out
but I think what we really
wanted to try to prevent was the
buying and selling of a state
issued license.
You know we are and so I think
we can limit licensees or grant
local control to licenses.
Because the problem in the
alcohol wasn't necessarily no
licenses but the the fact that
these licenses were became
private.
Almost private property
and with reverse to local
control the goal was to not have
dry county so to speak that if
we're gonna end prohibition
we're gonna probation and we
don't want local jurisdictions
to continue with prohibition.
Policies but but I think it is
as mentioned I think it we could
find that line from a policy
standpoint that allows local
jurisdictions to reasonably
regulate the number of to spend
the reason.
While still allowing folks to
to into the market that the key
is to destinatize
canabas that it's just a product
like any other product but
acknowledge the harms that it
make cars to.
Are to children into folks who
who abuse it you know so it's so
there's I guess like you said
mister
worked to be done on that
statute and are so some things
to think about thank you mister
chairman thank you
superintendent thank you john.
Thank you misses mister chairman
arm thank you for being here.
It is a subject matter that
we've been working on for quite
some times I don't know I got
here late so I wasn't sure if we
brought up the fbi background
check um legislation that we've
been trying to pass myself as a
lead sponsor on this legislation
for the past three years mister
chair we almost got it through
this year
but and we've got all the way
over to the senate which was one
step further than we we've been
able to make it in the last
three years so I just want to
bring that up that that is still
at large and as you mentioned if
that's something we can talk to
the governor's office about any
others a lot of a support for
that legislation just amongst us
here and I just like to see the
us get at least that peace
through in this thirty day
session if at all possible with
a message also I just like to
remind us of
as we were looking at different
versions of legislation
to pass canada's one of my I
might piece of legislation the
right sponsored west to limit
those licenses what's till to
really take account of the water
issue that we have and of course
really support our small
businesses which mister chair I
have been
people have been reaching
businesses i've been written out
to me and albuquerque and rural
communities with their concerns
with big box commercialization
of canabas in our state which
was one of the things that we
tried to prevent I thought we
did a really good job of with
that
could be came back as a fix on
that but I i'm still hearing a
lot of complaints about that.
I don't know what more we can do
there but mr chair just like us
to to if there's any comments
from superintendent or the
director on anything i've said.
Mr chairman and representative
members of the committee uh the
bill you were talking about
trying to get background checks
we have will tried I think it's
very important that will be one
of the wish lists I send up to
the top uhm in in the governor
has been real open with us
trying to help with me on the
trying to do enforcements agreed
to let me do bills and work with
people so I I think she'll be
open to it i'll have to speak
with her of course it'll be on
her call but it's it's an
important part that we need are
our challenges is getting it
through and we would get it
approved and then the f b I
kicks it back on us again.
I can't tell you why that is
other than it's federally
illegal III don't know why
because we can get these through
another you know pharmacy has
security has it and they will in
the eve even if we ask him what
burbage do you want book can
have that or it can't be there
so it's a challenge I I agree
and I hear what you're saying.
We talk about license pauses
we've talked about its leveled
out but they've talked about
different places and maybe i've
heard it on the retailers i've
heard on the producers so
there's a lot that goes with it
in and going to center my
assistance comment earlier about
alcohol what makes it alcohol.
They should see maybe easier to
regulate is the fact they've
made them license worth a
fortune and there's no more to
get so when they get out of line
or get uncomply it's pretty
easily to get him back in
because if they lose it and
they'll go through you know
lawsuit and hear it and all that
if they lose it it's not coming
back so there are some
challenges I think there'll be
some tweaking for quite some
time to come right as we can get
better and further in the
industry mature so I heard what
you said about the background
checks absolutely we were just
talking about that so thank you
thank you mister chair that's
really all I have if I could get
you know these conversations
going I will um work with those
that can help us to get this
through and.
In a thirty day session thank
you so much mister chair for the
time.
Thank you mister chair thank you
super intended mister stevens uh
I just had kind of maybe a.
Off the wall question and it was
regarding a bill that died it
was regarding.
Banning certain hemp products
not canada's but hemp products
that were.
I believe synthetic that.
I guess we're made to have to
see in them which I don't know
exactly how that works but I
know it died and i'm kind of
happy at died because I feel
like with that legislation it
was kind of pitting hem versus
canabas where they are similar
but it was banning one but
regulating the other like with
canabas so i'm just wondering
maybe mister stevens hasn't
answered this i'm just wondering
what other states are doing
pertaining to the two different
markets and the synthetic.
Opinion it's got it but um
canabanoids pardon me.
And what are we doing regarding
him versus canabas when it comes
to regulation
mister chair madam chair
representative a lot of states
have gone the route of banning
this synthetic or intoxicating
canada it's there are some kind
of annoyeds that are derived
from him that are the same or
similar that it arrived from
canada's when they're done the
right way and they're naturally
extracted or naturally occurring
or we have regulation over them
they can be safer products but
we are seeing states banned them
I believe texas pass through
their legislation a band that
would be similar I don't believe
the governor signed that and I
believe they're going to come
back for a special session but
you do see this kind of across
the states colorado has a band
california has a ban on these
products and uh essentially it
just again it's it's a little
bit of a a challenge
navigating those challenges back
in the firms of lawsuits if you
write the bill I think well that
can alleviate those but we do
have a little bit of a
concern with the the health and
human safety aspect of this and
then largely that the children
because there are no age limits
on this and as the
superintendent mentioned any of
our kids I mean mines five I
don't expect him to walk into a
gas station but if he was twelve
he he could walk into a gas
station and as we kind of
mention this kids we don't use
our judgment very well and
sneaking out behind the the the
cases uh to hit a pen um make
sure call and I think that's
what we're battling too so I
think there's ways to do this
and I think there's ways that we
could see a still a legal himp
market without synthetic or
intoxicating derived kind of
noise from him.
Thank you mister chair and thank
you for that mister stevens yeah
I think it would be in my
opinion it makes sense to maybe
put that under rld's hospitals
to oversee any kind of
enforcement mechanism since
you're already doing that with
canabas it's just so similar it
might be an idea in the future
to get that legislation across
the finish site and I don't know
if you have anything to add to
that but i'm sure i'm at three
minutes so i'll just let you go
mister stevens thank you go
ahead mister share madame chair
representative uh the
environment agency does oversee
him and has ability to regulate
I think the bill would have also
given them some uh authority
over the retailers which is
something they lack as well so
um while the RLD is always happy
to accept a challenge in in work
hard to to fix those um there
are agencies that I do believe
we could work with two support
more so uh and use our expertise
in canada and use some of our
investigations to help those
other departments.
The.
I sure for everyone I think you
I really do want to reiterate
the fact you said you may be but
in a short timer's list of like
everybody part of this
administration we never really
think that way I hope you'll
bend the governor's year and ask
her to
go guide us and give us that
leadership in the last year and
a half of the administration to
try and and maybe improve on the
system that that was created
during this administration and
then and we have the horses here
to do with senator hill and all
of you here in hate to think
that you are would move on at
the end of this administration
and we'd have new faces come in
and start all over again which
kind of what we're used to kind
of doing here the legislatures
getting new folks and recharge
retraining every few years I
i'll report remind us that we
pass this bill during a special
session
and I won't comment too much
more about that except to say
that sometimes special sessions
are fraught with peril
especially when you come in and
you rush in things and you're a
gun to your head and you your
hotel room you don't know where
they're going to be there one
night or two weeks and your jobs
for failing and family vacations
are council that's all part of
the job but when that happens we
make mistakes and and I want to
commend this legislature for
kind of pushing back of late on
a special session to be rushed
into bad decisions because I
think bad decisions were made in
in this instance because it was
a special session because we
rushed in you all have heard had
heard here may say that every
since that time but I I want to
be constructive I do hope that
we'll encourage and you have the
governors here you you too
should have the governors here
opio well as the governor to to
fix what work needs to be fixed
and and how much do that in the
remaining administration in the
thirty day session coming up so
thank you all very much for the
good presentation members for a
good discussion a day appreciate
very much alright too much the
next presentation up.
Uh mister bower mr messeus.
Let me give the everybody uh
come on up then let me give the
committee a little orientation
so we um we had on the agenda
today
prosecutors and represents the
public defenders
we have uh the da's coming this
afternoon
district attorney macius I
couldn't be here in the
afternoon so I I put him
together with mister bower and I
thought that might I ah to an
interesting presentation or
discussion because you all know
I do this from time to time I
put people with perhaps two
different perspectives not
necessarily different
perspectives are opposing
perspectives but different
perspectives together to hear of
together and have us here both
sides that's kind of the lawyer
in me as well I am in this
morning I have someone asked me
this as well
fernando mosius is only been a
district attorney for six months
so is he really the right guy to
have presenting a district
attorney's perspective and I
said in my mind that's the
perfect perspective because I
love new employees coming into
my organization telling me what
i've been doing wrong for thirty
years because they're seeing it
fresh right and they're not yet
body into the bs if you will no
offense to anybody here but you
know you you get we get into
group that click in and we're
all in the same boat too so I I
welcome the district attorney
from from my district it was not
folks that way bringing from
donate county and then we have
mister bower who's an
institution with us in this
committee whose will you are and
and and and a great valuable
asset to us too and so I thought
it would be entering to have two
different perspectives at the
same time and so we've got about
an hour for that and if you all
can each may be give us fifty or
twenty minutes of of the
perspective of criminal justice
from where you sit right now and
they will have days this
afternoon from the first in the
second maybe we're more for
focus on juvenile issues that
we've been talking a little bit
about when we may try and direct
that conversation but I wanted
to just broadly have you all
tell us yeah what are we getting
right what are we getting wrong
so mister berr.
The.
I'm in the unfamiliar position
mister chair of
going before a district attorney
so i'm gonna make my
presentation he'll make is and I
would ask for a time for a
buttle if they meet.
Thank you mister.
Mister chair uh madame vice
chair members of the committee
my name is bennett power and the
chief public offender for the
stated new mexico
it's preliven's really to be
here and speak to you all
there's i'm going to try to
cover a lot of grounds from
going to go over some things
relatively quickly and i'm
around all day and I know we
have a lot of time going into
the session I hope that this is
the beginning of a discussion
and that
I I think is you'll see I I have
a position I have a
responsibility for my department
I also have a lot of opinions
and I I expect that people will
have questions and will have
different view points and we'll
have push back and I I really
appreciate that I hope that
myself and our whole department
is a resource for the
legislature on
criminal justice is using the
same way that we are a resource
for our clients and our
community.
The public defender's office is
a steep weight agency and we
are responsible for representing
all indigent people in state
courts who are charged with a
cronin fence where they could
receive jail time so we're in
all thirty three counties uh
across new mexico we provide our
services in two different ways
first of all through our offices
at the trial level who represent
people a mastery courts for
misdemeanors and in district
court on belongings
and those thirteen officers
cover several more county some
of them cover more than one
county
we also provide representation
through private attorneys on
contract with us and that is on
conflict cases meaning in places
where we have an office a
depending can't
an attorney can't represent two
defendants at the same time in
the same case and so we have to
have what's called conflict
representations who private
attorneys who we pay who we
underpay I will say to do this
kind of work and in rural
counties it is all the
representative representation is
provided through a private
attorney's on contract with us
and so we are statewide um the
department used to be under the
governor first of all department
I believe it started in nineteen
seventy three.
Uh it was an executive agency
was under the governor of the
cheap public defender was hired
and sometimes fired by the
governor there was a movement to
make it independent so that we
can take that representation out
from under the control of
governors who frankly it's
pretty easy here's my opinion
part to run as tough on crime
it's pretty difficult sometimes
to
stand up for the rights of
people accused of crime and so
over several years there was a
movement to create an
independent commission
administratively attached to the
judiciary to provide this
representation several years is
came before the lens later I
believe governor richardson
actually vetoed that kind of
legislation at some point it
came back in twenty twelve to
get actually it needed an
amendment to say constitution to
create the independent
commission that did pass and
then and even legislation in
twenty in the twenty thirteen
session to create an independent
public defender
entity under eleven
commissioners and if you you can
get the statute it has to be
balanced among the parties and
we we hope that there is balance
also between urban and rural
areas so this a real oversight
and real input for only mexicans
under this and by the way center
to my yesterday's was a sponsor
of that legislation in twenty
thirteen work really hard with
all kinds of people to get this
through center thank you
it's been a long rude I have
been the cheap public defender
this time around since twenty
sixteen
just to let you know I started
my career is a trial turning in
albuquerque for a couple years I
then went to santa fe and was
five years and is as an
assistant district attorney I
love that job I believe in.
Our criminal court system
however flied I think it may be
but I have a strong commitment
to this to the service of the
prosecutors of the courts and of
the public cathedral's office
let me just briefly introduce a
couple people that are here from
our department julie ball is the
district defender for the first
additional first useful district
and touch county she is here
alex castage is the managing
attorney for the tales office
he's here in the audience and we
have three interns and I think
this is important we have lorn
card on a way I hope more and
i'm seeing their age she is a
second year or berkeley law
school we have union all of some
he is a junior undergraduate at
seen john's college and hannah
the loudest in I hope him and
pronouncing that correctly she's
a senior undergraduate would
have seen johns
we have these internship
programs because as you can
suspect
new mexico does not have enough
attorneys to provide the
individual representation and
for the district attorneys as
well that are home grown that
are they go to you and i'm oscar
who have grown in new mexico
growing up in new mexico and so
we have over the last several
years created insurance your
programs we want to pay our
interns thank you legislature
for giving us the funding for
this kind of thing we want to
pay them because we don't want
just people who can afford to
take a summer or a semester and
work for free frankly those are
not always the best the most
committed public offender so we
want to retail broadly to bring
people in I think this is an
investment it's heat off we
bring people in from all over
the country now to to work in
the public defender's office.
Both his staff attorneys and his
contractors and that is one of
the most important thing is we
of making insurer that we can
have private attorneys that are
competent they have the time to
do the kind of representation
it's necessary for our
communities
in to to take a case in these
these are difficult cases
they're difficult on both sides
for proscutors and and the
defense to
you know both the lowest level
crimes of somebody reclines who
may be homeless who have
behavioral health issues are who
may have subsense issues and
some of the highest level and
most difficult crimes for us
emotionally and legally to
handle
allegations of child sex abuse
murder cases
the the whole game this is what
we do it's difficult work it's
underpaid work but it is so
necessary for constitutional
rights but also if you think
about the fundamental fairness
of having someone in the court
system which is a very complex.
Court system to understand even
if you have a lot of great and
if you can imagine so many of
our clients many of them are
immigrants
some of them don't speak the
language and it is our job to
make the system coherent to them
so that they can understand make
choices so that we can talk on
their behalf to the courts to
the prosecutors I really believe
the public defender's office is
necessary not just for justice
but also frankly for efficiency
and efficiency should not be the
most important thing but it is
necessary for us to do this work
to be there bridge between the
court system the power of the
state and are or clients who are
you know facing this facing jail
and prison time
and i'm i'm going to end and
it's just a couple of minutes
mister chair but there is a
discussion about a grow
operation I just want to talk
about this because I think it
shows how important it is for
public companies and for the
system to work together there's
a mention of a a grow operation
as stance I think one of the
people involved with my grow
operation had a group recent on
the novel who nation several
years ago
and it came to light for me and
for our office because one day
in farmington.
Over ten
chinese speaking people arrested
in a motel room in farmington
there was marijuana all over the
police and so when the police
came in what they found were
people in this motel who had
large amounts of meral that
apparently they were cleaning or
packaging or something so all
these people were arrested and
charged with trafficking or
distribution in several years
ago I don't remember the details
and suddenly the public
defender's office was feasing
chinese speaking clients
and that many so if there were
let's see twelve of them I don't
remember the number we have to
get eleven contract attorneys to
represent them and what happened
over the next few weeks was
inspiring to me for the whole
system we started representing
these folks and it quickly
turned out that they had been
brought in as basically human
traffic and operation to work on
uh a marijuana grow operation on
the nova who nation but they
were staying in the cheap motels
in farmington we represented
them we contacted the district
attorney's office who's mister
tederal at a time
they were very collaborative
once we kind of sorted out what
was going on we got people out
of custody as soon as possible
be victive the state victims
organization which helps and
funds victims and looked at
these people very quickly as
victims and not just as criminal
within it they helped them have
a place to stay during the few
days and it helped them get back
to mostly from california or new
york this is a huge
collaborative effort and in the
end there are a couple of people
who were still criminally
charged some of the higher level
of people now operation but what
what I want to point out to you
is that there are so many times
that people are charged with
crimes and I think it's not in
the best interest of our
community for them to be held in
the criminal court system the
policing the prosecution.
And the jailing and prison
as a way to address some of the
things to come up like this
which is sort of it was new for
all of us but also just the
homelessness and the the
problems it arise because of
broken families because of
social media because of the way
some children are raised now
there are better ways than the
criminal courts this new address
these I feel like the reason why
our case loses so high the
district attorneys and courts is
because we have figured out no
other way to address these
community problems but we're
here the the cases get charged
we represent these people we do
are very best we need more of
talk to you it's at your leisure
and when you went to about our
budget request we've had
workloads studies down showing
we need many more attorneys and
staff to effectively do this
work and effectively in a think
efficiently the better we can do
that the more quickly have
these things moved through the
system
and so let me just take their
time
there's a lot of step out there
finding their certain issues
that I think you're going to
come in front of the legislature
in the next session or that have
been here before I believe very
strongly in due process which
means pretrol interviews for
defense attorneys are overseen
by district attorneys
potentially in and the courts
but do process should not be
limited because of budget issues
I think it's a right for people
and it leads to better
efficiency pretend attention I
it's a very important that the
presumption of innocence and the
data in studies that have been
done on people who are held or
released pre trial let's talk
about facts in along with the
emotions of these issues so in
in the end I will mister chair
album hardest is for me to do
all
to the district attorney who by
the way.
Um when we we've all been around
for a while I worked with mister
museus when he was judgmencies
and so those of us you know
bring our different view points
in is is a wonderful thing thank
you.
Thank you mister chairman and
good morning to all of you for
non domestic us for at least the
last six months i've been the
district attorney for donyana
county.
But again I have a little bit
about diversified background I
did serve on the bench as the
district court judge for eleven
years three of those years as
the cheap judge and I did have
the privilege of serving in the
state senate for sixteen years
a good part of that time as
chairman of the senate judiciary
committee.
So i'm here to talk to you about
my artists see.
Of the last six months.
But within that story i'm going
to talk to you about areas that
the legislature really has to
focus in one.
And they're not all just money.
It's the way the criminal
justice system operates.
So in december of this past year
there were seven prosecutors.
For done yanna county the second
largest county in the state.
By march there were nineteen
attorneys out of twenty one
now we've slipped a little bit
and you can go you can talk
about well you know what is it
take to recruit people I want to
tell you that there is a drought
of attorneys especially outside
of the albuquerque santa fe area
we are canabalizing one another
to get attorneys to come in to
work there are up stickles
including really through the
board of bar examiners in terms
of facilitating individuals
coming into the practice of law
so it is something that you
should look at because almost
every district in the state
along with a public defender's
office the salaries are not
competitive with a private
sector and you can talk about
trying to get lost students that
are coming out of UNM to work
and some of that may work but
the two individuals coming out
of last school that I made
office to didn't pass the bar
so there isn't an automatic
availability and there really
are some great young talent that
could be brought into this state
in order to fill some of these
positions if they're serving in
a public service capacity.
When I came in on the first of
january there were nineteen
hundred cases pending.
That hadn't really even been
filed yet and they stretched
back at least four to five years
I handle the grand jury process
because we've had two.
Use the grand jury to address
older cases and the preliminary
hearing process to address new
cases bears that volume of
backlog that was waiting.
And we've whittled down that
approximately nineteen hundred
but still almost eight hundred
cases that are twenty four in
older
friday there was another case
that was brought to my attention
that's from two thousand
fourteen that had been waiting
all of this time
and the victim in the case
actually wanted to go forward it
is not unusual for me to be
presenting cases from twenty
twenty one twenty twenty two and
I know that it's concerning to
the public defender's office
because it means that the case
load is going up.
And the issues are always do you
have the staff do you have the
capacity do you have the
understanding let me share
something that to me is a shame
but I want to share it with this
committee because of the make up
of the committee.
I asked
in the area of misdemeanor
domestic violence how many cases
in the last twelve months had
been able to go forward domestic
violence where women are the
victim at least in eighty five
percent of those cases
so out of eight hundred and
thirty nine domestic violence
misdemeanor cases.
Thirty one or successfully
prosecuted.
Thirty one out of eight hundred
and thirty nine and you may see
well that's somehow an outlier
that's unique to donate a county
I don't think so.
So the system doesn't respond to
the nature of some of these
cases
sold again not to take too much
time but
you're allowed under the rules
thirty days in which to share
disclosure with a defense
thirty days
and within those thirty days you
will lose most of these cases.
So I got together with the chief
of police
can you for los crucise can you
within seventy two hours give me
all of the reports all of the
disclosure.
So they have begun to shift the
timeline but if the entire time
line of how long you have to
prosecute a case if it does not
change.
Then you're going to have this
result and let me share with you
why it's even more important
there are bad actors in every
one of our communities and the
longer they are gone from the
community the safer the
community is but if you can't
charge them with shooting at a
motor vehicle or aggravated
battery against someone you
could almost be guaranteed
they're in that group that are
abusing members of their family
and you can prosecute them there
until there is that opportunity
to prosecute them for a more
serious crime.
D wise.
If you really look at the
success in those statistics
maybe a third of the cases.
So we talk the legislature
discusses the legislature
promotes reforms within dwi.
You're not getting the
productivity.
And again I want to share with
you because I was at the very
beginning of my legal career I
was a district public defender.
So my attitude isn't always
adversarial we have to find a
way especially when it comes to
drugs we are under utilizing.
The drug court programs in all
of the districts under utilising
em.
So you're funding it.
How can you accept that.
So the goal is to work with a
public defender's office and
we're in the process of doing
this a basically taking the
three hundred cases that are
possession of
a drugs and basically trying to
come together to see which of
them could be resolved through a
plea process that would move a
bulk of cases into drug court
you need to have those levels of
cooperation within the process
the process takes too long
when people have talked about
reform within the criminal
justice process you need to
shrink the timelines
if you don't do that
these cases are taking years but
they shouldn't.
You disclosed your witnesses
that you're going to you share
with a with a defense you
disclose your list of witnesses
they have thirty witnesses that
are named how many do you use it
trial
for five.
If you use thirty it would be a
two and a half week trial if you
lose four or five the average
trial date you should look at
that.
It's probably two to three days
unless the your average trial.
How long
should we allow the system to
take to get you to that level
that long not long at all some
of these settings and any any
district that has one of these
orders imposed by the supreme
court it's now time to rethink
those orders.
It's time to rethink how we are
doing the process let me assure
you there are steps along the
way that the legislature can
help promote I do want to echo
the need for adequate
compensation and I know that
you're going to say that this is
self serving for me to say this
and maybe it is to a certain
extent but I have been at this
record judge I can tell you that
in this position with a kind of
challenges that were facing with
a kind of backlog the the lack
of accountability in the
community.
This is a far more difficult job
for me than when I was cheap
judge but yet the compensation
is this proportionate.
So again I want to appeal to you
to look at that I also want to
suggest you there are needs
within the juvenile justice for
change.
Don't let anybody submit an
honumbers
package to you break it down
break it down so that we can
beat at least be making some
progress rather than feeling or
I don't like this part of that
bill someone have to vote
against it but if you would have
brought these other themes or
issues to me separately well
then I would have been more
inclined to vote for it so again
please understand that there are
issues I think that we can just
do a better chart.
Um people talk about the high
standards that are that are put
into place will we just have to
rise to those standards.
We have to manage to the
challenge.
So
let me stop there and if you
have some particular issues that
you'd like to discuss i'd like
to
join mister bower insuring our
opinions thank you in the other
feeling we probably do have some
questions so i've got
representative read to start out
with I just say you all know I
invited her to sit up there with
you all this morning she didn't
take me on the invitation but
she's welcome to go up there any
time including now to answering
these questions from her own
experience where we're of it's
it's valuable to have you on the
committee in in your experience
now represent read i'll also let
the know that.
I have been fortunate to go to
lunch frequently with the mr
macias and with the chief of
police of city last crucials and
this goes back sometime and in
it it's not hard for this que to
understand why you see me for
the last several years push back
on the notion that the solution
is more laws
and more crimes because
consistently I hear the type of
presentation he has heard which
is the system is broken in a way
that we can't prosecute the laws
we have uh can be getting
prosecuted last we have um in
comparison where laws is not
going to be the immediate
panacea that I think though
those who are find of of news
cameras are are more custom to
to jumping in front of so that's
that's reason why you've
consistently seen me saying
we've got to solve the problem
with the efforts of mister bower
in his department and and the
district attorneys like when I
don't know what table to use
your honor senator
chairman
I just trick attorney we'll see
this but I but I I have found
his council invaluable to me
precisely because he's had my
job here before
years ago and in the role of
chief judge and no district
attorney so it's been invaluable
information to me so represent
reviews got the for the we just
get an idea and any others so
expect to want to have questions
on the presentation at this
point.
Okay that we come back read so
send masters
center or represent it it's not
me right as a more
representative.
To hear.
Okay we're gonna ask everyone to
stay within five minutes or
recognize you to you for that
represent read to start you all
thank you mister chair and thank
you mister bower and mister c s
for your presentation I want to
talk a little bit about the
compensation especially starting
with public defender as i'm
moving around the state and and
still prosecuting
talking to your contract
attorneys on these double harmer
sites and bigger cases I I would
like you to explain to the
committee what they get paid for
these type of cases and it it's
it's kind of concerning because
I am you know i've been we've
had six days of interviews on a
double harm side and when I
heard what this attorney was
getting paid for it kind of blew
my mind so could you maybe
explain on your contract
attorneys what they get paid and
and how they're paid mister
chair
certainly and mister chair
representative read I
discuss a very briefly the
private furnison contract with
us and we're around a hundred
right now we used to have over a
hundred and twenty we went down
to ninety eight through some
pretty a sort of recruiting and
trying to bring people in we've
increased that and increasing p
some but we we have what I think
is not a very good structure for
pain contract attorneys which is
based rates up until a few years
ago they were flat fees so it
was for instance on a murder
case fifty four hundred dollars
on a first agree felony it was
about it right now the beast
read is about nine hundred the
reason we call a base readers
because it is possible for them
to apply for additional
compensation and then they'll
submit to the head of our
contract council services
they keep time as alternatives
have to do in private practice
to get paid and they can be
compensated additionally but
many attorneys end up getting
the beast rate so.
Represent every year read your
very correct that this is a
problem if I may also add mister
chair and representative in our
last budget request we did ask
for money for a pile of project
to pay our leg rates.
And even at that the hourly
rates that we requested and that
were denied would have been less
than the risk management rates
for a new associate meaning that
somebody who represents the
state in civil last so we are
underpaying them representative
mister chair and mister barrel
that was my kind of point I
think this attorney was getting
sixty four hundred dollars and
said i'll probably apply for
that additional money and I just
couldn't believe the amount of
work we are doing on that case
and and that didn't include a
trial she still got to do the
trial if we did the trail so
that that issue I I have
considered the might think we
should really think about how
your paying your contract
attorneys and get that money app
and then I guess my question
into
the d a is I remember three
years ago we started attorneys
at approximately fifty eight
thousand dollars I mean
obviously extremely low and
sense than you know three years
later since since i've retired
there now making ninety two
hundred thousand dollars and I
guess I consider that a pretty
decent salary so i'm wondering
what when you say underpaid as
far as prosecutors go and power
you recruiting these people in
are you are you getting
pushed back that the salary is
not high enough and obviously
you did some great recruiting
and I have a kind of curious how
you were able to fill your your
staff after your situation
mister chairman.
Thank you mister chairman part
of it is by showing a vision.
And showing that there is going
to be a turnaround in the
office.
Right now we're reorganizing in
a way that will allow me to do
considerable succession training
by basically training at least
five of the staff.
To be a district to turn.
To step in to the role of
management giving the
opportunity to manage other
attorneys and other staff within
the office.
That I think was a motivation
the motivation was again because
as soon as the election ended I
tried to get a her ahead of the
curb and start recruiting but I
can tell you that as I recruit
and we hit that nineteen i've
lost three.
And that's one to retirement and
too because they were offered an
opportunity to basically work
for actually.
Something I don't share an
enthusiasm for because I can see
the difference in the courtroom
you have to be in the courtroom
and I know that that may be as a
little bit or fashioned and
thinking but I think it's
critical I think you're more
effective so I don't offer that
as an option but if you can make
comparable money and you can
basically work virtually ninety
percent of the time then it
becomes very competitive to fill
those slots right now I can tell
you mr chairman that I have
maybe maybe two people in the
pipeline.
But I need six and i'm not sure
where the difference is coming
from and I know that there could
be modifications made to the way
individuals are from outer state
or license and how they come in
I have a brilliant young man
that has a non traditional live
degree.
Cannot come into the state under
the rules now but scored so high
on the oldest tea tests excuse
me that the city the the bar
exam that he's licensed in the
state of texas he's licensed in
the state of washington he lives
in los cruces wanted to come to
work for us and cannot
and so we have to open up the
avenues a little bit although
actually I think more in line
with where attorneys are
beginning it's more in the high
eighties then it is necessarily
right at the hundred thousand
although you're in a real
competitive you're off you're
being able to offer the higher
salaries because you can't
recruit enough people to use up
all of your budget so you have
the some degree of flexibility
but when you'd look at the
payment the compensation level
it is just historically too low
continues to be too low and you
lose people pretty quickly when
other areas are able to offer
more money and certainly people
going into the private sector
but let me tell you if somebody
gets up here and they say like
i'm doing all we have nineteen
people that are assistant
district attorneys.
Not all of them.
Our quality prosecutors.
Not all of them are quality
public defenders
so you're really having to.
Recruit.
Almost anyone who's available
and hope that you can train
them.
Hope that you can mention them
which all takes time from the
attorneys that are really the
core of the prosecution I would
say out of that nineteen there's
maybe.
Eight or nine that really form
the core of being able to
prosecute
more detailed cases.
It investor chair and
da macias what what amount of
money do you think pay in a
prosecutor would be able to get
these prosecutors in here a
hundred and twenty thousand
hundred twenty thousand that
should be the average.
Okay and I try to recruit
someone but if I don't offer.
I mean there are someone had the
experience to managed could be
your great asset would have to
come from outer state just bear
minimum one hundred and fifty
two hundred and fifty five
thousand well they wouldn't even
consider it mister terman's last
came and I know i'm on it but
time schedule I I also want to
just comment on the cmos and and
kind of the discussion you had
on those.
I am myself don't like cmos I
think that they do result in
dismissals and people that need
to be in jail I mean i'm waiting
two years on dna sometimes and
the dwiss we've already heard
presentations on how they have
to be dismissed and these people
don't need to be out of jail
some of these violent offenders
especially now with the blood
drawas me and passed and we're
gonna have a lot more blood
draws that we're going to it's
going to take more time for so I
I do think we need to discuss
whether cmos are the way to go
because it's it's getting
dismissals on cases where people
should be in jail violent
offenders and then having to
come back and refile them
so I wanted to make that comment
but we appreciate your
presentation and I think you are
pretty spart on and what what's
going on so thank you mister
chair thank you.
The.
Thank you mister chairman thank
you cheap power and judge thank
you
assessed and it is putting my
time run over here.
Some of the try to go lightning
round because there's so much
good stuff to talk about and and
thank you for running and taking
that job done increases
couple things with your chairman
of public defender commission I
think it was a twenty year
battle and then it done on us to
do a constitutional amendment
instead of a a constant vetoes
creating the public defender
commission and I I did that
constitutional amendment um.
For a couple couple reasons in
particular one is obviously it's
a conflict to have the cheap
executive manage the criminal
defense
public department but also
public comment there was some
times when a governor would
would muzzle the public defender
department so public comment in
committee coming to us with bill
ideas that's a valuable aspect
of the list legislative process
that that I appreciate you
participating in
a you know after give like a
defense bar wrap you can just as
a lawyer that happens to be a
defense lawyer teachers and tell
us had a great better statute
but also no general policies are
the governor
may at times kind of try to
implement policies.
And you can have policies as a
public different department
because each individual has to
be zealously advocated for as an
individual so so for example
free indictment please pre trial
diversion programs what we used
to call defense continuances
where the the time is you stay
the time and.
Then the defense it does xe and
then you dismiss the case that
that stuff is a valuable tool in
the prosecuting process
but in alba kirky because of the
the low
conviction rate and the low
success rate in certain cases
particularly domestic violence
cases.
These are rejected their
rejected almost a blanket
rejection because if you play
the percentages and you say no
to predict pretal
please and and precautivation
and defense continuous is you're
going to win at the end like if
you say noto hundred cases
you're going to win at the end
but but so I would urge you to
if in fact there's that tendency
within the public different
department that you that you
allow lawyers to deviate from
that because a particular plant
you can't risk up individual
clients liberty based on a
policy that may have a better
general general outcome and then
I could explain that more
privately later but what I
believe is that the criminal
just system needs above ours of.
Is the quality control expert
I mean what what made me
successful as the date wasn't
whatever but it was because I
worked in a factory and college
and I sold the assembly line of
that factory and and if there's
efficiencies within that
assembly line in each room.
Then you have you know we made
more boxes or whatever we can
have more justice outcomes with
the quality control expert I
think every single division can
handle five hundred cases a year
and all judges kind of freak out
on that
but the judge only has two
thousand hours a year.
And maybe of those two thousand
hours a year maybe only five
hundred or i'm sorry maybe
twelve hundred bench time hours.
And so if you have safe ten
prosecutors with fifty cases
each trying to move those fifty
cases through that division.
It has to be efficient it has to
be credibly efficient and the
proscutor has to understand the
plea process cause you can play
out these cases here try our
best over here and then hammer
these these folks over here.
Because you've got to be able to
hammer others horrible horrible
violent fenders has best you can
but.
But my point is is that.
In order to do that you you need
to have leverage and let me try
to explain this you need to have
leverage so when that when that
juries when that i'm sorry when
that yeah when the jury is
coming up the elevator and
you're ready for trouble you
ever have the heck of a lot of
leverage as a state.
Cause that it's it's crunch time
it's going to happen but if you
give a plea offers in my day of
any felony they got dropped to
three misdemeanors it's like on
me to there in fifteen minutes
i'll take that plea right now
but now those please are being
rejected because the the the
state doesn't seem to have a
whole lot of leverage in
prosecuting these cases via
reasonable plea offers could you
come and briefly on that because
my time is up but can you
comment on that does there's the
state out of leverage and
cruises are our fourth degree
felonies there that are given an
offer of mister all those
accepted rejected by the
reference bar well actually the
criticism is in
is the over please basically
i'll use dwis as an example and
I know that perhaps at the
misdemeanor level i'm getting
complaints in terms of third
dwi's being planned down to
first dwis those kind of offers
in terms of resolving the case
certainly there are there is an
growing alarm within the
community related to hand guns
and that kind of violence so
we're not pleading anything
dealing with a firearm we're
just not pleading it will just
go to trial on it if there is no
resolution to it
where creating a
a division apart of experience
prosecutors to identify the
worst the actors in the
community and no matter where
they are being charged at what
level they're being charged
they're going to pursue the
prosecution of those individuals
and that please will be somewhat
limited that area but we're
really talking like if you use
the the number five hundred were
talking maybe seventy five out
of those five hundred cases so
the majority of the cases can
absolutely move but that isn't
the attitude anymore the
attitude is if you wait if you
find technical flies.
If the the witness list isn't
complete if you file motions to
get with a witnesses i've never
never before and never when I
was on the bench that I have
received this level of
dismissals for small technical
matters so i'm whining the
supreme court to be having some
discussions with our judges over
why that is happening but the
ability the ability in some
cases you just have to elevate
the effort that you put into it
to resolve it in a timely matter
others than they they're just
the the course but if you don't
have prosecutors to be doing it
none of it works not thank you
mister chairman thank you dear
my sdum you know training is key
and and things that that nature
but with regard
thank you just as the loyal
opposition let me just say that
I think the the filing emotions
the interview of witnesses and
asking to take things to trial
is our system and um I I don't
feel bad for not pleading cases
and for putting the state to
their proof I I agree that there
are things that we need to do to
find justice and efficiency by
it that's one of the reasons
again what where I think the
system may be underfinded to do
what it's been asked to do so
let's take a lot of the social
problems how do the criminal
accord system and then we can do
these things that filing
emotions were judges find that
the constitutional rates are
being are being billy that's why
the
keep witnesses out that's why
they dismiss cases on time thank
you chair and sender thank you
mister just didn't closing the
the cmo for the folks listening
back and almost the the case
management order which is stiff
and and hard and fast deadlines
that the courts have imposed on
the state there was reasons to
impose those deadlines at the
time but if the days association
and some strong.
Voices are you know so called to
find crime voices can articulate
that we can put some funny
pressure on the support to
change that we can't do it
legislatively but those hard and
fast deadlines are in reasonable
under their circumstances and
and thank you for bring it up
because they need to be looked
at thank you sir
presentation and the questions
have stimulate a lot of interest
so i've had a lot of foots on
the list i'm going to be pretty
tape with the five minutes of
start your clock when you get
going and except me to catch off
eight I clearly to me visit a
little bit more with the chair
channel but this is the kind of
discussion where we're going to
have more of I think during the
interim more opportunities where
we just really allow a lot of
time for this kind of discussion
to hear both sides of the issue
and I hope the committee sees
this is always very valuable for
me to have two different
perspectives at the same time
and I and i'd like to let mr
power amazing to see how to have
more of this dialer but but for
today to keep everything else on
schedule I have representative
garet then represent an eye of
the incentive here represent the
honest server worse than our
stewart so represent your at
your own for five thank you
thank you mr chairman this is
actually very powerful I want to
think both of you for
your stories many of us are
eligible legislative finance or
a house appropriations and
you're giving us a background
that we don't even have time to
get in those places so very very
helpful and when I thank you for
bringing your interns I think
there are three most important
people in this room because they
represent the future
deemer see as wish you also the
county manager along the way
till I was fired yes
well i'm glad they got you in
this position you said something
very powerful the reforms are
not getting the productivity and
so looking at the systems
analysis it it seems then I
think the chairman probably is
is heading us way
there's policies.
And logistics in their slides
and legislation and the laws and
legislation are almost
meaningless if you don't do all
those systems and processes and
reforms that you're talking
about do you have a suggestion
for a set of appointment and
it's a state thing we can talk
about drawn on our bring a
little but it's a statewide
problem how do we do we need a
task force what do we need to
really analyze how to become
productive statewide so it's not
just it's so piece meals so much
at the time give any suggestions
at this point how we produce a
panel a task was what do we do
are there already people doing
that
thank you mr chairman i'd like
to senator my esther
comment earlier related to
quality control something that I
think is critical in any
organization there isn't enough
effort at quality control there
isn't enough effort to determine
if you're getting the results
that you wanted from the
legislation or from the funding
that you're have invested in two
of the areas that that are
absolutely critical for anyone
sitting on a finance committee
is at the state crime lab must
be funded better.
You must that there is that in
itself is clogging up the
process in the progress of cases
one of the best things that the
legislature did also was fund a
retention fund I believe for
both the district attorney's
office and the public defenders
to basically use incentive money
to help keep price securities in
place so I know that those are
critical areas but when you talk
about oversight i'm not really
sure that the legislature truly
knows whether it's getting the
for return on size of all
investments and I think a degree
of super not supervision but
quality control and reporting
back to the legislature what is
working what other changes in
the laws do we need to have I
think go back to domestic
violence even the felony
domestic violence in donald
county last twelve months a
hundred and ninety one cases
filed forty five successfully
completed.
Unacceptable results but when
are you going to start really
hearing more of that nobody
wants to say look we're not
we're not really protecting the
community were not giving
victims of the appropriate
results and I share the public
defender perspective the state
has to be held to standards I
understand that but the effort
that it takes in this increasing
level of standardization
because the challenge these
motions to keep someone in
custody when I was on the bench
I asked the district attorney at
that time why are you filling
and you're not doing anything
well we're just covering our
back side were filing these
motions so that when when you
deny them we can say it's the
court that denied them but you
didn't bring in the evidence
necessary for the court to make
a decision to support holding
the individual and custody so
that's what it takes a reversal
and it takes the extra effort
but you have to have the person
now you have to have the
financial ability you can
accomplish with a few more
million dollars we can elevate
the level of security and the
community to a level that has
not existed before.
Nationally when the rule of
lights offers really under
attack so I wouldn't appreciate
you for that
but i'm wondering if you might
be able to expand on some issues
you touched on with the state
bar and the shortage of lawyers.
I'm wondering if there are any
discussions or what your opinion
is I either doing away with the
bar as they have started to do
an other states maybe creating
alternative pathways for a
printerships I know they're
starting to do that not only and
with the bor itself but I know
senator to heal and I have also
talked
about social workers and the
examination
there we know that statistically
people have color are failing
these tests at a much higher
rate and so I wanted to ask your
opinion on that and maybe talk
about any discussions that are
being had
if I can start mr terroring at
representative of day thanks for
asking that I question it it's a
really important issue at both
the prosecutors and the public
offenders
as you've heard of shorts happen
and specially in rural areas
it's the problems really most
acute there because you no
longer have the small town home
room lawyer who can practice a
little bit of everything and put
together a practice and be there
and do you know the the criminal
offense effectively do the wills
and trust do the property
transfers things like that the
people that grew up in these
communities one wheel are school
and came back there they're not
there as much and it's not just
new mexico we've heard that this
is a national problem for both
of us there have been there have
been a lot of discussions I
think the bar has maintains we
work on a panel I I think
there's a group for through the
supreme court that's looking at
this nationally there are groups
that both are the district
attorneys and and we are
involved in and I I think that
what we like to do is get new
attorneys in the need to be
effective obviously by to
reimagine what the practice of
law is be able to give more
things to pair legals to other
kinds of limited practitioners
overseen by lawyers but.
So that the kind of work that
the community needs can be can
be done I think it were there is
a lot of discussion about that
in the end if we can bring
lawyers to a community
especially in the rural areas
also windonian accounting have
them put down roots and that's
what we really want to do is
paid bring them in pay them get
them interested in the community
and stay there then then we're
all going to win.
So I don't know that the
necessary that the legislature
has the authority to kind of
make major modifications but you
certainly have the strength of
your position to communicate to
another branch of government the
need for changes to occur
internal to that other branch of
government so the example that I
would give you and I was trying
to address it earlier that there
is a young man who is a licensed
attorney but not in your mexico
he's originally from scotland so
he is he has a foreign large
degree that isn't recognized in
the state of new mexico but yet
he his test scores were so high
that other states that allow
including the state of taxes.
Gave him his license and he's
practising law for the public
defender's office right now in
our parcel although he lives in
soul we filed the petition with
a supreme court asking them.
Give a waiver to this individual
son a 3 two vote they denied it
so and they sent the issue back
to the board of bar
board a bargain
to think about how we would
address this kind of scenario
but everything takes long and
there is immediate needs and
there's certain things that are
just common sense at a certain
point so any any even a memorial
anything directed to the other
branch saying.
Give consideration to opening up
and I know that some legislators
would be absolutely terrified at
the thought of more lawyers in
the state but nevertheless in
spite of that there is a need
there is a need for it I
actually really appreciate that
common temperature
it because I mean the really
interesting part about this is
we're actually seeing a lot of
parallels between a shortage of
doctors the medical providers
initiate of lawyers
interestingly enough but I know
in the medical space I also
serve
the
on the health committee and I
know some of the things that are
being proposed are allowing
internationally train docs to
come here and so I just want
like point out the parallels and
that and it really appreciate
you and updating us and what
that looks like on your so thank
you thank you do you represent
about them i'd like to suggest
that think new mexico do a study
on that on the dearth of lawyers
and what we need to do to track
more lawyers to the state will
have that is the next one up
senator hill thank you mister
chairman and thank you for being
there presenting um you know I
just want to say I I think we
all want to insure due process
but I know my community wants to
feel safer and so there's a
balance in that and and that's
what we're here to talk about um
I I i'm you did mention the
salary a hundred and twenty I I
think it's higher with i'll do
respect um my son went to
graduated from unam went to
colombia for law school and just
in the last year almost or I
guess maybe nine months was
contemplating a coming back to
new mexico and practicing umm
unfortunately you know I mean
he's he was he was making more
as an attorney in a new york law
firm and dealing
in a.
Volunteer work around new york.
Much.
More than double of what you're
suggesting rate and so coming
out of last school
although they worked into death
rate but I was unable to get him
to come back here but he did
move to washington and so we've
got a look at better ways to pay
these young people to pay off is
immense student loan so with
that I know we had do have some
debt forgiveness I believe four
attorneys but are we do we need
to consider you know the at the
federal level there's the ten
years of service in your loans
can be forgiven for public
service
but there's always a fear that
that's going to go away should
we be looking at something
that's more aggressive in debt
forgiveness so that young people
can afford to come and work at
those lower wages.
Mr chair and senator to heal
very much so I think that within
the state I have still
on forgivenesses in incredibly
important and it's not is it is
not a giveaway it is in
investment I think people need
to understand that and going to
law school any kind of education
is so much more costly than it
was when I was in college and
when I was in law school where I
could afford to take a public
service job out of law school I
mean i'm hearing about some of
this number of our applicants
and some of our lawyers who have
three hundred thousand dollars
in debt
and it just it weized them down
it's this huge anchor the drags
through so much of their
professional career and affects
the decisions like like you're
talking about in so much at the
time it affects them to knock
him to a place like new mexico
so I I think our second do more
I know mister letter going there
is very familiar with the
legislation that's been done on
this third the way the funding
is set up for for
student loan for giving this for
people in the public sector both
district attorneys and public
things I think would be it make
a huge difference
mr chairman again
I have to be respectful of the
way the process works especially
as a former legislator when I
use a hundred and twenty
thousand as being kind of entry
level I have to appreciate that
you're facing the challenge that
if you try to do something for
one sector every other sector
will come after it and then
you'll hesitate gosh if we had a
hundred and forty thousand
hundred and fifty thousand is
beginning salaries
we wouldn't be here having these
kind of discussions but are you
is the legislature really in a
position to do that not just for
attorneys in the district
attorneys and the public
defender's office but attorneys
are cross state government
that's why it becomes
intimidating and that's why I
use that more.
Reasonable and what I would be
leave is an achievable number
but again I want to go back and
ask you to please give continued
consideration for the retention
the retention stipend that is
available if um prosecutors are
public defenders will commit to
another year and service then
there is and they agree to pay
it back if they don't the stay
that full year that is helpful
that's a good step forward thank
you thank you mister chairman
and so
am I done.
Am I going
i'm gonna have to have my
answers be timed
how they think you I will just
say I kind of like to mister
german I liked senator my asters
idea of quality control but I
think we've already heard that
the labs have a challenge to and
i'm not sure that it's just a
funding issue it's or maybe some
quality control over the labs to
and then the last thing I would
love to speak with you about
what kinds of things we need to
do for juvenile justice so thank
you mr chairman I I don't mean
to be rude i'm trying to keep us
close to and we're behind with
the others I want to give thanks
to those from the minister
believe her still here we're
living behind but will catch up
during the noon are with their
bills with your patience and so
forth so I appreciate that it's
a good conversation it's it's a
good message to me and
represent channel that really do
think we need to keep this
discussion going during the
interim with more time in
allowing some more that but I
still have a representative
behind some worse than their
store representative borrega so
representative on your
recognized for five minutes it's
eleven twenty eight thank you
thank you both for being here
to so I wanted to address the
under utilization of our
treatment courts particularly
you mentioned the drive courts I
i'm from house
which is in the first district I
have visited my in participated
in and understanding how the the
court draw court system works
there and it's the only
district that has a medical
provider involved in the court
process so I just wanted to
bring out two
to the table today and also
perhaps information were sixty
six point four percent of the
treatment courts this is all of
our treatment operating right
now
I don't have a car about through
the drug courts but i'd like to
get that information we're seen
a twenty one percent percent of
visit.
Resident when they go to these
these treatment courts in sixty
eight percent retention and
these specialist courts
so my question is what is the
buyer from our public defenders
and defendants to go through the
the treatment court process
rather than take their clients
to trial mister.
Mister chair representative
behind
I think thank you for their
question because the I I think
the drug court inspected to
court issue is is complicated
and our jobs public fenders is
too give the best information we
can to our clients and then let
them make a decision
not all treatment courts are
created the same and so the
the faith in the effectiveness
of a treatment corporate and i'm
not seeing this that those with
lower citizens rates are not
sorry low
to being filled are are not
effective but there there's a
lot that goes into being in for
instance I was on the board of
the DWI that this mean your
debate court in santa fe county
of
they have to call colors you
know every morning now go in
they have to have transportation
to go take a drug test in the
morning they have to be able and
and these are people who
probably don't have a driver's
license although now you mare me
not to be able to have it
ignition airline so
we give them what the options
are we give them recommendations
is is this but I mean not every
court treatment court is for
every person and so they are
designed we want them to be
effective we do I can tell you
we don't want our clients coming
back we don't want repeat
business I want people to get
out of the criminal court system
I hate seen somebody come in
again I really heat seeing their
kids i've been doing this long
enough that you know when you
see the interduring generational
problems so we want effect of
courts we'd want to participate
in them we want to be part of
the creation of the courts and
then I want to send a lot of
people there and how them not
come back
thank you mister charles
I guess what i'm trying to get
to the cricks of is
in your participation may be
creating some of these courts
are making them better.
But that's why you mentioned in
district one way they have a
they have really good results
because they have a full team
it's it's very holistic is very
well rounded and they get those.
Those individuals with the the
wrap round services they need if
they need a ride but you know
they need to find work in all
the sort of things and it's
working so i'm just wondering
where where those gaps are and
if we could have that
conversation or some idea of
where we're not we'll refull in
short so we could have more
participation in univisation of
these especially to drive courts
with it was brought up today and
I don't know if oda wants to see
anything to check I believe that
the treatment courts the drug
courts whatever terminology you
want to use should be paneled at
a hundred percent there
shouldn't be one program in this
state that doesn't have a
hundred percent participation
that's what i'm advocating for a
month
and when we use statistics why
don't we take a look and compare
the truck courts.
If they're not if these
individuals that are being
convicted of possession of some
form of drugs if they're not
going into.
The penetentiary because of some
history of the individual then
where is probation sending them
if they're placed on probation
they're not going into the
courts drug court or treatment
programs where are they going
what is their success and let me
suggest you it would be far less
than what's in the drug courts
so the opposition from a defense
attorney's perspective is you're
you're going to set them up for
failure they're their attics
they're they're going to be
continuing to use drugs sold but
I think what's changed over the
last few years is a difference
in attitude that you're not just
there to punish you really are
there to treat an addict to the
greatest degree possible so i'm
just suggesting as the
legislature puts in money it
should be demanding a greater
utilization and at the same time
better results.
Thank you mister charles I
appreciate thank you said are
worth mince that are stories
there were thank you mister
chair and it's interesting being
around for a while you see
things for sure and I I just was
smiling center masters thinking
about that public defender bill
when I first got here I was on a
house appropriations in two
thousand five and john biggler
was a friend and was also the
chief defender sitting in that
chair and I remember in the
first house appropriations
hearing I was asking him why you
were asking for money you need
money don't you need additional
number asking for a flat budget
in the poor guy was literally
hanging in under the table it
was like water you doing their
representative pushing but it
was a perpet example of the
disfunction and so we have made
changes and that's a great
change that's allowed I think
for advocacy to happen for the
public defender
mister barrel can you just walk
through I so I follow what
representative rear by think may
have really important point
about the contract public
defender rates you just give
them committee flavor for what
those what what the it's not an
hourly rate what the rate is
especially going down into
mister meaners and d a m c s you
talked about domestic violence
misdemeanors.
I mean maybe start there what
does it what is a public
defender contract for a
misdemeanor of domestic violence
what what what are we paying.
Sure thank you mister chair and
center worth a missing meaner
DWI domestic violence the the
beast rate is three hundred
dollars
four eight and that is an upper
hour that is for the case
so mister chair what about a
fourth degree fellow
mister chair and center worth
fourth referring is five hundred
and forty dollars and just to
emphasize that we have advocated
for and breeze the rates a
couple times over the last
several years but that is.
Very low and hard for I think of
a person in private practice to
really keep a practice open
and less they start cutting
corners which gets back to the
effectiveness and volume argue
just one more mister chair the
first degree on nine
fellow murder non life
imprisonment what's what's the
rate for a first the base read
for that mister chaired and send
a roof is seven hundred and
fifty dollars.
So I think representative has
highlighted this is just I mean
it's unconscionable
it's just not fair to ask
someone to take on a
representation I mean I guess
you do probably know it's
probably not work is what it is
but I think we pay a risk
management.
An attorney with zero to two
years experience hundred fifty
dollars an hour.
That's the state civil defense
ten plus year two hundred and
twenty five dollars an hour so
we have got to fix this and I
think dmc has talked about the
this is one of those places and
I just the other thing I just
want to bring up III do want to
follow up on a case management
order a little bit because da
you said something that I wrote
down you want to shrink the
timelines and you're cleaning up
your office in your cleaning up
all these cases you're doing
exactly what needs to happen my
guess is in a lot of different
districts but it's not happening
in every district
so we're having the discussion
about case management order in
santa fe where
two hundred and ninety five days
is the average case.
Pro from start to finish and a
tower is the only area with a
longer time frame two hundred
and ninety seven days burnably
else now down to two hundred and
twenty four so i'm just trying
to understand there's there
seems to be.
Agreed opposition by both the
public defenders and days to the
case management order
is there just a resource issue
putting I mean I get the fact
that we put these deadlines on
it and that means things have to
happen and you don't have the
resources it sounds like to be
able to make them happen yet
you're saying.
We need to shrink the timeline
so just to help me out a little
bit more cause I think this is a
good discussion for australia
and here from both
I can suggest you that in donald
county there are individuals
that stay in carcerated for over
a year well over a year waiting
for a trial and usually there
are those individuals because
that was one of the shortcomings
on what was the bond reform
effort they didn't see anything
about the
enhanced time lines that we
should be pursuing for
individuals that actually are
held in cut in
in custody soul from my
perspective when we look at
statistics you have to be very
careful what you're looking at
because i'm assuming that has a
lot to do with cases that are
just dismissed early on and it
doesn't have to do with exactly
what is the average that you
actually went to trial on the
cases so my sense is that when
you're looking at completion to
trial you're looking at a
substantially longer period of
time our be the arm shooting and
young park I think that many of
you may have been familiar with
we're not going to trail on that
until february of twenty six
we could have got to trial on
that now in the spring.
Aren't forgive me now in the
fore we could have gone to trial
so people can say well you know
what is for five months
difference make well again
people if you're wanting to
restore the confidence of people
in the criminal justice system
if there is accountability to be
reached it should be reached in
a more timely manner that's my
perspective in it can be cause
ultimately what we end up going
to trial with and the questions
that have to be answered a trial
don't require a hundred
witnesses to be participating.
Mr chair in center worth just
very briefly
I am a believering case
management orders and it is
because especially in overwork
system all parties tend to focus
on the crisis in front of them
and not on the early that the
new case is coming in and you
have to hold people's feet to
the fire to get the work done on
cases especially when people are
sitting in custody and so I
think before case management
orders came around there a lot
of people languishing in jail
and cases languaging and this is
victims waiting for justice and
so this really it's not just
about the defendant it's about
the whole process and making
sure that the police reports get
submitted the crime lab and
without a case manager in order
what pressures are on a crime on
the crime lab to actually get
the results in there needs to be
some flexibility they are
imperfect but I think they're
really important to make sure
that the system moves
no and I appreciate that having
the other side of the argument I
know the chair is well aware
that
the civil world where I live in
and he lives in cases saddle
when you've got a court setting
in you are on the step to the
trial where you're in the middle
of trial so exactly what you're
saying so so it's how do we find
the right balance how do we get
the resources so that you can
move these cases for word and
they don't just language because
I think just right when they
language everyone suffers both
sides thank you mister chair
thank you mister chairman I have
to say I really like having a
public sender but so thank you
for doing that.
I want to give at first or you
just say something so no one
misunderstands what i'm
for many years I have felt like
we were not paying state a
workers enough
including days public defenders
we have worked the last several
years aren't the state personnel
off because their guidelines
stop secretaries from increasing
salaries so the state personal
office with their internal
mechanism support paypals
is just not very flexible not
very modern and has way too many
of them so we're honest dirty
were in second year of it we've
actually completed the study now
we just need to find the money
to put in to it so that people
can get on to their right paypal
so I agree and I worked on that
but let me give you a cautionary
tale you know we talk in every
committee I am in about not
enough work I enough social I
mean it's on and on and on so in
the education system and the
last twenty years we have almost
doubled teacher salaries almost
doubled we've increased that
three cheers system
almost double and given
increases on top of that at two
years ago we had seven hundred
and fifty classrooms around this
day that did not have a
qualified teacher so we've given
all these salary increases we've
given good professional
development with moved into
multicultural app curriculum and
this year we have seven hundred
and forty seven classrooms with
the article fight teacher so
we all say it's the salaries
but.
Not what's happening in the
education system
the two places where we've got a
lot of people all the sudden is
the environment department and
energy minerals and that's
because they're hiring those
federal workers that evolve and
laid off that quickly round to
those agencies so I just I just
tell you it it's just not
necessarily salaries it sounds
like it is republic to
and if you want to come in go
ahead but i've got something
else to work mis- mister chair
and center just very briefly I I
agree with you it's not just
salary salaries important we
have an independent salary
structure because we are an
independent agency we have our
own hr we've done our own salary
studies are returning vacancy
rate is still really high I
think seventeen percent as of
the end of march our course
staff against here was five
point nine and I think that goes
to
really trying to focus on people
who grew up in a community and
are going to stay in a community
for instance in alamo gordon
with center you know it was
center block those officers we
try to get higher people in and
pay them and create a place that
that they're comfortable working
now and let's determine of
course we have to do this and we
have to work on the salaries i'm
just telling you it's not silver
bullet and mr chairman may just
address just very quickly but
i've got something else I will
be up five minutes
the number of public defenders
in the district attorneys
is a tiny tiny tiny fraction of
the education community the
teachers so in this tiny
community compensation is a very
heavy factory i'm not seeing a
loan obviously to have a source
have a flow of individuals but
give the comparison is difficult
to make because you have so many
teachers in the state.
And basically when you add up
all of the public defenders and
district attorneys and the state
it's a very small number that is
very oriented to compensation
nevertheless the one i'm trying
to tell you is that you began
with the focus on compensation
and you're ending with it I
agree we have to work on that
that we have to increase your
salaries and i'm one that police
we don't have enough return it's
I just look at the legislature
like good grieve i've got no
attorney in the republican party
in the senate to send to the
what's the cop uniform
commission you know so yeah we
we had to put the center thought
in our judiciary cos we've got
no attorneys from his party so I
agree with that
however
it's very upsetting to me i'm
gonna claim senator seers
concept so I know you the best
that you had eight hundred and
thirty nine domestic violence
missed the meaners and you only
settled thirty one
no a number of years ago we had
all this back clock
sexual assoc kits that weren't
tested we've started to increase
those account and we've got
thousands of them telling you
women are start to feel like we
don't count that the days that
well the whole criminal system
seems to be against us
and numerous ways and of course
now of course with their our new
administration but it's really
upsetting to hear these numbers
how many untested sexual sockets
do you have well again this is
domestic violence is different
from sexual assault it is
it is
how many people start with
domestic violence and then
eventually it moves in to.
Heavy criminal stuff so they're
dinner
mr chairman the two challenges
that we face are that
unfortunately victims because
the case takes so long right
basically are not wanting to go
forward with prosecution or the
historical problem for law
enforcement officers don't show
up basically to the hearing or
the trial and you don't really
have the appropriate witnesses
so we're working very closely
with law enforcement to make
sure that they're there we're
working very closely with the
alleged victims so that they
stay the course but shrinking
the timeline specifically in
this area that's why I raised it
is something that the
legislature should be very
closely focused on what mr
chairman are I appreciate that
and I agree with you and I hope
we can do that
I haven't seen very many good
reforms
that have come out of this
constant it takes too long we
don't have enough people you
know we're going to cast your
side is just in this demeator
who cares sometimes those missed
demeanor turns in the murder and
I would ask you how many of
those cases has that happened
but I think my times
and i've made my point don't
take a personal thank you mister
chairman.
Five minutes please think you
mister chair I will try not to
take five minutes
I just want a
gratitude to both of you i've
worked with both of you i've
known mr macias for probably a
hundred years it seems like I
think when you became a senator
early on um
I i've seen your work I know how
hard it is and I just thank you
for what you do first about
so mister chair in the last
three years that i've been
in this position
i've seen you know the need for
more teachers so the need for
engineers from dlta
are state i'll have to recently
talk to us about accountants
today i'm hearing about
attorneys which I honestly did
not know cause I was one of
those people that that there's
too many attorneys rate
social service workers with
cyfde firefighters police
doctors and I heard us are
discussion and remember where I
come from I come as a bureaucrat
from twenty eight years in the
system so I know I very very
very sensitive to the need for
more workers and mister chair I
am only vaguely familiar with
the hour classification study
that the state is doing and I
really want to know more about
that then I understand that you
all have your own hr system but
I go back to the sort of hr
system
because especially when we talk
about classification because I
think about recruitment and
retention a lot and how do we
keep our state employer
employees because at the end of
the day what's important to them
is their pera.
And their quality of life and
you know how does that factor
back to the work that you're you
all are doing and trying to do
the best with what you have and
I know that that having having
had my own staff I know how
difficult that is
and so that's why I say to you
thank you for what you're doing
but mister chair one of the
things that I think about is our
parabenefits and what are we
really
offering these employees to want
to stay and deal with all this
craziness and nuts especially
the young ones that want to say
hey I think i'll move to new
york or washington or somewhere
else where they get paid twice
as much so as we think about all
of this
we need to be thinking about
how are economic development
issues are affecting our
implement our state employees
and what we're offering them
besides our parent benefits
peres are really valuable
resource our health care is a
really valuable resources
especially for repairer and your
erb
but the lack of professionals is
very concerning to me and I
think that we need to be working
with our hour systems and our
universities mister mister chair
I don't see any of those people
in the audience and I think
that's very concerning to me
right now as we're discussed
discuss discussing the
effectiveness and the
efficiency of these programs on
a daily basis so in our if we're
having these lag times in not
being able to prosecute I mean
it relates back to the lack of
staff that are in these systems
and you know I think that that
is very.
Important when we think about
the operation of each of these
state agencies and that is you
know not really are job it's the
governor's job but it is an our
job to ensure that we're
providing
you know the funding that are
needed for these positions and
that were make ensuring that the
operations of these agencies is
being taken very seriously that
there's accountability for the
effectiveness and the efficiency
of these departments so I you
know it it's very concerning to
me when I think about what is a
healthy work environment and
what is an unhealthy work
environment I mean just going
back to thinking about that
a toxic work environment is when
you're just stressed out you
can't handle it there's so much
going on you can bear you get
home and you have it out twenty
percent for your family and I
mean that's a really unhealthy
situation
especially when you're dealing
with criminals I help more
healthy work environment would
be a stable climate that is
sustainable over time and so
mister chairman I bring up these
issues only because I have been
immersed in these in these sorts
of operational agencies app at
my own on my own personal level
and I think that you know we
forget that these that you know
I mean we need to really be
thinking about what are the
benefits that were offering at
the end of the day and so thank
you mr chair i'm I said I would
try not to do my whole five
minutes.
Um for small ie to set a stewart
i've known
center whatever we're going to
call him mister macius for a
probably close to thirty years
now he got me into politics he
asked me run for county
commissioner initially in a made
that decision to the kitchen
table with him and his wife and
a few other people when I was
very young man
you're concerned about a women's
issues is very deep you may not
know this about service here's
three dollars
for daughters he's got me beat
on that too i've only got three
in and that's it it's a
household women so
there are some pretty good
advocates at home in his
household in mind too and and I
think that it's good to you
bring this issue up to us as
well I want to recognize the
fact we have three interns I
want to reemphasize that again
here they all women
I don't see san francisco back
there in the back anymore but
was a woman i'm sorry oh oh i'm
sorry terribly sorry my mistake
I I was going to focus my
attention on the san francisco a
connection because you just
can't beat uh what we can offer
you you all be interested here
and all about the the salary
issues here but we we offer a
more more than that I think here
in new mexico than high salaries
I I would want the committee
know that we've heard for the
last several years the issue of
pretrial detention very
important to the governor of her
important to the attorney
general when the young park
shootings took place I went to
the hearings for the prechild
attention and last cruise as I
sat in the courtroom because I
want to see how the system works
I could tell you to do this
doing your home districts go
watch prechild detention here is
asked the da public defenders to
let you know when they're going
on I went and watched the uh
pretrial detection hearing of
the accused of of those
shootings in last cruises and we
saw very efficient system I saw
law enforcement do an
exceptional job I saw something
I hadn't seen a long time we are
mister mosies do the
presentations of of the
arguments before the court and
all those individuals were
detained without changing our
loss without needing to pass any
new laws and we saw.
Good cops doing a good job we
saw a good prosecutor good
district attorney saga public
defenders doing their job well
and we saw courageous judge who
had been threatened I think and
was in a threat environment in
expressed some of those concerns
do the cradising and detained
these young individuals a system
worked the way that I was happy
to see it working in that
instance but I would want you to
know that we have mister masses
actually prosecuting cases this
has been a good panel we've got
a little bit long but I I think
i'm i'm I always as a chair I
watch the committee a lot to see
you know if we when I see on
your computers in your laptop so
I see you yourself once I I
think i've done a bad job
because I put a topic in in
presenters in front of us that
are not stimulating a your
interest and i'm not seeing that
today which is good that that
warms my heart it also tells me
that we need to do more of this
and i'll let you know that i'm
gonna ask these two individuals
that I want to think mr barcass
we we this was supposed to be
your hour alone in a
cut into it a little bit with a
discretion but we're going to do
this again the panels missing
one important person in my
opinion who's not with you and I
hope that he'll join us the next
time we have the two of you
together which would be the
chief justice of the spring
court
because a lot of the comments in
issues here been directed at the
court's role and we don't do
that we're going to hear the
chief justice tomorrow but
that's really not the right way
to do it right the right way to
do it would be to have the two
of you and the chief justice
here and have about two more
hours and then we might really
get somewhere I think and so i'm
going to try and work on that a
little bit as well too
represent garet made the point
it's when i've made a long time
when he ever emphasised it the
issue here our problem is not an
absence of laws and and you
talked about it as matter
policies the word you didn't use
representative guarantee I i'd
like to use is it's about
leadership it really comes down
to that I I got a district
attorney in my home district
where crime has been on the rise
you all have heard center
stewart is reminded me
repeatedly in years past I put
out the fact that lusters had a
very good crime rate.
Compared to albuquerque and I
would uh chat her and she tried
me right back her and i've been
find about this for ten years
and peters been in the middle of
it sometimes
where where i'd say hey last
christmas is doing great and
then and then we've seen the
numbers in last cruises declined
deplorably to the point where
las cruises is now a dangerous
place please keep in mind i'll
pass out comparable size best I
can come comparable to
albuquerque has probably won the
tenth is recreated consistently
by the f b I is when the taped
uh ten saver cities in the
country
someone park in anthony which I
represent is considered to the
safest cities in the state of
new mexico they all have the
same as stame state laws but
different results and parcel
that we blame our crime on
proximity the border we blame it
on immigration we blame it on
drugs we blame it on poverty
he'll pass us across the street
from the water i'll parcel has
more immigrants and has in the
welcoming environment for
immigrants in all passes when
the safer cities in the country
and the problem is not
approximately the board of
promised i'd immigration the
problem is not poverty the
problem is leadership and and
let's call it what is and let's
call it out and let's provide
that leadership as legislators
and that's that's my challenge
to all of us too as well and all
the nice words accountability
and oversight results are
statistics and so forth we'll
see some of those statistics in
your materials latest afternoon
because we have a lot of data we
are legislative council has done
a great job of of gathering a
lot of data and and we just need
to learn how to use that a
little bit too so I am I I think
there's one observation I want
to reimphasize what center my
has has talked about the this
notion in mister bower creating
the independence of the public
defender's office then what we
haven't said here recent peace
governor ridgets and veto that
because
let's just say what is generally
executive and governors don't
get elected and don't stay
popular in the polls by being
civil libertarians they get
there by being tough on crime.
And telling everybody they're
tougher than everyone else on
crime and not things have never
changed so governor richardson
would veto that legislation and
we had to the only thing to do
the right thing was to go to the
public and do a constitutional
member which worked and it was a
good thing I think it's
unfortunate that we had to ask
the public to do what we
couldn't do ourselves which is
override a veto because we knew
it was the right thing to do so
we should have done and we as
his leaders here have to accept
some responsibility for a lack
of courage at times too and that
was frankly lack of courage to
have to go to the public and say
you you the public tell the
governor that we want an
independent public defender's
office now what's interesting
about that as the public
defender structure is an
independent group the district
attorneys is curiously an
independent group into itself
each elected official seems
seemingly as an independent
authority and we have entirely
different results
so we have now let's talk about
it maybe later today we have a
district attorney who are our
legislature in the governor have
effectively defined it entirely
in a gallop because least
arguably that district attorney
is is doing such a poor job that
the only solution was taken away
all the funding for that
district attorney and who may be
have a disk different district
attorney that handle that job
i'm watching mr macias trying to
look away and I see the other
district there is ever looking
down into their lapses like oh
god there goes joseph talking
about the stuff we don't want to
talk about but but the reality
is we have all these district
attorneys and some of them are
good and so on there were not
an in when we talk about
salaries and attracting people
part of the reason and honestly
that I believe mr macias is
attracted to turns back this
because to his answer he showing
a vision he showing leadership
is making people feel part of
something more important than
just salaries and we we need to
say that
and we need to figure out this
is does it work where we have
the public defender's kind of an
under a centralized.
Form of organization and
administration and we have each
district attorney doing their
own thing and at different
levels of competence and simply
because they can get elected in
their home districts we we maybe
need to think about that and i'm
going to make the dates whose
representative here had exploded
by saying you know maybe we need
to start thinking about
centralizing district attorneys
a little bit more or created a
greater cohesiveness that's
probably a big step but it's I
think probably we're talking a
little bit about two so I am I I
think the
committee a members for some
good questions some good dialog
I hope that the point you all
don't have to hear from me again
the the problem is not going to
be sold by passing some new laws
and getting a press conference
and patting ourselves in the
back the problem is going to be
a showing leadership in making
sure that the other suit we rely
upon show the same as well to
holding them to it so thank you
for your discussion will do this
panel again I think during the
center of and we'll maybe try
and get the courts to join the
discussion so thank you all very
much for your questions good
thank you so much
mister barrel thank you again
for letting me share your time a
little bit
we're we're about getting close
to an hour behind schedule but
i'm we're going to make it up
during the new hour
to mister johnson ms nichols
commander.
I'm glad you could hear a part
of the last presentation.
The the schedule shows us for a
lunch break it's not shown as a
working lunch but I think we
turned into working lunch will
make up some time there and I
didn't want to cut off the last
discussion at all so
alright municipal league
recruitment law enforcement
recruitment in retention
I couldn't come up with a catchy
title for that I trade really
art
I was in a creative mode so
thank you mister chair and I
think you did have a clever
title on the agenda I think it
was boots on the ground or
something so that's it but we
like we like that that was good
i'm alice nicholson deputy
director of the new mexico
municipal league
mr chair members of the
committee good morning time
johnson with the municipally as
well
thank you we're going to talk a
little bit today about one
forcement recruitment and
retention so I think yet
continuing some of the themes
that you heard in the last
presentation around you know
attorney recruitment and
retention some some similar
themes uh some different as well
so um tim johnson's gonna go to
take it away mostly he obviously
has a wealth of experience on
this matter
and then i'll talk a little bit
at the end about the next steps
that we're looking at on this
topic and where we hope to go
from here to kind of push them
to thinking and the the data
analysis for it a little bit
given mr chair good morning
thank you
the lack of lawyers took our
hour and I know one between you
and lunch so i'll be as brief as
I possibly can
we're gonna go over a couple of
things will quickly highlight
them and then we'll go over the
first the current recruitment
and retention numbers that were
seeing in the state we have a
couple of chiefs here today I
was to acknowledge them chief
funds also a uh known as doctor
funds from hobs and we have chi
field uh from here towski valley
another thing is we're gonna
give some ideas or what we're
hearing from the field and what
we because some of these vacancy
rental law enforcement.
The thirteen is what the
municipal league and the self
insurers fund is doing to help
support our member agencies
possible solutions which we have
some and we're actually here to
get some solutions from you if
you have one we will love to
hear it and lastly we really
want to talk about is we're
planning to do an evaluation
speaking to everybody who has
affected by this to figure out
things we can do better and
hopefully get to present that to
you again before the next
legislative session or the the
sixty day two years now
on the second slide I would like
to first draw your attention to
the right side where it talks
about some of the national data
so we are not alone in our in
our country having problems
recruiting I think a lot of
agencies a lot along for some
agencies in our country are
having the same problems
and i've had a presentation
recently in a red of one of
bunch of articles last four or
five years
are military has seen a decline
as well oddly enough the only
branch that did not was the
marine corps I have some
theories on a that we probably.
Uh and so those problems we all
understand staffing shortages
mandatory over time
more you know having a cut
specialized units when you don't
have enough people and then you
see some of the things that you
were talking about in the
previous hour so
again you can see some of the
numbers there from around a
state there in front of you I
don't want to read him for the
sake of time but you know hob's
doctor fonds
back there working on a third
thirty three percent vacancy
rate uh which is probably not
very effective for his community
i'm sure he's doing the best
that he can inner his officers
are as well but
those are a dangerous levels
go to the third slide some of
the things we believe that maybe
contributing to this uhm
in there no specific order
the age old areas that we
sometimes uses perceptions
reality
our officers in the public for
that matter these days as I
think senator to heal mentioned
earlier
field demoralised
I can't remember the when I was
the chief of the state police I
remember talking to our folks
you know about the revolving
door the perception of the
robbling door and them being
frustrated with their job that
they don't feel like they're
being effective and protecting
the people they were sworn to
protect thousands of
conversations with most are
saying you can only do the part
that you can do you will make
good cases do good interviews
have good reasonable suspicion
good problem cause maybe good
arrests right good reports
testify well collect evidence
beyond that it's out of your
hands you know what the days do
what the judges do we can't
control that part so I had that
conversation thousands of times
the last four or five years as
the chief arm I think you'd help
sometimes a lot of times it
didn't but it's not only the
cops that are feeling
demoralised about this it's also
the public again as senator to
hue mention
i've been in front of this
committee many times thank you
for that senator servantes.
One thing that I have always
said as I felt like and I would
argue with anyone who says
that's not accurate that.
Over the last twelve to fifteen
years I feel like every societal
problem has been left for the
police to solve
and some of the expanded duties
as you can see
you know
we now have to be
an expert on controlled
substances you have to be an
expert in mental health school
resource officers all of these
things that I guarantee you in
nineteen ninety nine was not on
the job description when I
applied
was not on there
I mean I do think there's hope
if i'll be positive on the
slight the kids growing up these
days my kids you know some of
the younger guys are not guys
and gels are not going to know
any difference they grew up in
this system and how things are
going but the people that are
going out the back door didn't
sign up for that and frankly
didn't don't have the skills to
address those types of things
effectively as we want and we
wonder why we're seeing some of
the things that we are seeing
today with policing
so the moralized expanded duties
you understand that again
perception is reality some legal
risks
you know the debates the timing
the missing formation during
imposed house bill for was as a
complete disaster for recruiting
law enforcement but complete
disaster
we must remember that there was
an eight foot chain leak fence
surrounding the capital when
that bill was being debated lar
enforcement folks were not
allowed in the building
to give their opinions on this I
understand why we did it
but again I talk about
perception as reality
disasters for our profession.
Pay gaps which I think we have
done a good job I know
man protem just mentioned that
it's not always money
I think it it it probably is a
non starter when you don't pay
well but I don't think this was
making our field folks day or
retired
so pay gaps we have a couple
solutions for that if you look
to the right way as much as you
all have done and in law
forcement thanks you so much for
that as much as you have done
the last four or five years you
know you look to the right there
were still beating only ok
homeless in this region
um
so i'm still more to do there
and we have some we believe some
solutions for that
reactive policy making uh keep
seeing it you perception is
reality
all of us you know all this in
this preference and believe that
the conversation is being add in
the decisions being made in that
round building in santa fe
all of those decisions and all
those conversations that you are
having are we are having or
getting to the field we may not
think they're paying attention
but they are
and the municipal league I think
is great at this I don't realize
they do this before I got here
but we are making sure the law
enforcement in those folks are
updated on the conversations all
our having the decisions you
make you are making we do that
every day
and so again the reason why I
don't think it will recoup we
recruit as well as we did the
last four or five years this
what I call stimulus response
governance which was something
happens and we feel we have to
do something very quickly to
address that rather than looking
at you what may be the problems
and a better solution for it and
so there the folks in the field
and the people wanting to do
this job are seeing that and
seeing I would be crazy to sign
up for that right now and they
wouldn't be wrong most times
and we've always above all those
talking points we all understand
those I hope we all understand
those
when speaking rules talking
points recruitment has always.
Been done by the folks wearing
the uniform who are interacting
with the citizens every single
day of those citizens obviously
are your constituents
and they're reacting with them
day and day out the last four or
five years like I could assure
you and maybe this is our fault
we need to look in the mirror at
times to
but we are rarely encouraging
those for folks to join this
profession now and when I
started I would say half of the
new mexico police was probably a
family member of another state
police officer
a year before I retired we did
district meetings every single
year where I got in front of all
six hundred and fifty of our
officers and a just did like a
very impromptu pole where I
asked all of our current
officers how many of them are
recruiting their own kids to
join the state police or
another law enforcement agency
even in state the now the six
hundred and fifty i'm not
exaggerating I probably had
twelve hands
so that that tells you like our
number one
way of recruiting which is
people in uniform recruiting
their own family members is gone
hopefully we can get that back I
think we can
and even my own kid who wants to
join this profession I don't
know what to tell him right now
he'll be applying for somebody
in the next two or three years
hopefully it's hopefully it's
here but it may not be
lastly I think law enforcement
and I also listening to my good
friend
public definite and yes we are
good friends he was a state
please pin he should have been
wearing it today
I think we're missing out on the
I used to not believe in this
fluff stuff but the generational
gaps that were seen with the
kids these days who are entering
the work force it sounds like
they have the same problem I
think man and protest mentioned
it is nap I don't think they're
necessary looking at money these
days.
Are they looking at other things
and is hel- how they were raised
in the generation that they're
in I think we are missing that
hopefully someone smarter than
me can figure out how how to fix
that but I think those are many
of the factors uh which I don't
think are surprised anybody in
this room and why were having
trouble recruiting it's just a
few.
Want to tell you a few things
that how we support our folks
you know if you look to the
right for those of some of the
new newer members
you know we represent all the
cities in the state and as part
of that we have sixty five long
forcement agencies that we I
assist with and we insure
some of the things that we
provide them we think is going
is helping with some of the
recruitment and retention we
hope not yet but it we hope it
will but we offer free mental
health services to all of them
and their families you know at
any time after crisis or just
when they need to talk to
somebody
critical incident stressed
briefings if there's mass
incident but as the chair
mentioning last crucials we
would send public safety
psychology group down there to
talk to whoever needed needed to
have some conversations about
that in also training in
engagements we also pay for
the whole sweet of training that
the public safety psychology
group offers I won't listen to
thirteen classes it's all the
things that we have talked about
the last five years was pretty
descalation in things like that
we pay for them to get certified
on that most of those are weak
long classes that I think is
going to help us have better
interactions with the citizens
which again lower the
temperature a little bit and
hopefully allow more folks or
what more folks will want to do
this job
we do know in future chief
training folks that have a goal
of being achieved someday
there's currently no training
that the state offers them to be
prepared for that job so we put
on a week long class twice a
year
hopefully getting those people
ready to take that next step to
lead our lead our agencies in
the state we usually have twenty
five to thirty people in that
class I think it's great learn
everything from budgeting to ie
to a lot of different things
quickly.
Are we host the conference every
year which I think some of you
have been been invited to I
would invite you to the next
minutes and redo so in november
I think all of you should be
there be very I opening for you
you'll get to interact with
three hundred plus cops from
around the state and lastly what
we've implemented here recently
which I think the chair is going
to appreciate
but we are in contract with a
company called lexipol and so
basically what that is is all of
the policies for the member
agencies of self insurers for
sixty five are all going to have
the exact same policies on
everything they are they put
those in and our folks train on
them and you know once you get
through the implementation phase
it's very easy for a chief of
police uhm when a policy needs
to change like support does it
for you they have lawyers that
are constantly looking at the
tenth circuit or decisions that
you are making laws that pass
and those are updated overnight
in the policies and it since
quizzes to the officers to make
sure they understand the policy
and know what the new case
lawyers on on any matter so I
think the beauty and that is
that the countries also have
that and I believe the state
police is currently in
negotiations with lexible to
have that also have that service
so you figure out that would be
eighty percent eighty percent of
the state are going to be
working off the same policies
and procedures are i'm not sure
burning or counting out or epid
but or crucial eighty percent of
the caps in the state will be
working on the same under the
same standards
potential solutions some of
those some of these you have
already
tried to pass tax benefits we
think would be helpful or
financial incentives again
some tax benefits I think other
states do that we would be
property tax or if you get in
any tax questions some of the
folks you know me
you're gonna lose me after one
we got smart people here to
answer that so.
Uh just take my word for that
may help
however they go about that or
you go about that
you know having a part of money
obviously to senator moon center
moon yourself committee and
being approved by all of youth
to start rewarding a lot of the
small agencies are rule agency
can't afford this but if there
was a part of money where we
gave instead of pay for people
who spoke a spoke lane reserve
or or was an instructor or got
certified in the escalation or
has a master's degree
having a part of money to
increase that to instant avis
people to stick around and
become more professional
increased p levels again I think
it's a non starter I don't think
it's the biggest problem we have
a long forcement recruitment but
it is obviously close to the
front door if you're not paying
enough so we have some ideas for
that in its obviously trying to
keep somewhat competitive with
the larger agencies that pay
really good salary these days
thinks to you are
but getting the smaller more
rural agencies more competitive
with those folks
excuse me some of the working
conditions we think would be
beneficial
in I believe this is law
enforcements fault not
necessarily anybody staring at
me but pushing for some expanded
compensation
or i'm sorry yeah compensation
presumptions of
our brothers and sisters in the
fire service are very good at
this
of taking care of their folks
after they've been injured or
after they retire I don't know
that law enforcement has been
very good at that and we do see
re occurring problems with lower
backs from carrying all that
gear for twenty five years are
hearing
you know from being at the range
or anything else
we're seen of the hips or
starting to go out too I think
because of some of the gear.
So
law enforcement looking in the
mirror and saying hey we need to
be in front of you all to get to
get more of those
you know conditions covered
after their careers over.
One thing chief heavy wanted me
to mention and we can talk about
this tonight a dinner chair
because
you mean not like this and but
increased penalties and and
making it very clear to the
folks doing this job that if you
batter an officer shoot an
officer any of that
the likelihood of your feet ever
touching dirt again or zero
and I think they would go a long
way for the folks that were
doing this job and there's many
there's
People you know rocker or
lieutenant in in edgewood
was shot in the neck by a person
wearing an income monitor
wearing an echo monitor because
he shot at a cop that you an
impediate.
We don't need to get we could
talk about that a bunch.
And again us looking in the
mirror on with your help minimum
qualifications for chief
executives I think so often we
don't
you know no finished anybody
made me listen but we're not
always making sure we're getting
the right people to lead an
agency and I think that is
important and we can get those
folks they're not saying they
would never be but able to have
that job but we probably need to
have some minimum requirements
for a person if they are going
to be running allow forcement
agency which
i'm sure my phone will be
blowing up after this
chrome is strategies we've
talked about those bonus if we
go the next slide
and then the reason why we're
here
we want to do an evaluation and
identify the biggest challenges
and talk to everybody involved I
know the chair had mentioned
that dassels voice daft and may
have asked the question of how
are they fully staffed
you know when they're
sister agency cruises pd's I
believe thirty down at this time
what are they doing we want to
ask those things are to figure
out what they are doing so that
we can spread that across the
state and again just
figuring out ways
to make it better have better
outcomes for recouping a
retention and we want your input
on whatever data you think you
would want us to ask whenever we
start doing this evaluation.
Mr charges are briefly wrap up
um want to kind of take it to
the to the next level here with
some of these questions I mean
we hear a lot from municipal
unfortunate another law
enforcement so I think we have
some good hypothesis maybe not
just us you know you all do of
course on what is what is kind
of driving this recruitment and
retention challenges than some
of the solutions I think we all
have ideas but we want to take
it a little bit more from kind
of hypothesis or you know
anecdotal
solutions to more data driven in
this conversation came up
internally around the pay issue
when we were talking about what
is the right level of pay you
know what do you need to pay
somebody to to get them to join
the field as a as a police
officer get them to stick around
and then discuss in those
discussions realizing what we
don't really know what what is
the answer and you know this
came up in the last discussion
but how much is pay actually a
factor versus other things so we
want to dig in a little bit more
to that question specifically
and then from there i'm looking
at some of the other potential
solutions what will actually
move the needle because we want
invest and things that will work
and that you know have some kind
of research to back them up or
that we feel like there's some
kind of data
even just beginning with what
are the vacancy rates in law
enforcement agencies across the
state and how is that changed
over time because even that you
know we have some information
but not not super comprehensive
and especially at the municipal
level you know I don't think
anyone else is really doing that
that's our job of course so we
want to make sure we have that
and then
you know doing interviews with
law enforcement leaderships and
the people in the field surveys
I want to get some hiring data
from minister unfortunate
departments and dig into that
and then look at some
comparative national research
and best practices so again to
be more data driven going
forward so when you know we come
back to you accession or
whatever
we can feel confident that we're
asking for something that we
really feel.
So you know finally
happy to answer any questions
but would also like to know from
you as we do this exercise this
this more independent valuation
what questions would you like
answered and is there you know
any data that that you've
thought oh I would love to know
this but the state it doesn't
exist
and you know we want to try to
look into those things so thank
you thank you for your
partnership on this thank you
thank you for being a resource
for those listening back home
it's not your computer we have
some electrical activity going
on around us which is making the
day interesting and we we do
have we're limit behind the
schedule so i'm gonna be a
little tight with a gavel you do
have lunch waiting for us and I
don't want to get too far behind
so I have search for here and I
see representative block it was
a whole.
Brantley
will my rate on my left nobody
on my left man entry so that
doesn't mean anything i'm sure
senator hit through here
representative block thank you
mister chairman and and thank
you and allison for your
information i've had the
pleasure of working with him in
the past so it's nice to see you
here and always um I I think
when you when you talk about the
public perception it's important
and an and I just want to point
out how important it is by an
anecdotal story
we've had a lot of challenges in
our in my community and regards
to homeless on the shelter or
are we going to do about the
homeless issue and
the public has the impression
that linforcement has walked
away and doesn't respond and
isn't taking responsibility but
the reality is and i'm quoting
this from a newspaper article
that a press release that came
out from the city that in twenty
twenty four
there were three thousand two
hundred calls just for pete's
place
area and peace places are are
community homeless shelter three
thousand two hundred calls in
that service area they
anticipate if we go at the
current rate for twenty twenty
five they'll be over four
thousand and fifty calls to that
area there's already been
eighteen hundred and fifty four
proactive actions seven hundred
and twenty nine fire department
the cot calls and a one point
nine five million fire
department responses the state
police have been involved that
law enforcement has been at the
table but the perception is real
when I attend community forums
in my community on the east
side.
Cause I go from east to south
and that seems weird but it's
used to south and santa fe and
when I attend community forums
on the east side the subject
matter really focuses on
environment on maybe housing
cars maybe night
when I attend in my community
where I live I live just a few
blocks off of airport so i'm
really right in the heart of
southern santa fe on the south
side
people talk about crime
they're concerned about crime
they're concerned about what's
happened to their homes they're
concerned about what's happening
in our neighborhoods they're
concerned their very concerned
their fearful and they don't and
they don't know and so you know
we spend a lot of time trying to
educate the public about what
the law enforcement is doing the
challenges with pre detention
trials hearing like you can go
through all that but one thing I
learned early on in running for
office and an in and trying to
help the public understand
something is that if you have to
explain it too much you've
already lost them and so I do
think public perception is
really important and I don't
know you know how to go about
doing that
on a lighter note I will see the
fire department called and ask
me if I wanted to ride during
the parade I didn't get a call
from the police department
though to write in one of your
cars
to chair center trial it will
probably attempts place they
were probably at peace place
that's correct
but nonetheless I do think that
we've got to do something about
public perception and we have to
start pointing our fingers at
one another and saying you know
cause I tried to say when i'm in
a meaning it's not the
legislative fault I I quote some
of senator servant is statistics
about the crime laws that we
have.
Um but the police department is
saying it's not my fault it's
the legislature's fault because
they're not doing this and the
courts say it's not our fault
it's the the law enforcements
fall we've got a stat but I
don't really have a question
mister chairman I just want to
point out that I think public
perception is a bigger issue
than what has been shared today
thank you.
Thank you mister chair thank you
both for being here today good
presentation I really like that
you focus on both the
prospective of law enforcement
and then also the communities
that they serve which is super
important and for me in my
community we really love our law
enforcement and the thing that
we have is the county the
sheriff keeps on stealing
officers from the city and then
the city valme gordon keeps on
stilling officers from the
county and so it's like a I
guess it's a it's an interesting
dynamic where there's actually
people who do want to serve and
communities like mine we're
always looking for more but are
you also gonna be looking at
that in your evaluations to see
what local communities are doing
when it comes to law enforcement
to recruit recruit retain etc
thank you mr chair center or
representative of block yes
you're correct in we I again I
keep telling you i've been in
front of this committee many
times thank you for that but we
are china that one slide about
pay like being competitive with
other states we're not seeing
we're not seeing numbers or
applicants in the mexical right
now I think we can change that
so we're trying to focus on
getting some outer state folks
and
if we can I think it'll stop us
cannibalising each other's
agencies when we're fully
staffed like you don't hopefully
you don't have positions where
the share of department motor
county can take from almost pete
thank you so much mister
chairman thank you for that tim
and then can you just remind the
committee how much does it cost
to train a certified police
officer and the state in a
mexico
i'm a little bit out of the game
right now but I think I I think
it's north of a hundred thousand
and vehicles north of eighty
thousand
so yeah we're looking at you
know two hundred and million
thank you and I was looking for
that that statistic and that's
good to know because I know a
lot of our officers some bummer
recruited to other states and so
we trained them to get certified
in the city in mexico they have
all that training and then they
get sent to alabama or sent to
oklahoma or somewhere.
That is in my opinion more a
favorable and welcoming to law
enforcement officers and I think
we need to look at that and keep
that in our perspective while
we're making public policy
because we won't need to be a
place that welcomes both the law
enforcement officer as well as
their family and I think some of
the the items that you have on
your list such as a increased
penalties for shooting stabbing
and following us assaulting an
officer is something that is
just like
common sense I would have
thought there was already on on
the books but I guess not and I
think we can continue to work on
it and I hope you find a good
individual to sponsor that
legislation I won't be that
person because if it was me it
would die immediately and see
pack or judiciary committee or
somewhere but I hope you find a
good sponsor and I hope it can
pass thank you so much mister
chair thank you so much both of
you.
The interest rate
couple of couple of comments and
maybe a question in there
leadership you touched on that I
think is critical.
In maintaining
our numbers
my son was a young police
officer in farming can where the
answer sixty eight thousand
calls for service per month.
Leaderships critical to keep
these young after so it's not
pay per se
that's part of it.
Which you you've touched on
there now I would ask that when
you're when you were reaching
out to the agencies for their
opinions and stuff.
That if you could coordinate
because you guys come to a
support the municipally we need
to figure out what the county
needs and obviously you know you
know what the statement you have
good resources when the state
police but to jurisdiction of
the state police now they handle
calls how county sheriff's
office handles calls and
municipal police department
handles calls.
Is generally in especially given
the difference in municipalities
just in my area we've got
farming in the sixty thousand
calls for service per month and
into smaller communities and
then a rather large sharp's
office for the state in your
mexico so it incourage if we
could somehow get a
collaborative set of numbers
instead of just municipal
if if that was possible to do
that in the
I would like you to expand on
your thuts on why the marine
corps didn't have recruiting.
No I don't then I won't
I I mean
chief I just feel that
leadership is key
i've seen great leaders come in
and out along forcement and the
numbers typically show it or a
legislation effects the way are
law enforcement does things as
well
it's not just a pay issue and
i'd like exist for second expand
a little bit on that without
seeing something not comfortable
saying
mr chair representative are yes
I had notes in here about
leadership I I think this
committee in the past is quoted
the same and cynic guy whatever
his name is
I agree with you that leadership
is a huge issue I would
challenge you and everybody
staring at me and the person
people on the fourth floor
uhm the leadership is not only
the chief of police it's also
the mayor so so all of you the
governor
and it's a thought of feeling
secure so
is it easy to blame the cheaper
police but it's not just him
no I wasn't leaning towards
blaming just the chief just for
clarification
so when we when we look at that
I think too often the answer is
is it just money
in it's not just money I have
the opportunity I teach it the
law enforcement academy of the
same one county.
The new interview and very few
of those people have gone to
work in law enforcement very few
for the money obviously
they all to a person when
they're young rookies right
what's what we say we want to
make a difference
and I think we can I think the
recruiting
is an issue but once we show
they can make a difference and
they're going to be supported
we'll make a huge difference in
so I appreciate you you've
comments since in stepping out
of your comfort spoken on the
leadership but please
i'm assuming there's a way you
can coordinate with the county
association okay I see an idea
so thank you that's all I have
mister chairman thank you.
Thank you mr chairman and think
you guys both for being here
today geographically I have an
enormous district and i'm very
diverse I have an and I proud
myself on keeping very constant
communication with my law
enforcement agencies including
los cruces police chief journey
story whose daily duties and
priorities are very different
and let's say the sheriff of
capturing county during the
height of hunting season or
whatever it may be but I will
tell you on my frequent visits
with all of them including luna
and her daga who have a
different concerns when it comes
to proximity to the border this
list looks very similar and
that's because crime is not just
an urban issue anymore it is
really transcended into all
world parts of new mexico and it
all comes down to demoralization
this is why we're having a hard
time attracting officers and and
you said several times I remind
my officers though that are many
of these on these perceptions
let's say of an example you gave
was the revolving door that we
can't do anything about that
you're right but we as
legislators can do something
about it and the rest of that
list is in fact things I would
argue and we talk about failed
leadership that we did do as a
legislator the actually
perceived legal rest I think
that the removal of qualified
immunity has done great harm I
don't think that you guys were
disagree or any law enforcement
officers out there would pay
gaps I continue to hear from my
sheriffs that were cannibalizing
our own law enforcement officers
and while I am very proud that
we made enormous investments in
our state police officers that
came at a cost to our local
county departments who are now
all recruiting the same people
and it's coming down to in some
cases two three dollars
differences and were unable to
provide law enforcement in rural
areas of new mexico because we
did not consider the discrepancy
that create it.
And we active policy making I
couldn't agree more and neither
could my law enforcement
entities that that we do we as a
legislator react to headlines
and hot topic current political
topics that make good headlines
back during legislator but it's
not a big picture we're not
talking about how we create
sustainable law enforcement
community moving forward I do
think that on your side five I
would love to see all of these
proposals that you laid out
before us in draft legislation
and I know some of it has been a
tax breaks front of fantastic
ideas i'd love to see it out
draft legislation we start
having opening conversations
about how any of this could help
we we kind of joked around here
on the increased penalties for
attacking law enforcement
officers in fact every year it
has been proposed and they don't
get hearings every single year
and the reason why that matters
is because in my short time and
the legislator i've been to two
funerals for law enforcement
officers the more murder of
state police officer daring and
share it who was murdered during
legislative session in in this
last legislative session we bury
jonah hernandez the loss cruises
place department and the message
that we need to send is that
until new mexico is the worst
place to be a criminal
it it won't be the best place to
be a law enforcement officer and
in fact it's backwards we're
having this mass exitist of our
law enforcement officers but
it's a great place to be a
criminal really good place to be
a criminal it's not so good to
be alarming and and so I think
that the light legislator really
needs to decide if we want to
save new mexico what that looks
like in all I will agree and i'm
sure there are many terrible
stories of bad apples there are
mostly very good men and women
who put on how bad sugar out
defend us in our committed to
still doing all they can despite
leadership ourselves included.
And pushing back on that and so
the message I want to think you
was for bringing this I hope
these are real proposals that
actually begin circulating in
santa fe that we can make a
difference because it is as long
as new mexico continues to be
this lawless land the
responsibility that hasn't
fallen our law enforcement
officers that really falls on
our law makers not our law
enforcement so thank you for all
the men and women who continue
to come to new mexico and push
back despite perhaps the the
lack of of respect because of a
narrative that we have helped
create thank you.
Thank you mister chair and then
of course I had a jump in
because we're talking about this
legislation and I have proposed
this legislation um three years
now on increased penalties for
agreed battery and a few softs
or and think people see
increased penalties and they
think that oh i'm automatically
going to vote against increased
penalties but I would tell
everybody if you look at that
statute there is an increased
penalty when you assault an
officer there is an increased
penalty when you batter an
officer but if you shoot an
officer and you miss is a second
degree felony but if you stab an
officer in the neck and they
live it's a third degree felony
so or if you shoot him and you
hit it is so it's structurally
just not right so I encourage
especially the senate side
because we flown this through
the house seem to get through c
pack and all these other things
always getting held up on the
senate side when you see
increased penalties it's
basically fixing some been that
structurally wrong in that
statute saying if I can shoot it
on officer and miss him and get
charges a second to refer only
but if I shoot him and he lives
and it's paralyzed for the rest
of his life it's a third degree
fell me and so when we really
want to talk about perception I
don't think that sets a great
perception into the officers
when we're not we're not
structurally even doing what the
law requires an I second point
mr chair would be if we want
officers to want to be after now
their piece of legislation I
propose is why are they not
enumerated victims and the crime
victims act a try to add those
crimes why is it when they get
shart and killed they'll get a
notice and they get to their
family gets to be involved in
plea agreements and get notices
of hearings and things of that
nature but why is it when they
get shot and they're still live
or they're battered when they're
still live they don't get the
basic rates of a victim they
don't get to be notified they
don't get those twelve rights a
list listed in there and I try
to just add those crimes that
basically agree to salt on a
piece of server battery in a
piece of through.
Mandatory victims rates to where
they could be involved in the
process and get what every other
victim guess gang got through
god held up on the senate side
so I make that point following
senator to heal seeing it's a
perception thing and if we're
not going to support them like
they are victims when their ****
and it is important does his
legislators to acknowledge the
work that they're doing for us
every day shame on us and so I
would ask that
we really look at that and get
those bills across the finish
line this time around because
you know it was there at your c
pack said I I remember even
democrat saying we got to get
this done we got to get the stud
and I think sometimes when you
look at those bills you tend to
think this is increased penalty
is we're not going to do it but
structurally you need you need
to look at those bills and
you'll see that it's not set up
properly and also there is no
reason why please officer
shouldn't be in a numerated
victim and so I just want to
make those comments and
appreciate you bringing this app
in here because I think it could
go very far for recruitment of
officers if the legislature is
acknowledging that they are
important as every other person
who is a victim of a crime cell
thanks for your presentation and
I just.
Thank you miss nicholson mr
johnson for your
report today eight my my family
my brother and my dad were in
public safety and so i'm sort of
a product of public safety in a
sense
growing up with three brothers
my mom whose ninety eight now
has my father's pension and
that's what she lives on cash
she was a homemaker
and I raise that issue and
raised out that uh because
at the end of the day police
officers firefighters public
safety officers corrections you
know there they have families
and they have they're trying to
get a pension and they're trying
to live they're trying to raise
their families and you know
somehow along the way we've
decided our society I guess is
that there's as bad people but
in fact they're trying to stop
the bad people and so I I bring
that up because I think it's
important that as a profession
and when people will go into
their professions and I brought
this up a little bit earlier mr
chair is all of these groups
that are all of these
professions that are being
unprofessionalized
at some level and I don't and to
me that sort of a breakdown of
our society a little bit is that
it's better to be a criminal
than it is to be in a profession
and I I think that we need to
turn that around somehow
I know when I was in the city
council we passed
memorial recognizing an
focusing on professionalism and
I think that's something that we
as a legislature can do.
We can certainly bring up
legislation that recognizes are
professions within the state of
new mexico and in fact pointing
out that police officers you
know that is a profession and I
think somehow we need to
to reestablish some of these
things in our society is that
these are good professions to
choose and that
are you know there is a pension
and there are benefits and all
of that that goes along with it
the other side mister chair that
I wanted to hour to your list
here
miss nichols and mister johnson
is in the city of alba kirky
there was a time when when there
was a public private sort of
partnership between
police officers and firefighters
and if you look to the west side
of all the kirky there's a lot
of police officers and
firefighters that live on that
side of town and there is a
reason for that mister chair the
reason is that there was there
were some lower interest rates
given to homes buy the private
sector and so I think that you
could add another piece to your
little box here that maybe we
need to establish some benefits
from the private sector that are
public private indoors for two
create
you know more recruitment for
police and fire so I just want
to bring that out mr chair
because these are these are
things that we have not spoken
about at this committee but I
think that knowing what I know
you know from the city of albert
cookie we worked with our credit
unions we worked with inite and
I sat on the board of the credit
union so I know that there was
there were some lower interest
loans up given four first time
home buyers.
In those professions so thank
you for that mister chair.
Thank you very much mister
chairman director johnson
definitely director nichols
couble quick comments one is um
there's an initiative
I just there's an initiative are
you familiar with the thirty
thirty thirty police recruiting
initiative
mr cher center mariases
vaguely yes no thank you so much
a director the the thirty thirty
thirty initiative is a national
effort
by
you know various researchers
police leaders professional
organizations are trying to
up encourage agency cities
whomever to have thirty percent
female police by the year twenty
thirty and so it hopefully i'm
not hopefully i'm wrong but
the amount of men joining the
provision may have tapped out
you know
and so
so women joining the profession
would would be awesome in many
way respects one to have full
staffing levels but two to
influence are the culture of
those agencies out you know with
them
with different techniques or
whatever that that emails me
bring to the job also with
regards to qualified immunity we
need to work on that because
perception is reality and if we
were to do a poll of police and
and share of deputies in the
mexico the vast majority would
think that they have the their
injery of having to pay out in a
lawsuit they literally think
that and you could tell him
straight in the eye and they
will not believe you
so please we either with the
attorney general or the sector
deps or whomever we need to
convince them that yes there are
government employee yes their
names on the on the lawsuit but
they're in demnified the city or
the county pays the the
settlement
because qualified immunity does
not affect the pocket book of
the police or deputy but they
think it.
Does I anyway thank you.
Thank you mr chair i'll be brief
I just as I was listening to
this conversation as we talk
about going to policies and the
changes policies are necessary
being a data guy i'm sort of you
know when my make sure we make
policies that para actually
backed by data and so one of the
questions I have is to regards
to
the assessment in other words
can we find any states where we
can show that there has been any
correlation between salary
incentives or stipends or
retention awards or any of those
kinds of things that actually
have lead to increase numbers of
of law enforcement being hired
and retained and so i'd like to
see that evidence to so that
that is in fact good incinent
I I would argue the same thing
for the lawyers issue as well
when we had this earlier with it
with a judge and so so the
question there is whether or not
that would really make a
difference that i'd like to see
some evidence to support that
the other thing that i'm i'm a
model concerned about this is
when you talked about the expand
to do this
there are a lot of different
things now that they are
expected of a law enforcement
with regards to he said social
workers used to experts mental
health responders adolescent
behavior III could go on and on
you had this entire list that is
expected of all enforcement to
do are there any sinners for
professional development in
these arenas in that and then if
they were to do these kind of
additional take on these
additional responsibilities to
understand how to behave under
certain circumstances are the
incentivised with additional pay
and so it seems to me that we
need to have either some
professional development
expectations of our thoughts for
police officer I think I was
going to go get criminals i'm
not thinking about all these
other things that I have to be
concerned about and so there
should be some incentive for
them to get professional
development and be paid for that
just as you would pay for any
other expertise in in the other
area and so cause these
expenditures are a lot broader.
Then just law enforcement and so
it it's a it's another thing you
might want to put into the study
find out if there's places
around the country where people
are are actually paying their
wall enforcement more for doing
getting somebody's additional
areas of expertise required to
do the job thank you.
Cop companies myself
I do think it's important to to
fall up on the remarks by sir my
estimates in in
mr johnson you know you said
that the passage of the metal
civil rights act was disastrous
to the profession that's a
pretty strong word now I think
it's important for the point
that mrperiod mast is made to be
reinforced which is that the law
enforcement relied to and
they're still being lied to and
that's why it's disastrous
because they're being told that
that bill exposes them to
personal liability just does not
the point that he made this
exactly right but law
enforcement what I do not put
themselves at a financial risk
under the civil rights actual
passage to that bill the idea
that it would be disastrous to
the minute any kind of financial
way and and they were told that
I mean I sat there watched the
association and counties
municipally who you work for now
and others suggest that to the
law enforcement that they're
that this bill was going to
expose them to personal
liability and that's just true
and I know you want to jump in
so i'll stop there for a moment
to give you that opportunity
mister chair yes thank you for
saying that and I was shaking my
head when center my esther's
brought that up but you have to
remember again we need to look
in the mirror as parts law
enforcement goes to understand
that in I again I said a
thousand times to our officers
like you you can only do your
job we also told them a thousand
times like this is not not
they're not coming out for you
personally but the damage was
done when we see perception as
reality and disastrous was was a
common I can show you my notes
of some of the words I had in
there other than disastrous but
that was on the hills of like
we're going to cover it on the
hills of george floyd everything
is going on in this whole
country and then the debate if I
remember correctly uh
it was last minute when that
peace was stripped up
it was in there for a long time
whether we got to see a
judiciary short even but I might
put it on the floor crowd was
the floor sponsors still mean at
all interrupt you just because
we're going to try and get too
much I appreciate you said but
miss johnson you said repeatedly
they perception is reality
person we need you to change the
reality.
By the in the perception by
giving the reality the reality
is that yes that may have been
stripped out the end that's what
we do in the legislative process
we took it out I took it out I
was the sponsor and so wherever
it was before he got to me it
was out in and so you're right
though after the minutes believe
you get him and repeat this this
is your group now and you you
can change it i'm not blaming to
me this week i'm saying you're
in a position in the best
position of anybody here to
change that perception are the
minutes believe who's here and
association accounting will be
here this afternoon and they
were the ones telling all the
cups hate their they're making
you personally liable they're
they're doing this and it was it
attempted to feed the bill let's
be honest and we know how this
game works but we ought to call
it out when people misrepresent
legislation to try and get it
past or defeat it somebody's
going to push back and right now
i'm pushing back
mister chairman I respond sure I
will do that on behalf of the
municipal league and I would ask
you to try to make them feel
safe that it will never happen
i'm happy to do that III I think
that I use every opportunity and
I and I mean you know pretty a
little overly sensitive because
I saw the chief of police for
phoning to where things are
great guy does a great last week
suggesting that I don't have any
sympathy for the cops were
killed minor duty or or a
representative rebuis not your
suggestion that when her bill
dies because of any number of
things battery on police
officers that somehow I don't
respect the profession and
that's hurtful my dad was a car
and so but i've got a prethic
scan and the notion that that I
or anyone else don't respect law
enforcement and greatly or want
them to be at risk or want them
to be treated lesser it is
fanciful in an absurd but but
anyway on the issue of center
missus point on the we should
get the word out there and I
appreciate you acknowledging
that that was that was what was
long person was told that's what
frankly my ever series on the
other side of the aisle were
told and that's the arguments
they made is that we were going
to want to sue and it's always
the trial of course it's outlets
if this was let's do that again
look at you senator for
purposely.
It's a triallers trying to sue
cops uh to get money and it's
it's just false it's just
completely fast but that was a
way to defeat the bill it was
unsuccessful in and will have
the counties here this afternoon
to to try and maybe do the same
thing you're willing to do
mister johnson appreciate that
with because again our goal of
this presentation is how do we
get more cops
on boots on the ground and and
if that's our goal one of the
ways we don't do it despite line
to them and telling them hate in
new mexico the travelers want to
sue you for being a cop into a
good job and that's just that's
just not not that peace at all
and I think we've covered that a
lot you talked about the and I
think rightfully so and it's
important when the the the today
cops have to do far more than
you ever envision them having to
do and I hope we made some
progress there this session on
behavioral health and other
things to try and take some of
that and partner with you to say
you know you're not there what
you didn't saying your
presentation in and I think it
is a moral issue I really don't
believe that's the huge problem
with the recruitment is the
revolving door and i'm very
sympathetic to that I I cannot
imagine what it must be like to
arrest somebody in the morning
term losing the afternoon and
seem to do the same crime again
and have them you know mark you
for it for doing that and we
know that's what's going on we
know that the the criminals
particularly in albuque can mark
law enforcement because they
know they're going to not no
consequence rate zero zero
consequence there
and I think that we should
recognize that's going to be a
i'm i'm gonna say morale buster
I have another word that i'd use
but i'm trying to control my
language a little bit more at
the request of my leadership
center stewarts as we clean up
my mouth a little bit so I want
I won't say balbuster but I
would say normally I would say
balbuster
we both mature today senator
yeah
but you know that's going to be
a very demoralizing thing and I
we you know we got a law
enforcement officer here in the
front and I I want to recognize
him and thank you for being here
in in
a you know the the job you will
do is incredible one of the
things that that you're being
asked to do that you haven't
been asked historically to do
besides behavior of.
Is enforced immigration laws now
and you're being asked take an
entirely new role in my district
in other parts of the state to
take on a military presence to
where maril military uniforms
use military equipment and to
take on militant role we saw
that in los angeles last few
weeks and I think we're gonna
see more and more of that in
this sim initiation let's just
call it what it is and in I
think that's unfortunate too is
that when you talk about the
rules you you know to be spit on
and and and have rocks thrown in
a brextronitu and have your own
citizens fighting and I was
turning upon one other let's be
honest by that that's not going
to help recruitment and that's
not going to help morale any and
we have we had a fight back on
that ourselves it is the state
you make square to be the ones
to push back and say hey how
about let's not be that let's be
not let's not be that nation
let's not do that to our law
enforcement officers let's not
which which you all in that
situation because that's a bad
place to be and and my guess is
but a lot of people were in the
uniform of their probably have
some friends and family who are
immigrants or may come from
immigrants themselves and may
not be happy to be out there
being asked to be immigration
officers but will
have me looks at will attack
that in another time I do want
you to recognize that when we
were in last cruises on our for
this committee a while back we
had to share off in front of the
committee I know some of you who
were there we asked her about
her
vacancy rate because we ask
everybody rather begins here she
said she had zero she said she
was fully staffed at the
sheriff's office and we floored
because we hear alberta key we
can't hire cops and last cruise
we can't hire cops and how does
the sheriff down there a higher
fully staffed service department
I don't know whether she was
shining us on or given us fast
data states but that we should
follow us and we asked you how
in wine we got an answer so we
need to learn from that
experience as well too you you
asked about data you can give me
I I love date I think the
committee like state I think
legislature likes data.
Folks asked me you may have
heard this earlier el parcel
you'll play getting sick of here
if hearing about it but again no
pass a comparable population
size to to albuquerque safes
want to save a cities in the
whole country usually in the top
ten saver cities what are they
doing over there people say
survive as you got a big mouth
and you're always criticising
this out of the other side what
would you do and I so real
simple i'd go figure out what
all parcels don't i'd go get
through chief of police and i'd
go get their deputy chief police
and i'd go get their mayor and I
go get their city counsels and
i'd haven't come up and spend a
week with us and what are we
doing wrong um and consider
brantley who is laughing like
her I sit down with the chief of
police and los crucials that I
hope all of you is if I can give
you any advice to take him go
sit down with your cheaper
police in your local community
go talk to I have once with
german and with fernando and sit
down though the chief of police
in the district attorney and we
have insurance and talk about
what I need to do what they need
to be doing go do that
and i've asked my two law
partners who are both from open
so what is it up out of does
differently that makes it so
safe and albuquerque and new
mexico so unsafe and their
answer is usually something that
I can't legislate or put into a
bill they said it's about
community he said we have a
community
law enforcement as part of our
community are law enforcements
part of our business community
are law forced as part of our
political community we're we're
much more unified as a community
and that comes back to
leadership of course as you've
talked about before that said
that's a big difference and and
that may or may not be accurate
but but I ask in if anybody if
you're asking for me to give you
data give me that data what is
what is el passage and different
do they have do they have the
same recruitment problems of
their salaries the same where
their benefits are saying why
are they are they able to poll
and keep officers that were not
or maybe they're not maybe they
don't maybe they do have a high
vacancy maybe there may be
they're paying a lot more maybe
they're not there's a lot of
information but I make that
comparison over and over because
am I district is on the border
bell pass across the street.
Is the safest city almost always
in the country and across the
street in in immense albuquerque
daughters living where I do
business and right love my heart
that is a little more in usually
the safe unsafe cities shouldn't
be that right so give us a data
help us figure out what they're
doing over there
I am
I appreciate you being here
today I think that it will be be
good I think it's important to
note that that you're here
mister johnson both are you here
with the municipal leading it's
kind of ensuring I I think it's
great because like with center
mechanism previously somebody
who was at the county management
level in the and on the bank and
then this and they're the fact
that you're now with the
municipal part of the of the
equation formally with a state
police I I would guess the the
role of law enforcement very
different at the municipal level
then probably the the state
police level and I i'd like to
hear more in the future about
how those two things intersect
what happens when the governor
sends the national guard into
all the kirking what happens
when the governor sends the
state police into albuquerque to
try and clean things up and then
they're there for a few weeks
and then everybody's cracking
heads and doing whatever they're
doing i'm not being disparaging
but there and there were nine
other not cracked heads but you
know what i'm saying there there
is boots on the ground right and
you show a massive presence with
the national guard or the state
police and then does it have it
benefit i'm told that it does
i'm told that there's a lot of
stuff that happens with that
happens but it lasts for two
weeks in and then it goes away
again and and so I don't know I
don't know how I don't know
that's good thing bad thing
but we've got where we've got
the national guard going into
albuquerque now is that the
latest I guess at the governor's
behalf I think in this meeting
talking about that too what
happens when we send in the
national guard we got the we
have the president sending in
the national guard we got the
governor in the national garden
one before we have trouble
getting recruitments at the
national guard I mean we we
we're going to have to.
Uh start asking ourselves those
questions to ask the last points
for representative lost
everybody who wanted to address
comment to represent rebass a
lot of questions about bills
that they didn't get through a
judiciary
one of them was the the issue of
sentences for an assault on a
law enforcement officer and what
I will ask you all to let us
know in the future my guess is I
don't want to put yours but
because i'm guessed you don't
know the answer to but people in
room do where was the sentencing
commission on that bill
where and when rippers every
talks about the structure of
penalties in the lords this
penalties too low this penalties
too high this penalties just
rate I don't approach this uh
i'm not a criminal lawyer but I
don't broaches his goldy locks I
don't say too hot to call the
answer must be somewhere in the
middle we have a sentencing
commission their entire job is
to do exactly that and I know
center my assistance been
working for years on a rewrite
of the criminal code to make
sure that we don't get out of
alignment because politicians
will always do this lawyers
brother say we need to be
tougher on this we need to make
the cops everybody been tougher
on the people that batter a
couple of course with anybody
battering cup but you want to
get out of alignment I don't
know whether we do not represent
reep said we are out of
alignment but sensing
commissions here right and my
guess is i'm gonna i'll ask you
to do not if you want to answer
to not very we know the answer
did the sentencing commission
endorse that legislation
they did not get so we've got
back rooms in the sense of
commission's got days and petes
and law enforcement and law
professors and
i'm i'm a not a criminal lawyer
i'm going to listen to the
experts in the field that say
yeah this bill doesn't fear this
enhanced period penalties does
not fit into our structure which
is what representative was
saying she was trying to do so
i'm gonna listen to all the
respect to represent read on the
listen to the sense and
commission before we listen to
her in terms of where that
structures that but maybe she
needs to be persuaded or maybe
the senators in commission has
been persuaded but that's why
that building it hurt girl
simple in judiciary and that was
my answer to a lot of
legislation is that.
Where does where does the
sentence in commission the
experts in the field come down
on these increased penalties and
more often than not they would
say no and so we would say that
but just so anyone revealing the
mysteries of the senate
judiciary can be in the house
judiciary committee they take
they take the hits to it that
the chair and I take the hits
and we we get all the need your
press in the everybody says oh
you guys are soft on criminals
or you don't like enhanced
penalties or you don't like cops
the answers really simple which
is I go to the experts in the
field and when they say
sentencing commissioners yeah
this doesn't work I buy it so
i'm sorry rips and reads I hear
i'm sure she'll hear all about
this review second and third
hand and then i'll hear about it
second if they're hand too but
but but the the the the
mysteries of the senate and
house judiciary companies are in
really not that mysterious so
anyway that's my peaceful today
again thank you for the
discussion we have lunch I think
with sandwiches I don't think
it's raining that's the good
news i'm going to ask you all to
try and help me get a little bit
closer to the schedule so we can
say back in say thirty minutes
that's about quarter till we
won't be too far behind mr
johnson thank you all very much
for both of you and for allowing
me to rant a little bit but
you're going to stick around I
heard you say for dinner right
so so make sure you sit next to
me in all rants more
I believe lunch is at the
restaurant at the blake nancy
saying she said yes while her
but it we're right is that the
restaurant the hotels are right
it's at the
