for just a moment, please, of a
personal recognition. We lost
the valued member of this
committee recently, um, who was
also vice chair of the Senate
Judiciary Committee, uh, under
my chairmanship and um uh
Senator Protem Mimi Stewart put
together a beautiful ceremony
for Bill O'Neill in the rotunda.
I know many of you all attended.
It was a lovely uh opportunity
for us to recognize a person
very committed to this
committee, the interim, and the
work of this interim committee.
So if you all would just take a
moment, please, and just
for me just a moment, please, to
recognize the work of Senator
Bill O'Neill.
Thank you for that.
All right, well, we've got a
great turnout for all of you,
and normally we begin the
process by recognizing and
introducing ourselves, but I'm
gonna take just a few moments to
delay that a bit so we can get
to some of the work right away
and then his members come in,
we'll, we'll do some of that
too.
Um, I will just, uh, let you all
know that we've got, we, we, um,
it's, it's my practice not to
have an organizational meeting
and we just do the
organizational part of the work,
but to try and put something
juicy into the uh topic and
agenda for you. It's mine and
Christine's goal to always make
these meetings interesting. Uh,
I also chair meetings a little
differently than others, you all
probably know some of that by
now, but let me just tell you
that um I'm pretty strict with
the gavel and time commitments,
and I will put the time
limitations on members, mostly
so that because we have such a
big committee, I can make.
sure that everybody gets a fair
opportunity to ask questions and
be heard and the only way to do
that is to take the time and
divide it up and then hold you
all to that. So I'll recognize
you for a brief period of time.
Um, I, I don't think there's any
such thing as on that point. Um,
I don't think that exists in
parliamentary procedure. It's a
debate, uh tactic, I think, but
it's not in our rules of
procedure, so don't expect me to
let you jump in ahead of
somebody else unless there's a
specific question that you know
the answer to, and others may
not, and you can help us move
things along a little bit.
Uh, we'll, we'll spend the
latter part of the meeting
talking about where we're gonna
go and what we're gonna do, but
I wanted to start with this last
session because many of you all
have heard me say this before,
I'm an old football player, not
very good. I sat on the bench
most of it, but uh, uh, but one
thing that you would always do
the day after the game is watch
the films to see who miss their
block, uh, who, uh, scored, who
ran their route, and who did
things right, and who did things
wrong. So because of that old
habit of mine, it's, it's my
preference oftentimes to look
back at our recent sessions and
see what we did and and how it
went well and how we can do
better in the future.
I think it's also, if you'll
give me just a few more minutes.
Um, I think it's important to
recognize this committee's work
this last year was extraordinary
under the, the vice chair now,
uh, Christine Chandler. We were
called into a special session to
address crime issues and this
committee was the committee that
really did the work, um, that,
uh, that had the hearings on the
specific agenda items that
tackle those um that ultimately
came up with the, the, the um uh
result that we needed to take
more time to deal with things
like behavioral health and
competency, which we did.
And still got that done in 30
days, but it took all of those
30 days to come up with a very
complicated piece of legislation
that we'll go back and look at
again as well, uh, in this, in
this interim. Um, I'll also note
just as a personal side that
many of the agenda items that we
were criticized for not passing
during the special session, did
not revive themselves at all in
the regular session even when we
had 60 days, you didn't see that
legislation coming back again,
most of it, uh, if it did get
introduced, it wasn't passed. I
think that speaks volumes for
itself.
In, in, in terms of the
effectiveness of any of that
legislation. So those are some
personal comments to get us
going. My practice is to throw
grenades out into the group and
to see how we do with some of
that, and I also leave lots of
time in our agenda for us just
to talk amongst ourselves, um,
and that's somewhat unusual
about the way I chair meetings
too. Um, I'm not um inclined to
bring in lots of lobbyists and
organizations and groups to tell
us what they're doing. I think
there's better, more efficient
ways for us to learn about that.
And I think the chance
we have here is, is important.
And one last point, if you'll
allow me, please. One is we're
gonna go into a 30 day session.
And I think that's important to
recognize as well too. I will
make an effort as I have in the
past to invite the governor to
participate in our committee as
much as we possibly can because
she will control that agenda,
and I'm hoping that when we
recognize we only have a 30 day
session coming up. We're gonna
have to do a lot of work if any
bill's going to be passed in
that session, it's gonna have to
be done well in the interim,
and, and we're gonna have to lay
the ground work for that, so
that it can get through both
chambers in that short period of
time.
And I'm hoping this committee
will be part of that process
again as well too, is to put
together a good agenda for a
quick 30 day session and have
the governor's cooperation and
participation, so those are my
introductory comments as the
chair, and again, thank you for
letting me kind of give you an
idea of how I see our session
going. Uh, we're beginning with
House Bill 5.
Uh,
uh, which is the, uh, children,
youth and Families initiative
that came out of the house, I've
asked, uh, Representative Dave
Hochman v. Hill and, and, uh,
uh, her experts and her
witnesses to help present that
bill because she was one of the
sponsors and the only reason I
asked her to do so is because
she's on this committee. So I
looked to those who were on the
committee, there were a number
of sponsors and thank you to all
who sponsored it as well too,
but I figured she'd be here, and
I thought it would be useful for
her to tell us a little bit
about the course of that bill,
take about 5 or 10 minutes to do
so, and then we'll talk about,
see.
the more, more broadly after
her. So representative.
Very much, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee, good morning.
Um, happy to be here. We're
talking about House Bill 5, it
was sponsored by Representative
Michelle Paulina Beta, speaker
Jase Martinez and myself. I want
to take a moment to introduce
Claire Dudley Chavez, who is our
policy director at the Speaker
of Martinez's office, and Claire
has been working on this issue
for several years. This has been
an issue that many of us have
been uh looking to again for
several years, and we've been
asked to uh present on the House
version of the bill.
As was passed out of the house.
And so that's what we're gonna
do.
Um, the problem that House Bill
5 addresses is, um, you know,
Mr. Speaker, I'm sorry, Mr.
Chairman, Mexico children are
dying in CYFD custody, um, New
Mexico needed an independent
impartial means to gather,
investigate and proactively
address the well-being of
children in state custody, and
that's precisely what this bill
did, um, wanna take a moment and
also acknowledge that the bill
was passed, Mr. Chairman, um,
although it was amended by the
Senate, and so again we're just
talking about the House bill.
And um we do have a side by side
sheet that I believe was passed
out to members. It does do a
comparison of the two bills as
that was that was passed out of
the house versus the Senate
version, um, for members'
edification, so, um, New Mexico
is among one of the last states
to create this critical service
and as a result, we were missing
significant opportunities to
support children and parents and
to keep our legislators and the
governor practically informed,
uh, and help us improve child
well-being.
So the purpose and scope of the
bill, Mr. Chairman, uh, is that
it would establish the Office of
Child Advocate, which, uh,
again, the House version would
be administratively attached to
the office of the Attorney
General. The state child
advocate would serve a term of 6
years. The state child advocate
would be appointed by a
selection committee composed of
9 members, including 1 member
from the President pro tempore,
uh, one member of minority
Leader chose by the minority
leader of the Senate, one chosen
by the Speaker of the House, one
chosen by the minority for a
leader, uh, one member minority
for leader.
the House of Representatives,
uh, one chose by the governor
with ICWAS and IFPA experience,
one from the Attorney General
and two members from the Chief
Justice of the Supreme Court.
The Office of Child Advocate is
an independent and impartial
office of state government
responsible for receiving
complaints and grievances from
children, parents, and other
stakeholders related to state
services for children,
investigating these matters,
assisting and ensuring their
resolution and reporting to
inform the public, the
legislature, and the governor
about general and specific
opportunities for improvement.
Uh, and lastly, the Office of
Child Advocate is responsible
for reviewing CYFD's provision
of services to children and
families. There's even
investigate complaints, review
CYFD policies and procedures to
adopt and promulgate rules for
the OCA office operate a
toll-free hotline, compile an
annual report, subpoena
witnesses, access information
records, and other duties as set
forth in the bill.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, I, I don't
know how much time you want me
to take on, uh, just the bill
generally. I can also go into
the policy arguments for the
bill, but again, the bill was
already passed, so just kind of
looking to you for direction as
to where you want this
conversation to go. thank you
for being available to us is one
of the sponsors and.
Claire as well too. Um, we have
Two individuals representing the
Department of Justice. I, I
gotta be honest with everybody.
I, when, when originally I heard
the Attorney General's office
was going to become the
Department of Justice. I thought
this was like the new Coke kind
of thing, uh, uh, a rebranding,
but the same stuff in a
different package, turns out I
was wrong, uh, there are
existing law actually refers to
the agency, I think, as the
Department of Justice in in
state law, so they're just
following what was state long.
We all got into the habit of
calling you that attorney
General's office, but um I
appreciate.
Of them being here today, what
I'm gonna do is I'm gonna have
all the presenters come up and
then um we'll leave the
questions and I know you've got
another commitment
representative as well too. I
thought it would be useful for
you to, uh, maybe if if if you
want to add anything more to
just a description of what the
bill does, if you want to make
any personal observations or
comments about the process and
I, I've also taken the
opportunity of giving all of you
the governor's message on House
Bill 5. You'll find that in your
materials. And I think that's
useful as well too, um, because
I think she offers us some
suggestions about what more we
might be able to do and perhaps
some uh suggestions about how
some of us are responding to the
problems at CYFD with the, with
a different perspective. So, uh,
representative, is there
something else that you'd like
to add about having sponsored
the bill or the process.
Um, no, Mr. Chairman, other than
I, again, this has been a
multi-year effort from several
people, you know, very involved
in the subject of the
legislature, um, I know Miss
Dudley Chavez worked tirelessly
to get this bill passed. Um,
we're very excited that the
office is being created. We're
very excited that, you know, we
are moving to address this
problem, and is there more work
to do? Yes, probably, but the
fact that we got this pass is a
very big deal for many of us in
the legislature, and we look
forward to seeing uh what effect
it will have. I don't know.
No, thank you, madam we captured
it very well before you step
down for the department of, of
justice, the um uh the
appropriation, can you, can you
address the appropriation
process associated with the
bill. Uh, sir, sure, Mr.
Chairman, so I believe that the,
the House version of the bill
did not have an appropriation
attached to it, the
appropriation was put in on the
Senate side, and then it was
subsequently a line item vetoed
by the governor in the bill.
So the office is being stood up
without that information.
Thank you very much. All right,
let's hear from the Department
of Justice.
Good morning, gentlemen
Good morning. Sorry about that.
Uh, good morning, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee. Just
wanted to provide a brief,
you're gonna want to introduce
yourself to the committee first.
Sure. So Billy Jimenez, uh chief
Deputy Attorney General of the
civil side of the New Mexico
Department of Justice or Office
of the Attorney General. With me
is Sean Sullivan, special
counsel for the Mexico
Department of Justice. Uh, we
just want to provide a brief
recitation of the steps that are
supposed to take place
practically to
To appoint the child advocate,
and then I can provide a brief
status update about where our
office is in the process to
provide clerical and
administrative support to the
office. Um, so, in House Bill 5,
it anticipates there's going to
be a selection committee, uh,
that comprised of 7 members who
come together before September
1st to engage in the selection
of, of nominees that will go to
the governor for possible
appointment. And then at that
point, the, uh, the governor
will select.
And appoint a child advocate
with advice and consent of the
Senate. Um.
To that point, our involvement
obviously is to allow this
office to operate independently,
um, and provide the necessary
administrative budgetary and
clerical support to the office.
And so I've spoken with our
