Is to put time limitations on
members and, um and cut you off
and that sometimes comes across
as well again bowling or rude,
But there's no other way to do
this. Um, So what I will do is
at when we get to a place where
there's participation by
committee members all asked for
just a show of hands to see who
may be interested in addressing
a specific topic and then
simply, I'll take the amount of
time that we have allocated on
our schedule for this topic, and
I'll divide it by the number of
people and I'll recognize you
for that amount of time. So
Maybe some shorter maybe 345
minutes. I take a little
liberties with that when we're
having some good, Uh, good, uh,
flow to the conversation, but
But for the most part, I'm
pretty strict with that.
What's important for you is to
know that when I recognize you
for five minutes, that's your
five minutes to do with as you
see fit. That means that if the
person you're addressing a
question to is running on, uh,
rambling or not addressing your
question, I'm expecting you to
cut them off yourself. Um, and
to and to insist that that you
get in as much of your time for
your purposes as you wish. But
if if you ask a five minute
question, you're gonna find
yourself maybe short of your
agenda. And if you have a five
minute answer from somebody
you're gonna
Yourself disappointed, but but
that's the that's the rules of
the game so that everyone's
clear about that. All right? And
and, um I'll be pretty strict
about cutting you off at that
time, though. This is my way of
making sure that everybody has
an equal opportunity. When I
When I first joined the
Legislature, you might have one
committee member who would take
the full hour of questions and
answers and everyone else would
be left sitting on their hands,
and that was disappointing to
everybody and probably unfair.
So, uh, the only other thing
that's somewhat unique about me
is the, um in in many years past
we used to have
Something that members I think
are getting used to not doing
because I just don't allow it.
Is this notion of on that point,
you'll have somebody just kind
of say, I want to be on that
point and jump in. In my
experience. That's usually
somebody who can't wait in line
like everybody else. Uh, we all
knew that kid in school, and we
tend to be attracting a lot of
those folks to this chamber for
whatever reason, but but you
will not find on that point in
any rules of parliamentary
procedure. In my opinion,
there's really no such thing. So
please don't ask to jump in in
front of somebody else by by
Uh, jumping out of your seat and
trying to make a point. With
really one exception. That is,
if if there's a question before
the committee that has an
answer, and that you know the
answer to in the presenters
don't know the answer to then I
think that's an appropriate time
to to ask to be recognized to at
least educate us on something
you may know the answer to
instead of us, uh, scrambling
around and spinning our wheels
to to find out what that is, Uh,
the only other thing that I'll
let you know is, um,
Representative Chandler has a
little different style than
In the sense that she well,
she's she's done one thing that
I appreciate, uh, doing very
much as we've allowed time for a
committee discussion at the end
of the day. Uh, she's a lot. Uh,
15 minutes. I hope that we will
feel a little bit of liberty
with that because I think that's
usually pretty constructive.
when we just kind of talk about
what we've heard or what we may
be thinking and then and then
she's a little bit of a little
bit of time for public comment.
and for those of you that are
here for public comment, Or, uh
uh, Representative Chandler. I
know allows people to come in by
zoom for public comment. I'm I'm
gonna ask the people
Plan to allow only three minutes
for public comments so that we
keep that moving along pretty
quickly.
The idea of of letting anybody
in the state get on a zoom call
and and express opinions with
unlimited
I'm uh to me, I think would
bogged down the the committee's
process. So, with all of that
said, I hope everyone's clear
about the way that I, uh,
chaired this committee and and
the other committees that I
chair. They're a little bit
rules a little unconventional at
times, but they think they're
catching on. I'm glad to see so
we'll, we'll start, uh, as well
by having members introduce
themselves. I'm glad to see a
great turnout. Thank you all for
being here. Uh, we'll start from
representative Henry with us Go
a person to person so represent
B. Introduce yourself, please.
Thank you, Uh, Jared Hembry, Uh,
District 59 from Roswell and
Chavis County.
Um good morning. I'm Andrea Ree
District 64 4 from Curry,
Roosevelt and Chavez County. I'm
happy to be here.
Good morning, Mr Chairman, John
Block House District 51
representative Otero County.
Good morning. Everyone represent
Steffi Lord East Mountains. Buro
County, a little bit of
Albuquerque and some Torrance
County. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Bill O'Neill.
Uh, just about every
neighborhood in Albuquerque
district, 13
So it's good to be here. Thank
you.
Uh, good morning, everyone.
Peter Wirth Senate District 25
in Santa Fe.
Good morning, state Senator Mimi
Stewart District 17 in
Albuquerque, the International
district and East Gateway area.
Yeah. Good morning, Mr Chair,
Nathan Small, privileged to
represent House District 36 down
in Dona County.
Good morning, Mr Chair. I'm Ros
Castano State representative of
District 70, which encompassed
San Miguel and Torrance.
Thank you, Mr Chairman, Alan
Martinez district 23.
Um, which is Northern Rio
Rancho, the western part of the
town of Bern, Leo.
Happy to be here.
Thank you, Mr Chairman, Bill
Ream Far northeast Heights of
Albuquerque District, 31.
Good morning, Mr Chairman, Bill
Hall, District three
representative. It's Bloomfield,
Aztec.
Uh, San Juan County.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Good
morning. I'm representative
Micaela Lara Cadena honored to
be in house District. 33, South
central New Mexico, Theana
County.
Buenos Dias
de
Dios, Mr Chair, and, um everyone
who is here today and
representative Cynthia Borrego
and I represent District 17,
which is the Northwest Mesa of
Albuquerque, closest to
Cottonwood Mall.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Good
morning, everybody. I am
representative of the COE Alcon.
I represent District six, which
is part of S and McKinley
County. And I'm really Mr chair,
hoping and praying that we don't
spend the next two days talking
about why we don't want a
special.
I just hope that we can work on
whatever is before us. And if
the governor makes a decision to
have a special session at the
governor's prerogative, not
ours. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I'm
representative Janelle and Yorn
House District 19. That's
southeast Albuquerque, Metro
area. I share International
District with the Senator
Stewart. Thank you very much.
He has this representative
district 15.
About 1/4 of Doanna County. The
district I represent borders
Texas and Mexico as well as, uh
uh, my colleagues from Donata
County. So thank you all for
being here today again. Thanks
for the good turnout. Our first
item on the agenda is mental
health courts in New Mexico.
We're ready to go with that
presentation. Mr Chair. Yes, We
are very good. The agenda that
we have before us. Today has an
an hour for this topic. I'm
hoping that your presentation.
Um again. I'm standing in for
representative Chandler. But I
hope I hope your presentation
will allow more than adequate
time for committee questions.
And so with that, please begin.
Mr Chair members of the
committee. Thanks for having us
this morning. My name is Martin
Burkhardt. I am a statewide
program manager with the
therapeutic justice, Uh, program
with the administrative office
of the courts.
Mr Chair members of the
committee. My name is Diana
Corri. I am a statewide program
manager with a O CS Department
for therapeutic justice. Thank
you for having us
But what was that again Therapy
Department for therapeutic
Justice.
So this morning. What? We're
wanna go over and kind of also,
um
Make sure that that we
understand is that when we say
we're trying to change our what
we what we previously called
drug courts. We're now calling
them treatment courts. Um,
that's just to get, um get past
the stigma of what people think.
A A drug court is, Um what the
main focus of a of a drug court.
Uh and its heart has always been
treatment. So, uh, we've been
starting to call them treatment
courts. So if I if I say drug
court still, that's probably why
I'm also, uh, Dean and I are
also used to
Judges, So if we throw in your
honor in there, that's uh by
accident. Um so
There are many different types
of treatment courts in New
Mexico. Um we have adult hybrid
courts. So that's an adult drug
court. That's a felony court,
but it also includes DWIS so
felony DWIS. We have behavioral
health courts, which we're going
There are many different types
of treatment courts in New
Mexico. Um we have adult hybrid
courts. So that's an adult drug
court. That's a felony court,
but it also includes DWIS. So
felony DWIS. We have behavioral
health courts, which we're gonna
discuss in in more, uh more
specifically, today. Uh, DW I
courts which are typically
misdemeanor courts, they they
are in our magistrate courts,
But we do have one program in
the second. That is a felony.
DW. I
That just focuses on DWIS. We
have, uh, veterans treatment
courts. Uh, we have several of
those across the state. Of
course, those are focusing on
justice involved veterans.
The hardest part about that
sometimes is is finding them and
making sure we're adjusting
treatment. Accordingly. We have
right now. Two young adult
courts. This is focusing on
individuals between 18 and 25
years old, uh, who have been
convicted of a felony? The
reason why there's a difference
between the adults Court and
Young adult court is because
between the ages of 18 and 25.
That's when the brain is the
brain hasn't developed by 25 or
26, So it's unfair to treat
those clients the same as you
would an adult and a a person
who's older than 25.
Uh, we have juvenile drug
courts. That's of course for our
our juvenile. Uh, participants,
uh, anybody less than 18 years
old and then our family
treatment courts, which are
family Uni reunification courts,
which is more of a uniting
families, Uh, for Children who
are in the, uh
In the in the welfare system.
So, what is the behavioral
court? Um, Mr Chair and members
of the committee.
Um, I want to preface this by
letting you all know that
As we go through our
presentation, mental health
courts and the names that we
refer to them, as has been
slowly moving over to behavioral
health courts in an effort to
reduce that stigmatization of
individuals within our programs,
A behavioral health support is a
voluntary program for adult
individuals that have been
either arrested or convicted of
a crime that has primarily to do
with
With their behavioral health
diagnosis. Those individuals
that are eligible for the
program also have a moderate to
high risk crimi genic need,
meaning that they may reoffend
and pick up additional charges
later, um when the individuals
come into our programs, they are
assessed and their needs are
matched so that we're meeting
them where they're at, Um and
they are provided with a
clinically appropriate level of
And support not only from their
treatment providers, but for the
entire behavioral health court
team.
Um, our goal of
Our programs is to reduce
participant, um or to support
their success in reintegrating
into our communities, um, and to
also reduce recidivism. Um, we
wanna make sure that we're
increasing public safety and
improving their quality of life
when they're leaving our
programs.
Mhm.
Mr Chair members of the
committee. Um, so what makes
somebody eligible for a
behavioral health court? Um,
they have to be individuals
who've been arrested or
convicted of a crime due to
behavior that is been a result
of their, uh, behavioral health
issues. They have to have a di
diagnosed behavioral health
disorder. They as Diana
mentioned earlier, they have to
screen high risk and high need
on an objective risk and needs,
uh, screening tool That is, um
Uh, that and also we need to
make sure that we're accessing.
We're assessing their level of
their level of care, but also on
not just for the treatment
needs. But what are other needs
such as, uh, housing? Uh, so
pairs um and other other
criteria like that.
So within our behavioral health,
um, program we have. It's a team
approach. So we have a team that
rallies around our participants.
Um, the first member of the team
is going to be the presiding
judge. The judge leads the team,
their knowledgeable about the
participants case, and they also
ensure that participants do
process and other legal
constitutional rights are
protected.
We also have a member from
treatment. Um, that repris, um
represents the treatment side of
our program. Um, they administer
evidence based behavioral and
cognitive behavioral therapy,
and they provide clinical case
management, relapse prevention
and continuing care for our
participants. Additionally, we
have a program coordinator that
oversees the program and the day
to day functions of our program.
Make sure that the program is
following our national all rise
best practices as well as any
contractual obligations that
they may have with agencies that
they collaborate with, and they
treat our participants. We also
have community supervision.
Their mean. Uh, focus within the
team is providing case
management, um, ensuring
compliance with any court orders
or program requirements, but
also providing support to
participants and they often
times may conduct field visits.
Um, we do field visits, um,
typically filled visits in
normal probation are seen as a
monitoring tool for us in
treatment courts and behavioral
health court. We
So support our participants out
on filled visits so we may often
times make sure that they are
basic needs are met if we go to
visit them in their household,
and we see maybe they have a
broken window. We noticed that
you know, maybe they don't have
food. We try and provide that
either provide that to them or
provide access by connecting
them to community resources. Um,
we also have a prosecuting
attorney on our team. The
prosecutor
Advocates on behalf of public
safety. Um
We and as well as victim
interests, and they hold
participants accountable for
meeting any program obligations
while they're in the program,
and they do this through a non
adversarial approach. We also
have defense counsel who may
either be a public defender. Or
maybe a private, um, contracted
attorney for the program. They
advocate on the participants
stated interests and they ensure
that their constitutional rights
are protected.
Um and we also have a member of
law enforcement on the team. Law
enforcement is the E eyes and
ears within our communities and
our teams because oftentimes we
can't go out and see everything
that our participants are doing.
So they connect with our
participants out in our
communities, Um, and they
observe their behaviors and
oftentimes will be bring back
both positive and sometimes
negative things that they see
are participants doing out in
the community.
Mr Chair members of the
committee. So how does someone
come into the program and what
makes? Uh so how does someone
enter? So we have an example
here for Sally. She's a 32 year
old who lives with her mother.
She has no Children. She's
graduated from high school and
she has some college education.
Uh, she has a history of
behavioral health disorders and
law enforcement contacts, and
she's been deemed competent, but
her behavioral health issues are
unmanaged. Uh, she was arrested
for a domestic violence charge
involving her mother, but she
continues to still live with her
mother because she has nowhere
else to go.
Mister Ta members of the
committee,
Sally has either been arrested,
um and depending on the program.
This may start at a rest or it
may sta start at the point of
her conviction or plea. Um
Either the judge um one of the
attorneys, somebody will
identify the Sally Mae me
criteria for the program and
that it may be a benefit her to
participate in art program. Um,
once she's been identified, her
defense attorney will discuss
the program with her. Um,
explain to her what the
obligations of the program are
what all shall have to do, such
as attend treatment. Meet with
supervision. Um, and explain the
benefits of being in that.
Also give Sally um other
options. Other legal options
that she can choose because our
programs are voluntary. Um
If Sally agrees that she thinks
it may be a good fit for her,
and she'd like to have that
discussion about being in the
program she is typically
referred to program staff to
have a program screening as well
as a risk in, UM, needs
screening to determine if she
meets the eligibility criteria.
Um
If she is eligible. She is then
referred to typically the
programs either contracted
treatment provider or the
treatment provider that they
collaborate with to have a
comprehensive assessment done to
determine what her behavioral
health needs are her needs in
general, are, um And at that
point if
She meets all criteria, and
Sally is willing and wants to
participate in the program.
She's then inducted into the
program. Um, and the program
staff typically will do an
intake with Sally going over in
detail What her her sibil are in
the program. What type of
support we can provide Sally
with. Um We also do a needs
assessment to determine what
types of needs she has, like
basic needs.
Need housing, maybe access to
medical care. In this case,
Sally's mental health or
behavioral health disorder was
not managed, so she may not have
been on medication. So we would
refer Sally, um, for medication
evaluation. Um Sally will also
have a an assessment done with
treatment and her and the
treatment provider will come up
with a treatment plan. They do
this in collaboration with our
part.
P to make sure that it's a fit
for our participants because we
don't want to be setting goals
for them or treatment plans that
maybe they don't feel are
attainable. So we do this in
collaboration with our
participants.
Throughout the program, and once
or once Sally's had all of the
assessments done. She then
begins programming She attends
treatment Court sessions
meetings with her supervision.
officers. Um and throughout the
program, she receives support
from the team, and that's each
member of the team. They get to
know Sally and we support her
and, um, completing her goal
successfully and her treatment
plan. Um upon approaching
graduation from the
Sally begins to work with her
treatment provider to come up
with an aftercare plan and to
identify support so that when
she leaves the program, she
knows where to go. Um, when she
needs that additional support
once she's completed the program
we then have a graduation
ceremony and celebrate Sally's
success and then a final
judgment and sentences entered.
Mr Chair members of the
committee. So what is the
typical program structure for
these courts and this is ever
changing. In fact, um, over the
last couple of years from, uh,
our national best practice
people that it's changing so
typically, these courts are one
year in length.
Um there's five phases. Phase
one is focusing on
stabilization, orientation and
treatment planning. That's a
little bit different from what
we used to do before I've been
with treatment court since about
2011. So, uh, we are used to
just, uh, someone tested
positive for something just
putting them in jail and then
when they came out, they tested
positive again. Give him double
the jail next time and what we
What we've learned over the
years is that we're punishing
clients for being what they are.
Um, if somebody is an addict,
and you're putting them into a
treatment
Program and you you on the day
one. They're testing positive.
Well, of course they are. Um, So
the trick is, uh, getting them
stabilized, getting them
oriented to the program and then
getting them their treatment
plan. Um, then we can and then
focusing on what their needs are
What, like Diana mentioned
earlier. So if someone is
homeless, uh, how are they? How
are we gonna expect them to go
to treatment? How do we expect
them to go to meet with their
probation officer? So we we try
to make sure we're meeting our
clients each individually where
they're at, based on
Assessment and tailoring the
treatment and the case plan to
that one phase one is done, and
that's based on the client. It's
not based on a checklist. OK,
you've done this. You've done
this. It's based on each
individual client. Uh, phase two
is more stabilization, symptom
management, behavioral, health
and cognitive impairment
support. So, um, that's where we
get into the actual treatment.
Phase one. They should have the
men of the behavioral health and
the substance use phase one
should be just stabilizing them
into the program and getting
them.
State. Phase two is getting them
starting the treatment and
getting them going. Phase three
is, uh, working on behavior
modification and problem solving
skills, because, uh, trying to
focus on what brought them into
the system and, uh what, what
they can do to to fix that in
the future. Phase four is life
skills and clinical stability,
so making sure that they're, uh,
have the life skills to continue
progressing after they've been
in the program? Um, and then
Phase five is a recovery
management, which is what is
gauging, ideally gauging the
recovery capital.
What they what? What supports
they have in the community they
can rely on once they're out of
the program. Um, because what
we've found is that we we used
to just, you know, graduating
somebody and say, OK, that's it,
And they're kind of like, OK,
Well, now what? So we wanna make
sure that we have that structure
in place, Uh, before the client
graduates, So, um, there's
there's less chance of them.
Reoffending. Um so
We do treatment is also
medication referral and
monitoring. Um this can be a
tricky one I. I used to
supervise a code track caseload.
So having, uh, clients we'd
refer them for medication and,
of course, the first couple of
weeks, especially if they're
taking an SSR. I They don't like
it because it's not. They don't
feel very well taken the first
couple of weeks because of all
the side effects. The trick is
just, um talking them through it
and making them like yes, it's
gonna be It's gonna be
uncomfortable for the first
couple of weeks. As with
anything, but once
You start to stabilize, you'll
start to feel better.
And if you don't then maybe this
isn't the right combination for
you because it's sometimes it's
not the right fit, uh,
medication, so we we try to make
sure we're that support for that
client. Um, if that happens, so
in case in this case, Sally if
she she's unmanaged, and she
doesn't want to get on
medication, we try to steer her
that way, because, um, it's
Or or or treatment because of
whatever is being managed right
now or how it's not being
managed isn't obviously working
because she's in the criminal
justice system. Um and then we
also offer compliance support,
so that's
Monitoring to make sure she's
doing what she needs to do.
That's not
To say that, um, it's it's kind
of weird because I know people
are like well drug courts or
treatment. Courts are just hug a
thug and you let him do whatever
and it's well.
We try to meet the client where
they're at.
And so what That means is is
that if
They're not doing what they're
supposed to be doing, And but
they can do it. Well, then
that's when we do start.
Sanctioning clients. If it's
something they can do if it's a
if they call him proximal and
distal goals, if it's a distal
goal for the client, we and they
we kind of reasonably expect
them to complete that. Then why
are we holding them accountable
for it? So it's all a matter of
gauging where they're at and
meeting them where they're at?
Mr Chair member of the
committees. So what does it look
like, Um, in our programs when
participants are actually doing
these programs
So we have Sally, um, when she
be starts the programming she
begins going to treatment,
according to her individual
treatment plan, So every
individual that comes into our
behavioral health courts they
don't all follow the same
treatment plan. Um, as I stated
earlier, they do work with their
treatment provider to come up
with their own plan. And so they
had to start attending that we
may have some participants that
have a trauma history. Um, that
needs to be dealt with.
With before they can actually
start treating other things in
this case, Sally's behavioral
health was unmanaged so we would
more than likely refer Sally for
an assessment with a provider
that can possibly provide her
medication so that we make sure
that we get her behavioral
health managed for her so that
she can be successful in this
program and in life.
Sally will then begin in the
earlier phases attending court.
You typically in phase one, she
would go to court once a week,
and that's gonna be a meeting
with the judge that all the team
is there and prior to court the
team meets and we have what we
call as a staffing so that the
team can meet and discuss
anything going on with all of
the participants, um, positive
things that they've done
anything that they may be
struggling with, and we can have
those discussions to determine.
What the best course of action
is for them as she progresses
through the program, she is
gonna start attending court less
and less, Um, towards the end of
the program. She'll only be
going to court about once a
month. She'll also be having
weekly meetings in the beginning
of the program with her
supervision officer and same
thing with that, as she
progresses through the program
and becomes more stabilized. She
then will start seeing her
supervision officer less um
Medication adherence while in
the program if Sally is required
to be on medication to manage
her behavioral health disorders,
we make sure that she is taking
her medication as prescribed. We
also do random drug and alcohol
testing, and we don't just do
drug and alcohol testing to
catch our participants doing
something or using analysis,
substance. We also do
medication, um, monitoring
through drug and alcohol testing
to make sure
That when they are taking their
medication, but also if there's
something going on, and maybe
they are using another illicit
substance, we wanna make sure
that that's um substance that
they may have used isn't
interacting with the medication
that they're already being
prescribed. So that's one of the
big reasons why in behavioral
health courts, we are drug and
alcohol testing. Um, I did
mention the team discussion. Um,
for instance, let's say, Sally
had you know she began taking
Medication. She's in phase one
of the program. We're still in
trying to stabilize her. She's
still getting oriented to the
program and we get a positive
test for an illicit substance.
But we also noticed that Sally
didn't actually she's her
medication that she's prescribed
isn't coming up instead of just
reacting to her having a
positive test in our behavioral
health courts, we would have a
discussion with Sally to find
out. Why did she use an Alya
substance and also
Noticed you're not taking your
medication. Um, oftentimes, just
having those conversations with
the participants and giving them
a chance to have a voice, um and
explain to us what's going on.
We may find out in this case
that Sally that she didn't feel
OK on her medication. Her
medication may have made her
feel weird, and she may have
also felt stigmatized. So what
we would do when we got that
information whether
That to her treatment provider,
possibly her supervision
officer. We would staff that as
a team, um, typically, um, in a
normal criminal justice,
probation setting that
individual may be sanctioned,
possibly put in custody because
they had a positive test. In
this case, the team would then
discuss that and realize maybe
we need to work with Sally a
little bit more through
treatment, maybe change her
treatment plan so that we help
her work through those
And be OK on her medication. We
may also send her to her doctor
to make sure that that is the
correct medication for her, but
we wouldn't sanction her. In
this case. Of course, there are
times that sanctions may come
into place, but at this point
that wouldn't be something that
we would be doing.
Um
Yes, Sally needed connection to
maybe she needed she didn't have
enough money to buy groceries.
We would then connect her to
those resources. We know Sally
was unemployed when she was
arrested, and maybe she
stabilizing in the program and
ready to start working. Um,
maybe she doesn't have interview
skills or she's not quite sure
where to apply for something. We
will come in as a team and help
her with that with our case
managers so that she's not doing
this alone.
She knows that she has a support
of our team. Um
If Sally were to have any type
of mandatory sentences or
statues within her T, or
conviction, she would also be
required prior to finishing the
program to complete any of those
mandatory items.
So current time.
Mr Chair members of the
committee. Um, So where are our
new Mexico Behavioral health
programs right now? Well, right
now we have seven.
We have three in Burn. Leo
County. The second Metro
Behavior Health Court, which was
the first one in the state in
July. Started in July of 2003.
We have the second judicial
district Be county.
District court that started in
October. A few months later. Uh
we have one here in Santa Fe.
Uh, we have another one in San
Juan. Uh, we also have one in
Sandoval County. Uh, Metro
started at DW I behavioral
Health court in 2016. And just
this last October, San Miguel,
uh, in Las Vegas, started
another court. So these are
we're just going to go over some
of these numbers? Um,
particularly some stats that we
felt that the the committee
would would find interesting. So
Uh, the utilization is how many
clients what's the percentage of
clients versus what's the
capacity of clients? So, uh,
dating back to FY? Uh, 17
through 24. We noticed, um, that
Utilization has gone up, but
we've also noticed that the
capacity has gone down and what
we feel that that is, is that,
um I think the programs realize
what the realistic benchmarks
were for their for their
programs and adapted to that, um
We did see a dip, uh, starting
with FY 21 and FY 22. We
attribute that to the pandemic,
um because cases weren't moving
forward
Less arrests, um, less jury
trials. So once that happened
once they started coming back,
That's when the numbers started
coming back. So we hit. Uh 69%
FY 23 and so far in FY 24. We're
at 61%.
Um, So what is the recidivism
look like for our behavioral
treatment course. So the blue
box is, um graduate recidivism
and the orange box is everybody
else that's intent to treat that
includes people who were
unsuccessful. Uh, that's either
being uh, voluntarily like I
don't wanna be in this program
anymore, or they were terminated
because of non compliance and
what we can see is that since FY
20, the number has more or less
been decreasing in both, Um the
NUM. The number is
Better in our graduates, which
we'd like to see. We'd like to
see it down for everybody. Uh,
but what This is also telling us
is that, uh, in what the what
We've also been learning is that
any type of treatment is good
treatment doesn't matter how
long the client is in as long as
they're getting some sort of
treatment. If they graduate,
they tend to do better. But even
if they don't, they also tend to
do better than the general
population.
Um, so this one might be a kind
of hard to see. But the main
thing to notice is the bottom
number is the 128 and the 15%.
What That is is that's the
housing for our clients, but
that's improved. So what our
case management system is, is
that at intake and at discharge,
we gauge where a client is
current living situation when
they came in versus when they
left. Um and what this is
telling us. Is that since uh so
for the last several years 15%
of our clients is is excluding
juveniles have their their home.
Uh, living
Has improved.
Uh, this is also true for, uh,
education. Um, that's the bottom
bar. That has, um, gone up by
11%. We This may be because we
are getting data that was
captured in a different case
management system before we
moved it over. So some of the
education data may be
incomplete. Hence why? There's
um There's an unknown in there
that there's a box for that
night. Don't like that. We're
trying to fix that. But, uh,
what we can see is when our
clients are discharged, they are
improving.
Uh uh, while they're in our
program
Mr Chair members of the
committee. Our role as a OC is
to provide support to our
programs. Um, we provide support
from the judge, the coordinator
to team members, um through
providing training and techno
technical assistance to them.
Um, oftentimes we're providing
guidance to programs because we
treat each individual that comes
into the program as an
individual. They are programs
may run into situations that
they've never been in before.
They're not sure quite how to
handle it because every person
circumstances are different. Um,
whenever things are happening in
their lives, so we oftentimes
will provide guidance to
programs on how to deal with
something. How to address
something.
Um, We also make sure that our
programs are following best
practices that we have quality
programs and that they are
sustained. Um, we do that
through sometimes providing
funding. Um, data collection
like March Martin mentioned. All
of our programs are in our
state, including our behavioral
health treatment courts are
required to use the data
information management system,
also known as Dems, Um, where we
collect
All of the data on our
behavioral health and treatment
courts. Um and we also make sure
that that data is being entered
accurately. In addition to that
we also evaluate our programs
through our certification
process. Each behavioral health
court in our state is required
to to go through a certification
process every three years where
our team goes in and reviews
their policies, procedures and
their practices of their
program. If we find that a
program isn't quite
Um, you know, following maybe
one best practice or also any of
our new Mexico treatment court
standards. We will guide our
programs on how to become better
aligned with the national best
practices in our new Mexico
treatment. Court standards.
Thank you. Let me let me
interject there, and I do want
to leave some time for some
questions. If you would, please.
So we we allowed an hour for the
presentation about 45 minutes
in, so I've got members already
asking for the opportunity to
make sure your questions. So can
you maybe tie it up for us
quickly, and then we'll get to
questions.
Mr Chair members of the
committee That was actually our
next. Our next slide was the was
the last one. So, uh, what? This
is just a summation of what
we've talked about today. And
what a behavioral health
achievement program is, it's for
our criminal justice involved
clients. It is a voluntary
program. Uh, there's frequent
drug and alcohol testing in
combination with, um, medication
management. There is frequent
reassessment because we we we
reassess treatment every 90 days
because we wanna make see if the
treatment plan has changed.
Maybe step down treatment from a
higher level of care to a lower
lower level of care, and vice
versa. Um, we try to make sure
we're referring our clients for
resources if needed. Um, this is
a supportive structure that we
have. It's not a not a punitive
one frequent meetings with their
probation officer. Behaviors are
responded to each individual
based on incentive, sanctions
and service adjustments. Um, and
it's a team centered approach
that's been molded by over 30.
Years of best practice. Thank
you very much. That's great, um
members.
Committee. Those who wish to be
recognized they see represent
Kenna got you.
Others.
Anyone else right now, Stuart
OK, I've got four members we
have about 20 minutes, so I'll
recognize each of you for up to
five minutes. Right now,
Representative Cadena, you're
first.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you.
Presenters. I first had a
question on Page four. You spoke
about the
Uh, risk assessment tool. Can
you share a little bit with us
about what that is and whether
it's standard across each of
these programs.
Um, Mr Chair. Representative,
Uh, Laura can what we do is we
We have a We mandate that the
every program uses the risk. It
needs triage.
Um, it was developed by um, one
of the head researchers for the
National Association of Drug
Corps Professionals. It's been
validated. It's vetted. Um
there's two types there. It's
been validated for New Mexico's
population, both for
According to gender as well as
New Mexico's population, it's
been it's been vetted for the
norm for the criminal justice.
Population. Uh, I would. I had
that other question. I would
refer to Mr Mitchell behind me.
But I. I think it's more focused
on nationwide. It's a standard
risk and need screening tool
that that everybody uses.
There's also AD UIR, which
focuses on DU. I, uh, clients I
would appreciate follow up on
that and specifically if it's
been validated by gender, and
for New Mexico's population,
we've all heard about the Arnold
tool and a very different
capacity and and what it took to
get there, Um, moving to Page
five. Mr.
Chair. I appreciated this
interesting little PowerPoint.
Here and heard you all speak to
the role of the prosecutor as
Someone that's going to hold
participants accountable in a
non adversarial way. Can you
quickly speak to
How you might accomplish
something like that, because,
frankly, prosecutors in the
system have a very particular
responsibility, and that to me
doesn't quite land. Mr. Teh,
representative Ken, So our
prosecutors in our programs they
do wear, um, kind of a different
hat.
Um, And in this case, it's the
ha of being understanding of the
participants when they are are
prosecutors do agree that a
positive drug test doesn't
result in jail for our
participants now, sometimes it
may later on in the program, but
they really play a dual role and
have to keep an open mind when
dealing with our participants.
Um, it's still taking into
account public safety so because
we treat our participants as
individuals, they're gonna take
everything into
That maybe was going on in their
life where they're at. Is this
an a goal for them at the time,
and they actually work closely
with the defense attorneys and
the team as a whole, um, to make
sure that they're not just being
punitive. I appreciate that, so
ultimately they are asked and
take on this task of holding
their role and responsibilities
differently, but ultimately they
are still a prosecutor in the
criminal legal system. Um
The piece about law enforcement.
I heard you all say that they're
the eyes and ears they connect
in communities. They observe
behaviors I would imagine as
someone in this participant,
someone that navigates mental
illness and behavioral
challenges myself that that
would feel like someone is
watching you and they're waiting
for you to mess up or to trip or
to relapse. Um, I, I hear you
all continue to repeat and and I
don't need you to answer this
one. But I It's interesting to
me to hear that, like
Someone's in a permissive way
being asked to observe behavior,
but we're trying to tell people
these participants in a system
that has not treated them with
kindness or care overwhelmingly
that this time it's gonna be
different. So
Potentially an offline
conversation and would love to
hear more examples of how that's
working. How you identify law
enforcement officers like how
they decide or elect to be parts
of these teams and then with my
final minutes on Page nine, you
had a slide about medication.
Adherence. It made me a little
nervous, Probably because we're
having these, um fantastic
conversations with the
governor's office about a OT and
what it means to require
treatment, But casually, you all
said something.
About, Um, whether they're on
the medications that they're
required to be in this system.
There is no requirement of
medication is there
What? What does that look like
to require someone to take their
meds? And is that something
that's part of this court
system?
Mr Chair.
Representative.
Mr Terror represented Kenna so
within behavioral health courts
if a participant is or is found
or assessed to need medication,
we do require that they take
their medication as part of
participation in the program.
Um, but we also do that with
we're not making those
decisions. We leave that
decision up to their medical
provider. We do sign a release
with where we have them sign a
release of information with our
provider, so that if there is
something that's going on with
Vacation. Um or they don't want
to be on that medication. They
go back to the medical provider
to be reassessed and determine
what is the best course of
action for them. So, Mr Chair
presenters, what are the
consequences if they
Given that the system or your
courts are designed to have a
friendly approach, ultimately.
There's a legal process behind
that approach. What happens if
they elect not to take their
medication in your courts?
Well, everybody would be treated
differently, of course, so it's
gonna be up to their individual
circumstances, Mr Chair that
they end up with a
Time in detention, like what are
the worst case scenarios in this
for this participant if they've
agreed to participate, they
agreed to a treatment plan. They
ultimately do not follow that
treatment plan or maintain that
treatment plan. Like what could
be one of some of the
The consequence to that, Mr
Chair, Representative Ken if
they were not willing to follow
the treatment plan out a certain
point, they may be terminated
from the program. Yes, OK, Mr
Chair. My last comment. Um, I
was grateful finally, to get to
page 10 and see the map of where
you have these behavioral
health.
Um, some I as we can see,
there's you all have a lot of
data. Many of these are 20 years
old. Uh, this is just a comment
like I've made in other interim
committee meetings we've had so
far this summer. I do have
concerns a OC is a fantastic
branch of government. The
judiciary. It is concerning to
me that new Mexicans will access
different court programs based
on where they live and where
they call home. Um, so I
appreciate this is potentially
has some positive impacts. You
all can speak to the
transformative way.
You've impacted communities up
north, Um, clearly, even down
where I represent in the third
this we have different. We have
different, um
Course that you've laid out
here, but we don't have these
courts and and I continue as if
we're gonna have special
sessions to talk about what it
means to have access to care. We
need to be talking about the
disparate access that new
Mexicans have. Thank you, Mr
Chair.
Uh, thank you. And now the, UM
representative Anna North who
Five minutes.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um so I
just had a really quick kind of
clarifying question towards the
end of your presentation. You
mentioned that the program
itself is evaluated every How
often did you say
Mr Tear representative and
animal that our programs are
required to go through our
certification evaluation
process every three years, OK
And and then.
If there's something lacking
found at the end of that
evaluation there, guided towards
the what guideline of best
practices. It's the national all
rise best practices and also our
New Mexico treatment course
standards. And is there any
enforcement?
Behind that.
There is our team actually works
with the programs, um, to help
them find ways to meet those
best practices and standards.
Um, so and if they as we work
with them until we actually get
them there, sometimes we need to
provide them with the resources.
Um, they may not have, um,
possibly training funding a lot
of different things that our
team will work with them so that
they can adhere to those. OK.
All right. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you. And now, uh,
representing Ga for five
minutes.
Thank you, Mr Chair and thank
you all for your presentation.
Um, I've known some people that
have gone through this program,
Um or programs similar to this,
Um, on page nine. Where you talk
about your supervision officer,
Is that the pro? Uh, probation
and parole officer? Is that who
that is? Um, Mr Chair,
Representative, Um, it? Yes. Um,
what We're trying for our
treatment courts. It's um
depending on the
Um, some courts actually have in
in staff Court staff who are
monitoring the the clients and
their courts, depending on
staffing issues, may may partner
with a PPO to do that for them,
Um, what we want to understand,
though, but for everybody is
that it's a non adversarial
approach, and it's it's, uh,
making sure that it's more not
more supervision. But more case
management sometimes, especially
for this population, Uh, but
also making sure that when
needed to these clients are
being held.
OK, and just a couple of
comments on on the report. Um it
seems to seems to me like, um
There's some numbers that are
sort of missing from this
report. Um
In looking at the next page,
where you talk about program
utilization, and then you talk
about recidivism. Um I mean, I.
I feel like I'm sort of missing
the
Percentage of what
Um, I guess, um, program
utilization. You're saying an FY
17? There were 302. And then
there were hundreds and 20 that
were
120 participants of 302. Is that
what you're saying and then
moving on to FY, 2400 and 67 and
the the percentage of what 100
and two of the 167 so I'm just
trying to be clear about what it
is that you're analyzing here.
Um, and that on page
Mister chair. Thank you. And on
the next page where you talk
about recidivism, you're talking
about the totals.
And so I'm just trying to follow
your graphs here.
So the totals are it doesn't
give me the totals. It gives me
the percentages, which is fine,
but it would be kind of nice to
know what the totals are so that
we're we know what we're
comparing percentages of, so I'm
just that's just a comment, uh,
for future, um
Surveys. Um and then on page and
I don't see a page number here
for where you talk about the
housing. Um
Mr Chair.
What I'm wondering about is as
you follow these individuals and
they are linked to housing.
We don't have enough housing. So
how is it that you're
Putting them into housing. I
mean, I. I just have to ask that
question.
Mr. Chair, representative Bargo.
Those are all excellent
questions. Um or as for the
housing What? What we hope is
that as clients become
stabilized as they become, uh
more and more lucid, uh, they
get the skills necessary that
they become employed and they're
able to find housing through
that avenue instead of perhaps
going through housing and urban
development.
And I realized Mr Chair that
that is not your job.
specifically. Um, but I think
that I'm just trying to make a
point. Mr Chair is that the need
for housing Just affordable
housing, low income housing. All
sorts of housing is just so
important and not just that
piece, but also the
transportation piece, which many
people fall because they can't
get into the housing.
And then they fall because they
don't have the transportation.
And this is just a point. Mr
Chair is that we really need to
increase these linkages as to
how we get people and follow
through over time and not just
for a year. But like
Long term, um to ensure, and I
think this is my point, Mr Chair
and I've made this point before
is that we really need to
Create these linkages between
how people are successful and go
into housing and can actually
maintain housing and then find
the transportation to get them
to those services. And I
understand that's not your You
know your focus, and I think
it's really important that if
we're really gonna make people
successful in these programs
that they have that opportunity,
So thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you. And next up is
Senator Stewart.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. You're
doing a good job by the way.
Looked over the representative
re OK, I can get behind that.
Uh, So thank you for the
presentation and the
information. I have a couple of
clarifying questions and then a
couple of comments so page 11.
What do you mean by program
capacity? What does that mean?
Uh, Mr Chair, Senator Stewart.
Uh, that's a good question. So
Courts are based on the
population base. There's only
one judge should have supervise
this many clients or or be over
this many clients. This is how
big the drug court should be.
Um
Otherwise, um in each court
determines their own capacity,
so initially when, in FY 17 they
the capacity was 302 clients,
but only 120 were in. So that
was the utilization of four only
40%.
What we're finding is that as
time goes on, and they realize
that their capacity maybe they
overshot what their capacity
could be, and they lowered the
what Their matrix would be. So
instead of saying, OK, we can
see 50 clients. Um, we're
We're we're better off seeing
30. So focusing on those 30
clients because we're not
getting up to up to 50 clients.
Um, so that's that I understand,
explains some of the some of the
differences in the utilization.
Um, but that's
That's uh
That's my explanation for that,
Senator.
Mr Chairman.
We're we're trying to study
this. Um, I am
I I'm uh
And flummoxed by your page 11
that the capacity has gone down
and the utilization rates are
calmed down. We, of course, the
pandemic messes everything up.
So take those out. I'm also
Looking at the seven courts we
have. And the 22 of the ones in
Bern. Leo have been there for 21
years. Um, I would like some
more information about that. If
we're this sounds like a
fantastic program incredible
support for each individual.
It's very heavy on staffing and
people working on it. It it
doesn't seem to me that we're
that we're really getting there.
If this is
All we can show for 21 years.
Uh, so
Uh, just I don't quite
understand why this is such a
good program. Why haven't we
grown it? But why hasn't it
expanded and it has just a tiny
little bit, But for the most
part, we're just looking at what
looks to me like the status quo.
We're helping some. Not many,
uh, we still have so many of
these problems. We're not really
making a dent in this issue. And
so I. I apologize for all of
that. But
A happy to hear a response.
Sure. Um, Mr. Chair, Senator
Stewart. Um there's that's not
gone unnoticed by the I by the
Department for Therapeutic
Justice as well. Um, what we
found is that we we, these
programs are there.
But it's incumbent on the on the
rest of the criminal justice IE,
the public defenders, defense
attorneys prosecuting attorneys
to refer clients to these
programs, too.
Um, we could try to
As as courts we can try to refer
clients as much as we can. But
if we're not getting any type
of, uh, assistance that way,
then we may not get that, and
that's not to say that that's
particularly the case. Um, with
every court or with all courts.
It's just that something, um,
that we've noticed also, um, why
we we noticed that there's no
expansion is because it takes,
uh sometimes urban areas have
better transportation. So, um,
it's easier to have courts like
this in in
Larger populated areas.
Well, and Mr Chairman, we
certainly have more people that
need help in larger, populated
areas by nature of population
alone, so
What are we missing?
What aren't we doing?
Mr. Chair, Senator Stewart. Um
some of the reasons that we're
seeing an underutilization in
some of our programs, um, is due
to the agreement by parties
because these are voluntary
programs the individual has to
want to do this program. Um and
then the attorneys, everybody,
They have to be in agreement
that they are going to be a
participant in this program. So
sometimes individuals opt to not
do these programs. Um, of
course, like you mentioned
Covid. We took a a deep dive
with the utilization but also in
some of our smaller communities,
but we're also seeing it in some
of our larger communities is the
lack of resources that are
available.
Um, treatment providers wanting
to work with, um the courts or
just treatment providers not
having the capacity within their
staff to actually serve a
treatment court. Um, also within
our programs, we also have some
staffing concerns. Um, I think
we're seeing that across the
state. Um, For some reasons,
they're not fully staffed, so if
they don't have enough staff to
provide support and services to
these participants, they may
have a Capac.
Of Let's say 100, but they only
have staff to support 50. Same
goes with the treatment
provider. So we're seeing some
of those trends and that may be
some of the reasons that we're
seeing why programs are
underutilized M term and I
appreciate that answer. And of
course, we've been talking about
that for a long time. A long
time. It's just It's very odd to
have a program that we think is
good, and it doesn't grow.
His languishing
Nothing's happening with it. So,
um, thank you so much for doing
this yourselves And for the
presentation. Thank you, Mr
Chairman.
Thank you. I have represented
Lujan still and I believe that
completed other than a few
questions. I have Lujan. I
recognize you for up to five
minutes. It's 1150.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Appreciate
the time and I apologize for
being late. I
For the conference. Um my
question. Uh, Mr. Is
And again. I'm sorry I wasn't
here. How many? How many, Um,
courts are you available in such
PE.
I'm I'm Mr Chair. Representative
Lujan. I'm sorry. I didn't hear
how many courts are you Is this
program available to you? Right
now? There's seven courts across
the state. Thank you. And do you
coordinate with any other
wraparound service type courts
like our wellness court here in
Santa Fe?
Mr Chair.
Uh, Mr Chair? Uh uh.
Representative Lujan, the the
Wellness Court. Um I don't
believe that we do.
Um, but we do, um, partner with
every other court in the state.
Mr Tear, representative Lu Han.
So some of the behavioral courts
are separately from the wellness
court. However, all of our
treatment courts, um, even
though they may not be specific
to behavioral health Court if,
um our participants have
behavioral health disorders. We
do it, try to treat them and
support them with that.
Thank you, Mr Chair, and I do
appreciate those those answers.
I want those that information to
be put on the record because we
have these different types of
treatment courts available to us
with limited resources as you
just mentioned. So the issue
that I'd like us to really dive
into really address is how do we
consolidate those efforts with
these treatment courts? And how
do we you know what kind of
information can we get? Is this
something we need to look at?
Through the research and and
available, um
Resources we have as legislators
through a legislative, uh,
committee? Uh, Finance Committee
who do a lot of our research who
are here today? I want to
recognize them and I want to say
what are How are we going to
really consolidate those efforts
so that we get the most out of
them? Because I have actually
spoken with, uh, some of our
justices about this issue, and
really, we need to refocus. We
need to readdress where those
treatment courts are who they're
getting out to where those
resources are and how we can
consolidate some of
Those efforts because I feel
like there's too many things
going on all at the same time
with a limited amount of
resources as we all know. What
can we do to do? Uh, have a
better plan for those in most
need. Thank you, mister Chair.
Thank you. I believe that
completes everybody. I just have
a few questions myself. We're
pretty close to schedule. I want
to follow up on the comments, or
did you have Senator? I sure you
bet.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank
you. Presenters. Just, uh,
apologies for being late as
well. If I can ask folks to look
at the
The chart on the referral
process page. I think it's uh
But there's a 13 boxes. They're
blue, green and pink.
The upper left. Mr Chairman, uh,
is conviction or plea agreement.
In other words.
The process doesn't start unless
the state successfully convicts
somebody.
And then they're facing, you
know, say a year in jail and go
into this program, and you won't
do the year in jail. Um
And so there's plenty of
incentive to complete this
program.
Uh, some of the folks made Mr
Truman not
The, uh
Be not be facing jail. They kind
of know they're gonna get
probation, So it's like, Well,
I'm gonna get probation.
And have kind of a more mellow,
so to speak.
Supervision. Why should I do
this? So the key is to
Is to, um, provide an incentive.
For them to do this.
Or for there to be a
disincentive if they don't do
this, But my point, Mr Chairman,
um, is
I think if we really wanna, um
Solve the the
Public safety crisis in the
state. We have to figure out how
we can get folks into a similar
type program.
Prior to conviction.
That if the state has leverage
if the state has leverage in the
criminal justice system
You get arrested. You're facing
these allegations if you go to
this program
The state will not convict you.
The case will go away in a
perfect world. Miss Chairman,
the case is stayed in other
words postponed the state
doesn't lose its its, You know,
procedural.
Aspect of the case or whatnot,
and the person voluntarily or
or, you know
Voluntarily with a push.
Get these services that to me
that and I know that's we're
gonna have to change a lot of,
uh
Way of thinking, uh and maybe
even change some of these
institutions, But to me, that's
that's the future. That's what
we need to be. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator.
I. I wanted to follow up on the
comments of Senator Stewart
because I think they're they're
worth really repeating and
focusing on which is why, uh,
this is where it's at and
I thought comes to my mind, too,
because the the governor and
others have proposed certain
subjects for a coming special
session. Perhaps and again. I'm
interested in knowing how does
this
Effort overlap with an intersect
with all the other efforts that
everybody else is making. In
other words, we have this
program under the administrative
Office of the courts, the courts
being a separate branch of
government, right, so we have a
judicial branch of government
that's operating its own
programs. It would seemingly,
uh, address some of the same
things that we're trying to
address, perhaps with a OT
assisted outpatient treatment,
Uh, commitment competency again.
We seem to have everybody kind
of off doing their own thing.
Um, they're all probably chasing
the same grants. Uh, they're all
probably up in Senate Finance
and house appropriations with
representative small trying to
get their own budgets and and
everybody's off doing their own
programs. Um, and there. I mean,
it seems to me there would
probably be a lot of overlap a
lot of duplication and so forth.
Um, that that's not a question
for you, but it's an
observation. Really. For my
colleagues. We really need
somebody to bring this whole
thing together and and and it
should concern. It does concern
me a little bit that we've got
to the courts for good reason.
I'm sure with good motivations,
but they're kind of
Doing their own thing, Um,
independently as a branch of
government apart from what we're
trying to do, and presumably in
coordinations with the executive
branch, and this is not really
the best way to run a
government. It would seem to me.
Um the, um
The other point that I think is
probably worth making. If I
looked at your slide, right, and
please don't take any umbrage to
this, But it's my my role almost
consistently here. I think you
said there were seven of your
programs around the state. I
didn't see any of them south of
Berli County.
And I see you not. I see. You're
nodding your head. Yes. And I
see you nodding your head. No,
you're saying the same thing.
There are no programs south of
Albuquerque, uh, of seven.
And of course, when we say Well,
we've got these located where
there's large populations, uh
from my colleagues who are here
from, uh, rural New Mexico and
from uh Southern New Mexico and
Dona County. I'll remind
everyone, um Dona County second
largest Population County in the
state. Las Cruces, second
largest population. Santa Fe
forgets that, um Albuquerque
forgets that, but but we're
saying, Well, we're putting
these programs in places where
the population is at. That's not
really true, uh, because, uh,
there's none of the program
south of Buro County, all seven
of them.
Here in the north, and and
that's not too big a surprise
again. I'm gonna get in trouble
with my colleagues on the bench,
which, um, I do from time to
time, but you know, everybody on
the benches from, um Santa Fe
and Albuquerque, right. So it
doesn't surprise me that the A
OC, who's running this programs
is putting all their effort.
their energy. Uh, with that you
all are doing good work with,
but they're putting it all where
they're from, right? Um, and
that may be maybe, uh, there may
be a reason that you're gonna
give me for why that's
happening. So I wanna give you
that opportunity. But, um, if
you're if you're me and you're
trying to represent your cons
From Almo, Gordo or Las Cruces
or others, and and, uh and
Chavez or whatever he's saying.
Well, hold on a second. How come
none of these services? None of
these programs are available to
anybody other than south of
north of Albuquerque, right? Um
And so, um, a concern, right and
and to Senator Stewart's point,
If it's a good program, we want
to expand it. If it's really
that good. Why wouldn't we have
it in our courts in other parts
of the state? Really? So, um,
those are
Few observations. Um I hope that
we'll this legislature will work
with the executive and with the
courts to figure out why, why
everybody's got their own turf,
right? Why? Why does courts
gotta have its version of this
and the Legislature and the
executive gotta have their own
version. Department of Health
got to have their own version.
Everybody's gotta have their own
way of treating really the same
problem. It seems to me, right.
Uh um and, and that's gonna take
a leaders.
Presumably like us or somebody
to bring it all together and and
say one system, right? I assume
there's so much duplication so
much overlap that that probably
explains part of why centers
Stewart's question is. Why isn't
this expanding? Well, because
you're competing with everybody
else Who's doing the same thing
you're doing.
And, um again, I'm repeating
this No way to run a government
so
Go ahead.
Thank you, Mr Chair, Senator.
Samantha. Um, it's not to say
that we don't want to expand
these programs so that we can't
There has to be, uh, this all
starts with having a desire to
have a a program. The AOC
doesn't just you know, you can't
have a program. You can't If you
want to have a program, the
department for therapeutic
Justice will will support that.
Uh, if the need is there and if
the want is there
Um, So what I what would be all
that to say? That is if, um if
the need is there and the want
is there then the A OC will be
more than happy to support any
Any behavioral health court that
would wishes to start
And I, and I appreciate the the
spirit of your comment. It's
It's hard for me to imagine that
the second um I'm sorry. The
third District Onana County
would say, Hey, we don't want
this, right. Um my guess is they
probably don't know about it.
They have probably been having
offered it. Somebody's come down
and said, Hey, we We have these
resources We have this staff.
We'd love to come open an office
in some part of the state other
than Santa Fe. Um and, um so I.
I don't know that it's been a
purposeful rejection on their
part of unavailable service. I
think it's more of a like has
been offered to us right and
that's
That's probably a natural, uh,
response to the court there,
too, So I hope that we'll do
some of that outreach, but I
hope more than that will some
point in time. Somebody's gonna
bring this whole thing together
and say, Hey, let's let's come
up with a structure that doesn't
duplicate doesn't overlap and
frankly, doesn't compete against
each other, which we see a lot
in government. We everybody's
got their turf. Nobody wants to
let go of it, and, uh and
everybody's competing for the
same services and same money,
Frankly, so thank you for that
members. Um, thank you for that.
We're close to on time. Thank
you.
For the presentation and the
good discussion. We'll go next
to
Related topic in the second
district.
A OT.
I hope I hope so. In my
comments. Maybe you're a good
segue to what's going on in a
second.
We've heard from the third for
this I. I use these, uh,
descriptions for the lawyers.
But for the Nonla the I'll
always take a moment to pause
back. So the second district for
Leo County, Right, Um First
District, Santa Fe Third
District, Onana County So most
of the most of the big, big
judicial districts we've heard
already from at our last meeting
from a OT as it's working in the
third District, Dona County,
which is being touted as
Successful. Um I'm not gonna
argue that it is or isn't but
that's at least be. It's being
touted as the model for a OT. So
our next presentation is to hear
about.
A OT as it's been attempted in
Bern, Leo County, the second
district
And before you all get started,
We've got about an hour and 15
minutes on this topic. We are
members. We, um
Again, Um
The agenda being what it is.
There's there's a lunch break in
there. We did not make
arrangements for lunch to come
in. It's not showing as a
working lunch on our agenda, so
we'll we'll, uh, we'll break for
lunch as quick as much as we can
on schedule, so we'll try and
keep that that being said, I'll
ask the presenters to, uh, try
and make sure that your
presentation wraps up no later
than noon. So we have 30 minutes
at the end for some questions,
OK, All right. Thank you very
much.
Your microphone's not working,
Please. Sorry about that.
Good morning, Mr Chair and
members of the committee. I am
Judge Beatrice Brickhouse from
Second Judicial District Court
with me is Laura and I am the A
OT court judge for Second
Judicial District Court in Lower
Bron is our program manager. And
so this morning what? We, uh
will present to you is an
overview of our program A
history of our program, our
screening and referral process.
Our court infrastructure. Um
Structure and our data that was
collected during the pro. During
the time that our program was
operational, and where we are
with regards to our program
right now, and so Miss Brown is
going to begin with presenting
that history and I will
interject occasionally with
regards to my observations,
experiences and additional
information for you.
And so with your permission,
mister Chair members of the
committee we'd like to proceed.
Good morning, Mr Chair
representatives. Um, thank you
so much for welcoming us. I
thought that the best way to
start our presentation would be
to give some history on the
background of the Bern. Leo
County, a OT program.
And there has, I think been some
confusion As of late. Um, in
regards to where the program
stands, so I thought, perhaps if
we started at the beginning, um
and then, um, led into where
Operation currently stands so in
2017, the city of Albuquerque
partnered with the second
Judicial District Court to
establish an advisory team. Uh,
to start the the groundwork, um,
of an a OT program in Bernalillo
count.
Um, that work led to, um in
2018, the city being awarded a
substance abuse and mental
health Administration grant for
four years, Um, from that period
of time in November of 2019, the
Bern Leo County program, Um
Was up and launched and we
ordered our first participant
into the program in 2019.
We We did, uh, suffer the loss
of our program provider in June
of 2021, and it's at that time
that we did have to place the
program on a hold. And it has
been since that time that we
have been, um, restructuring and
reorganizing. Um, with, uh
The supports available in the
community to bring on a new
provider. Um and II. I could
definitely speak to where we
are, Um, in that process a
little bit later in the
presentation.
I thought it would be helpful
just from the court's
perspective to to share the
infrastructure of the program.
We do have three court staff
assigned to a OT that would be
myself as the program manager.
uh, primarily responsible for
program oversight, education
outreach. We do have what we
call a court case manager. They
they primarily serve as the
liaison for the program and
their roles and responsibilities
is ensuring that the treatment
plan that's ordered, um
For an a OT participant is is
being a accurately followed, Um,
in a satisfactory manner for
both the participant, the judge,
um and all parties represented
in that case, and then we also
have a judicial specialist
assigned to a OT with the
responsibility of administrative
support. Um, and court
processes. I know that this
committee has received some
On a OT in terms of the statute
and
The purpose and goals of the
program, but we thought that we
would just lightly touch on them
briefly again. Um and so a OT is
is the practice of providing a
community based, uh, mental
health treatment option under
civil court commitment with the
hope of motivating that adult
with a mental illness. Um, who
might struggle with voluntary
treatment options? Um, help
keeping them focused on their
treatment plan while
simultaneously um
Holding that treatment as a as a
two way commitment, um, that
it's not just the individual's
responsibility to this treatment
plan, but it is also the
treatment providers
responsibility to ensure that
the service is outlined in that
year, too.
Um, We also do that through
leveraging the power of the
court by trying to motivate, um,
influence encourage healthy
behavior through the black robe
effect. Um, and I believe Judge
Brickhouse can speak a little
bit more to how she oversees
that, Um, a little bit later in
the presentation with the
overall goal of a OT being
reducing incidence of
hospitalizations, arrests, Um,
episodes of harm to self and
others, um, home.
And then we also were hoping to
reduce the financial strain of
our communities, Emergency
resources that we see these
individuals tend to utilize.
Um and then the overall goal
being to support individuals in
the community, Um, achieving
their goals. Um, and living safe
and productive lives with
Uh, one thing that we do always
like to point out is that a OT
is a civil law, which does make
it a bit different in that it
does not need to be predicated
on the commission of a crime.
And so the goal one of the main
goals of a OT is to, um, keep
individuals out of that criminal
justice system system and cycle.
And so it is a civil legal
procedure. Um, a lot of
Conversation surrounding a OT
oftentimes surrounds the fact
that there are no sanctions or
some people say no teeth to a OT
and we like to just remind, uh,
individuals that while there may
be no sanctions for a violation
of the order, it doesn't mean
that there are no consequences.
And so with that, um, a couple
of
Um
Consequences that we wanted to
point out natural consequences
that we wanted to point out are
there there is, um, an allowable
option for, um, an order for
emergency evaluation. Uh, where?
If
Clinically that individual is
deemed to have decompensated to
the point where they may
require, um, an a a higher level
of intervention. It does allow
for that individual to be picked
up at a hospital setting.
The other, um, potential natural
consequence might be increased,
Uh, status reviews before, uh
before the judge, and so if we
find that an individual, um
perhaps is having a hard time we
can bring them before the court
before the judge more
frequently address what those
issues might be problem solve
around those issues, Be it
medication, be it services, um,
to be able to try to get that
individual back on track. And
then that would
To lead to increased clinical
provider intervention. And so
perhaps you were receiving, uh,
weekly. Uh, appointments with
your case Manager? Um, but we we
did.
Um, perhaps identify that there
was some decompensation. Perhaps
those visits would increase in
nature, Um, to ensure
Um, that we could get them back
on a healthy path.
Um, And the other thing, too, I
think just keep in mind, uh,
with a OT is that it does not
require the individual's
voluntary choice to participate.
I think that's the core of what
assisted outpatient treatment
is, Um, is that the individuals
that
Are involved in a OT have a
history of
Um, disengagement, and they also
have, um, a history of of lack
of insight. And so these are
individuals that are very
specific subset of the mental
health continuum. And so
oftentimes these individuals are
suffering from a condition
called anassa, which is
essentially a fancy word for
lack of insight. Um, and so they
may not realize that they need
medication that they need
treatment that they need care
and assistance. And so this
program specifically
Targeted towards that
population and so because they
may not feel like they need that
support and services, they're
not necessarily gonna wanna come
into a program of this nature
voluntarily. Um, so we have an
option, um, to be able to order
them to follow this treatment
plan. Despite that, I do also
know that this committee has
received quite a bit of
education about the a OT
criteria and statute, so I
won't, uh, really delve into
that too much, But we did just
wanna present
But just as a refresher, um in
terms of participant and
petitioner criteria.
Um, one of the things, um, with
our A OT program, as I had
mentioned earlier is, we began
out of a Samsa grant a four year
Samsa Grant. And so with that
came an evaluation process and
We were evaluated through the
University of New Mexico
Institute for Social Research
and
One of the things that they
evaluated. Our program based on
was best practice standards. And
so this is a list of treatment
Advocacy center. Best practice
standards. Um, this is really
what they're looking in the A OT
program across the nation to be,
um, infusing into their
programs. Um, we are a partner
with the treatment advocacy
center. They do provide us quite
a bit of training and technical
assistance. Um, to ensure that
our program is kind of
Eating and adhering to these
different areas, and so, um, for
the sake of time, I definitely
won't go through each bullet
point, But I just, um did want
to point out that through our
evaluation. Our evaluator did
find that our program while it
was in its period of operation
did meet all of these different
best practice standards. Um, a
couple that I just wanted to
highlight is family engagement.
I think there's quite a bit of
research that shows that with
family engagement or with a
healthy support system.
Your outcomes tend to be better.
And so, with our program, we, um
encourage and we solicit any
kind of family or healthy
support systems from the very
beginning of the process, And
then we do try to engage those
individuals as much as the
participant is comfortable with,
Um throughout the the the
process of that one year court
order, the other thing that I
just wanted to point out that I
think, um, our program really
did well is was, um
Make judicious use of law
enforcement partners. I will say
that, um, we have had, um, a a
really healthy relationship. Um,
with our crisis intervention
partners in our community. Um,
and that
If they were to, um, come into
contact with one of our
participants in the community
who was struggling, Um, and they
know that they're involved in
this a OT program. Then it
really does offer them a much
warmer handoff back into
treatment. Then into, um some
sort of arrest or legal, Uh, I.
I also thought it would be
helpful to touch really briefly
on our programs, referral and
evaluation process. And so the
way that an individual comes
into assisted
Patient treatment is first a
referral and we are our program
was established that a referral
does not necessarily have to
start at the hospital.
And so a referral can be made
through the hospital be. It can
also be made by a community
member. Um, so that could be a
physician, a group hall member,
a family member, a treatment
guardian, and so we really
wanted to make it low barrier
and very accessible. Um, to
refer to And so with that, um,
we receive referrals from the
community. They go to our
clinical service provider if
that clinical service provider
determines that the criteria has
Met her statute and that
individual is scheduled for an
assessment with a qualified
professional.
If that qualified professional
deems that a OT would be most
beneficial and least
restrictive, Um then AAA
petition can be filed with some
subsequent documentation. Um,
the creation of a treatment
plan. Um, an affidavit by that
qualified professional, um,
attesting that they believe that
this is gonna be, um And then at
that point, the individual is
appointed legal counsel, and we
have once that petition is filed
between three and seven days. We
do.
Set that hearing. Um, to be
heard, um, and then provided
that clear and convincing
evidence is present. Then that
individual can be
And I believe Judge Brookhouse
might want to elaborate on that
process. A bit more. OK? All
right, Mr Chair and members to
use the moment we need to
recognize also Ramirez, who's
part of this panel as well, too.
So we're gonna get you to, sir.
So I wanna make sure the
presentation wraps up here in
about the next 10 minutes with
Mr Ramirez as well too. So,
Judge Go ahead, please. OK,
Thank you, Mr Chair. Members of
the committee. Well, I'll start
where I get involved, which is
the hearing process. Um and so
I'll start off with how we have
our hearing.
The structure, and there is that
initial hearing and then there
is a hearing at the three month
0.6 month point. And then the
one year point um and we
developed this after observing
another A number of other court
models. Um, as you saw in the
history, um this process started
with second Judicial district in
the city of Albuquerque around
that 2016 17 time frame. It was
actually going to initially be a
pilot program between the city
and second Judicial District
Court with the city, providing
the
Funding, and then the city had
that opportunity for the Samsa
funding. And so then that ended
up funding that first four years
of the program. Um, but when the
city was going, um, when it was
just gonna be the city and the A
and second judicial District
court with the pilot program, I
did have an opportunity to
travel to Ohio with the
assistance of the treatment and
advocacy center to observe
different court models. And so
there were three different court
models that I observed, Um, in
Ohio all very differently.
Rated, um and so as a result of
the observations of those
different court models, as well
as attending a OT symposiums,
uh, watching a number of
webinars and of course, with
assistance from treatment and
advocacy center. We structured
our program the way that it
ended up being and again. It's
with, uh, four hearings in that
one year time frame.
Um, I can tell you that, you
know, one of the observations,
Um, for me is that when the
program first started, there
were more petitions that were
contested. But as we went deeper
into the program, there were
less less contested petitions,
and I think that's for a couple
of reasons that I'll talk about
later. Having said that a
majority of the petitions are
non contested when they come
before me for hearing
In spite of the fact that they
are non contested, I make the
effort to talk with this
potential participant about what
the obligations are starting
with the fact that I let them
know I am going to be signing a
court order for them to be in
this program, so this is an
enforceable court order, and I
let them know what the
expectations are with regards to
their participation in the fact
that the service provider also
has obligations. Um
Under the court order.
And I do that because I do wanna
emphasize this is a court order
and there are going to be
requirements for you during the
pendency of your participation
in a LT. And so I covered the
fact that we're gonna have
several hearings that they're
required to attend. They need to
stay in contact with their
counsel. They need to stay in
contact with their case worker,
The service provider, um, take
their medication and attend all
appointments. And then at the
end of that explanation again, I
give that opportunity to make
sure they understand.
They understand those
requirements and do they still
not contest that petition?
Um, that first hearing is a more
formal hearing. Uh, certainly.
But after that first hearing,
the hearings are really quite
informal and more of a
conversational nature, I would
say, um, and again, I base that
upon my observations of other
court models as well as
gathering information through,
um, talking and observing other
judges. Um and
You know, the purpose of that is
to allow the participant to talk
about what issues they may still
be facing, Um, how the
interaction is going on between
them and the service provider.
Um, do they have any unmet
needs? Is there any other
support that we can provide for
them?
And so, um, again, it's a pretty
informal process after that
initial adjudicatory hearing
Um, luckily, um, the previous
provider and I think, um, our
future provider. They are full
service providers, which is
fortunate for the participant
that they're not having a run
around to a lot of different
places. They have that, Uh, one
point of contact with that full
service provider who then
navigates them through, Um all
of the different needs. They may
have. Um, I will say one of the
things that, um you know, I
appreciate, um, about the
treatment plan is that it
doesn't just address medical
Shoes and also addresses non
medical issues. What other needs
does this individual have? And
many members of this population
may not have an ID. They may
have dropped off of Medicaid and
not be established with any kind
of primary care and have you
know, uh, an unstable housing
situation, have some
relationship issues and the, uh
assessor evaluator that we had
did address all of those issues
and the treatment plan, which
was helpful for
As a judge with regards to
engaging in dialogue with the
participants. Also, it's not
just about medication and
therapy, right? It's about how
is everything going. How is your
life going? How else can we help
you?
Um And so I did want to point
out that the treatment plan does
go beyond just medication and
therapy. Uh, services for the
individual. Um, of course. Um
With regards to that alt order.
It's good for one year can be
extended. We did have a number
of individuals that, um, the
order was extended beyond that
one year period, sometimes for
six months and sometimes for an
additional year. Um, and that
was on the course before we had
our hiatus and of course, the
treatment plan. Also, um, all
the tender treatment plan is
what's clinically recommended by
that health professional judge
Let me use the pause to try and
make sure that we try and wrap
it up here just shortly, so we
can get Mr Ramirez in here and
Time for questions. I find a
good way to wrap it and
synthesize for me. Would you
please just OK? Well, then, um,
I think it would probably be
helpful to you to find out about
the data. Um, that we learned
about from operation of our
program then so I'll turn it
back over to Laura. Um, members
of the committee and Mr Chair,
Mr. Chair. I think Judge
Brickhouse did a really good
job, I think wrapping up um, the
the remainder of our slides, Um,
discussing the court order.
What goes into that court order?
I think the only other thing
that we
Really wanted to touch on is
that, um
Although this is a civil
outpatient commitment order and
there there doesn't necessarily
need to be that voluntary nature
to this program. We do respect
and, um, the the client's
individual rights in this
process, and it is very client
centered, and so with the
development of that treatment
plan that's that's co created
with the participant. Um, I know
Judge Brickhouse on that first
initial hearing. If the
individual is not present, and
there's not a
Clinically indicated reason for
why that individual cannot be
present. I know that Judge bows.
We want that individual to be
involved. Um they are
represented by legal counsel.
Um, we do really want them to,
um, feel like they have a voice
in this process, um, to be able
to articulate what their needs
are in in this program, um and
and feel like it's more of a
treatment team approach than
than kind of an adversarial, um,
type of relationship that they
Might be accustomed to, um with
other co interactions that they
may have had. Um And so with
that, um, we did touch, um, on
on legal representation. I do
know that there are other
programs that, um have, uh,
perhaps a different, um, take on
the involvement of that legal
representation. Our program has
chosen to, um, make them very
involved in the process
throughout that whole entire one
year order. Um, they they
attend.
Both official hearings and
status review hearings. We want
those individuals to feel very
supported represented, um
And then we have also found that
by having our, uh legal
representatives involved for the
individual over the course of
the program that they have also
served, um, helpful in other
rules, who come into program
with maybe a pending criminal
case, and maybe they have active
warrants. Um, that legal team
can somewhat help as a liaison
to kind of bridge. Um, some of
those, um
Those other, um legal issues
that that might be present. Um,
in a procedure.
Um
So, um, as far as our data, uh,
we just wanted to show uh, where
our referral sources are coming
from, and, uh, so on our
referral resolution, um, you
could see primarily our
referrals do come from, um, the
hospital setting. Secondly, um,
from family members, Um, we do
find that in a referral does not
go to a petition. Um, some of
the outstanding reasons for that
could be, um, they don't have a
qualifying petitioner. Maybe
they live out.
County. Um, maybe that that
referral has been pulled.
There's kind of a number of
various reasons as to why we
can't necessarily take a
referral to that petition
process. We thought it would
also be helpful to show who the
petitioners of these cases. Uh,
historically are, um, we do find
that that primarily, it's either
a physician or a parent, Um,
that is serving as that
petitioner for that a OT order.
Um, some participant, uh,
demographics based on the 155
referrals that we received
during our period of operation
in 2021 does show. Um, the
diagnosis. Um, uh, a little bit
about age, ethnicity, gender of
individuals that we find in Beo
county that are coming into a
OT. Um, and then a little bit of
our participant outcomes and so
during our period of operation,
uh, it was I'm gonna have to.
I'm sorry. I have to cut you off
because I when I meant to
But I'm I need to get through
it. The difficulty we've got, I
think is I don't think we have
these slides in our materials,
So we're gonna have to find a
way to get these two members
because I don't think we have
them in for us. There's no way
we can be reading all that data
while you're talking and
listening to at the same time,
too. So, um, Mr Ramirez, Um, why
don't you? Um why don't you join
the discussion a little bit,
and, uh,
We do have the slides. OK, Thank
you. I hadn't seen those. But
thank you for having those. So
we do have those. We'll make
sure the public has them to Mrs
Ramirez again, Uh, about 10
minutes, sir. And then again, we
wanna make sure we I'm sure
there's gonna be a lot of
questions for this group. So
thank you. Mr Ramirez. Mr Chair
Members of the committee. My
name is Gilbert Ramirez. I serve
as the director of health,
housing and homelessness for the
city of Albuquerque. Um, I wanna
take a quick uh
Back story to when I came
involved with this as a deputy
director of behavior, health and
wellness programs for the city
of Albuquerque in 2018, which
was right a time. Uh, around the
time we were notified of the S
MS, a grad and and the
opportunity to kind of initiate
this program, so as a funder,
primarily with a partner with
the second judicial, I think you
know, we've learned a lot from
the needs and how a OT can be
beneficial to the community,
Right. Um, as you saw with some
of the data what it highlighted
was I had a numerous meetings
with parents who cared for their
Children who are adult Children
and had every right
Kind of stand on the issues of
medication and treatment.
Compliance and parents want it
better for them whether they
were assisting them with
housing, and they kept getting
evicted because of episodes in
which the landlords would then
kick them out. So there's a
trickle effect. My background is
a licensed clinician, so I'm
very familiar with the clinical
issues that you have in regards
to supporting individuals met,
Compliance can be difficult,
right? You have individuals who
want autonomy do not want to be
medication dependent and don't
want that compliance issue to be
something that's over them, or
they choose to self medicate
with other alternative
substances that are in the
community, right.
So with a OT coming on board
with our partners, Um, the
funding is is probably what the
primary issue and information I
can share with you all. Uh,
despite the ability to be able
to build Medicaid for a lot of
the clinical programming there,
What's not gonna covered on this
end is the amount of funding
that requires for the court
support to be able to have those
positions. I also understand
that the petitioning attorneys
cost quite a bit when we receive
the SA a Gran, um, there wasn't
enough money to actually employ
any attorney who wanted to be
part of the program at the rates
that they allowed us.
So the city had to offset those
costs to our own internal
funding. We've learned that the
program to continue how to about
what it's at will be just under
a million dollars what we were
able to commit from the city,
and this year was 900,000 to be
able to continue the program in
partnership with second
Judicial. Um some of the
complications we've had is in
gauging clinical providers to be
able to provide this service and
then secondly, having the
additional funding on the
background when we ended the
Samsa grant we had about nine
months left in the fiscal year
that we were able to build into
the budget about 700.
And 3700 and $50,000 to offset
that cost. What we were able to
do this year That's in the
budget is 900,000, which is
still short of I believe what
the program would fully need,
which is about $980,000. So our
commitment is to be able to move
this money over to second
judicial to allow them to
administer those contracts. Um,
I would say that if you all are
reviewing this as something they
could, you know, be employed in
other areas. Please have
consideration for the fact that
there's going to be challenges
for sustaining the, uh
additional pieces of funding
that are required. That's the
partnerships and the staff at
the
That's also the petitioning
attorneys. None of that is
billable or reimbursable through
Medicaid. Um, I appreciate that
we can actually build the
clinical services and be
reimbursed for portions of
those. But the program's
success. Sustainability will
require quite a bit of an
investment in that local area to
make sure that the courts are
funded appropriately and that
there's adequate funding for the
petitioning attorneys to be able
to be involved, especially to
the level that I think that was
built in second judicial and
where we're at, Um so I wanted
to kind of highlight that,
because as a funder, it's
important to look at
sustainability models.
You are making decisions as to
how, uh, helpful this program
could be, um, we definitely
stand behind the fact that you
know at least restricted
environments for individuals to
be able to be compliant with
their treatment is a program
like this right? It's uh,
allowing a wraparound model to
address the issues and they're
complex. It's not just met
compliance as was mentioned.
here It is ability to sustain.
Sustain your housing when you
fall off your medications and
have an incident that could
actually end up in your eviction
and losing that when you have to
make a decision between the
co-pays of your medication.
And or paying rent or food or
gas or getting to a job and
sustaining a job. Those all
become challenges with
individuals. And as you saw on
the slides, the, uh, the
diagnosis that you saw some of
the hardest ones to treat when
you're looking at schizophrenia,
bipolar disorder. Um, I've I've
treated clients on that case
load. And you know the
challenges that come with that
and the behaviors that come with
that they could easily result in
them being terminated from
employment, lose their housing,
And then the medications are
last thing they're worried
about. Um, so those are some
background and pieces of
information.
To understand why the full
wraparound the ability to
actually address all the issues
and provide that case management
and follow those clients and
again, you have a lot of caring
and supportive adult parents to
adult Children living with
mental illness who want that
support, But because they are
adults, they can refuse that,
right. That's the right we all
have to be able to say, Don't
want us to do that, And this is
a different model and program
that has been stood up to be
able to say, how do we help with
the least restrictive
environment, Med compliance
treatment compliance, and also
so
Um good citizens who are
contributing to everyday you
know, society.
So with that I close and stand
for questions. Thank you, Mr
Ramirez. All right.
I have, but we have about 30
minutes before our break I've
got right now. Representative
Lord, representative Martinez
represent ream Small with
questions anyone else that
Got a few. All right, Senator
Stewart. I wanna get a senator
in there.
Represent a no and nothing
personal there, but we got all
their house buddies way ahead of
you. So, um, the centers you
know, we're always so soft
spoken and
Few words, but, uh, Senator Dig,
too. So I call and do Higgs. All
right, uh, Lord Martinez, Ram
small, Uh, Alcon and
What did I get here? At the end?
We were right.
All right. That's good to know.
Uh and Orrego. So that's a lot
of folks. We got. 30 minutes.
Everybody's gonna have to be
held to about three minutes. So
represent a lord. For about
three minutes. John.
Thank you, Mr Chair. This super
super quick expert. So what
happened in June? 21st 2021 when
you the loss of the clinical
service providers, and if you
could answer that shortly. That
would be great. Thank you.
Uh, I'll go ahead and address
that. Um, what ended up
happening was we had a clause in
our contract and procurement for
oversight that required that
there be a specific reporting to
the city in regards to Medicaid
billing before they draw down on
the grant. And so, um, there
was, uh, several meetings in
regards to compliance for that,
Uh, the organization we went
into in regards to that it ended
up being remediated, but they
had to do some paybacks because
it was some double bill. So that
lost that was a breakage for I
think the first clinical
provider that we went back out
to putting that
RP. We had just a lack of
providers in the community to be
able to meet the need. Um, the
timeline for that, uh, which I
can also share because we've
kind of already summed that up.
Uh, was that we put it out to
RFP. Um, we were able to find
somebody who applied for it all
primarily to serve female
clients at a much lower rate.
Um, and then, unfortunately,
we're unable to staff up fully
and we had to terminate that
contract. So then we put it out
a different additional way in
regards to looking at for
profits and nonprofits because
our procurement rates primarily
limit us to
Only engaging I'm I'm gonna cut
you off a little bit. I only
have a few minutes left. So, um,
M, Mr Chair and experts. So do
you have enough providers for
this program? Because I know you
said that the courts and the
attorneys need assistance. Uh,
do you have enough providers
that are going to take Medicaid
for this program?
I would say that you know the
discussion we had with the
courts. We have more
restrictions that the city with
regards to that procurement
process. Um, I believe the
courts are able to go into that
without competitive bid, which
will allow them to actually
select and go into a contract
with the provider so we
hopefully won't have that issue
moving forward, OK, because
that's always issue Mr Chair and
and experts is finding people to
have enough. That's in general
with the whole entire state and
not just bling county.
And, uh, so when they get into
the system, who is the oversight
for this person that follows
them along to make sure they're
compliant? Who's the person?
That is our direct oversight?
To making sure that there's
compliance. So, Mr Chair
representative, I'll go ahead
and fill that so
Oh,
I think I just need to be closer
here.
The oversight is is the clinical
provider. Um, and as well as the
court, so the clinical provider
is the day to day oversight
through. Uh, we utilize the CCS
S. Uh, case management. Um,
option within the steps, the
statute and so they provide
ongoing, Uh, case management
check ins. They, uh
They use the information that
they collect, and they report
that through adherent summaries
to the court and then through
periodic hearings. We have the
oversight of the court and the
judge to determine if
Additional implementation or
strategies need to be And last
question, Mr Chair? Uh, experts
what happens if the person is
non compliant?
Uh, Mr Chair and, uh,
Representative Lord, um, on one
of our, uh, slides. We did cover
that. But briefly. What happens
is the consequence of non
compliance is more intervention
by that service provider. Uh,
possibly more court hearings.
And if there is a concern that
this individual really is, um
relapsing than there is, of
course, um, the option for a
certificate of evaluation to
occur. Ok, Thank you, Mr Chair.
I want to give everyone else
time to ask questions.
Thank you for that
consideration, representative
Representative Martinez. I'm
watching the clock. Um I gave
you a little bit more time.
Represent Lord and thank you for
being short with yours. I
recognized representative
Martinez and then represent re
for up to five minutes each
Represent a Martinez.
Thank you, Mr Chairman and thank
the presenters. II. I have three
quick questions.
Kind of general questions.
Ask my questions first and then
You can provide the answers.
Uh, first of all,
When the program ended in 2021,
What happened to the
participants? Um
Or
Was anybody tracking that what
was going on with them?
And
Since 2021.
You show three staff members
have they been
Tracking the the people that
were in the program before. Are
they searching for new
providers? You know what? What's
One of those staff members been
up to for the past three years.
And who pays for the services is
this
Um, Mr Ramirez briefly touched
on it. But as the state going to
have to come in, and
Pay for this Is the county gonna
pay for it?
Not everybody you said, is
We can build, uh, Medicare and
Medicaid.
How is the program going to be
funded?
Uh, if if and when you stand it
up again.
Thank you.
OK?
Chair representative. If I can
address question one and two
when the, uh termination of the
clinical provider happened, it
was an agreement that all cases
would be carried and then
followed through as we
transition that out, so that was
taken care of with regards to
those clients, So they were
served to the end, and that was
the agreement in regards to the
last question of the funding.
The city has put up our funding
to be able to offset the amount
of costs and we've committed
that money, uh, to be able to
pay for the petitioners and all
the funding that's not included
in the Medicaid drawdown.
Mr. Chair representative. I can
address the question about the
court staff that that is
assigned to a OT. So there are
three court staff, including
myself, primarily over these
last 2.5 years. I've been really
working with the city on trying
to, um, establish provider
options in the community as well
as just continuing to, um, do
outreach to the community and
informing them of where the
program is the fact that there
is still support and funding
behind this program. Um and
We are working to to become
operational. Um, we did have a
case manager. That position has
since vacated. We have not
refilled that position. We don't
plan to until we get our our new
clinical provider up and going
and established. We do have, uh,
a judicial specialist, um, who
is still on staff? Um, that
person, um does, um, carry some
small administrative tasks still
within a OT in terms of, um they
are the the
The service line for calls Just
general inquiries about a OT.
They do fill those calls as well
as they have been doing, um some
other support services within
the court, based on
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank
you for those answers.
And grabs. Martinez,
representing re five minutes.
Thanks very much, Mr. Chairman,
um
Uh, my question is on these
individuals who go into the
programs that you're sending
them off for treatment. Are you
adjudicating them mentally ill,
uh or court ordering them?
And are you reporting that to
the FBI Nick system so they
can't purchase a firearm.
Uh, Mr Chair and Representative
Ram. Now I am not adjudicating
the individuals to be mentally
ill. I am either granting or
denying the petition to order
the individual in into the A OT
program.
And no, there is no reporting,
um through a OC to nix. Um, I
think what you might be
referring to is that it does
happen within guardianship
cases, but that is not happening
in the alt program.
Mr Chairman, I think you and and
I think you ought to look at
that because we wanna keep
firearms out of the hands of
mentally ill. And if you're not
doing that, then they can go
purchase a firearm. Thank you.
Thank you. Representative Re
next. We have representative
small.
Thank you very much, Mr Chair.
Thank you, Judge. Thank you.
Presenters. Um, the so the work
that you described, uh,
recruiting new providers looking
for new providers with the
city's transfer of funds to the
courts, which opens up the
procurement system.
Do you? Are you confident that
you there are other providers
and what is sort of the timeline
for getting the program sort of
going again and at what level
Mr Chair representative
Beginning in fiscal year, 25. So
here next week in July, um, the
transfer of funds will will go.
The court or Excuse me from the
city to the court. Um, we have
identified a provider. Um, that
provider was identified on this
fiscal year through the city.
Um, we plan to carry that
provider over, uh, with the
court's contracting that
clinical provider I believe is
Judge Brickhouse. Just briefly
outlined is a um, a full
continuum provider. Um, we have
a matrix of serving 40
individuals and fiscal year 25.
They do feel like they have the
capacity to do so.
Um and they continuum of
services, uh, really allows to
be able to meet the full needs
of of what an individual in a O
would require. Great, Uh one
final question and follow up.
Uh, that's exciting.
Congratulations in in good to
sort of creatively move the
funding. Seems like you've seen
some roadblocks and have now
have a lot of, uh, insight to
share about the best ways to do
it in terms of sort of sharing.
Um, even
That participation level. Will
that be sort of a as you get
started and in FY 25. Will that
be? Can we look for information?
Just even not outcomes, but just
sort of participants unders
like, Yeah, seeing if it's how
you all are doing as everybody's
eyes are really tuned into a O
as one important piece for our
state moving forward.
Or will it be? Is it more of a
after the fact which is totally
OK or, I guess interesting and
appreciative. Thank you, Mr
Chair, Mr. Chair,
Representative. Small. I don't
think that we have formulated,
Um, you know, specifically with
regards to providing that that
data, um outside of the court
system, I don't know that there
are specifically is a
prohibition regarding that. Um,
you know, the data before was
collected as as Laura Laura
Brown, mentioned by the
Institute of Social
And that wasn't requirement of
the SAS a grant actually.
Um, but we do, of course plan on
tracking outcomes so that we
know about the efficacy of our
program. Understood? Thank you.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you,
Representative. Small. Next we
have a representative Alcon.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
I just curious about one thing.
Explain to me where your funding
is And what what would happen if
your funding would go away?
Jarrett, representative. Um
what? What we've learned through
our grant is that the cost that
are not billable through other
Program basically would
dissolve. Um, so our commitment
to the program is to offset
those additional costs, which
are petitioning attorneys the
staff required in the court
pieces through the funding we're
providing for the clientele we
hope to serve. We're we've
identified at least within our
arena. That's about a million
dollar program outside of what's
reimbursable through Medicaid.
We do require that you know, the
clinical providers report their
billable services to Medicaid
for offset before they bill for
the program for any additional
costs, And so we continue to
learn, I would say.
That if the intent and our goal
is to grow the program to serve
more clients in this arena,
you're going to look at
increased costs right, so
doubling that program easily
right now at 40 clients at a
million dollars a year, you want
80. It could be up to $2
million, right and that's just
based on what we've established
and learned through our Samsa
Gran
So OK, so
Mr Chair. So what I'm thinking
is basically you're self funded
with the money you collect for
Medicaid.
Mr. Chair representative, Um it
it's not necessarily self
clinical care is there. Uh,
To make sure the quality of the
what's not funded are the core
Technically clinical, right, so
supposed to be an EC enter.
Where does the money come from?
Other than Medicaid City General
Fund budget.
So, uh, about how much money is
that from the city.
I tell you, Mr Chair this year.
What's in budget is 900,000.
OK, So what would happen if
those $900,000 from the city
would get pulled?
The program wouldn't be able to
continue.
It would not or would would not.
OK, so then my next question is,
uh, does the state to provide
any the state of New Mexico
provide any money?
Uh, towards this program.
Only via the Medicaid drawdown
for clinical services. Medicaid
but not the state budget itself.
I think it
was
Thank you. Um roo Valco. Next we
got, um
Senator Leamy Stewart.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Good thing happens when other
people go first, because a lot
of my questions have been
answered. My goodness.
This is another one of these
programs, so I don't know if you
were here earlier when we heard
about mental health courts, I
I'm confused a little bit. How
this a OT programs work with the
mental health courts. Are they
totally separate, different
judge different people, et
cetera, because they sound like
they're doing the same thing
with the people that show up in
front of those courts. So you
can just
About how those work together or
not, and, uh,
Maybe about the funding. Uh, Mr
Chair, and, uh, Senator Stewart,
I'm not going to address the
funding issue. I'll let Mr
Ramirez um, address that, um,
the A OT program is not
associated with the mental
health court. We came in on the
on the tail end. Um, again, Uh,
I like to make sure it is
absolutely crystal clear. A OT
is a civil division program.
There does not have to be a
pending criminal case.
And so there we don't need to be
associated with with any other
treatment court programs.
All right. Well, that was
crystal clear, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you. So with the mental
health courts, uh, it it looks
to me like we're not moving up
or really moving down. We have
less program participation, and
we have less ability to serve
people. Uh, what is happening
with this program mean? Yes, it
was fun to, uh, in part for four
years. Then it went away.
How many people did you serve in
those four years or I mean, did
it
Did it make enough of an impact
so that you really wanted to
continue it? Um, because if
that's the case, it seems to me
just the issue is funding and
finding experts goes along with
funding. Uh, so if we were to
want to double this to 80
instead of 40, so it'd be 2
million. Is it just the money
that's holding us back? Or is it
all these other phalanx of
issues?
People, no service providers, it
being voluntary anyway. It's
difficult to manage. We're
trying to really understand
where we're at so we can figure
out how to move forward and I
appreciate your answers on these
questions. But if you could talk
a little bit about that
Address the client success in
that, Um, Mr Chair? Uh, Senator
Stewart. I could start with, uh,
the beginning of that question.
So during the four year
operation while we were under
Samsa during those four years we
were actually operational for
about 19 months of that period
of time, and that was largely
due to provider issues. So
during that period of time, we
did a file 58 petitions and we
did order 43 individuals into a
OT. I will say that, um it was
not lack of demand.
Um, that we were not able to
continue the program. Um, so I
think that the, um interest is
there the support is there the
community, um
The the community. Um,
definitely has a population that
is very interested in this
program. Um, I think that we we
did, um, struggle somewhat with,
um, provider options.
Uh, and chair. Uh, Senator, I
want to, um, address the other
issue with regards to providers,
you know, come in. We've seen
this statewide and this is a
consideration part for the
entire committee. I can only
speak to Albuquerque, Burnley
County, but you're gonna face a
provider shortage statewide.
This is just what is happening
Coming out of covid. Um, there
aren't the incentives for the
clinicians and the rural area,
the landscape all those
challenges that we're facing,
and it's nationwide. It's not
just you know our state, so I
will say it's important to
understand there are some
clinical
Providers. There may be a need
to really incentivize telehealth
and the ability to have those
carrier coordinators and
providers in other areas being
able to support the rural areas
for program. Stand up. Um, I
believe we've engaged with the
clinical provider and we are
building that landscape within
Albuquerque, but we are a larger
metropolitan area. Um, that is
drawing that, But it is a
consideration statewide as you
look at this for other areas.
Thank you for those answers, Mr
Chairman, and it's you know, 40
people a year is what Las Cruces
is also doing. Um, so I just
think 40 a year for Albuquerque
is just not nearly enough. Uh,
so
So
I think it was, um M Braun, who
mentioned compensation and you?
Are you talking compensation for
the providers that needs to
increase? What? What were you
talking about? With
compensation?
Do you remember? Um Mr Chair?
Senator, I think perhaps that
was, uh Gilbert shared that
information, so I'll lend that
to him.
Chair. Uh represent let me let
me back up to the the cost
outside. Originally, when we got
the the Samsa Grant, we, uh were
allocated a budget in which we
could pay positioning attorneys,
et cetera. Nowhere near the
rates of what the going rate
was. We put, uh, requests out
numerous times, and nobody
responded. The city then had to
infuse some funding to be able
to increase those reimbursement
rates to bring in the legal
professionals. Um, and
compensate for that, And then,
of course, there's the
additional staff over at the
courts.
I think it's a consideration
from what we've learned is that
there are costs at rates that
have all increased in every
arena in regards to making sure
you have the program. Um staff
and professionals to be able to
support it. So that's what we've
seen a majority of the cost and
what we've had to infuse our
dollars into.
So thank you for that, Mr
Chairman.
It's clear to me that unless we
start paying state government
and city and county employees
and providers more were not
gonna change. So I mean, I just
we now are I one of my
colleagues says we're no longer
poor. We're rich state. Now we
better step up to the plate and
start paying for the services.
And we all wanna do that. So
you've got a chance to make your
case to us here today.
And I hope you remember that.
Thank you. Mr Chairman. Thank
you, Mr Chair members, can I
just
Oh, so we're going to go. I
would love to hear from the
judge. She won't take long.
Um, thank you, Mr Chair and
Senator Stewart. I just wanted
to, um, I guess highlight the
intense supervision and
intervention intervention that
this population requires. Even
though there were only 40
participants I conducted 100 and
44 hearings to just put it in
perspective.
Thank you. Thank you for that.
Thank you next, uh, in doing
Five minutes. Thank you, Mr
Chair, and I won't need five
minutes because my senator
Stewart, Uh, most of my
questions have already been
asked and answered, Um
I have a question. And And if
this is not something you all
wanna say in a public meeting at
this point, that is just fine.
But who? I'm curious who the new
provider is.
Who you are are gonna be working
with. I can share. It's a
federally qualified health
provider that we've engaged with
who has enhanced ability to
actually get reimbursement rates
for Medicaid. So we think it's a
win win, and they're currently
staffing up their clinical. Uh,
team for us to engage in that
contract. Thank you, That's all
Mr Chair.
Thank you, Senator. Thank you
guys. Um, I see there's nobody
on the list for any more
questions. I think now we are in
recess for lunch. Uh, I
We got five minutes.
Good representing Virgo.
Mr Chair, I think, um, you
didn't see my hand up. Probably,
um, Mr Chair and members and
Judge. Thank you for being here
today and your staff.
Um, I happen to be on the City
Council when this program was,
uh, funded and initiated and and
I just want to thank Mr Ramirez
also for being here. I worked
with him when he ran the West
side shelter, and I just think
very, very highly of you, Mr.
Ramirez. Um, a
You know the cost of, um, doing
this type of business?
I kind of equate it Mr Chair to
Changing.
To the Titanic in a way because
you're changing people's whole
way of life, especially when we
have, uh generational, um,
addiction. Um and you know
I just
I thank you guys for what you're
doing, Even if it's 40, maybe
next year, it's 100 and 40 the
following year.
And I think funding is so
important, Mr Chair for this
these kinds of programs because
you know, how do you get people
sort of off the street into and
and this is a volunteer program.
And maybe that's why the numbers
are still low. Um, but I support
the this type of program and I
think that you know, we need to
really look at our funding
mechanisms when we put together
when the the city of Albuquerque
has
Committed to putting almost a
million dollars into these
programs continuously and there.
Hopefully they're working in
somebody's following to make
sure that those people are you
know, changing their lives.
Changing lives is not an easy um
Direction. I mean, it just isn't
because people by nature go back
to a lot of times the way that
they're used to living, So I
just wanna thank the Mr Chair
and give them credit for what
they're doing, and in Dona Ana
County as well, Um I would love
to see programs like this all
over the state.
I mean, I just would like to see
that and you know
The cost of doing this kind of
business is the cost of our
social, um, welfare moving
forward in a positive way so
that I just wanted to make that
comment. Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Thank you. Oh, and one other
thing, Mr K real quick. If 40
seconds I would love to work
with Mr Ramirez to have a tour
of the West Side shelter. Uh,
for legislators. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you. Panel for
coming and presenting for us.
today I will reconvene at 145.
